The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Temporal Event Cues for Dense Video Captioning in Cyclic
Co-Learning
Zhuyang Xie1 , Yan Yang1,2∗ , Yankai Yu1 , Jie Wang1 , Yongquan Jiang1,2 , Xiao Wu1,2
1

2

School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China
Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Urban Intelligent Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
{zyxie, yyk}@my.swjtu.edu.cn, {yyang, jackwang, yqjiang, wuxiaohk}@swjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Dense video captioning aims to detect and describe all events
in untrimmed videos. This paper presents a dense video
captioning network called Multi-Concept Cyclic Learning
(MCCL), which aims to: (1) detect multiple concepts at the
frame level and leverage these concepts to provide temporal
event cues; and (2) establish cyclic co-learning between the
generator and the localizer within the captioning network to
promote semantic perception and event localization. Specifically, weakly supervised concept detection is performed for
each frame, and the detected concept embeddings are integrated into the video features to provide event cues. Additionally, video-level concept contrastive learning is introduced to
produce more discriminative concept embeddings. In the captioning network, a cyclic co-learning strategy is proposed,
where the generator guides the localizer for event localization through semantic matching, while the localizer enhances
the generator’s event semantic perception through location
matching, making semantic perception and event localization
mutually beneficial. MCCL achieves state-of-the-art performance on the ActivityNet Captions and YouCook2 datasets.
Extensive experiments demonstrate its effectiveness and interpretability.

Figure 1: (a) The two-stage approach predicts multiple event
candidates and eliminates redundancy using non-maximum
suppression. (b) Learnable event queries are embedded in
the generator (visual transformer), with two prediction heads
for localization and captioning. (c) MCCL uses cyclic colearning, where the generator, localizer, and descriptor enhance performance collaboratively by leveraging the mutual
benefits of captioning and localization.

Introduction
In recent years, with the rapid growth of video data, automatically generating high-quality video captions has emerged
as a significant research focus in the fields of computer vision and natural language processing. Dense video captioning (Krishna et al. 2017; Shen et al. 2017; Mun et al. 2019;
Suin and Rajagopalan 2020; Deng et al. 2021), a critical task
within this domain, requires systems not only to accurately
identify multiple events but also to generate natural language
descriptions for each event. The primary challenge is to simultaneously handle video content understanding, temporal
event localization, and event captioning.
Despite recent advancements in dense video captioning,
existing methods still exhibit limitations when handling
complex video scenarios. Early methods typically adopt unimodal information (e.g., visual features) as input (Krishna
et al. 2017; Tu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2018; Tu et al. 2023)

for image semantic understanding. Additionally, current approaches face challenges in feature representation and crossmodal alignment, which can lead to inconsistencies between
the generated captions and video content. Inspired by recent progress in vision and language learning (Radford et al.
2021; Luo et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2023a; Deng et al. 2023),
we enhance video semantic comprehension by retrieving
text information that is highly relevant to the video content,
thereby improving both event localization and caption quality.
Event localization and caption generation are commonly
integrated into a unified framework. Mainstream methods
can be divided into two categories: two-stage method (Krishna et al. 2017; Duan et al. 2018; Chen and Jiang

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8771

