The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SegFace: Face Segmentation of Long-Tail Classes
Kartik Narayan, Vibashan VS, Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
{knaraya4, vvishnu2, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Face parsing refers to the semantic segmentation of human
faces into key facial regions such as eyes, nose, hair, etc. It
serves as a prerequisite for various advanced applications,
including face editing, face swapping, and facial makeup,
which often require segmentation masks for classes like eyeglasses, hats, earrings, and necklaces. These infrequently occurring classes are called long-tail classes, which are overshadowed by more frequently occurring classes known as
head classes. Existing methods, primarily CNN-based, tend
to be dominated by head classes during training, resulting
in suboptimal representation for long-tail classes. Previous
works have largely overlooked the problem of poor segmentation performance of long-tail classes. To address this issue,
we propose SegFace, a simple and efficient approach that uses
a lightweight transformer-based model which utilizes learnable class-specific tokens. The transformer decoder leverages class-specific tokens, allowing each token to focus on
its corresponding class, thereby enabling independent modeling of each class. The proposed approach improves the performance of long-tail classes, thereby boosting overall performance. To the best of our knowledge, SegFace is the first
work to employ transformer models for face parsing. Moreover, our approach can be adapted for low-compute edge devices, achieving 95.96 FPS. We conduct extensive experiments demonstrating that SegFace significantly outperforms
previous state-of-the-art models, achieving a mean F1 score
of 88.96 (+2.82) on the CelebAMask-HQ dataset and 93.03
(+0.65) on the LaPa dataset.

Head Classes

Long-Tail Classes

Figure 1: The proposed SegFace leverages a lightweight
transformer decoder with learnable class-specific tokens.
The association of each class with a token enables the independent modeling of each class, which boosts the segmentation performance of long-tail classes that typically underperform in existing methods. The blue line represents the probability of a class being present in a randomly selected image
from the CelebAMask-HQ train set. SegFace provides a significant boost in the segmentation performance of long-tail
classes (+7.9, +21.2), thereby establishing a new state-ofthe-art in face parsing performance.

Code — https://github.com/Kartik-3004/SegFace

1

classes, which are mostly accessories like eyeglasses, necklaces, hats, and earrings, because not all faces will feature
these items. We cannot expect to have equal representation
of all classes in current or even future face-parsing datasets,
as certain facial attributes like hair, nose and eyes are naturally more common than accessories like earrings and necklaces. Additionally, it is difficult to collect samples with less
frequently occurring classes. Moreover, detailed annotation
for face segmentation, especially for less common or smaller
facial features, is labor-intensive and costly.
Since the advent of deep learning in semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), numerous studies have focused on solving face segmentation. Several
works (Guo et al. 2018; Zhou, Hu, and Zhang 2015; Lin

Introduction

Face parsing, a semantic segmentation task, involves assigning pixel-level labels to a face image to distinguish key facial
regions, such as the eyes, nose, hair, and ears. The identification of different facial regions is crucial for a variety of
applications, including face swapping (Xu et al. 2022), face
editing (Lee et al. 2020a), face generation (Zhang, Rao, and
Agrawala 2023), face completion (Li et al. 2017), and facial makeup (Wan et al. 2022). Long-tail classes are those
that occur infrequently within a dataset. Existing face parsing datasets (Lee et al. 2020a) consist of these long-tail
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6182

