The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Syntactic Feature Filtering and Injecting Networks for Cross-lingual
Dependency Parsing
Jianjian Liu, Zhengtao Yu, Ying Li* , Yuxin Huang, Shengxiang Gao
Yunnan Provincial Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Faculty of Information
Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650000, China
jjliu_nj@foxmail.com, ztyu@hotmail.com, {yingli_hlt, gaoshengxiang.yn}@foxmail.com, huangyuxin2004@163.com

Abstract

punct
ccomp

Pre-trained language models enhanced parsers have achieved
outstanding performance in rich-resource languages. Crosslingual dependency parsing aims to learn useful knowledge
from high-resource languages to alleviate data scarcity in
low-resource languages. However, effectively reducing the
syntactic structure distributional bias and excavating the commonalities among languages is the key challenge for crosslingual dependency parsing. To address this issue, we propose novel dynamic syntactic feature filtering and injecting
networks based on the typical shared-private model that employs one shared and two private encoders to separate source
and target language features. Concretely, a Language-Specific
Filtering Network (LSFN) on private encoders emphasizes
helpful information and ignores the irrelevant or harmful
parts of it from the source language. Meanwhile, a LanguageInvariant Injecting Network (LIIN) on the shared encoder
integrates the advantages of BiLSTM and improved Transformer encoders to transcend language boundaries, thus amplifying syntactic commonalities across languages. Experiments on seven benchmark datasets show that our model
achieves an average absolute gain of 1.84 UAS and 3.43
LAS compared with the shared-private model. Comparative
experiments validate that both LSFN and LIIN components
are complementary in transferring beneficial knowledge from
source to target languages. Detailed analyses highlight that
our model can effectively capture linguistic commonalities
and mitigate the effect of distributional bias, showcasing its
robustness and efficacy.

nsubj
cop

root
advmod

$
$

可以
It can be

认为
considered

amod

这
this

是
as

无效
invalid

合同
contract

。
.

punct
root
advmod

$
$

Có thể
It can be

coi
considered

ccomp
nsubj
cop

đây
this

là
as

amod

hợp đồng
contract

vô hiệu
invalid

.
.

Figure 1: Examples of the dependency trees, with the Chinese on the top and the Vietnamese on the bottom.

various artificial intelligence models, i.e., neural machine
translation (Yamin, Sarno, and Tambunan 2024), grammatical error correction (Tang, Qu, and Wu 2024), and question
answering (Hou et al. 2024).
Recent researchers have focused on integrating strong
representations of pre-trained language models into dependency parsers, enhancing the parsing performance significantly (Ross, Cai, and Min 2020; Yao, Xue, and Min 2022;
Nishida and Matsumoto 2022a; Gu et al. 2024). In its
early stages, Dozat and Manning (2017) propose a BiAffine
parser which employs GloVe word embeddings (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) as its inputs and utilizes
a multi-layer BiLSTM to encode contextual information,
achieving excellent performances on multiple languages. Li
et al. (2019a) improve the BiAffine parser by integrating the
representations of ELMo (Peters et al. 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2019). Nguyen (2020) utilize the fine-tuned BERT
model and extra POS tagging task to improve the Vietnamese parsing performance. However, the effectiveness of
these models is still limited for low-resource languages due
to insufficient training data (Rotman and Reichart 2019;
Wang et al. 2020; Effland and Collins 2023).
To mitigate the scarce corpus of low-resource languages,
cross-lingual dependency parsing has gained more attention,

Code — https://github.com/Flamelunar/crosslingualDP

Introduction
The purpose of dependency parsing is to identify and describe the syntactic and grammatical relationships between
input words via a dependency tree. Figure 1 depicts a dependency tree, where a dependency arc from the head word
“hợp đồng (contract)” to the modifier word “vô hiệu (invalid)” with relation label “amod” indicates that “vô hiệu
(invalid)” serves as an adjective to modify “hợp đồng (contract)”. These dependency trees reveal the syntax information via a hierarchical structure which is easily injected into
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24614

