The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TreeEval: Benchmark-Free Evaluation of Large Language Models through Tree
Planning
Xiang Li1 , Yunshi Lan1 * , Chao Yang2
1

East China Normal University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
xiang.li@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, yslan@dase.ecnu.edu.cn, yangchao@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

2023b; Wang et al. 2024). Thus, investigating automatic
evaluation approaches for LLMs becomes crucial.
To date, numerous automatic evaluation methods have
been proposed. One approach involves annotating benchmark datasets, such as MMLU and BBH (Hendrycks et al.
2021; Suzgun et al. 2022), to test various capabilities of an
LLM. The performance is assessed by checking the overlap
between annotated answers and generated answers, producing a holistic score to indicate the LLM’s performance. We
refer to this category of evaluation methods as the benchmark paradigm. However, the holistic score can be inflexible for measuring the quality of LLM outputs since token
mismatches do not necessarily indicate incorrect answers.
With the advent of high-performance LLMs, another
approach leverages them to simulate human evaluation.
This involves providing the evaluated LLM with predefined
benchmark questions and using another LLM, such as GPT4, to judge its responses (Zheng et al. 2023a; Li et al. 2023b;
Bai et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a; Zhang et al. 2023b;
Wang et al. 2023c; Li et al. 2023a; Zhu, Wang, and Wang
2023). We refer to this category of evaluation methods as
the LLM-as-judge paradigm. However, this evaluation approach can also introduce additional biases, including positional bias (Wang et al. 2023a), verbosity bias (Saito et al.
2023), and style bias (Wu and Aji 2023). Positional bias
refers to the tendency to assign higher scores to answers
based on their specific positions. Verbosity bias indicates
that large language models often prefer more verbose answers, even if these longer responses are not necessarily of
higher quality than shorter ones. Style bias manifests in the
inclination of large language models to favor answers that
match their own generated style, such as giving lower scores
to correct responses with spelling errors, since LLMs rarely
produce content with spelling mistakes.
Despite enabling automatic evaluation with standard
pipelines, both the benchmark and LLM-as-judge paradigms
face significant data leakage issues. The extensive training
data used in LLM development, considered a valuable asset by many closed and even open-source models, can easily lead to benchmark data leakage, severely biasing evaluation results (Zhou et al. 2023b). To solve this issue, we
propose a novel evaluation paradigm, which takes an LLM
as an examiner to raise questions. The examiner should produce different evaluation session for each time which makes

Recently, numerous new benchmarks have been established
to evaluate the performance of large language models (LLMs)
via either computing a holistic score or employing another
LLM as a judge. However, these approaches suffer from data
leakage due to the open access of the benchmark and inflexible evaluation process. To address this issue, we introduce
TreeEval, a benchmark-free evaluation method for LLMs
that let a high-performance LLM host an irreproducible evaluation session and essentially avoids the data leakage. Moreover, this LLM performs as an examiner to raise up a series of questions under a topic with a tree planing strategy,
which considers the current evaluation status to decide the
next question generation and ensures the completeness and
efficiency of the evaluation process. We evaluate 6 models of
different parameter sizes, including 7B, 13B, and 33B, and
ultimately achieved the highest correlation coefficient with
AlpacaEval2.0 using only around 45 questions. We also conduct more analysis to show the robustness and reliability of
TreeEval.

Code — https://github.com/Ashura5/TreeEval

Introduction
The recent surge in Large Language Models (LLMs) has
been significant, transitioning from closed-source (OpenAI
2023; Team 2023a) to open-source (Touvron et al. 2023;
et al. 2023a; Jiang et al. 2023) models. Various Supervised
Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) techniques have been proposed to
further enhance the performance of LLMs (Taori et al. 2023;
Chiang et al. 2023; Bai et al. 2022; Ouyang et al. 2022; Tunstall et al. 2023a). These LLMs demonstrate capabilities to
address diverse tasks and are widely utilized in both academic and industrial fields. While human evaluation is intuitive for assessing the performance of LLMs, it is timeconsuming and susceptible to unexpected bias (Zheng et al.
* Yunshi is the corresponding author and she is also affiliated
with Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Big Data Management.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
0
Due to AAAI’s format limitations, the full version with appendices is available at (Li, Lan, and Yang 2024).

24485

