The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MSP-MVS: Multi-Granularity Segmentation Prior Guided Multi-View Stereo
Zhenlong Yuan1 , Cong Liu2 , Fei Shen3 , Zhaoxin Li4, 5 * , Jinguo Luo2 , Tianlu Mao1 , Zhaoqi Wang1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing
4
Agricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
5
Key Laboratory of Agricultural Big Data, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
yuanzhenlong21b@ict.ac.cn, liucong@stu.hit.edu.cn, feishen@njust.edu.cn,
cszli@hotmail.com, 23s153135@stu.hit.edu.cn, {ltm, zqwang}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Recently, patch deformation-based methods have demonstrated significant strength in multi-view stereo by adaptively expanding the reception field of patches to help reconstruct textureless areas. However, such methods mainly
concentrate on searching for pixels without matching ambiguity (i.e., reliable pixels) when constructing deformed
patches, while neglecting the deformation instability caused
by unexpected edge-skipping, resulting in potential matching distortions. Addressing this, we propose MSP-MVS, a
method introducing multi-granularity segmentation prior for
edge-confined patch deformation. Specifically, to avoid unexpected edge-skipping, we first aggregate and further refine
multi-granularity depth edges gained from Semantic-SAM
as prior to guide patch deformation within depth-continuous
(i.e., homogeneous) areas. Moreover, to address attention imbalance caused by edge-confined patch deformation, we implement adaptive equidistribution and disassemble-clustering
of correlative reliable pixels (i.e., anchors), thereby promoting attention-consistent patch deformation. Finally, to prevent
deformed patches from falling into local-minimum matching costs caused by the fixed sampling pattern, we introduce
disparity-sampling synergistic 3D optimization to help identify global-minimum matching costs. Evaluations on ETH3D
and Tanks & Temples benchmarks prove our method obtains
state-of-the-art performance with remarkable generalization.

Figure 1: Comparative analysis between APD-MVS and our
method. In (c) and (d), green, blue and red dots respectively
denote the central pixel, conventional PM and deformable
PM. Due to the lack of depth edge guidance in APD-MVS
(c), its deformable PM occurs edge-skipping, thereby covering areas with depth-discontinuity. Differently, our method
(d) leverages multi-granularity segmentation image (b) as
prior to guide deformable PM within homogeneous areas.

Introduction
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) is a technique that employs images captured from different viewpoints to reconstruct 3D
scenes or objects. Its diverse application spans across autonomous driving (Wei et al. 2023), augmented reality (Cao
et al. 2020), and 3D printing (Zhu et al. 2021). Numerous
ideas (Heise et al. 2013) and datasets (Yao et al. 2020) have
significantly advanced its progress. However, it still faces the
primary challenge of reconstructing large textureless areas.
The majority of traditional MVS methods are extended
from the PatchMatch (PM) (Barnes et al. 2009) algorithm,
which predicts depth hypothesis by computing the minimum
matching cost between patch pairs and achieves iterative renewal through propagation and refinement. However, depth

hypotheses may exhibit ambiguity in textureless areas when
patches lack reliable pixel correspondence. To tackle this,
numerous methods attempt to introduce technologies such
as cascade architecture (Liao et al. 2019), confidence estimators (Li et al. 2020), superpixel planarization (Yuan et al.
2024b) and planar priors (Ren et al. 2023), etc. Yet these
methods either require complex and time-consuming postprocessing or result in excessively smooth surface details.
Differently, learning-based methods employ deep neural
networks to create learnable 3D cost volumes, thereby enabling the extraction of high-dimensional features and thus
providing a wider receptive field. Although typical methods employ deformable convolutions (Ding et al. 2022) or
adopt a coarse-to-fine strategy (Su and Tao 2023) to broaden
the receptive field, their unaffordable time and memory consumption make them unsuitable for high-resolution imagery.

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9753

