The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Truncated Gaussian Policy for Debiased Continuous Control
Ganghun Lee1,3 , Minji Kim2 , Minsu Lee* 4 , Byoung-Tak Zhang* 1,2,3
1

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
2
Department of Computer Science, Seoul National University
3
AIIS, Seoul National University
4
School of AI Convergence, Sungshin Women’s University
zxc8594@snu.ac.kr, cyqkcy01@snu.ac.kr, mslee@sungshin.ac.kr, btzhang@snu.ac.kr
Abstract

Schulman et al. 2017), continuous actions are usually sampled from noise (Lillicrap et al. 2015) or density distribution
such as Gaussian (Mnih et al. 2016; Schulman et al. 2017;
Haarnoja et al. 2018a).
In continuous domains, Gaussian policies are dominant
for their strong generality and mathematical advantages,
such as differentiability, appropriate stochasticity for continuous actions, and simple, intuitive parameters like location
and scale, which are advantageous for modulating exploration and exploitation (Ribeiro 2004; Engel, Mannor, and
Meir 2005; Kuss and Rasmussen 2003). However, in many
continuous control tasks where the action range is practically limited, the unbounded support of Gaussian distributions requires careful regulation to ensure actions stay within
these limits. A common solution is to clip the out-of-bound
actions into the nearest boundary, as in proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al. 2017), one of the most popular policy optimization methods. However, this approach
can introduce a bias toward boundary actions (Chou, Maturana, and Scherer 2017; Fujita and Maeda 2018), inducing
performance degradation.
In this paper, we revisit this bias as “boundary action
bias” and analyze its nature in PPO with illustrative explanations and formalization. A fundamental solution to mitigate the bias is using bounded distributions to avoid out-ofbound samples, such as Beta (Chou, Maturana, and Scherer
2017; Petrazzini and Antonelo 2021; Xiao et al. 2023)
or logit-normal distribution (squashed Gaussian) (Haarnoja
et al. 2018b; Ciosek and Whiteson 2020; Jang 2021) employed in prior studies. However, the basic shapes and properties of such distributions differ from Gaussian to some
extent. Instead, we propose introducing a truncated Gaussian for a policy, which applies minimal modifications to
Gaussian to accommodate bounded support. However, our
observation implies that a plain truncated Gaussian policy
can induce counter-bias, preferring interior actions. This
perspective suggests that a balanced distributional trend
should be taken into account when designing continuous
control policies. To balance the boundary action bias and
its counter-bias in a truncated Gaussian policy, we finally
propose the scale-adjusted truncated Gaussian policy, where
a discounted scale near the boundaries facilitates the sampling of necessary boundary actions. Our extensive empirical studies on various continuous control tasks demon-

In continuous domains, reinforcement learning policies are
often based on Gaussian distributions for their generality.
However, the unbounded support of Gaussian policy can
cause a bias toward sampling boundary actions in many continuous control tasks that impose action limits due to physical constraints. This “boundary action bias” can negatively
impact training in algorithms like Proximal Policy Optimization. Despite this, it has been overlooked in many existing
research and applications. In this paper, we revisit this issue by presenting illustrative explanations and analysis from
the sampling point of view. Then, we introduce a truncated
Gaussian policy with inherent bounds as a minimal alternative to mitigate the bias. However, we find that the plain truncated Gaussian policy may lay the counter-bias, preferring
interior actions: to balance the bias, we ultimately propose a
scale-adjusted truncated Gaussian policy, where the distribution scale shrinks if the location is near the boundaries. This
property makes boundary actions deterministic more than in
plain truncated Gaussian, but still less than in original Gaussian. Extensive empirical studies and comparisons on various continuous control tasks demonstrate that the truncated
Gaussian policies significantly reduce the rate of boundary
action usage, while scale-adjusted ones successfully balance
the bias and counter-bias. It generally outperforms the Gaussian policy and shows competitive results compared to other
approaches designed to counteract the bias.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a promising
decision-making model for solving wide range of challenging problems such as games (Mnih et al. 2013; Silver et al.
2016; Fan et al. 2022), robotic manipulation (Kalashnikov
et al. 2018; Han et al. 2023), locomotion (Margolis et al.
2024), visual tasks (Le et al. 2022; Franceschelli and Musolesi 2024), recommendation system (Afsar, Crump, and
Far 2022), automation (Kabbani and Duman 2022; Hu et al.
2023; Ordouei et al. 2024), and training recent language
models (Ouyang et al. 2022; Achiam et al. 2023). Across
these diverse applications, actions generally fall into two categories: discrete and continuous. While discrete actions are
sampled from a categorical distribution (Sutton et al. 1999;
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18071

