The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

NLSR: Neuron-Level Safety Realignment of Large Language Models
Against Harmful Fine-Tuning
Xin Yi1 , Shunfan Zheng1 , Linlin Wang1 * , Gerard de Melo2, 3 , Xiaoling Wang1 , Liang He1
1

East China Normal University
2
Hasso Plattner Institute
3
University of Potsdam
{xinyi,sfzheng}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {llwang, xlwang, lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, demelo@uni-potsdam.de
Abstract
The emergence of fine-tuning-as-a-service has revealed a new
vulnerability in large language models (LLMs). A mere handful of malicious data uploaded by users can subtly manipulate the fine-tuning process, leading to a compromised alignment state. Existing methods to counteract fine-tuning attacks
typically require substantial computational resources. Even
with parameter-efficient techniques like LoRA, gradient updates remain essential. To address these challenges, we propose Neuron-Level Safety Realignment (NLSR), a trainingfree framework that restores the safety of LLMs based on the
similarity difference of safety-critical neurons before and after fine-tuning. The core of our framework is first to construct
a safety reference model from an initially aligned model to
amplify safety-related features in neurons. We then utilize
this reference model to identify safety-critical neurons, which
we prepare as patches. Finally, we selectively restore only
those neurons that exhibit significant similarity differences by
transplanting these prepared patches, thereby minimally altering the fine-tuned model. Extensive experiments demonstrate
significant safety enhancements in fine-tuned models across
multiple downstream tasks, while greatly maintaining tasklevel accuracy. Our findings indicate that safety-critical neurons exhibit significant regional variations after fine-tuning,
which can be effectively corrected through neuron transplantation from the reference model without the need for additional training.

Figure 1: The harmful fine-tuning attack for fine-tuning-asa-service scenarios and our neuron-level safety realignment
approach to mitigate it.

have also demonstrated that fine-tuning, even on clean data,
can degrade the model’s safety. As illustrated in Figure 1, a
customized model that has been fine-tuned with harmful instructions can comply with malicious requests of an attacker,
leading to harmful or unethical behavior. Such harmful finetuning attacks raise serious concerns regarding the practical
deployment of LLMs.
To mitigate the degradation of safety safeguards caused
by harmful fine-tuning, the main methods can be categorized into three types based on the stage of the safety defense. The first strategy involves introducing perturbations
that could potentially trigger harmful behaviors, with the
aim of recalibrating the model’s parameters to counteract
these threats (Huang, Hu, and Liu 2024; Zeng et al. 2024;
Reuel et al. 2024). However, perturbation-based methods
are sensitive to the form of harmful instructions, leading to
significant variability in their effectiveness against different
types of harmful instructions. The second strategy entails
fine-tuning the model on both a task-specific dataset and a
preference dataset to bolster the model’s consistency in providing harmless and useful outputs (Zong et al. 2024; Huang
et al. 2024c). Nevertheless, a critical challenge remains in
striking the optimal balance between optimizing task-level
performance and ensuring output safety during fine-tuning.
The third strategy avoids interfering with the fine-tuning objectives and instead directly realigns the fine-tuned model to
ensure safety (Hsu et al. 2024; Bhardwaj, Anh, and Poria
2024). SafeLoRA (Hsu et al. 2024) is a realignment tech-

Code — https://github.com/xinykou/NLSR

Introduction
Emerging research suggests that the growing fine-tuning-asa-service model raises significant safety concerns (Huang
et al. 2024b). In contrast to open-source settings, finetuning-as-a-service means that users do not have direct access to model parameters. However, users may inadvertently
or deliberately upload data containing harmful content, potentially compromising the model’s safety alignment. One
study shows that mixing just 1% of harmful instructions into
the clean dataset used for fine-tuning is enough to breach the
model’s safety mechanisms (Qiang et al. 2024). Additionally, He, Xia, and Henderson (2024) and Kumar et al. (2024)
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25706

