The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DuMo: Dual Encoder Modulation Network for Precise Concept Erasure
Feng Han1,2 , Kai Chen1,2 , Chao Gong1,2 , Zhipeng Wei1,2 , Jingjing Chen1,2 * ,
Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
{cgong20,chenjingjing,ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, {fhan23,kchen22,zpwei21}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

based on textual prompts within seconds. This is primarily
attributed to the extensive web-scale datasets for model pretraining. However, the advanced generation capability of the
models is accompanied by a number of potential risks including copyright infringement and the propagation of NotSafe-For-Work (NSFW) content.
Recent studies demonstrate that diffusion models tend
to imitate famous artworks and specific painting styles of
artist (Jiang et al. 2023; Setty 2023) or generate sexually explicit content (Zhang et al. 2023), which violates the societal
norms and legal regulations. To tackle this problem, a naive
approach is to filter out the inappropriate data of the datasets
and retrain the model from scratch. Nevertheless, this is not
only resource-consuming but also unsatisfactory in terms of
the results. For instance, Stable Diffusion v2.0 continues to
generate explicit content while being trained on a sanitized
dataset. Besides, both the interference of classifier-free guidance during generation time (Schramowski et al. 2023) and
the safety checker (Rando et al. 2022) afterwards can be easily circumvented (Fan et al. 2023; Shi et al. 2020).
Therefore, recent methods either concentrate on parameter fine-tuning or developing erasure-specific modules to
the U-NET (Gandikota et al. 2023; Fan et al. 2023; Heng
and Soh 2024; Kumari et al. 2023; Gong et al. 2024; Huang
et al. 2023). Although these methods are effective to the target concept, they alter the backbone features of the U-Net
decoder and severely sacrifice the ability of generating nontargeted concepts. In each stage of the U-Net decoder, the
skip features from the skip connection and the backbone
features are concatenated together. Nevertheless, the skip
connection features and backbone features exhibit distinct
characteristics during the denoising process. Notably, it is
discovered by FreeU (Si et al. 2024) that the backbone features have much relevance to the structural (low-frequency)
components of the generated image, while the skip connection features are more related to the style and details (highfrequency) (Si et al. 2024). Altering the backbone features of
the U-Net decoder engenders harmful effects to the generation of the non-target concepts, compromising their structural integrity (Fig. 1a). Besides, the potential of the skip
connection features is not fully exploited, which refrains the
model from fulfilling excellent erasure ability and superb
generative ability (Luo et al. 2024).
To cope with the aforementioned challenges, we de-

The exceptional generative capability of text-to-image models has raised substantial safety concerns regarding the generation of Not-Safe-For-Work (NSFW) content and potential copyright infringement. To address these concerns, previous methods safeguard the models by eliminating inappropriate concepts. Nonetheless, these models alter the parameters of the backbone network and exert considerable influences on the structural (low-frequency) components of the
image, which undermines the model’s ability to retain nontarget concepts. In this work, we propose our Dual encoder
Modulation network (DuMo), which achieves precise erasure of inappropriate target concepts with minimum impairment to non-target concepts. In contrast to previous methods, DuMo employs the Eraser with PRior Knowledge (EPR)
module which modifies the skip connection features of the UNET and primarily achieves concept erasure on details (highfrequency) components of the image. To minimize the damage to non-target concepts during erasure, the parameters of
the backbone U-NET are frozen and the prior knowledge
from the original skip connection features is introduced to
the erasure process. Meanwhile, the phenomenon is observed
that distinct erasing preferences for the image structure and
details are demonstrated by the EPR at different timesteps and
layers. Therefore, we adopt a novel Time-Layer MOdulation
process (TLMO) that adjusts the erasure scale of EPR module’s outputs across different layers and timesteps, automatically balancing the erasure effects and model’s generative
ability. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
Explicit Content Erasure (detecting only 34 nude parts), Cartoon Concept Removal (with an average LPIPSda of 0.428,
0.113 higher than SOTA at 0.315), and Artistic Style Erasure
(with an average LPIPSda of 0.387, 0.088 higher than SOTA
at 0.299), clearly outperforming alternative methods.

Code — https://github.com/Maplebb/DuMo

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Nichol et al. 2021; Ramesh
et al. 2022; Nichol and Dhariwal 2021; Saharia et al. 2022)
have made notable progress in creating high-quality images
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3320

