The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Incentives for Early Arrival
Dengji Zhao
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Human-Machine Collaboration
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai, China
zhaodj@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

tion that all players are already part of the game. This assumption overlooks the strategic process of coalition formation present in many real-world scenarios (Flammini et al.
2021; Bullinger and Romen 2023). For example, when investors decide to invest in a company, they may wait for
others to invest first and choose the optimal time to join.
Similarly, shops or restaurants considering joining a shopping mall do not necessarily do so collectively; optimizing
the timing of their entry can be a key part of their strategy.
If the sequence and timing of coalition formation are
strategic elements for players, solution concepts must be designed to incentivize desirable behaviors. A key incentive is
to encourage players to join the coalition as soon as possible. This approach accelerates coalition formation and eliminates the strategic delay in deciding when to join. In practice,
such an incentive helps start-ups secure necessary funding
during their early, challenging stages and allows shopping
malls to overcome the initial “cold start” period more effectively. This concept, known as the incentive for early arrival
(I4EA), was first explored by Ge et al. (2024). Their research
focused on online value sharing games where the players’
identities and joining times are unknown before their arrival. They proposed a solution called reward the first critical player (RFC), which effectively encourages players to
join as soon as they become aware of the game. Their work
was recognized with a best paper award at AAMAS 2024.
In this paper, we will further explore and underscore the
importance of studying incentives for early arrival beyond
the context of value sharing games. We will examine its relevance and potential applications in various critical domains,
including value sharing, cost sharing, financing, and marketing. Additionally, we will discuss how incentives for early
arrival can be integrated with invitation incentives (Zhao
2021; Li et al. 2022). Invitation incentives, which encourage existing players to recruit new players via their social connections, represent a significant trend in mechanism
design and are highly effective for expanding collaborations (Pickard et al. 2011; Zhang and Zhao 2022).

Incentives for Early Arrival (I4EA) is a novel concept for online cooperative games introduced in an award-winning paper
by Ge et al. (2024). The aim of I4EA is to encourage players
to join a collaboration as soon as they become aware of it, a
new study with significant real-world applications, including
data collection and venture capital finance. This paper provides an in-depth discussion of I4EA and highlights its importance across various domains.

Introduction
Collaboration is a fundamental and crucial aspect of human
behavior that drives economic and social development. It
has been extensively examined through cooperative game
theory (Davis and Maschler 1965), which explores scenarios where players can form coalitions, cooperate, and make
binding agreements. In cooperative games, players work together towards a shared goal, such as maximizing rewards
(value sharing (Shehory and Kraus 1998)) or reducing costs
(cost sharing (Jain and Mahdian 2007)).
To ensure effective collaboration among players in a
coalition, it is essential to design a mechanism for allocating
value/costs among them. This allocation mechanism, known
as a solution concept, is typically grounded in various notions of fairness. Prominent examples of solution concepts
include the Shapley value (Shapley 1953), the Harsanyi dividend (Harsanyi 1958), and the core (Von Neumann and Morgenstern 1947). For example, the Shapley value computes a
player’s value allocation based on their marginal contribution (the value increase) when they join a coalition. Since
there is no fixed join order to decide their marginal contributions, Shapley simply considered all possible join orders
(i.e., permutations) and averaged the marginal contributions
across these orders to decide the player’s value allocation.
Shapley value is not necessarily in the core, which requires
that no coalition (a subset of the players) has an incentive to
leave the game.
In traditional cooperative game theory, a game is defined
by specifying the value or cost for each coalition within a
fixed and finite set of players N (known as the grand coalition). Solution concepts are typically based on the assump-

The Model
An online cooperative game is given by a triple (N, v, π),
where N is the set of players who will join the game in the
sequence defined by π, which is a permutation of N , and
v : 2N → R is a set function which assigns a value (can

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28624

