The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

WPMixer: Efficient Multi-Resolution Mixing for Long-Term Time Series
Forecasting
Md Mahmuddun Nabi Murad1 , Mehmet Aktukmak2 , Yasin Yilmaz1
1

University of South Florida
2
Intel Corporation
mmurad@usf.edu, mehmet.aktukmak@intel.com, yasiny@usf.edu

Abstract

Fedformer (Zhou et al. 2022b), and Crossformer (Zhang and
Yan 2023) have become popular thanks to their improved
capability of learning long-term dependencies. However, recently, questions have arisen about the performance of the
transformer variants in time series forecasting. The study
(Zeng et al. 2023) demonstrated that a simple linear model
can outperform or perform similarly with the state-of-theart transformers on the popular benchmark datasets for time
series forecasting.
Recently, MLP-based models have outperformed transformer variants in this domain. TimeMixer (Wang et al.
2024) and TSMixer (Chen et al. 2023) showed excellent
prospects in multivariate time series forecasting. TSMixer,
an MLP-mixer-based variant, mixes data in the time
and channel domain but is computationally expensive for
long-term forecasting due to a longer look-back window.
TimeMixer, which achieves the state-of-the-art results on
most benchmark datasets, decomposes a multi-scaled time
series into seasonal and trend series using the moving average method and then employs the mixing among the
mult-scaled data. However, due to complex seasonality patterns, decomposing a signal into seasonal and trend data
is inadequate, and mixing among the multi-scaled data can
cause information loss (Hyndman et al. 2011). Additionally, real-world time series data can have abrupt spikes and
dips, which is difficult to explain using multi-scaled moving
average-based decomposition techniques. Furthermore, capturing the information only in the time domain is not sufficient due to the complex nature of the time series data.
SWformer, a variant of Sepformer (Fan et al. 2022), extracts information in the time and frequency domain utilizing wavelet transform-based decomposition. However, a
multi-level wavelet transform is required to achieve its full
potential.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel MLPmixer-based model, called Wavelet Patch Mixer (WPMixer).
What sets our model apart is its ability to capture intricate information in both the time and frequency domains,
achieved through the use of multi-level wavelet decomposition. WPMixer decomposes the time series into multiple
approximation and detail coefficient series using the multilevel wavelet transform. Distinct resolution branches handle each coefficient series, preventing information loss from
mixing among multiple coefficient series. We utilize patch-

Time series forecasting is crucial for various applications,
such as weather forecasting, power load forecasting, and financial analysis. In recent studies, MLP-mixer models for
time series forecasting have been shown as a promising alternative to transformer-based models. However, the performance of these models is still yet to reach its potential. In
this paper, we propose Wavelet Patch Mixer (WPMixer), a
novel MLP-based model, for long-term time series forecasting, which leverages the benefits of patching, multi-resolution
wavelet decomposition, and mixing. Our model is based on
three key components: (i) multi-resolution wavelet decomposition, (ii) patching and embedding, and (iii) MLP mixing. Multi-resolution wavelet decomposition efficiently extracts information in both the frequency and time domains.
Patching allows the model to capture an extended history with
a look-back window and enhances capturing local information while MLP mixing incorporates global information. Our
model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art MLP-based
and transformer-based models for long-term time series forecasting in a computationally efficient way, demonstrating its
efficacy and potential for practical applications.

Introduction
Typically, time series data volume accumulates to vast
amounts in various applications due to recording observations and events over long time horizons. The study of predicting time series data has been essential because of its extensive use in various domains such as finance, weather forecasting, and energy consumption prediction.
While research in time-series forecasting, for a long time,
relied on traditional statistical methods such as ARIMA
(Ariyo, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014), HMM (Hassan and Nath
2005), and SSM (Durbin and Koopman 2012), with the increasing availability of large datasets and high computational power, deep learning methods gained prevalence due
to their superior performance in complex tasks. Specifically,
RNN and CNN-based models like DeepAR (Salinas et al.
2020), and SCINet (Liu et al. 2022a), as well as transformerbased time series forecasting models, have become popular
over time.
Transformer models for time series forecasting, such as
Informer (Zhou et al. 2021), Autoformer (Wu et al. 2021),
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19581

