The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Contrastive Knowledge Distillation for Efficient Image Restoration
Yunshuai Zhou1 * , Junbo Qiao1 * , Jincheng Liao1 , Wei Li2 , Simiao Li2 , Jiao Xie1 , Yunhang Shen3 ,
Jie Hu2 , Shaohui Lin1,4†
1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
3
Xiamen University, China
4
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science - MOE, China
shlin@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a valuable yet challenging approach that enhances a compact student network by learning from a high-performance but cumbersome teacher model.
However, previous KD methods for image restoration overlook the state of the student during the distillation, adopting
a fixed solution space that limits the capability of KD. Additionally, relying solely on L1-type loss struggles to leverage the distribution information of images. In this work,
we propose a novel dynamic contrastive knowledge distillation (DCKD) framework for image restoration. Specifically,
we introduce dynamic contrastive regularization to perceive
the student’s learning state and dynamically adjust the distilled solution space using contrastive learning. Additionally,
we also propose a distribution mapping module to extract and
align the pixel-level category distribution of the teacher and
student models. Note that the proposed DCKD is a structureagnostic distillation framework, which can adapt to different
backbones and can be combined with methods that optimize
upper-bound constraints to further enhance model performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DCKD significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art KD methods across
various image restoration tasks and backbones.

(a) Vanilla Knowledge Distillation

(b) Contrastive Knowledge Distillation

(c) Dynamic Contrastive Knowledge Distillation
Anchor
Positive
History Anchor

Negative
History Negative

Pull
Push

Figure 1: Difference between our DCKD and existing KD
methods. (a) The Vanilla KD method overlooks the information from negative images as a lower bound. (b) Existing
contrastive KD methods adopt a fixed lower bound that limits the capability of KD. (c) Our DCKD introduces dynamic
contrastive regularization to perceive the student’s learning
state and dynamically adjust the distilled solution space.

Introduction
Image restoration aims to recover high-quality images
from low-quality ones degraded by processes such as subsampling, blurring, and rain streaks. It is a highly challenging ill-posed inverse problem since crucial content information is missing during degradation. Recently, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) (Dong et al. 2015; Lim et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018) and Transformers (Liang et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Zamir et al. 2022) have
been extensively investigated for designing various models,
achieving remarkable success in image restoration. However, these models demand high resources and exhibit inefficiencies, making deployment on resource-constrained devices challenging. To facilitate their real-world applications,
there is a growing research focus on compressing image
restoration models.

Knowledge distillation (KD) is an effective model compression method that transfers knowledge from a cumbersome teacher model to a lightweight student model. This
process allows the student model to inherit the capabilities
of the teacher model, resulting in significant performance
improvements while reducing computational and storage requirements. KD has gained broad recognition for its excellent performance and broad applicability. It also can be
combined with other model compression techniques, such
as quantization (Du et al. 2021; Ayazoglu 2021; Hong et al.
2022), pruning (Fan et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021a; Oh et al.
2022), compact architecture design (Ahn, Kang, and Sohn
2018; Zhang et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022a), and neural architecture search (NAS) (Gou et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021;
He et al. 2022), to enhance the compactness of student models further.
Since KD has been well-established in natural language
processing (Hahn and Choi 2019; Sanh et al. 2019; Fu et al.
2021) and high-level vision tasks (Touvron et al. 2021; Lin

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10861

