The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MagicMan: Generative Novel View Synthesis of Humans
with 3D-Aware Diffusion and Iterative Refinement
Xu He1 , Zhiyong Wu1,5 * , Xiaoyu Li2 * , Di Kang2 , Chaopeng Zhang2 ,
Jiangnan Ye1 , Liyang Chen1 , Xiangjun Gao3 , Han Zhang4 , Haolin Zhuang1
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Stanford University
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
hex22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, xliea@connect.ust.hk, di.kang@outlook.com, cpz@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Existing works in single-image human reconstruction suffer
from weak generalizability due to insufficient training data or
3D inconsistencies for a lack of comprehensive multi-view
knowledge. In this paper, we introduce MagicMan, a humanspecific multi-view diffusion model to generate high-quality
novel views from a single reference image. As its core, we
leverage a pre-trained 2D diffusion model as the generative
prior for generalizability, with the parametric SMPL-X model
as the 3D body prior to promote 3D awareness. To maintain consistency while generating denser views for improved
3D human reconstruction, we introduce hybrid multi-view attention to facilitate efficient and thorough information interchange across views. Besides, we present a geometry-aware
dual branch to perform concurrent generation in both RGB
and normal domains, further enhancing consistency via geometry cues. Last but not least, to address ill-shaped issues
arising from inaccurate SMPL-X estimation, we propose a
novel iterative refinement strategy, which progressively optimizes SMPL-X accuracy while enhancing the quality and
consistency of the generated multi-views. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms existing approaches in both novel view synthesis
and subsequent 3D human reconstruction tasks. Code and demos are available at https://thuhcsi.github.io/MagicMan.

Figure 1: Given a reference human image in different poses,
outfits, or styles (i.e. real and fictional characters) as input,
MagicMan is able to generate consistent high-quality novel
view images and normal maps, which are well-suited for
downstream multi-view reconstruction applications.

Code — https://thuhcsi.github.io/MagicMan
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14211

1

networks on scanned 3D human datasets, capable of reconstructing 3D humans from a single image. Nevertheless, these data are scarce with limited diversity, resulting in
poor generalizability to varied poses and outfits. Besides, the
weak generative capability from insufficient data also leads
to overly-smoothed geometry and blurred textures.
Thanks to the abundant priors in text-to-image diffusion models trained on large-scale data, another category
of works (Zhang et al. 2024; Gao et al. 2024) leverage
pre-trained diffusion models to optimize 3D representations
through a Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss to create
human models from a single image. Although these methods
yield impressive results in generalization and detailed textures, the absence of 3D awareness frequently leads to 3D
inconsistencies like multi-face Janus problem (2022). More-

Introduction

3D digital human creation is an important technique in computer vision and graphics. Traditional methods (Balan et al.
2007; Vlasic et al. 2009) usually utilize a dense camera array
to capture synchronized posed multi-view images for human
reconstruction. However, these methods typically require a
tedious and time-consuming process which is not practical for general users. Therefore, creating 3D human models
from a single image is a significant task to be investigated.
To this end, early works like PIFu (2019), PaMIR (2021),
and ICON (2022) have been introduced to train feed-forward
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3437

