The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sentence-level Aggregation of Lexical Metrics Correlates
Stronger with Human Judgements than Corpus-level Aggregation
Paulo Cavalin1 , Pedro H. Domingues2 , Claudio Pinhanez1
1

IBM Research Brazil
2
PUC-Rio
pcavalin@br.ibm.com

Abstract

(Zouhar et al. 2024), which is an issue that can be considerably amplified with the lack of sufficient data. It is thus
unrealistic to think that neural metrics will be applied for
such scenarios in the near future. With this perspective in
mind, we argue that there is a very under-explored and important component of lexical metrics which is the aggregation method.
Lexical metrics such as BLEU and chrF usually rely
on corpus-level aggregation (CLA) (Papineni et al. 2002a;
Popović 2015), but one can easily rely on segment-level
aggregation (SLA). The main difference between CLA and
SLA is that, while in the former we compute n-gram matching statistics for all samples in a first step and then we compute a global score for the entire test set, in the latter we
compute the statistics and the score for each sample individually and then use the mean of these scores for evaluating a
test set. We notice that SLA is a very underexplored method
for lexical metrics and, to the best of our knowledge, there is
no previous work demonstrating why corpus-level should be
preferred besides generic theoretical statistical assumptions.
At a glance, it surely looks that in the worst-case scenario, both CLA and SLA present comparable results, so
there would be no good reason to question the aggregation
method choice. But in this paper we show that, counter the
common belief that CLA is better and should be the aggregation method of choice for lexical metrics, SLA is far more
correlated to human judgements and to the more robust neural metrics. To support this claim, we first show that there
is a conceptual difference between these two aggregation
methods, mathematically related to the average of ratios vs.
ratios of averages problem. Then, based on empirical experiments, we show not only that the choice between the aggregation method significantly impacts the resulting systemlevel scores but also that CLA is not statistically robust.
In greater details, in a first set of experiments we investigated whether the aforementioned mathematical differences
between CLA and SLA statistically impact the scores provided by the metrics. For this, we considered 492 system
outputs from the WMT23 metrics shared task (Freitag et al.
2023) and computed system-level scores considering not
only these two aggregation methods with both BLEU and
chrF as base metrics but also scores computing the mean of
bootstrap-resampled scores (BRS), as a reference point of
a more statistically-robust approach. For this evaluation, we

In this paper we show that corpus-level aggregation hinders considerably the capability of lexical metrics to accurately evaluate machine translation (MT) systems. With empirical experiments, we demonstrate that averaging individual segment-level scores can make metrics such as BLEU
and chrF correlate much stronger with human judgements
and make them behave considerably more similarly to neural metrics such as COMET and BLEURT. We show that this
difference exists because corpus- and segment-level aggregation differs considerably owing to the classical average of
ratio versus ratio of averages mathematical problem. Moreover, as we also show, this difference considerably affects the
statistical robustness of corpus-level aggregation. Considering that neural metrics currently only cover a small set of
sufficiently-resourced languages, the results in this paper can
help make the evaluation of MT systems for low-resource languages more trustworthy.

1

Introduction

Currently, we can group machine translation (MT) metrics
into two main groups: lexical and neural metrics (Freitag
et al. 2023). Although lexical metrics such as the BLEU
score (Papineni et al. 2002a) have contributed considerably
to the progress in MT in the past 20 years, neural metrics
have emerged in recent years as viable alternatives not only
to overcome the shortcomings of n-gram lexical matches,
but also to leverage corpus-based training to improve the
evaluation of MT (Rei et al. 2020a; Sellam, Das, and Parikh
2020b; Zhang* et al. 2020).
Although it is quite clear that neural metrics tend to
be more robust and will eventually replace lexical ones
(Mathur, Baldwin, and Cohn 2020; Freitag et al. 2021,
2022), we believe that not only lexical metrics are still quite
needed but also that there is room to improve the robustness
of such metrics. We say that they are needed because most
progress with neural metrics is observed on the one hundred or so most-resourced languages in the world, but almost
7,000 languages in the world still lack the minimum amount
of data to train a MT model (Lorandi and Belz 2024). Furthermore, neural metrics can struggle in unseen domains
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23532

