The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Probabilistic Explanations for Linear Models*
Bernardo Subercaseaux1 , Marcelo Arenas2, 3, 4 , Kuldeep S. Meel5, 6
1

2

Carnegie Mellon University
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
3
IMFD Chile
4
RelationalAI
5
Georgia Institute of Technology
6
University of Toronto
and the input instance x “ p1, 1, 0, 1q. We can say that
Mpxq “ 1 “because” x1 “ 1, x2 “ 1, and x4 “ 1, as they
are sufficient to determine the value of Mpxq regardless of
x3 .

Abstract
Formal XAI is an emerging field that focuses on providing
explanations with mathematical guarantees for the decisions
made by machine learning models. A significant amount of
work in this area is centered on the computation of “sufficient
reasons”. Given a model M and an input instance x, a sufficient reason for the decision Mpxq is a subset S of the features of x such that for any instance z that has the same values as x for every feature in S, it holds that Mpxq “ Mpzq.
Intuitively, this means that the features in S are sufficient to
fully justify the classification of x by M. For sufficient reasons to be useful in practice, they should be as small as possible, and a natural way to reduce the size of sufficient reasons is to consider a probabilistic relaxation; the probability
of Mpxq “ Mpzq must be at least some value δ P p0, 1s,
for a random instance z that coincides with x on the features
in S. Computing small δ-sufficient reasons (δ-SRs) is known
to be a theoretically hard problem; even over decision trees
— traditionally deemed simple and interpretable models —
strong inapproximability results make the efficient computation of small δ-SRs unlikely. We propose the notion of pδ, ϵqSR, a simple relaxation of δ-SRs, and show that this kind of
explanations can be computed efficiently over linear models.

Let us start formalizing the framework for our work. First,
we consider binary boolean models M : t0, 1ud Ñ t0, 1u.
Despite our domain being binary, we will need a third value,
K, to denote “unknown” values. For example, we may represent a person who does have a car, does not have a house,
and for whom we do not know if they have a pet or not,
as p1, 0, Kq. We say elements of t0, 1, Kud are partial instances, while elements of t0, 1ud are simply instances. To
illustrate, in Example 1 we used the partial instance y “
p1, 1, K, 1q to explain Mpxq “ 1. We use the notation
y Ď x to denote that the (partial) instance x “fills in” values of the partial instance y; more formally, we use y Ď x
to mean that yi “ K _ yi “ xi for every i P rds. Finally,
for any partial instance y we denote by Comppyq the set of
instances x such that y Ď x, thinking of Comppyq as the
set of completions of y. One can define sufficient reasons as
follows with this notation.
Definition 1 (Sufficient Reason (Darwiche and Hirth 2020)).
We say y is a sufficient reason for x if for any completion
z P Comppyq it holds that Mpxq “ Mpzq.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00154

1

Introduction

A crucial factor for the helpfulness of sufficient reasons
as explanations is their size; even though x is always a sufficient reason for its own classification, we long for explanations that are much smaller than x itself. Miller (1956), for
instance, goes on to say that explanations consisting of more
than 9 features are probably too large for human stakeholders. In general, empirical research suggests that explanations
ought to be small (Narayanan et al. 2018; Lage et al. 2019).
There are several ways of formalizing the succinctness we
desire for sufficient reasons:

Explaining the decisions of Machine Learning classifiers is
a fundamental problem in XAI (Explainable AI), and doing
so with formal mathematical guarantees on the quality, size,
and semantics of the explanations is in turn the core of Formal XAI (Marques-Silva and Ignatiev 2022). Within formal
XAI, one of the most studied kinds of explanations is that of
sufficient reasons (Darwiche and Hirth 2020), which aim to
explain a decision Mpxq “ 1 by presenting a subset S of
the features of the input x that implies Mpzq “ 1 for any z
that agrees with x on S. In the language of theoretical computer science, these correspond to certificates for Mpxq.
Example 1. Consider a binary classifier M defined as

• (Minimum Size) For a sufficient reason y, we define its
explanation size |y|e as the number of defined features
in y, or equivalently, |y|e :“ d ´ |y|K , where |y|K is the
number of features of y taking K. See e.g., (Barceló et al.
2020).1

Mpxq “ px1 _ x3 q ^ px2 _ x1 q ^ px4 _ x3 q ,
* The authors opted for randomized author ordering instead of
alphabetical.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
When talking about a partial instance y, we will use the “size”
of y to mean |y|e .

20655

