The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LiON: Learning Point-wise Abstaining Penalty for LiDAR Outlier DetectioN
Using Diverse Synthetic Data
Shaocong Xu1,2 * , Pengfei Li1 * , Qianpu Sun1 , Xinyu Liu1 , Yang Li1 , Shihui Guo2† , Zhen Wang3 ,
Bo Jiang3 , Rui Wang3 , Kehua Sheng3 , Bo Zhang3 , Li Jiang4 , Hao Zhao1† , Yilun Chen1
1

Tsinghua University
Xiamen University
3
Didi Chuxing
4
Chinese University of Hong Kong, ShenZhen
2

Abstract
LiDAR-based semantic scene understanding is an important
module in the modern autonomous driving perception stack.
However, identifying outlier points in a LiDAR point cloud
is challenging as LiDAR point clouds lack semantically-rich
information. While former SOTA methods adopt heuristic architectures, we revisit this problem from the perspective of
Selective Classification, which introduces a selective function
into the standard closed-set classification setup. Our solution
is built upon the basic idea of abstaining from choosing any
inlier categories but learns a point-wise abstaining penalty
with a margin-based loss. Apart from learning paradigms,
synthesizing outliers to approximate unlimited real outliers
is also critical, so we propose a strong synthesis pipeline
that generates outliers originated from various factors: object
categories, sampling patterns and sizes. We demonstrate that
learning different abstaining penalties, apart from point-wise
penalty, for different types of (synthesized) outliers can further improve the performance. We benchmark our method on
SemanticKITTI and nuScenes and achieve SOTA results.

Input

Output

(a) Segmentation model's random classification of furniture in the road

REAL resize synthesis method

Our ShapeNet synthesis method

(b) Synthesis Method Comparison

Figure 1: (a). The semantic segmentation model fails to identify furniture because the training set does not include such
objects; (b). Comparison of our ShapeNet outlier synthesis
method and the former resize outlier synthesis method.

Code — https://github.com/Daniellli/LiON/

et al. 2023, Miao et al. 2024), addressing outlier class imbalance (Choi, Jeong, and Choi 2023), evolving from pixelwise to mask-based outlier detection methods (Zhang et al.
2024, Rai et al. 2023, Nayal et al. 2023, Zhang et al. 2024),
developing promptable outlier detectors (Zhao et al. 2024,
Li et al. 2024, Zhou et al. 2022), and utilizing model ensembling (Liu et al. 2024), the field of LiDAR outlier detection
is still in its early stages (Li and Dong 2023). Seminal work
REAL (Cen et al. 2022) proposes randomly choosing and resizing objects existing in the scene to synthesize outliers to
approximate unlimited real outliers. For example, as shown
in the left panel of Fig. 1-(b), the car is chosen and shrunk.
This is viable but fail to represent the long-tail distribution
of real outliers, in two regards. Firstly, objects from existing
road scene understanding datasets are limited in category.
Secondly, naive resizing violates the sampling pattern of real
LiDAR sensors: points on enlarged objects get sparser while
those on shrunk objects get denser. This leads to a shortcut
problem: the model may find a trivial solution to distinguish
outliers from inliers solely using point sparsity.
Besides, REAL empirically finds 2D outlier detection
methods (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2018, Hendrycks et al.
2019, Gal and Ghahramani 2016) perform poorly in the 3D

Introduction
LiDAR outlier detection (Li and Dong 2023) complements
LiDAR semantic segmentation (Wang et al. 2024), aiming
to enhance the model’s ability to recognize outliers without
compromising its inlier segmentation performance.
This task is important and practical. Traditional segmentation methods (Wang et al. 2024, Li, Shum, and Breckon
2024) assume that the samples in the training and test sets
belong to the same set of categories. Thus, these models are
trained on inlier categories and tend to classify all inputs into
one of the inlier categories. However, this assumption fails
in real-world scenarios where outliers are present. For example, as shown in Fig. 1-(a), the model may randomly classify
furniture that has not been seen in training, leading to disastrous consequences in the downstream planning stage.
While 2D outlier detection has made significant strides,
including optimizing inlier prediction (Tian et al. 2022, Liu
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8951

