The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diffusion Models for Attribution
Xiongren Chen1 , Jiuyong Li1 , Jixue Liu1 , Lin Liu1 , Stefan Peters1 ,
Thuc Duy Le1 , Wentao Gao1 , Xiaojing Du1 , Anthony Walsh2
1

University of South Australia
Green Triangle Forest Industries Hub
{xiongren.chen, wentao.gao, xiaojing.du}@mymail.unisa.edu.au,{jiuyong.li,jixue.liu,lin.liu,
stefan.peters,thuc.le}@unisa.edu.au,anthony@gtfih.com.au
2

Abstract

interpretations (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Hanin
2018), and blurred attribution maps due to information loss
when mapping from the representation space to pixel space.
In contrast, black-box methods, which directly perturb the
input images and analyze the changes in the model’s output (Petsiuk, Das, and Saenko 2018; Yang et al. 2021; Novello, Fel, and Vigouroux 2022; Chen et al. 2024), can theoretically produce clearer and more precise attribution maps.
However, this approach is computationally expensive when
perturbing individual pixels, and while methods like HSICAttribution (Novello, Fel, and Vigouroux 2022) and SMDLAttribution (Chen et al. 2024) mitigate this by perturbing regions of pixels, they do so at the cost of reduced resolution
and precision in the resulting attribution maps.
In this paper, we reformulate attribution as an information bottlenecks (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000) optimization problem by introducing noise perturbations directly on individual pixels, rather than on representation features, to address the three key limitations of existing whitebox and black-box methods: (1) reliance on gradients, (2)
mapping attributions from the representation space to the input pixel space, and (3) perturbing individual pixels. However, optimizing information bottlenecks in the pixel space
presents a significant challenge: calculating mutual information from a data distribution perspective to determine pixel
importance is impractical because the pixel space distribution is unknown. Mutual information computation becomes
intractable with high-dimensional data and often depends
on assumptions—such as those in the IBA method (Schulz
et al. 2020) that assume features follow a normal distribution—assumptions that do not hold in pixel space.
To address the challenge, we propose using diffusion
models (Luo 2022) as information bottlenecks. By leveraging the Gaussian noise in diffusion models, we connect the
information bottleneck with the MMSE from classical information theory (Guo, Shamai, and Verdú 2005). This approach leads to an integral expression for mutual information, and we demonstrate that reducing the SNR effectively
decreases mutual information. Building on this, we design a
new loss function that directly minimizes SNR, simplifying
computations within the information bottleneck framework.
Ultimately, our method achieves pixel-level attribution in the
input layer by utilizing diffusion models and the integral
form of mutual information. Figure 1 visually compares the

In high-stakes domains such as healthcare, finance, and law,
the need for explainable AI is critical. Traditional methods for
generating attribution maps, including white-box approaches
relying on gradients and black-box techniques that perturb
inputs, face challenges like gradient vanishing, blurred attributions, and computational inefficiencies. To overcome these
limitations, we introduce a novel approach that leverages diffusion models within the framework of information bottleneck theory. By utilizing the Gaussian noise from diffusion
models, we connect the information bottleneck with the Minimum Mean Squared Error (MMSE) from classical information theory, enabling precise calculation of mutual information. This connection leads to a new loss function that minimizes the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), facilitating efficient
optimization and producing high-resolution, pixel-level attribution maps. Our method achieves greater clarity and accuracy in attributions than existing techniques, requiring significantly fewer pixel values to reach the necessary predictive
confidence. This work demonstrates the power of diffusion
models in advancing explainable AI, particularly in identifying critical input features with high precision.

Introduction
As machine learning continues to evolve and expand its applications, explainability of these systems becomes increasingly critical, especially in high-stakes areas like healthcare (Chaddad et al. 2023; Saraswat et al. 2022), finance
(Soundararajan and Shenbagaraman 2024) and judiciary
(Gless 2019). Various explainable machine learning methods have been developed, and they generally fall into two
categories: white-box approach and black-box approach
(Novello, Fel, and Vigouroux 2022; Chen et al. 2024).
White-box and black-box methods each have distinct
approaches and limitations in generating attribution maps
for explainability. White-box methods, which use gradients
from the input layer (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman
2014; Smilkov et al. 2017; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan
2017; Pan, Li, and Zhu 2021) or map importance from the
representation space back to the input (Schulz et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2021), can suffer from issues like gradient vanishing or exploding in deep networks, leading to inaccurate
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2266

