The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Game4Loc: A UAV Geo-Localization Benchmark from Game Data
Yuxiang Ji1 * , Boyong He1 * , Zhuoyue Tan1 , Liaoni Wu1,2†
1
2

Institute of Artifcial Intelligence, Xiamen University
School of Aerospace Engineering, Xiamen University
yuxiangji@stu.xmu.edu.cn, wuliaoni@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Perfect One-to-One Matching

The vision-based geo-localization technology for UAV, serving as a secondary source of GPS information in addition
to the global navigation satellite systems (GNSS), can still
operate independently in the GPS-denied environment. Recent deep learning based methods attribute this as the task of
image matching and retrieval. By retrieving drone-view images in geo-tagged satellite image database, approximate localization information can be obtained. However, due to high
costs and privacy concerns, it is usually difficult to obtain
large quantities of drone-view images from a continuous area.
Existing drone-view datasets are mostly composed of smallscale aerial photography with a strong assumption that there
exists a perfect one-to-one aligned reference image for any
query, leaving a significant gap from the practical localization scenario. In this work, we construct a large-range contiguous area UAV geo-localization dataset named GTA-UAV,
featuring multiple flight altitudes, attitudes, scenes, and targets using modern computer games. Based on this dataset,
we introduce a more practical UAV geo-localization task including partial matches of cross-view paired data, and expand the image-level retrieval to the actual localization in
terms of distance (meters). For the construction of drone-view
and satellite-view pairs, we adopt a weight-based contrastive
learning approach, which allows for effective learning while
avoiding additional post-processing matching steps. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our data and training
method for UAV geo-localization, as well as the generalization capabilities to real-world scenarios.

Drone-view

Pa
rti
al
Nto
-N

M
at
ch
in
g

Aligned Satellite-view
Strong Assumption

1. R
et
rie
va
l

2. Localization

Area to be located
Real-world Scenario

Arbitrary Satellite-view
Real-world Scenario

Figure 1: Comparision between perfect matching pair and
partial matching pair.

and visual place recognition (Arandjelovic et al. 2016). Recent research formulates this as a cross-view image retrieval problem (Lin et al. 2022; Dai et al. 2023). Given a
drone-view image, the goal is to retrieve a matching scene
from a database of GPS-tagged satellite-view images to infer the current GPS information of the UAV. Compared to
traditional hand-crafted feature extraction algorithms, deep
learning based methods achieve higher accuracy and better generalization performance (Tian, Chen, and Shah 2017;
Dusmanu et al. 2019). However, such superiority is built
upon the training on a large amount of paired images from
drone-view and satellite-view.
Existing cross-view datasets are mostly composed of image pairs from different platform views, e.g., ground cameras and satellites (Workman, Souvenir, and Jacobs 2015;
Zhai et al. 2017; Liu and Li 2019). The datasets for UAV
localization follow this paradigm and expand the view to
drones (Zheng, Wei, and Yang 2020; Xu et al. 2024; Zhu
et al. 2023a; Dai et al. 2023). Due to high costs and privacy concerns, most of these data are obtained through
Google Earth Engine simulation, and the remaining realworld data are very limited in terms of scale, height, angle,

Project Page — https://yux1angji.github.io/game4loc/

Introduction
Vision-based UAV geo-localization, as an independent onboard technology that can work independently of communication systems, enables UAVs to autonomously obtain GPS
information even when GNSS communication fails. This
UAV visual localization task could be refered as a special
case of cross-view geo-localization (Deuser, Habel, and Oswald 2023; Zheng, Wei, and Yang 2020; Hu et al. 2018)
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3913

