The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Speeding Up the NSGA-II with a Simple Tie-Breaking Rule
Benjamin Doerr1 , Tudor Ivan2 , Martin S. Krejca1
1

Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), CNRS, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
2
École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
{first-name.last-name}@polytechnique.edu

and more objectives when the population size is linear in the
size of the Pareto front (Zheng and Doerr 2024b). The proof
of this result suggests that similar problems exist for many
optimization problems with three or more objectives. (2) All
runtime guarantees proven for the NSGA-II increase linearly
with the population size. For some settings, even matching
lower bounds proving this effect were proven (Doerr and Qu
2023b). This behavior is very different from many singleobjective EAs, where a moderate increase of the population
size increases the cost of an iteration but at the same time reduces the number of iterations in a way that the total runtime
(number of function evaluations) is at most little affected.
The reason for this undesired behavior of the NSGA-II, as
the proofs by Doerr and Qu (2023b) reveal, is that the population of the NSGA-II is typically not evenly distributed on
the known part of the Pareto front. Instead, the distribution is
heavily skewed toward the inner region of the Pareto front.
Inspired by this observation, we propose to add a simple
tie-breaking criterion to the selection of the next population.
In the classic NSGA-II, selection is done according to nondominated sorting, ties are broken according to the crowding
distance, and remaining ties are broken randomly. We add
the number of individuals having a certain objective value
as the third criterion, and break only the remaining ties randomly. We note that a similar idea was suggested already by
Fortin and Parizeau (2013) and supported by empirical results, but has not made it into the typical use of the NSGA-II.
Our tie-breaker solves both problems. We rigorously
study the runtime for the three most established benchmarks
in the theory of multi-objective EAs (MOEAs): O NE M IN M AX, L EADING O NES T RAILING Z EROS, and O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP. For all defined versions with at least three objectives and for constant gap parameter k, we show that our
NSGA-II with a population size exceeding the Pareto front
size only by a lower-order term efficiently solves the problem when the Pareto front size is polynomial (Theorem 3).
For the bi-objective versions of these problems, we prove
runtime guarantees showing that for a certain range of the
population size, the runtime is (asymptotically) not affected
by this parameter. The size of this range depends on the difficulty of the problem. For the difficult O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP
benchmark with problem size n and gap parameter k, our
runtime guarantee is O(nk+1 ) for all population sizes N
between 4(n − 2k + 3) and O(nk ), and it is O(N n) for

Abstract
The non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) is
the most popular multi-objective optimization heuristic. Recent mathematical runtime analyses have detected two shortcomings in discrete search spaces, namely, that the NSGAII has difficulties with more than two objectives and that
it is very sensitive to the choice of the population size.
To overcome these difficulties, we analyze a simple tiebreaking rule in the selection of the next population. Similar rules have been proposed before, but have found only
little acceptance. We prove the effectiveness of our tiebreaking rule via mathematical runtime analyses on the classic O NE M IN M AX, L EADING O NES T RAILING Z EROS, and
O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP benchmarks. We prove that this modified NSGA-II can optimize the three benchmarks efficiently
also for many objectives, in contrast to the exponential lower
runtime bound previously shown for O NE M IN M AX with
three or more objectives. For the bi-objective problems, we
show runtime guarantees that do not increase when moderately increasing the population size over the minimum admissible size. For example, for the O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP problem with representation length n and gap parameter k, we
show a runtime guarantee of O(max{nk+1 , N n}) function
evaluations when the population size is at least four times the
size of the Pareto front. For population sizes larger than the
minimal choice N = Θ(n), this result improves considerably
over the Θ(N nk ) runtime of the classic NSGA-II.

Introduction
Many real-world optimization tasks face several, usually
conflicting objectives. One of the most successful approaches to such multi-objective optimization problems are
evolutionary algorithms (EAs) (Coello, Lamont, and van
Veldhuizen 2007; Zhou et al. 2011), with the NSGA-II (Deb
et al. 2002) standing out as the by far dominant algorithm in
practice (over 50 000 citations on Google Scholar).
Recent mathematical works have shown many positive results for the NSGA-II (see Previous Works) but have also
exhibited two difficulties. (1) For more than two objectives,
the crowding distance as selection criterion seems to have
some shortcomings. This was formally proven for the optimization of the simple O NE M IN M AX benchmark, where an
exponential lower bound on the runtime was shown for three
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
26964

