The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Increasing Revenue in Efficient Combinatorial Auctions
by Learning to Generate Artificial Competition
Maria-Florina Balcan1 , Siddharth Prasad1 , Tuomas Sandholm1, 2, 3, 4
1

School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Strategy Robot, Inc.
3
Strategic Machine, Inc.
4
Optimized Markets, Inc.
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu, sprasad2@cs.cmu.edu, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract

levels of competition. We show that this new auction class
offers the flexibility and expressive power to meaningfully
boost revenue under three different auctioneer knowledge
models: (i) knowledge of full bidder valuation distributions,
(ii) knowledge of bidder valuation quantiles, and (iii) knowledge of historical bidder valuation data.
Our primary research question is: how can the auction
designer use additional knowledge to boost revenue via enhanced competition while striving to run an efficient auction? If efficiency, incentive compatibility (IC) (each bidder
is weakly best off bidding her true values no matter how
other bidders act), and individual rationality (IR) (each bidder is motivated to participate in the auction via a guarantee
of non-negative utility) are constraints of the auction design,
the weakest-competitor VCG (WCVCG) auction of Balcan,
Prasad, and Sandholm (2023) is revenue optimal. So, a more
competitive auction that implements the efficient allocation
and attempts to boost revenues beyond WCVCG necessarily runs the risk of determining that a bidder should pay
more than her winning bid price. Such a bidder could respond in one of two ways to that situation. She could decline
the offer, which would force the auctioneer to keep her winning items unsold and result in an economically inefficient
allocation. But if the overcharge is not too significant, she
might accept the offer—violating her individual rationality
constraint—leading to the efficient allocation to be realized.
In both cases an economically desirable aspect of the auction design is compromised: either the auctioneer settles for
a less-than-efficient allocation, or the auctioneer accepts that
a bidder was overcharged (potentially eroding bidder trust
and opening the door for further unwanted negotiation). We
model this behavior, design new kinds of competitive auctions that are sensitive to this behavior, and show how those
auctions can increase revenue without violating individual
rationality nor efficiency too frequently.

The design of multi-item, multi-bidder auctions involves a
delicate balancing act of economic objectives, bidder incentives, and real-world complexities. Efficient auctions, that is,
auctions that allocate items to maximize total bidder value,
are practically desirable since they promote the most economically beneficial use of resources. Arguably the biggest
drawback of efficient auctions, however, is their potential to
generate very low revenue. In this work, we show how the
auction designer can inject competition into the auction to
boost revenue while striving to maintain efficiency. First, we
invent a new auction family that enables the auction designer
to specify competition in a precise, expressive, and interpretable way. We then introduce a new model of bidder behavior and individual rationality to understand how bidders
act when prices are too competitive. Next, under our bidder
behavior model, we use our new competitive auction class
to derive the globally revenue-optimal efficient auction under two different knowledge models for the auction designer:
knowledge of full bidder value distributions and knowledge
of bidder value quantiles. Finally, we study a third knowledge model for the auction designer: knowledge of historical
bidder valuation data. In this setting we present sample and
computationally efficient learning algorithms that find highrevenue probably-efficient competitive auctions from bidder
data. Our learning algorithms are instance adaptive and can
be run in parallel across bidders, unlike most prior approaches
to data-driven auction design.

1

Introduction

The design of combinatorial auctions is an intricate problem spanning theory and practice. We study the design of
competition in efficient (welfare-maximizing) combinatorial
auctions. Efficiency in large high-stakes auctions is important. For example, Cramton (2013) advises countries to focus on efficiency in spectrum auctions since that will yield
the best and most competitive use of the allocated resources,
leading to higher long-term revenues and an overall better
economic state. The classic efficient auction for multi-item
settings is the Vickrey (1961)-Clarke (1971)-Groves (1973)
(VCG) auction, but VCG is rarely used in practice due to
its unacceptably low revenue. We introduce a new class of
auctions that augment VCG prices with auctioneer-specified

Summary of Contributions and Related Work
Competitive VCG auctions We introduce a new family of
auctions, f -VCG auctions, that gives the auction designer
the expressive ability to specify precisely, for each bidder,
an artificial competitor to drive competitive prices. These
auctions have the feature that the auction parameters for a
bidder—her competitor—can depend on the revealed bids
of all other bidders.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13572

