The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CA-Edit: Causality-Aware Condition Adapter for High-Fidelity Local Facial
Attribute Editing
Xiaole Xian1 * , Xilin He1 * , Zenghao Niu1 , Junliang Zhang1 , Weicheng Xie1, 3† , Siyang Song4 , Zitong
Yu5 , Linlin Shen1, 2, 3
1

Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University,
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University,
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
4
University of Exeter,
5
Great Bay University
Abstract

at the noise level. However, such methods may lead to inconsistencies beyond the editing target area. Regarding lo-

For efficient and high-fidelity local facial attribute editing,
most existing editing methods either require additional finetuning for different editing effects or tend to affect beyond
the editing regions. Alternatively, inpainting methods can edit
the target image region while preserving external areas. However, current inpainting methods still suffer from the generation misalignment with facial attributes description and the
loss of facial skin details. To address these challenges, (i)
a novel data utilization strategy is introduced to construct
datasets consisting of attribute-text-image triples from a datadriven perspective, (ii) a Causality-Aware Condition Adapter
is proposed to enhance the contextual causality modeling of
specific details, which encodes the skin details from the original image while preventing conflicts between these cues and
textual conditions. In addition, a Skin Transition Frequency
Guidance technique is introduced for the local modeling of
contextual causality via sampling guidance driven by lowfrequency alignment. Extensive quantitative and qualitative
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in
boosting both fidelity and editability for localized attribute
editing. Our codes will be made publicly available.

“Closed
eyes”

(a)Description
Misalignment

(b) Skin Details
Missing

(c)Textual-Visual
Conflict

Output of Existing Approaches
Fine-Grained
Prior Knowledge
“Closed
eyes”

Causality-Aware
Modeling

Output of Our Method

Local Attribute
Description
Specific Skin
Details
Textual-Visual
Harmony

Figure 1: (Top) The existing text-guided inpainting pipeline
for our local attribute editing task. (Bottom) Our method
takes account of the causality of the the specific details from
the original image, improving the editability and the fidelity.

Introduction
cal facial attribute editing, image inpainting is a technique
focused on local masked region painting, which also benefits from the recent advances in diffusion models (Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Yang,
Chen, and Liao 2023). Besides, image inpainting has been
also developed for local facial attribute editing, which focuses on the inpainting of local masked regions, based on
advanced diffusion models (Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried
2022; Yang et al. 2023; Yang, Chen, and Liao 2023). Textguided image inpainting(Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried
2022) allows prompt-driven content generation in specific
areas without finetuning during inference, while maintaining consistency between the editing and unmasked regions,
which is thus used in our method.
However, existing methods for image inpainting may suffer from concerns in terms of editability and fidelity. The
first problem: they (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023; Ju
et al. 2024) struggle to understand the contextual relationship between unmasked facial regions and the textual de-

Efficient and high-fidelity local facial attribute editing with
textual description represents a challenging task in computer
vision. GANs-based methods (Wang et al. 2022; Pernuš,
Štruc, and Dobrišek 2023) have explored this task, which
primarily optimize the original image within the latent space
with a pre-trained StyleGAN model (Karras et al. 2020).
However, these GANs-based methods require additional
fine-tuning for different attributes. Subsequently, the prior
diffusion-based image editing methods based on the text-toimage (T2I) diffusion models achieve image editing in various ways. These methods are either based on P2P (Hertz
et al. 2022), utilizing the original image attention injection
mechanism to preserve the layout, or based on DDIM Inversion (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020), modifying the latent
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8593

