The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On Finding Hubs in High Dimensions with Sampling
Huiwen Dong1 , Linghan Zeng2 , Zhiwen Zhao1 , Francesco Silvestri3 , Ninh Pham2
1

Faculty of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Guangdong, China
2
School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, New Zealand
3
Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Italy
donghw.dhw@gmail.com, lzen402@aucklanduni.ac.nz, mlt.bnu2017@bnu.edu.cn, francesco.silvestri@unipd.it,
ninh.pham@auckland.ac.nz
Abstract
Hubs are a few points that frequently appear in the k-nearest
neighbors (kNN) of many other points in a high-dimensional
data set. The hubs’ effects, called the hubness phenomenon,
degrade the performance of kNN based models in high dimensions. We present SamHub, a simple sampling approach
to efficiently identify hubs with theoretical guarantees. Apart
from previous works based on approximate kNN indexes,
SamHub is generic and applicable to any distance measure
with negligible additional memory footprint. Empirically, by
sampling only 10% of points, SamHub runs significantly faster
and offers higher accuracy than existing hub detection methods on many real-world data sets with dot product, L1, L2,
and dynamic time warping distances. Our ablation studies of
SamHub on improving kNN-based classification show potential for other high-dimensional data analysis tasks.

Introduction
Analyzing high-dimensional data is often challenging due
to the presence of hubs, known as the hubness phenomenon.
Hubs are defined as a few points that frequently occur in
the kNN lists of many other points (Radovanović, Nanopoulos, and Ivanović 2010a). This phenomenon has significant
implications across various data analysis tasks. In classification, addressing hubness can improve performance in
applications such as text-image matching (Liu et al. 2020),
recommender system (Hara et al. 2015a), and few-shot learning (Trosten et al. 2023). In clustering, leveraging hub-like
centroids as cluster centers has been shown to increase the
accuracy of clustering algorithms (Tomašev et al. 2013; Mani
and Domeniconi 2020).
While hubness reduction has recently been the subject of
much research (Schnitzer et al. 2012; Hara et al. 2015b; Feldbauer and Flexer 2019), hubness verification, i.e. whether
hubs exist in a data set, is a prerequisite to any reduction technique. A recent approach for hubness reduction is to transform data sets into a new hubness-resistant space (Trosten
et al. 2023). This necessitates the hubness verification in the
new space.
Hubness verification and hub identification are important
parts of the hubness reduction process but have not received
enough attention so far. Unfortunately, identifying hubs by
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11590

Figure 1: An illustration of SamHub.

calculating kNN for each point of the data set X of size n
has O(n2 ) time, which is infeasible for large-scale data sets.
To reduce the cost of executing n kNN queries, approximate
nearest neighbor search (ANNS)-based methods (Douze et al.
2024; Malkov and Yashunin 2018) have been utilized (Feldbauer et al. 2018). However, the cost of building ANNS
indexes is significant and might dominate the execution time.
Since hubs are the most frequent points on the n kNN
lists, given a data set with strong hubness, hubs will likely
appear on a small number of sampled kNN lists. Therefore,
by considering the set of points on these sampled kNN lists
as hub candidates, we can accurately and efficiently identify
hubs. Figure 1 briefly shows how our sampling algorithm,
called SamHub, works. In the exact method, we compute
kNN for each xi ∈ X and count the kNN frequency of each
point to find the top-1 hub. SamHub has 2 phases, including
filtering and verifying steps. In the filtering step, we randomly

