The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CFDM: Contrastive Fusion and Disambiguation
for Multi-View Partial-Label Learning
Qiuru Hai1 , Yongjian Deng1 , Yuena Lin1,2 , Zheng Li1 , Zhen Yang1 * , Gengyu Lyu1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
2
Idealism Beijing Technology Co., Ltd.
haiqiuru@emails.bjut.edu.cn, yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn, yuenalin@126.com, lizhengcn@bjut.edu.cn, yangzhen@bjut.edu.cn,
lyugengyu@gmail.com
Abstract
When dealing with multi-view data, the heterogeneity of data
attributes across different views often leads to label ambiguity. To effectively address this challenge, this paper designs
a Multi-View Partial-Label Learning (MVPLL) framework,
where each training instance is described by multiple view
features and associated with a set of candidate labels, among
which only one is correct. The key to deal with such problem
lies in how to effectively fuse multi-view information and accurately disambiguate these ambiguous labels. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach named CFDM, which explores
the consistency and complementarity of multi-view data by
multi-view contrastive fusion and reduces label ambiguity
by multi-class contrastive prototype disambiguation. Specifically, we first extract view-specific representations using multiple view-specific autoencoders, and then integrate multiview information through both inter-view and intra-view contrastive fusion to enhance the distinctiveness of these representations. Afterwards, we utilize these distinctive representations to establish and update prototype vectors for each
class within each view. Based on these, we apply contrastive
prototype disambiguation to learn global class prototypes and
accordingly reduce label ambiguity. In our model, multiview contrastive fusion and multi-class contrastive prototype disambiguation are conducted mutually to enhance each
other within a coherent framework, leading to a more ideal
classification performance. Experimental results on multiple
datasets have demonstrated that our proposed method is superior to other state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: An Example of multi-view partial label learning.

design a new learning framework named Multi-View PartialLabel Learning (MVPLL), where each training instance is
described by multiple heterogeneous views and associated
with several candidate labels, among which only one is correct. MVPLL provides an effective way to learn from such
complex data and predict correct labels for unseen instances.
The key to deal with multi-view partial-label data lies
in how to effectively integrate these heterogeneous features
while accurately identify the correct labels from ambiguous
label sets. An intuitive strategy to formulate MVPLL problem is to utilize either Multi-View Learning (MVL) (Lyu
et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2023b; Zhang et al. 2023) or PartialLabel Learning (PLL) (Dong et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023;
Feng et al. 2020; Li et al. 2023). MVL provides an effective framework to integrate multi-view heterogeneous information and directly induce the final prediction model. However, such a unique feature-fusion operation cannot precisely
eliminate the ambiguity in the candidate labels, inevitably
leading to inaccurate identification of the true labels. PLL
focuses on identifying the unique correct label from the candidate label set, but it ignores the exploration of potential
multi-view consistency and complementarity information,
which also significantly damages the classification performance of the learning model. Recently, some studies (Zhao
et al. 2022; Sun, Yu, and Tian 2023) attempt to handle these
two challenges simultaneously, however, they can only handle dual-view scenarios and hardly be extended to more
views, which restricts their practicalities in real-world applications. Meanwhile, they don’t establish direct and com-

Introduction
With the rapid development of internet technologies, social
media platforms generate vast amounts of multi-view data.
For example, in the task of user interest classification (Figure 1), the information posted by a user can be represented
by text, images, and video, and may be associated with multiple topic labels (such as travel, food, and culture). However, only one of these labels can accurately reflect the user’s
main interest. Obviously, it is a significant challenge to accurately identify the correct label due to heterogeneous data
from multiple views and ambiguous labels. To this end, we
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17005

