The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SVRMamba: Slice-to-Volume Reconstruction from Multiple MRI Stacks with
Slice Sequence Guided Mamba
Jiangjie Wu1 , Hongjiang Wei2 , Yuyao Zhang1 *
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
wujj@shanghaitech.edu.cn, hongjiang.wei@sjtu.edu.cn, zhangyy8@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
In fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), slice-to-volume
reconstruction (SVR) involves the computational creation of
a 3D volume from multiple stacks of 2D slices. This process
is challenging due to slice misalignment and image noise.
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) SVR methods typically employ coarse-to-fine techniques that iteratively refine slice-tovolume motion correction and 3D volume reconstruction.
However, both processes are inherently inefficient, making
these methods time-consuming and prone to errors. This often results in less robust and accurate outcomes, primarily
due to insufficient modeling of the spatial relationships between slices. Typically, 2D fetal MRI slices are acquired using the interleave sequence, which first acquires the odd slices
and then the even slices in one stack. To this end, we propose a novel Mamba-based framework called SVRMamba,
which integrates slice-to-volume reconstruction with slice
sequence-guided state space modeling. Specifically, our approach reformulates Mamba’s unidirectional scanning into a
slice sequence-guided odd-even directional scanning method
and marks the slice positions using sequence embedding tokens. This enables the network to learn the slice relationships
and spatial sequences, enhancing fetal MRI SVR motion correction performance. We further integrate a convolutional
neural network (CNN)-based interpolation network that generates a noise-suppressed 3D reconstruction by leveraging the
predicted motion for each slice. This framework notably enhances 3D fetal brain SVR, delivering substantial improvements in both reconstruction speed and overall performance.
Extensive experiments conducted on various benchmark and
clinical datasets demonstrate that SVRMamba significantly
outperforms existing SOTA methods, delivering comparable
results with a remarkable sixtyfold increase in reconstruction
speed.

Figure 1: Slice sequence-guided odd-even scan. The pink
dotted box highlights the original input slices and its corresponding slice-stack position.

slices and assembling them into a 3D volume through a process known as slice-to-volume reconstruction (SVR). Unlike
3D MRI acquisitions, where a single motion event can corrupt the entire k-space (Fourier) data, 2D techniques confine
this corruption to individual slices, preserving the integrity
of the k-space data for the remaining slices. SVR can then
be applied to the non-corrupted slices, enabling artifact-free
brain imaging and supporting various downstream tasks,
such as brain morphometry (Coakley et al. 2004; Payette
et al. 2023; Namburete et al. 2023), brain cortex development study (Zöllei et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021a; Chen et al.
2023), and atlas creation(Evans et al. 2012; Gholipour et al.

Introduction
Non-invasive imaging of the brain, particularly in cases
where the subject may exhibit severe uncontrollable motion,
such as in fetal populations, often relies on two-dimensional
(2D) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Coakley et al.
2004; Davidson et al. 2021; Aviles Verdera et al. 2023). This
technique involves acquiring multiple stacks of 2D brain
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8404

