The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

REM: A Scalable Reinforced Multi-Expert Framework for Multiplex Influence
Maximization
Huyen Nguyen * 1 , Hieu Dam * 2 , Nguyen Hoang Khoi Do 3 , Cong Tran 1 , Cuong Pham 1
1

Posts and Telecommunications Institute of Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam
2
FPT University, Swinburne Vietnam Hanoi campus, Hanoi Vietnam
3
University of Florida, Gainesville, USA
huyenxam250400@gmail.com, hieudmswh00475@fpt.edu.vn, nguyen.do@ufl.edu, cuongpv@ptit.edu.vn, congtt@ptit.edu.vn
Abstract
In social online platforms, identifying influential seed users to
maximize influence spread is a crucial as it can greatly diminish the cost and efforts required for information dissemination.
While effective, traditional methods for Multiplex Influence
Maximization (MIM) have reached their performance limits, prompting the emergence of learning-based approaches.
These novel methods aim for better generalization and scalability for more sizable graphs but face significant challenges,
such as (1) inability to handle unknown diffusion patterns
and (2) reliance on high-quality training samples. To address
these issues, we propose the Reinforced Expert Maximization
framework (REM). REM leverages a Propagation Mixture of
Experts technique to encode dynamic propagation of large
multiplex networks effectively in order to generate enhanced
influence propagation. Noticeably, REM treats a generative
model as a policy to autonomously generate different seed sets
and learn how to improve them from a Reinforcement Learning perspective. Extensive experiments on several real-world
datasets demonstrate that REM surpasses state-of-the-art methods in terms of influence spread, scalability, and inference time
in influence maximization tasks.

Introduction
Graph data has found a wide range of applications such as
social networks and data mining (Lim et al. 2015; Liaghat,
Rasekh, and Mahdavi 2013; Nettleton 2013; Bonchi 2011).
One popular application is Influence Maximization (IM),
which aims to identify a set of individuals that can maximize
the spread of influence in a social network under a specific
diffusion model. This problem is known to be NP-hard and
has been extensively studied in various domains such as viral
marketing (Domingos and Richardson 2001; Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003). With the diversification of social platforms, many users on Online Social Networks (OSNs) like
Facebook and Twitter are linking their accounts across multiple platforms. These interconnected OSNs with overlapping
users are referred to as Multiplex Networks. The structure of
multiplex networks allows users to post information across
various OSNs simultaneously, presenting significant value
for marketing campaigns (Vikatos, Gryllos, and Makris 2020;
Zhang et al. 2022; Jalili et al. 2017).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27099

The inner information propagation models on each OSN
can vary, leading to differences in how information spreads
and influences users across platforms. Consequently, it becomes crucial to customize influence maximization strategies
that effectively exert influence over multiple platforms. This
is known as Multiplex Influence Maximization (MIM). To
date, Combinatorial Optimization (CO) algorithms for MIM
(Zhan et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2016; Kuhnle et al. 2018;
Singh et al. 2019; Ling et al. 2023) have limitations compared to learning-based approaches. CO algorithms struggle
to generalize to unseen graphs and handle diverse multiplex
networks. They also face scalability issues when dealing with
large-scale networks. Furthermore, CO algorithms rely on
predefined rules or heuristics, limiting their ability to capture
complex patterns and non-linear dependencies in multiplex
networks. These shortcomings significantly undermine their
effectiveness in optimizing the selection of influential seed
nodes. In contrast, learning-based approaches (Do et al. 2024;
Yuan, Shao, and Chen 2024; Chen et al. 2022; Li, Han, and
Wu 2018) offer advantages in terms of generalization, scalability and capturing complex patterns. However, they still
suffer critical weaknesses in MIM as follows:
1) Inefficient optimization. MIM, being a NP-hard problem
with layers potentially scaling to billions, demands efficient training. RL methods, such as those presented in
(Manchanda et al. 2020a; Chen et al. 2022; Yuan, Shao,
and Chen 2024; Do et al. 2024), optimize seed sets in
discrete spaces through exploration, iteratively improving
solutions without an initial dataset. However, they rely
on extensive random sampling, leading to long training
time and risks of local optima. Data-driven approaches
like (Ling et al. 2023) address these issues by leveraging
generative models trained on diverse datasets, though their
success is tied to dataset quality. Only with a sufficiently
diverse training dataset can the model capture key features
for optimization. Developing low-complexity models for
efficient optimization remains a major challenge.
2) Inaccurate propagation estimating models. Accurately
measuring propagation value is crucial for evaluating seed
set effectiveness. Simulation-based methods (Manchanda
et al. 2020a; Do et al. 2024; Yuan, Shao, and Chen 2024)
rely on running propagation processes to compute spread
which is computationally expensive and scales poorly for
large graphs. GNN-based approaches (Chen et al. 2022;

