The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

From Words to Worth: Newborn Article Impact Prediction with LLM
Penghai Zhao1 , Qinghua Xing1 , Kairan Dou1 , Jinyu Tian1 , Ying Tai3 , Jian Yang1 ,
Ming-Ming Cheng12 , Xiang Li*12
1

VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
3
PCALab, Nanjing University
zhaopenghai@mail.nankai.edu.cn, xiang.li.implus@nankai.edu.cn
Abstract
Predicting the future impact of newly published articles
is pivotal for advancing scientific discovery in an era
of unprecedented scholarly expansion. This paper introduces a promising approach, leveraging the capabilities of LLMs to predict the future impact of newborn
articles solely based on titles and abstracts. Breaking
away from traditional methods heavily reliant on external data, we propose fine-tuning the LLM to uncover
the intrinsic semantic patterns shared by highly impactful articles from a vast collection of text-score pairs.
These semantic features are further utilized to predict
the proposed indicator, TNCSISP , which incorporates
favorable normalization properties across value, field,
and time. To facilitate parameter-efficient fine-tuning of
the LLM, we have also meticulously curated a dataset
containing over 12,000 entries, each annotated with titles, abstracts, and their corresponding TNCSISP values. Experimental results reveal an MAE of 0.216 and
an NDCG@20 of 0.901, setting new benchmarks in
predicting the impact of newborn articles. Finally, we
present a real-world application example for predicting
the impact of newborn journal articles to demonstrate its
noteworthy practical value. Overall, our findings challenge existing paradigms and propose a shift towards
a more content-focused prediction of academic impact,
offering new insights for article impact prediction.

Input Features

Method

Citation & Venue

Decision Tree

97

Author & Affiliation
Is highly-cited?

…

…

Textual Content
Heavily Rely on External Info

Published Papers Only

Lv. II - Newborn AIP (ours)
Input Features

Method

Target

0.26
LLM
Only Title and Abstract Needed

All Papers Welcome

Figure 1: A taxonomy of article impact prediction (AIP):
since there are virtually no other Lv. II methods, the “newborn AIP” segment represents the proposed approach, which
predicts future academic impact in a “double-blind peerreview” manner.

promotions. Individuals may also benefit from impact predictions, which help them efficiently identify cutting-edge
articles and remain leading in their fields, especially given
the hundreds of daily arXiv submissions across various academic disciplines.
Recently, as the field of Large Language Model (LLM)
agent-based automated scientific research systems rapidly
evolves (de la Torre-López, Ramı́rez, and Romero 2023;
Wang et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2024), article impact prediction
has never been more important than it is today. Imitating human experts, these autonomous systems typically start with
identifying the most relevant and valuable research literature
from extensive academic articles. Only then do these systems extract and synthesize knowledge from the retrieved
literature, thereby enabling practical applications such as
idea generation (Baek et al. 2024), and compound discovery (M. Bran et al. 2024), etc. As the saying goes, You can’t
make bricks without straw, article impact prediction has thus
become a central component of automated research systems.
However, almost all existing impact prediction ap-

Link — sway.cloud.microsoft/KOH09sPR21Ubojbc
Demo — https://huggingface.co/spaces/ssocean/
Newborn Article Impact Predict

Introduction
The emerging field of article impact prediction is becoming
increasingly critical in advancing scientific research. Generally, it focuses on forecasting the potential future citation
counts of academic publications by exploiting the external
data related to the article (Xia, Li, and Li 2023), such as early
citation feature, venue characteristics, and author reputation,
etc. Unlike traditional bibliometric evaluations that measure
established influence, article impact prediction typically encompasses a broader range of applications. Large institutions utilize it for research funding decisions and academic
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1183

