The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

xPatch: Dual-Stream Time Series Forecasting with
Exponential Seasonal-Trend Decomposition
Artyom Stitsyuk 1 , Jaesik Choi 1,2
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
2
INEEJI, South Korea
{stitsyuk, jaesik.choi}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

preserving temporal information remains a challenge for
transformer-based models. This limitation can adversely affect the performance of the LTSF task dealing with a continuous set of points. As a result, the effectiveness of transformers in the LTSF task has been challenged by a simple linear approach utilizing a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) network (Zeng et al. 2023). Surprisingly, a simple linear model
named DLinear has surpassed the state-of-the-art forecasting performance of all previous transformer-based models,
raising a fundamental question: “Are Transformers effective
for long-term time series forecasting?”.
Due to the non-stationary nature of real-world systems,
time series data usually contain complex temporal patterns.
To handle this complexity and non-stationarity (Liu et al.
2022), many recent LTSF models have adopted a paradigm
of decomposing inputs. They use a seasonal-trend decomposition to capture linear trend features and non-linear seasonal variations. For handling time series trend features, certain transformer-based models, including Autoformer (Wu
et al. 2021) and FEDformer (Zhou et al. 2022), incorporate
seasonal-trend data decomposition. By partitioning the signal into two components, each with distinct function behavior, it becomes more feasible to capture semantic features
from each component and make separate predictions.
Both Autoformer and FEDformer focus on refining the
transformer architecture by introducing an auto-correlation
mechanism and a frequency-enhanced method while decomposing the signal using a simple average pooling method.
This technique requires padding at both ends, essentially repeating the last and first values. Consequently, we argue that
this approach introduces a bias towards the initial and final
values, potentially altering the behavior of trend values.
We propose a simple yet effective decomposition technique based on a generally applicable time series smoothing
method named Exponential Moving Average (EMA) (Gardner Jr 1985). The proposed strategy assigns exponentially
decreasing weights over time, facilitating more efficient feature learning from the decomposed data. The resulting exponentially smoothed sequence represents the trend, while the
residual difference encapsulates the seasonality.
Currently, the state-of-the-art models for the LTSF task
are transformer-based architectures CARD (Wang et al.
2024b) and PatchTST (Nie et al. 2023). These models
rely on channel-independence and segmentation of time se-

In recent years, the application of transformer-based models in time-series forecasting has received significant attention. While often demonstrating promising results, the transformer architecture encounters challenges in fully exploiting
the temporal relations within time series data due to its attention mechanism. In this work, we design eXponential Patch
(xPatch for short), a novel dual-stream architecture that utilizes exponential decomposition. Inspired by the classical exponential smoothing approaches, xPatch introduces the innovative seasonal-trend exponential decomposition module.
Additionally, we propose a dual-flow architecture that consists of an MLP-based linear stream and a CNN-based nonlinear stream. This model investigates the benefits of employing patching and channel-independence techniques within a
non-transformer model. Finally, we develop a robust arctangent loss function and a sigmoid learning rate adjustment
scheme, which prevent overfitting and boost forecasting performance.

Code — https://github.com/stitsyuk/xPatch

1

Introduction

Long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) is one of the fundamental tasks in time series analysis. The task is focused
on predicting future values over an extended period, based
on historical data. With the advent of deep learning models, they have recently demonstrated superior performance
in LTSF compared to traditional approaches such as ARIMA
(Box et al. 2015) and LSTM (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2015).
Transformer-based models (Vaswani et al. 2017) have
revolutionized the LTSF task, enabling powerful AI systems
to achieve state-of-the-art performance. The transformer architecture is considered highly successful in capturing semantic correlations among elements in long sequences. Recent works have primarily focused on adapting transformers to the LTSF task and addressing such limitations of the
vanilla transformer as quadratic time and memory complexity (Li et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2021; Wen et al. 2022).
The self-attention mechanism employed in transformers is permutation-invariant. Although techniques like positional encoding can partially retain ordering information,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20601

