The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PCM Selector: Penalized Covariate-Mediator Selection Operator
for Evaluating Linear Causal Effects
Hisayoshi Nanmo1, 2 , Manabu Kuroki2
1

Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Nihonbashi Muromachi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
2
Yokohama National University, Tokiwadai, Hodogaya-ku, Yokohama, Japan
nanmohisayoshi@gmail.com, kuroki-manabu-zm@ynu.ac.jp

Abstract

(2021), and Kuroki and Tezuka (2023) formulated the exact
variance of causal effects based on the front-door criterion.
Furthermore, Kuroki and Cai (2004), Hui and Zhongguo
(2008), and Ramsahai (2012) compared some identification
conditions in terms of the asymptotic estimation accuracy of
causal effects. On the other hand, under the assumption that
a treatment variable is associated with a response variable
through a univariate intermediate variable, from the viewpoint of the asymptotic estimation accuracy, Cox (1960)
showed that the estimation accuracy of the regression coefficient of the treatment variable on the response variable
in the single linear regression model can be improved by
using a joint linear regression model based on the response
variable and the intermediate variable. In addition, Kuroki
and Hayashi (2014) and Hayashi and Kuroki (2014) derived
the same results as Cox (1960) in terms of the exact variance of causal effects. Gupta, Lipton, and Childers (2021)
derived the same results as Kuroki and Hayashi (2014) and
Hayashi and Kuroki (2014) for cases in which a multivariate
intermediate variable is available.

For a data-generating process for random variables that can
be described with a linear structural equation model, we consider a situation in which (i) a set of covariates satisfying
the back-door criterion cannot be observed or (ii) such a
set can be observed, but standard statistical estimation methods cannot be applied to estimate causal effects because of
multicollinearity/high-dimensional data problems. We propose a novel two-stage penalized regression approach, the
penalized covariate-mediator selection operator (PCM Selector), to estimate the causal effects in such scenarios. Unlike
existing penalized regression analyses, when a set of intermediate variables is available, PCM Selector provides a consistent or less biased estimator of the causal effect. In addition,
PCM Selector provides a variable selection procedure for intermediate variables to obtain better estimation accuracy of
the causal effects than does the back-door criterion.

Technical Appendix —
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.18180

Introduction

In existing studies, it is noted that causal effects can be
estimated by standard statistical estimation methods, e.g.,
the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) method and the
ordinary least squares (OLS) method. Thus, many covariates affect both the treatment variable and the response variable and are highly correlated with each other in reality.
This situation leads to a multicollinearity problem, which
decreases the estimation accuracy of the causal effects and
leads to the formulation of an unreliable plan that prevents
us from conducting appropriate policy decision-making. In
addition, when the sample size is smaller than the number
of explanatory variables in the regression analysis, highdimensional data analysis also suffers from multicollinearity problems, which cause overfitting and interfere with obtaining admissible solutions for regression coefficients. Recently, due to the development of technological advances in
collecting data with many variables to better understand a
given phenomenon of interest, the multicollinearity problem has become serious in many domains. To overcome this
difficulty, numerous kinds of variable selection techniques
based on penalized regression analysis, e.g., the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), adaptive
LASSO, and Elastic Net, have been proposed by many statistical and AI researchers and practitioners (Bühlmann and

Background
Auxiliary variables are those that are not considered to be
of interest in themselves but help us to evaluate causal effects and/or understand the data-generating process in practical studies. For example, an intermediate variable is often
considered an auxiliary variable because it is used to evaluate causal effects (Pearl 2001, 2009), to understand the
data-generating process in the context of mediation analysis (Baron and Kenny 1986; Imai et al. 2011; Mackinnon
2008) and to improve the estimation accuracy of causal effects (Cox 1960; Hayashi and Kuroki 2014).
In the context of linear structural equation models, this paper focuses on estimating causal effects using intermediate
variables. For cases in which the data-generating process for
random variables can be described by nonparametric structural equation models and the corresponding directed acyclic
graph, Pearl (2009) provided the front-door criterion as the
identification condition for causal effects based on intermediate variables. In addition, in the framework of linear structural equation models, Kuroki (2000), Nanmo and Kuroki
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26851

