The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Parables of the Mustard Seed and the Yeast: Extremely Low-Budget,
High-Performance Nighttime Semantic Segmentation
Shiqin Wang1,2 , Xin Xu1,2 * , Haoyang Chen3 , Kui Jiang4 , Zheng Wang3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430065 China
2
Hubei Province Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing and Real-time Industrial System
3
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001 China
wangshiqin@wust.edu.cn, xuxin@wust.edu.cn, haoyangchen@whu.edu.cn, jiangkui@hit.edu.cn, wangzwhu@whu.edu.cn
Abstract
Nighttime Semantic Segmentation (NSS) is essential to many
cutting-edge vision applications. However, existing technologies overly rely on massive labeled data, whose annotation
is time-consuming and laborious. In this paper, we pioneer a
new task focusing on exploring the potential of training strategy and framework design with limited annotation to achieve
high-performance NSS. Insufficient information at very low
labeling budgets can easily lead to under-optimization or
overfitting of the model. Our solution comprises two main
components: i) a novel region-based active sampling strategy called Contextual-Aware Region Query (CARQ), which
identifies highly informative target nighttime regions for labeling; and ii) an innovative Fragmentation Synergy Active
Domain Adaptation framework (FS-ADA), which progressively broadcasts the limited annotation to the unlabeled regions, achieving high performance with a minimal annotation budget. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art UDA-NSS & ADA-SS
methods across four day-to-nighttime benchmarks, and generalizes well to foggy, rainy, & snowy scenes. In particular
only with 1% target nighttime data annotation, our method is
on par with the mainstream fully-supervised methods on the
BDD100K-Night val dataset.

Figure 1: I) Compared with UDA-NSS, the Fully Supervised
method requires 100% of the budget to increase the mIoU
by 12.97%. while ADA only requires 1% of the budget to
increase the mIoU by 9.98%. II) (a) treats an entire image as
the individual query sample; (b) and (c) choose either 3×3
or 1×1 pixel regions as the query granularity. We choose
the image patch as the query granularity (d), which makes
a trade-off between sample diversity (compared to (a)) and
reduces labeling costs (compared to (b) and (c)).

form pure daytime-trained models (“Source Only”), yet still
lags behind fully supervised counterparts (Figure 1 (I)).
The main reason contributing to the large performance
gap between UDA-NSS and fully supervised counterparts is
the scarce annotated nighttime data. Since collecting generous paired annotations is cumbersome and costly, leveraging
the Active Domain Adaptation (ADA) technique, i.e., labels
few target nighttime domain data for model training, provides an alternative and reasonable solution. Consequently,
we pioneer the Active Domain Adaptive Nighttime Semantic Segmentation (ADA-NSS) task, which queries the most
informative target nighttime samples for labeling and performs effective learning to maximize NSS performance.
In the previous studies of ADA, bare efforts have been
made on Active Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
(ADA-SS). In ADA-SS, the design of the label query, including acquisition functions and query granularity, is vital
to maximizing supervision within the given budget. In acquisition functions, current methods mainly utilize prediction uncertainty (Franco et al. 2024) or feature space diversity (Ning et al. 2023) to select valuable data. These strategies are less effective under the large domain gap, as in
the ADA-NSS task (Xie et al. 2023a; Han et al. 2023; Wu

Introduction
Nighttime Semantic Segmentation (NSS), aiming to label
each pixel of a given nighttime image to an object category,
has been widely applied to autonomous driving (Wu et al.
2021b; Wang et al. 2024), visual surveillance (Wang et al.
2023, 2020), and robotic vision (DeSouza and Kak 2002;
Xu et al. 2021). Recent fully supervised NSS methods have
achieved great success by leveraging abundant nighttime
labeled data, yet acquiring full-pixel annotations is laborintensive. To avoid annotation efforts, some researchers
multiplex daytime-trained models at night, yet encounter
severe performance degradation due to the huge domain
gap (Wu et al. 2021b). Subsequently, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Nighttime Semantic Segmentation (UDANSS) attracts much attention to adapt models trained on
well-labeled source daytime domain to the unlabeled nighttime domain. The performance of UDA-NSS can outper* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7853

