The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On Shallow Planning Under Partial Observability
Randy Lefebvre1 , Audrey Durand1,2
1

Université Laval
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
randy.lefebvre.1@ulaval.ca, audrey.durand@ift.ulaval.ca
2

Abstract

proposed (Amit, Meir, and Ciosek 2020; Jiang et al. 2015).
Unfortunately, these results provide loose bounds that do
not consider the structure of the underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP) and thus fail to capture its impact on
the optimal planning horizon. The optimal planning horizon
can be defined using the discount factor γ which minimizes
the planning loss (see Eq. 2), i.e. the one which can extract
the best policy possible considering the limited amount of
data. Distinct results involving the structure of MDPs (Jiang,
Singh, and Tewari 2016; Gheshlaghi Azar, Munos, and Kappen 2013; Wu, He, and Gu 2023; He, Zhou, and Gu 2021)
have been achieved separately, but these insights have never
been brought together.

Formulating a real-world problem under the Reinforcement
Learning framework involves non-trivial design choices, such
as selecting a discount factor for the learning objective (discounted cumulative rewards), which articulates the planning
horizon of the agent. This work investigates the impact of the
discount factor on the bias-variance trade-off given structural
parameters of the underlying Markov Decision Process. Our
results support the idea that a shorter planning horizon might
be beneficial, especially under partial observability.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has had tremendous success
on Atari games (Mnih et al. 2013), yet applications of
RL in the real-world remain limited (Dulac-Arnold et al.
2021). This complexity is due to many challenges such as
sample efficiency of RL methods (Yu 2018), risk/safety issues (Gu et al. 2023) and partial observability (Sondik 1978;
Francois-Lavet et al. 2019; Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998). Formulating a real-world problem under the RL
framework also involves several non-trivial decisions such
as selecting a state/action space (especially when these are
continuous), formulating a reward function, and formulating the learning objective (Hare 2019; Devidze et al. 2021).
The learning objective usually corresponds to the discounted
cumulative rewards, which depends on a discount factor articulating the considered planning horizon when attributing
values to states and actions (Sutton and Barto 2018). This
objective is useful since it can reduce the search space intuitively by giving less credit to future rewards and actions.
In toy and simulated environments, early practitioners tend
to use large discount factor values often found in the RL
literature on Atari (Kaiser et al. 2024; Mnih et al. 2013).
This equates to considering very long planning horizons.
On the other hand, real-world applications tend to formulate
sequential decision-making problems under the contextual
bandit setting (i.e. with a myopic agent w.r.t. the planning
horizon) in response to low data regimes (Bastani and Bayati 2020; Ding, Li, and Liu 2019; Durand et al. 2018).
The impact of reducing the planning horizon has been
studied previously, and bounds on the resulting biasvariance trade-off on the state value functions have been

Contributions In this work, we introduce new results on
the bias-variance trade-off that explicitly depend on highlevel structural parameters of the underlying MDP. More importantly, our results touch on Partially Observable MDPs
(POMDPs), providing the first insights supporting the advantage of considering short horizons in the learning objective for practical applications under partial observability.
We support and illustrate the theory with experiments, hoping that this can open the door to choices in learning objectives that are better adapted to real-world RL applications.
Finally, we provide the open-source code1 for all our experiments to ensure reproducibility and offer a framework that
practitioners can modify to better understand the impact of
partial observability on their specific applications.

Fully Observable Setting
An MDP can be described as a tuple (S, A, P, R), where
S is a finite state space, A is a finite action space, P :
S × A × S 7→ [0, 1] is a transition function, and R :
S × A 7→ [0, Rmax ] is a reward function, with Rmax denoting
the maximal reward obtainable in the MDP. On each time
step t ∈ N0 , the current state St ∈ S is observed, an action
At ∈ A is played, the environment transitions into next state
St+1 (using P ) and generates an observed reward Rt+1 (using R). Given an MDP (tuple) M , the value of state s ∈ S
under policy π : S 7→ A is the expected sum of discounted
rewards obtained by selecting actions according to policy π
1
https://github.com/GRAAL-Research/shallow-planningpartial-observability

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26587

