The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PScalpel: A Machine Learning-based Guider for Protein Phase-Separating
Behaviour Alteration
Jia Wang1 , Liyan Zhu1 , Zhe Wang1 , Chenqiu Zhang2 , Yaoxing Wu3 , Jun Cui2 , Jianqiang Li4 *
1

2

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Functional
Genes, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Functional Genes, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
{jia.wang, lijq}@szu.edu.cn, zhuliyan2023@email.szu.edu.cn, zwanghs@foxmail.com, zhangchq26@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
{wuyaox5, cuij5}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

that exert a significant influence on LLPS ability assumes
paramount importance in comprehending the multifaceted
role of phase separation in molecular biology and harnessing this knowledge for applications in disease therapy.
Intuitively, the goal could be achieved in an evaluatethen-recommend fashion. However, the intricate and timeintensive nature of biochemical techniques employed in
evaluating the LLPS ability hinders the systematic testing
of all possible mutant combinations for a given protein. As
the molecular principles underlying phase separation is being continuously uncovered, several protein features, such as
disordered region, arginine rich domain and low-complexity
aromatic-rich kinked segments, have been identified as the
driving force thus the determinants of phase separation,
which resulted in the development of the so-called first generation Phase Separation Proteins (PSPs) prediction tools.
More recently, observing that the molecular grammar of
phase separation could be learned from its linear amino acid
sequence, multiple machine learning based PSPs prediction
models have also been proposed (van Mierlo et al. 2021; Sun
et al. 2019; Saar et al. 2021).
Although these knowledge-based and sequence-based
models achieved great success in LLPS propensity prediction, none of them is suitable to be used to distinguish LLPS
ability of mutant proteins since they’re all designed for natural proteins which differ significantly in protein sequences.
For mutant proteins, it remains a very challenging problem to precisely discriminate their phase separation likehood
and screen out the ones that best meet the actual demand,
mainly due to the following facts: (1) Requirement of high
model sensitivity. As the mutants are extremely similar in
sequences, the prediction model should be of high sensitivity
to its input. Hence, new features should be explored for differentiating LLPS propensity of mutant proteins. (2) Lack
of labeled data. Although the number of reported proteins
mediating phase separation is growing rapidly, well labled
data that can be used for evaluating mutant proteins’ LLPS
ability is extremely limited, which means the utilization of
other related domain data should also be considered in the
learning approach for better performance. (3) Requirement

Missense mutations could affect the Liquid-Liquid Phase
Separation (LLPS) propensity of proteins and lead to aberrant phase-separating behaviours, which are recently found to
be associated with many diseases including Alzheimer’s and
cancer. However, the regulatory role of mutations in LLPS
remains unclear due to challenges in accurately characterizing the LLPS ability of mutants, including the high similarity in features, lack of labeled data, and vast amounts
of data involved. To bridge this gap and facilitate the discovery of therapeutic strategies, we propose the first machine learning-based guider for protein phase-separating behaviour alteration, PScalpel. PScalpel leverages both structural information and an auxiliary tasks-based graph contrastive learning framework to distinguish the mutants’ LLPS
ability, and incorporates a genetic algorithms-based recommendation method to identify mutants with desired LLPS
properties. Comprehensive computational and biological experiments validate the effectiveness of PScalpel as a versatile
tool for guiding alterations in protein phase separation behavior.

Introduction
Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation (LLPS) has emerged as
a pivotal and intricate mechanism underlying the maintenance of cellular homeostasis(Alberti, Gladfelter, and Mittag 2019). It orchestrates the condensation of biological
macromolecules, including proteins and nucleic acids, into
membrane-less, liquid-like condensates. Given the intimate
connection between LLPS and the proteome, the occurrence of missense mutations can perturb the phase separation and transition behavior of proteins(Hopf et al. 2017;
Sundaram et al. 2018; Schuster et al. 2020). Recent investigations have substantiated a causal relationship between aberrant phase-separating behaviors and the manifestation of disease pathologies, encompassing neurodegenerative disorders(Tsang et al. 2020) and cancer(Zou et al. 2022).
Consequently, the elucidation of key sequence perturbations
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

817

