The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DMF-Net: Image-Guided Point Cloud Completion with Dual-Channel Modality
Fusion and Shape-Aware Upsampling Transformer
Aihua Mao1 * † , Yuxuan Tang1† , Jiangtao Huang1 , Ying He2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
ahmao@scut.edu.cn, 202120144052, cs jetthwang@mail.scut.edu.cn, yhe@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

number of learning-based approaches for point cloud completion have emerged. Most of these learning-based works
utilize an encoder-decoder architecture, wherein the encoder
extracts a global latent vector from the partial input, and the
decoder subsequently generates the complete point cloud
based on this global latent representation. However, the
global information from an incomplete point cloud can be
ambiguous and misleading.
Compared to 3D point cloud data, it is obvious that the
corresponding 2D image data is easier to acquire (Nan,
Sharf, and Chen 2014). Moreover, we know that humans
can easily infer the 3D shape of an object from its 2D image, which intuitively proves that 2D image can play an important role in 3D shape completion task. Specifically, an
image has the global shape information of an object, while
the partial point cloud has rich local details. The two complementary information mentioned before can make the extracted feature more representative so that the decoder can
generate a more plausible shape. Previous multimodal completion networks (Zhang et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2023; Aiello,
Valsesia, and Magli 2022) have successfully improved the
performance by introducing a single-view image into the
point cloud completion process. However, the modality fusion process of these methods is dominated by point cloud
modality, lacking reasonable utilization of image modality.
To address the above issue, we design an image-guided
point cloud completion network with dual-channel modality fusion and shape-aware upsampling transformer (named
DMF-Net). DMF-Net recovers the partial point cloud in two
stages. At the first stage, DMF-Net employs an encoderdecoder architecture to generate a sparse but complete point
cloud. We observe that image modality should not just serve
as a guidance for point cloud modality, but should complement point cloud modality, which indicates the two modalities should be considerd equally important when performing
modality fusion. Thus, in the encoding phase, we propose
a dual-channel modality fusion strategy, which is capable
of capturing the complementary information in both image
and point cloud by fusing the two modalities in a symmetric way. At the second stage, inspired by these works (Xiang
et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024), to further
recover the local details and improve the uniformity of the
complete point cloud, based on the coarse point cloud generated by the first stage, DMF-Net utilizes a shape-aware

In this paper we study the task of a single-view image-guided
point cloud completion. Existing methods have got promising
results by fusing the information of image into point cloud
explicitly or implicitly. However, given that the image has
global shape information and the partial point cloud has rich
local details, We believe that both modalities need to be given
equal attention when performing modality fusion. To this end,
we propose a novel dual-channel modality fusion network for
image-guided point cloud completion(named DMF-Net), in a
coarse-to-fine manner. In the first stage, DMF-Net takes a partial point cloud and corresponding image as input to recover
a coarse point cloud. In the second stage, the coarse point
cloud will be upsampled twice with shape-aware upsampling
transformer to get the dense and complete point cloud. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experimental results show
that DMF-Net outperforms the state-of-the-art unimodal and
multimodal point cloud completion works on ShapeNet-ViPC
dataset.

Introduction
With the development of 3D sensing equipment such as LiDARs, laser scanners and RGB-D cameras, it is easier to
acquire point clouds data, which has abundant applications
like autonomous driving (Cui et al. 2021), scene understanding (Hou, Dai, and Nießner 2019), robotic vision (Varley
et al. 2017) and augmented reality (Park, Lepetit, and Woo
2008). However, point clouds captured by these devices are
often incomplete and sparse due to self-occlusions, occlusions between objects, uneven illumination and low scanning resolution. The poor quality point clouds can make it
difficult to understand 3D shape, which will leads to ambiguity in many downstream tasks like point cloud detection (Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Qi et al. 2019), point cloud reconstruction (Yang et al. 2018; Mandikal and Radhakrishnan 2019) and point cloud upsampling (Yu et al. 2018; Mao
et al. 2022). Therefore, point cloud completion, which focus on recovering complete high quality point clouds from
sparse partial input, has become a hot research topic.
Inspired by the seminal work (Qi et al. 2017a) employing
shared-MLP for point-wise feature extraction, an increasing
* Corresponding author.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6063

