The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-Shot Learning in Industrial Scenarios: New Large-Scale Benchmark,
Challenges and Baseline
Zekai Zhang1 , Qinghui Chen1 , Maomao Xiong1 , Shijiao Ding1 , Zhanzhi Su2 , Xinjie Yao3 , Yiming
Sun4 , Cong Bai5 , Jinglin Zhang1 *
1
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China
National Supercomputing Center in Jinan, Qilu University of Technology, Jinan, China
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
4
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China
{202420810, 202420785, 202314866, 202234879}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, 10431220602@stu.qlu.edu.cn, yaoxinjie@tju.edu.cn,
sunyiming@seu.edu.cn, congbai@zjut.edu.cn, jinglin.zhang@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Large Visual Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved remarkable success in vision tasks. However, the significant
differences between industrial and natural scenes make applying LVLMs challenging. Existing LVLMs rely on userprovided prompts to segment objects. This often leads to suboptimal performance due to the inclusion of irrelevant pixels.
In addition, the scarcity of data also makes the application
of LVLMs in industrial scenarios remain unexplored. To fill
this gap, this paper proposes an open industrial dataset and a
Refined Text-Visual Prompt (RTVP) for zero-shot industrial
defect detection. First, this paper constructs the Multi-Modal
Industrial Open Dataset (MMIO) containing 80K+ samples.
MMIO contains diverse industrial categories, including 6 super categories and 18 subcategories. MMIO is the first largescale multi-scenes pre-training dataset for industrial zero-shot
learning, and provides valuable training data for open models in future industrial scenarios. Based on MMIO, this paper
provides a RTVP specifically for industrial zero-shot tasks.
RTVP has two significant advantages: First, this paper designs an expert-guided large model domain adaptation mechanism and designs an industrial zero-shot method based on
Mobile-SAM, which enhances the generalization ability of
large models in industrial scenarios. Second, RTVP automatically generates visual prompts directly from images and
considers text-visual prompt interactions ignored by previous
LVLM, improving visual and textual content understanding.
RTVP achieves SOTA with 42.2% and 24.7% AP in zero-shot
and closed scenes of MMIO.

Figure 1: Comparison between traditional prompting methods and RTVP. RTVP solves the subjectivity of traditional
manual prompts and introduces text to further refine the semantics.

Zhao et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023a) has shown powerful
interactive and strong zero-shot capabilities in remote sensing, medicine, and other fields. The uniqueness of SAM lies
in the design of human-computer interactive prompts, which
allows segmentation based on user-provided point, line, and
box prompts.
However, since the environment, scale and distribution of
images in industrial scenes are significantly different from
natural scenes (Figure 2-a), there are many significant challenges in applying SAM’s pre-training-prompt paradigm in
industrial scenes. As shown in Figure 1, the existing SAM
prompt mode needs to rely on the user’s prompts (point, box,
mask) (Kirillov et al. 2023) to segment objects when processing complex scenes. The user’s familiarity will significantly affect specific prompts’ effect and introduce irrelevant or noisy pixels.
To address the above problems, some methods (Liu et al.
2023c; Zhang et al. 2023b) combine semantic models (Xie
et al. 2017; He et al. 2016) to obtain pseudo masks of objects. CPT (Yao et al. 2024) and ReCLIP (Subramanian et al.
2022) use visual prompt to establish relationships between
instances. On above basis, Hu et al. (Hu, Xu, and Shi 2023)

Introduction
Product defect detection tasks in industrial scenarios play an
important role in ensuring the safety of users. Expert models
(Wang, Bochkovskiy, and Liao 2022; Ge et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022a) in industrial scenarios usually use single-modal data
from a single field and strictly follow class-aware methods,
which limits the ability of model to process multi-scene data
and generalize to open datasets. Recently, the development
of Segment Anything series (SAMs) (Kirillov et al. 2023;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10357

