The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Physical Marker: Revealing Invisible Hyperlinks Hidden in Printed Trademarks
Yuliang Xue, Lei Tan, Guobiao Li, Zhenxing Qian* , Sheng Li, Xinpeng Zhang
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, ShangHai, China
ylxue21@m.fudan.edu.cn, 23110240157@m.fudan.edu.cn, 20210240200@fudan.edu.cn, zxqian@fudan.edu.cn,
lisheng@fudan.edu.cn, zhangxinpeng@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Embedding links in brand logos is a promising technology,
which allows consumers to access the online information of
products by capturing physical logo images. Previous physical data hiding methods primarily embed data within cover
media in a global manner, making them ineffective for processing brand logos in vector graphics format with a transparent background. To address this issue, we propose in this
paper a novel physical deep hiding scheme for invisibly embedding links in printed trademarks. Specifically, the encoder
embeds links only into the area of the brand logo under the
constraints of a mask, which is generated from the transparency information of the logo image. A background variation distortion is introduced into the distortion layer that
approximate practical logo print-camera environments, such
that the decoder could be learnt to retrieve the link from the
camera-captured logo with various backgrounds. A feature
prompt subspace modulator is further proposed and employed
in the encoder to enhance the invisibility of the encoded logo
pattern and in the decoder to boost hyperlink extraction accuracy. Various experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the advantage of our proposed method for embedding
links in printed brand logos, which provides reliable extraction accuracy under both simulated and real scenarios.

Figure 1: Examples of extracting links from photos of a logo
printed on a red packaging box under two different printing
ways. The top row involves printing with background, while
the bottom row pertains to printing without background.

tion from captured images, the presence of logos with backgrounds printed on products will impact aesthetics in real
applications. To enhance visual appeal, transparent background vector logos are commonly utilized for printing in
real-world scenarios, as shown in the bottom row of Fig. 1.
However, previous approaches can not accurately extract the
links due to the absence of original backgrounds leading
to the loss of embedded messages. Additionally, the performance of previous methods would further compromised
due to the diverse backgrounds, making it challenging to locate the region with embedded data and to accurately extract
the links. Moreover, due to the homogeneous nature of logos, these regions lack variations to hide links both robustly
and imperceptibly, rendering previous methods potentially
inadequate. To sum up, achieving invisible and backgroundagnostic link embedding within printed logos, along with
accurately extracting links from captured images, presents
a more challenging task.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel physical deep hiding scheme for embedding links in printed
trademarks. Specifically, the scheme follows the classic
encoder-distortion-layer-decoder framework, where the encoder hides the link only within the area of the brand logo

Introduction
In interconnected world, businesses face the challenge of
effectively integrating their offline and online marketing
efforts to create a unified and impact brand experience.
The convergence of physical logos and digital platforms
has become a powerful strategy to bridge the gap between
the physical and digital realms, helping businesses enhance
brand awareness, attract consumers, and drive sales.
Image print-camera resilient (PCR) watermarking offers
promising way to bridge the gap between offline and online
channels and create a seamless and dynamic brand experience. It embeds hyperlinks into physical printed images and
allows consumers to extract the links from phone-captured
version (Tancik, Mildenhall, and Ng 2020; Jia et al. 2022).
As shown in the top row of Fig. 1, previous methods primarily focused on embedding links into entire images, including backgrounds. While these approaches enable link extrac* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9068

