The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoSDA: Enhancing the Robustness of Inversion-Based Generative Image
Watermarking Framework
Han Fang1 , Kejiang Chen2 * , Zijin Yang2 , Bosen Cui1 , Weiming Zhang2 , Ee-Chien Chang1 *
1

National University of Singapore
University of Science and Technology of China
fanghan@nus.edu.sg, chenkj@ustc.edu.cn, bsmhmmlf@mail.ustc.edu.cn, e0708234@u.nus.edu, zhangwm@ustc.edu.cn,
changec@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Generative image watermarking inserts secret watermarks
into generated images and plays an important role in tracing
the usages of generative models. For watermarking of diffusion models, inversion-based framework emerges as an effective approach. Such framework employs a robust mechanism to embed the watermark into the starting latent before “forward sampling”, thereby generating images with the
implicit watermark. During watermark detection, inversion
techniques are employed to reverse the process and obtain
the watermarked latent, followed by further extraction. The
robustness of this technique hinges primarily on the embedding mechanism and inversion accuracy. Previous methods
predominantly focused on enhancing the robustness of the
embedding mechanism but overlooked the reduction of the
inversion errors. However, our results show that inversion error will significantly affect the overall robustness. Therefore,
in this paper, we delve into the inversion error aspect and propose CoSDA, a compensation sampling and drift alignmentbased approach. The inversion error primarily accumulated
during two stages: the internal error incurred by the algorithm, and the inevitable external noise. We observe that the
main source of internal error comes from the mismatch in
conditions (e.g., prompt, guidance scale) between forward
and backward sampling processes. Therefore, we propose
a compensation-based forward sampling, compensating for
certain mismatch conditions and reducing the inversion error
caused by the mismatch. Addressing external error caused by
inevitable image distortions (e.g., JPEG compression), we introduce a drift-alignment approach, where a neural network
is trained adversarially to restore the original watermarked
latent from the distorted counterpart. Experimental results
show that CoSDA effectively enhances watermark robustness
while maintaining the visual quality of generated images.

Figure 1: The framework of inversion-based generative image watermarking schemes and proposed CoSDA.

mense generative prowess of these systems also brings forth
potential risks. Malicious users may exploit them to create
inauthentic images depicting false events. Consequently, ensuring the detectability and traceability of generated images
or the underlying generation models has become an urgent
imperative.
Generative image watermarking can play a role in meeting these requirements. By embedding watermarks into the
output of the generated models, one could detect generated
images or trace the source model based on the extracted watermark signal. In practical applications, watermarking must
fulfill two primary criteria: utility and robustness. Utility ensures that the watermarking process does not compromise
the visual quality of the generated image, while robustness
ensures that the watermark can still be extracted reliably
even if the generated image undergoes distortions.
To fulfill both utility and robustness requirements, various generative image watermarking works (Fernandez et al.
2023; Wen et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024)
for diffusion models have been proposed. Among them, the
inversion-based framework emerges as a prominent and potent approach. The typical framework of inversion-based
watermarking is depicted in Fig. 1. In the embedding stage,
the watermark signal is initially injected or mapped into
the starting point of the diffusion model through a robust
embedding mechanism. Subsequently, the forward sampling
process, starting with the watermarked latent, iterates to generate images with implicit watermarking. During extraction,
an inversion method is employed on the generated image
to reverse the watermarked latent, facilitating the extraction
of the watermark. In this framework, robustness primarily

Introduction
Advances in diffusion modeling (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Nichol and Dhariwal 2021; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020;
Rombach et al. 2022) have notably elevated the quality of
generated images, and modern text-to-image latent diffusion
models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) further provide the remarkable capability in producing highquality images based on textual prompts. However, the im* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2888

