The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Lessons Learned as an AI Policy Advisor in the United States Senate
Serena Booth
Brown University
serena booth@brown.edu
Prior to assuming my role as an Assistant Professor of
Computer Science at Brown University, I served as an AI
Policy Advisor through a AAAS Fellowship in the U.S. Senate. I worked for the Committee on Banking, Housing, and
Urban Affairs on the Democrat side. In this unconventional
talk, I will detail the lessons I learned about legislating, regulating, and governing AI systems as a policymaker, and how
these lessons influence my research agenda as a new PI.

one of many such examples of a technology-agnostic law
with far-reaching implications for AI development and use.

Necessary Legislative Interventions
While many existing laws govern AI in financial services
and consumer protections more generally, there are nonetheless many oversights in these laws. For example, many financial institutions rely on technology companies to provide
access to services like cloud computing or to artificial intelligence models, like ChatGPT. These technology companies are known, in Congressional parlance, as “third-party
service providers.” Of the seven financial regulators in the
United States, only five have what is colloquially known as
“third-party vendor authority,” in which regulators have the
ability to both examine and regulate bank service companies. Two, however, do not, including the Federal Housing
Finance Agency. This agency oversees one of the most sensitive issues in government, the oversight of mortgages. This
is a significant risk surface, and the solution is simple: this
agency needs expanded third-party vendor authority. I will
share many several examples of necessary legislative interventions to ensure the good governance of AI systems.
Consumer protection laws, more broadly, are one of the
main guardrails in place for encouraging safe AI development. With the increasing integration of AI in consumer applications, ensuring the safety and fairness of these systems
is paramount. I will examine existing consumer protection
laws, such as the Fair Credit Reporting Act and the GrammLeach-Bliley Act, which offer frameworks for protecting
consumer data and financial data privacy. I will also highlight the role of the CFPB and FTC in enforcing these laws
and how their focus on deceptive practices can be applied to
AI. I will also propose necessary updates to existing regulations, like disparate impact law, to better address concerns
such as algorithmic bias and transparency in AI decisionmaking, advocating for robust mechanisms that empower
consumers to understand and contest AI-driven outcomes.

Regulatory Oversight Bodies
In the first part of this talk, I will provide an overview of
how the United States federal government works, focusing
on the differences between legislation and regulation. I will
explain how the United States Congress considers AI legislation and detail the roles of federal agencies that have meaningful AI regulations in place from the financial services and
consumer protection perspective. These federal agencies include the CFPB (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau),
the FTC (Federal Trade Commission), the SEC (Securities
and Exchange Commission), BIS (Bureau of Industry and
Security), among others. I will also explain the role of the Judiciary branch in AI regulation, and of how these dynamics
are changing in the aftermath of the downfall of the Chevron
Deference, in which federal agencies formerly had assumed
authority to interpret ambiguous legislation. I will highlight
some changes needed to these oversight bodies—for example, the establishment of a new data protection agency or the
addition of a bureau of data protection to the FTC.

Existing Laws
It is a common misconception that AI is not regulated in
any meaningful way. The United States legislative record is
generally technology-agnostic; this means that many existing laws apply and significantly affect AI development and
usage. For example, consider the Equal Credit Opportunity
Act of 1974. This law was designed to increase women’s access to financial services, as it is fundamentally a nondiscrimination law. One provision of this act is that whenever a financial institution takes an adverse action on a loan
application—for example, by denying it or offering a worse
interest rate—they must provide an explanation for this action. This law applies to financial institutions that choose to
use AI systems to assist in their determinations of creditworthiness. Although it does not mention “artificial intelligence” in any capacity, this law effectively precludes the use
of deep learning-based decision support systems. This act is

Implications for AI Researchers
In my new role as faculty, I research how to specify, inspect, comprehend, and govern the behaviors of AI systems.
That last piece—governance—necessarily requires an understanding of our existing legislative and regulatory structures and laws, from government procurement to fiduciary
duty to tort law and liability. I will discuss how my experiences as a policymaker have shaped my research agenda,
and how this knowledge of legislation and process influence
how I think about the development of AI systems. I will emphasize the importance of interdisciplinary and substantive

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28702

