The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Privacy-Preserving V2X Collaborative Perception Integrating Unknown
Collaborators
Bin Lu1 , Xinyu Xiao2 , Changzhou Zhang3 , Yang Zhou4 , Zhiyu Xiang1 , Hangguan Shan1 , Eryun
Liu1*
1

Zhejiang University
2
Ant Group
3
Hangzhou Geely Automobile Digital Technology Co., LTD
4
Hangzhou Fenghua Technology Co., LTD
lubin2022@zju.edu.cn, xinyuxiao@nlpr.ia.ac, zhangchangzhou@geely.com, zy@geely.com, Xiangzy@zju.edu.cn,
hshan@zju.edu.cn, eryunliu@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) collaborative perception has recently gained increasing attention in autonomous driving due
to its ability to enhance scene understanding by integrating information from other collaborators, e.g. vehicles or
infrastructure. Existing algorithms usually share deep features to achieve a trade-off between accuracy and bandwidth.
However, most of these methods require joint training of all
agents, which results in privacy leakage and is impractical
and unacceptable in the real world. Sharing prediction results seems to be a direct solution, but its performance is
suboptimal and sensitive to localization noise and communication delay. In this paper, we propose a privacy-preserving
collaborative perception framework, where each agent is separately trained with its own dataset and the ego vehicle needs
to integrate with completely unknown collaborators. Specifically, we propose MSD, a multi-scale feature fusion method
combined with deformable attention, to better fuse features
of different agents. We also propose PLDA, a plug-in domain adapter to align the features from unknown collaborators to ego-domain. Extensive experiments on the challenging DAIR-V2X and V2V4Real demonstrate that: 1) MSD
achieves remarkable performance, outperforming others by
at least 2.8% and 6.7% on DAIR-V2X and V2V4Real, respectively; 2)After domain adaptation, it significantly outperforms the No Fusion, Late Fusion scenarios and can approach
or even surpass the performance of joint training. We truly
achieves privacy-preserving collaboration, providing a new
paradigm for the study of collaborative perception, which is
crucial for practical applications.

Figure 1: Domain gap across datasets and backbones. (a)
feature map by PointPillars trained on DAIR-V2X, (b) feature map by VoxelNet trained on DAIR-V2X, (c) feature
map by PointPillars trained on DAIR-V2X with different weights, (d) feaature map by PointPillars trained on
V2V4Real.

vehicles often encounter occlusions, which are difficult to
handle due to lack of sensory observations of the occluded
area, which can also potentially lead to catastrophic consequences.
One solution to this challenge is by sharing information
between different agents, which is known as multi-agent
perception or collaborative perception (Liu et al. 2023). Depending on the fusion strategy, it can be divided into datalevel early collaboration (Chen et al. 2019b), feature-level
intermediate collaboration (Hu et al. 2022) and output-level
late collaboration (Rawashdeh and Wang 2018). Early collaboration aggregates the raw measurements from all agents,
promoting a global perspective. It can achieve better performance but requires a lot of communication bandwidth. On
the contrary, late collaboration aggregates each agent’s perception outputs, although it is bandwidth-efficient, the sharing of possibly poor perception outputs of a certain vehicle may results in unsatisfying fusion results, and its performance degrades rapidly with the presence of localization noise. Intermediate collaboration aggregates intermediate features across agents, achieving better trade-off between
performance and bandwidth. Due to its robustness to noises
and the compressibility of features, it is gradually becoming
the mainstream choice for collaboration.

Introduction
Perceiving the complex driving environment is crucial for
the safety of autonomous driving. Recent advancements in
deep learning have improved the performance of modern
perception systems on many tasks, such as object detection
(Lang et al. 2019; Zhou and Tuzel 2018), semantic segmentation (Pan et al. 2020), tracking (Fan et al. 2022b), etc.
Despite the remarkable progress, challenges remain. Singleagent perception systems are still subject to many limitations
due to single-view constraints. For instance, autonomous
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5802

