The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DigitalLLaVA: Incorporating Digital Cognition Capability for Physical World
Comprehension in Multimodal LLMs
Shiyu Li1,2 , Pengxu Wei2,3 , Pengchong Qiao1,2,4 , Chang Liu5 * , Jie Chen1,2,4*
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
4
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
5
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{shiyuli, pcqiao}@stu.pku.edu.cn, weipx3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
liuchang2022@tsinghua.edu.cn, jiechen2019@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

of these challenges. It finds broad applications in fields such
as medical diagnostics, smart manufacturing, industrial automation, smart homes, the Internet of Things (IoT), augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR).

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have shown
remarkable cognitive capabilities in various cross-modal
tasks. However, existing MLLMs struggle with tasks that require physical digital cognition, such as accurately reading
an electric meter or pressure gauge. This limitation significantly reduces their effectiveness in practical applications like
industrial monitoring and home energy management, where
digital sensors are not feasible. For humans, physical digits
are artificially defined quantities presented on specific carriers, which require training to recognize. As existing MLLMs
are only pre-trained in the manner of object recognition, they
fail to comprehend the relationship between digital carriers
and their reading. To this end, referring to human behavior,
we propose a novel DigitalLLaVA method to explicitly inject digital cognitive abilities into MLLMs in a two-step manner. In the first step, to improve the MLLM’s understanding
of physical digit carriers, we propose a digit carrier mapping method. This step utilizes object-level text-image pairs
to enhance the model’s comprehension of objects containing
physical digits. For the second step, unlike previous methods
that rely on sequential digital prediction or digit regression,
we propose a 32 bit floating point simulation approach that
treats digit prediction as a whole. Using digit-level text-image
pairs, we train three float heads to predict 32-bit floatingpoint numbers using 0/1 binary classification. This step significantly reduces the search space, making the prediction
process more robust and straightforward. Being simple but
effective, our method can identify very precise metrics (i.e.,
accurate to ±0.001) and provide floating-point results, showing its applicability in digital carrier domains.

For humans, the physical digit is an artificially defined
quantity presented on a specific carrier that requires postnatal training to learn to recognize it. It is a fundamental component of human intelligence that allows humans to interact
with and make sense of the world around us. In contrast,
existing MLLMs struggle due to their inability to grasp numerical concepts and relationships. As shown in Fig. 1, the
answers from GPT4V, Gemini Pro, and LLaVA are all incorrect. In the vernier-caliper case, Gemini Pro fails to provide an answer, while both GPT-4V and LLaVA show significant deviations. This is mainly because these models are
pre-trained for object recognition but lack cognitive learning
for physical digits. As a result, MLLMs lack understanding
of physical quantities and misinterpret the physical information presented in images. In the thermometer case, the results
from GPT-4V, Gemini Pro, and LLaVA all approximate 36
degrees, but diverge from the ground truth of 36.6 degrees.
This discrepancy arises because they encode each digit individually, making it difficult to predict the correct sequence of
numbers consistently. Although some studies on LLM have
explored methods for encoding digits (Charton 2021; Anil
et al. 2022; Grosse et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2024), they have not
performed well in terms of precision, efficiency, and scope.
To bridge this gap, we introduce an innovative method,
DigitalLLaVA, to explicitly inject digital cognitive abilities
into MLLMs in a two-step manner. In the first step, humans typically confirm the carrier before recognizing digits, as different carriers have various physical rules. However, MLLMs are pre-trained with a small proportion of carrier data. Therefore, we propose a digit carrier mapping
step, where we finetune the MLLM’s image encoder with
object-level text-image pairs to enhance its recognition ability of physical carriers. In the second step, as predicting
continuous numbers accurately is challenging for MLLMs
due to the large search space, we propose a 32-bit floatingpoint simulation step. This step approximates continuous
numbers using discrete 32-bit floating-point representations.
Specifically, we use digit-level text-image pairs to train three

Introduction
The emergence of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) (OpenAI 2023; Team et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a;
Li et al. 2023b; Liu et al. 2024a) has shown significant
promise in handling complex tasks, such as image captioning and visual question answering. Despite these advancements, MLLMs face substantial challenges in specialized
domains. Physical digital cognition, a critical aspect of Artificial Intelligence for Science (AI4Science), addresses some
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4932

