The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Joint Scoring Rules: Competition Between Agents Avoids Performative Prediction
Rubi Hudson
1

University of Toronto

Abstract

mortality affect healthcare usage and thus mortality.
When non-performative predictions are evaluated using a
strictly proper scoring rule, the only optimal response is honesty (Gneiting and Raftery 2007), where honesty means an
agent reports their actual beliefs. However, all such rules
give higher expected scores when the underlying distribution of outcomes is more extreme. In the performative case,
such rules then incentivize making the distribution more extreme. (Oesterheld et al. 2023).
This introduces two risks. The first is that such manipulation
could push the world towards becoming more predictable,
with potentially negative effects on inflation, crime, healthcare, or other outcomes. In the worst case, it could pose an
existential risk — a dead human is more predictable than a
live one. (Hubinger et al. 2023). The second risk is that optimal performative predictions are typically not stable upon
reflection (Oesterheld et al. 2023), which dramatically lowers their usefulness.
Still, one might ask how performative prediction could arise
if we do not intentionally run a gradient running through
a prediction’s impact on outcomes? We identify four main
pathways for this to occur:

In a decision-making scenario, a principal could use conditional predictions from an expert agent to inform their choice.
However, this approach would introduce a fundamental conflict of interest. An agent optimizing for predictive accuracy
is incentivized to manipulate their principal towards more
predictable actions, which prevents that principal from being able to deterministically select their true preference. We
demonstrate that this impossibility result can be overcome
through the joint evaluation of multiple agents. When agents
are made to engage in zero-sum competition, their incentive
to influence the action taken is eliminated, and the principal can identify and take the action they most prefer. We
further prove that this zero-sum setup is unique, efficiently
implementable, and applicable under stochastic choice. Experiments in a toy environment demonstrate that training on
a zero-sum objective significantly enhances both predictive
accuracy and principal utility, and can eliminate previously
learned manipulative behavior.

Technical Appendx —
https://arxiv.org/src/2412.20732/anc
Code —
https://github.com/rubi-hudson/Joint-Scoring-Rules

1. If a model implements search, either by design or as
learned behavior (Hubinger et al. 2019), and chooses
their prediction based on expected score.
2. If there are selection pressures other than gradient
descent, such as population based training (Krueger,
Maharaj, and Leike 2020) or economic competition
(Hendrycks 2023).
3. If there is generalization (Shah et al. 2022), from only
historical training data to an environment where the
model can influence the outcome.
4. If powerful models are developed through a process other
than gradient-based updating.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at pattern recognition and predicting text. As capabilities improve, this predictive ability will be applied more frequently to real-world
outcomes. This could include predicting human preferences,
as is used in reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) (Christiano et al. 2017), or predicting outcomes for
multiple actions when only one action can be taken. Restricting highly capable AI systems to only make predictions,
rather than autonomously pursue goals, is one proposal for
AI alignment known as Oracle AI (Armstrong, Sandberg,
and Bostrom 2012; Armstrong 2013).
A potential risk of using AI to make predictions is that the
very act of making a prediction can affect the outcome, in
a phenomenon known as performative prediction (Perdomo
et al. 2020). For example, predictions of inflation affect consumer behavior and thus inflation, predictions of crime affect police deployments and thus crime, and predictions of

One method for avoiding performativity is to elicit predictions conditional on various actions that can be taken in response to the prediction. As this reaction is the causal pathway by which a prediction affects outcomes, conditioning
on it removes the performative aspect.
Unfortunately, this approach introduces a new type of performativity. The predictor can influence which action gets
taken by dishonestly reporting certain predictions. In fact, it
is impossible for a decision maker to always take their most

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27339

