The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SimRP: Syntactic and Semantic Similarity Retrieval Prompting Enhances Aspect
Sentiment Quad Prediction
Zhongquan Jian1,2 , Yanhao Chen3 , Jiajian Li1 , Shaopan Wang1,2 , Xiangjian Zeng4 ,
Junfeng Yao3,2,1,6 , Xinying An5, * , Qingqiang Wu3,2,1,6, *
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
3
School of Film, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
4
School of Journalism and Communication, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
5
Institute of Medical Information, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China
6
Xiamen Key Laboratory of Intelligent Storage and Computing, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
{jianzq,cyhao,shaopanw,lijiajian}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {xjzeng,yao0010}@xmu.edu.cn,
an.xinying@imicams.ac.cn, wuqq@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
Aspect Sentiment Quad Prediction (ASQP) is the most complex subtask of Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA),
aiming to predict all sentiment quadruples within the given
sentence. Due to the complexity of sentence syntaxes and
the diversity of sentiment expressions, generative methods
gradually become the mainstream approach in ASQP. However, existing generative models are constrained in the effectiveness of demonstrations. Semantically similar demonstrations help in judging sentiment categories and polarities
but may confuse the model in recognizing aspect and opinion terms, which are more related to sentence syntaxes. To
this end, we first develop Syn2Vec, a method for calculating syntactic vectors to support the retrieval of syntactically
similar demonstrations. Then, we propose Syntactic and Semantic Similarity Retrieval Prompting (SimRP) to construct
effective prompts by retrieving the most related demonstrations that are syntactically and semantically similar. With
these related demonstrations, pre-trained generative models,
especially Large Language Models (LLMs), can fully release their potential to recognize sentiment quadruples. Extensive experiments in Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Incontext Learning (ICL) paradigms demonstrate the effectiveness of SimRP. Furthermore, we find that LLMs’ capabilities
in ASQP are severely underestimated by biased data annotations and the exact matching metric. We propose a novel
constituent subtree-based fuzzy metric for more accurate and
rational quadruple recognition.

Figure 1: Retrieving sentences with similar syntaxes.

Model (LLM) era, owing to its wide range of applications,
including product reviews, social media analysis, and customer feedback analysis (Zhang et al. 2024b). The most
representative and challenging subtask in ABSA is Aspect
Sentiment Quad Prediction (ASQP), which aims to predict
all sentiment quadruples within the given sentence (Zhang
et al. 2023, 2024a), each consisting of aspect term, opinion term, aspect category, and sentiment polarity, denoted
as (a, o, c, s). As depicted in Figure 1, given a review sentence ”In the end you end up with a fair tab and nothing but
a great time !!!”, ASQP requires predicting two containing
sentiment quadruples: (Null, fair, restaurant price, positive)
and (Null, great, restaurant general, positive), where Null
represents an implicit aspect term in this sentence.
Due to the complexity of ASQP in recognizing all sentiment quadruples, generative models, like T5 (Raffel et al.
2020) and GPT (Brown et al. 2020), with seq2seq paradigm
have been mainstream approaches and achieved promising results (Peper and Wang 2022). Initially, studies show
that generation objectives greatly influenced the extraction of sentiment quadruples. Representatively, GAS (Zhang
et al. 2021b) explored the influences of annotation-style and
extraction-style generation objectives, demonstrating the superiority of the extraction-style mode in ASQP. Another

Code — https://github.com/jian-projects/simrp

Introduction
Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) is a crucial task
in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and real-world applications, aiming to enable machines to understand human concerns and opinions expressed in text (Liu et al.
2020; Brauwers and Frasincar 2022). ABSA has consistently attracted increasing attention in the Pre-trained Language Model (PLM) era, as well as in the Large Language
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24248

