The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Is LLMs Hallucination Usable?
LLM-based Negative Reasoning for Fake News Detection
Chaowei Zhang1 , Zongling Feng1 , Zewei Zhang2 , Jipeng Qiang1 , Guandong Xu3 , Yun Li 1 *
1

Yangzhou University
2
Auburn University
3
The Education University of Hong Kong
{cwzhang,jpqiang,liyun}@yzu.edu.cn,
mz120220995@stu.yzu.edu.cn, zzw475622@gmail.com, gdxu@eduhk.hk,
Abstract
The questionable responses caused by knowledge hallucination may lead to LLMs’ unstable ability in decision-making.
However, it has never been investigated whether the LLMs’
hallucination is possibly usable to generate negative reasoning for facilitating the detection of fake news. This study
proposes a novel supervised self-reinforced reasoning rectification approach - SR3 that yields both common reasonable reasoning and wrong understandings (negative reasoning) for news via LLMs reflection for semantic consistency
learning. Upon that, we construct a negative reasoning-based
news learning model called - NRFE, which leverages positive or negative news-reasoning pairs for learning the semantic consistency between them. To avoid the impact of labelimplicated reasoning, we deploy a student model - NRFED that only takes news content as input to inspect the performance of our method by distilling the knowledge from
NRFE. The experimental results verified on three popular
fake news datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method
compared with three kinds of baselines including prompting
on LLMs, fine-tuning on pre-trained SLMs, and other representative fake news detection methods.

Introduction

Figure 1: The examples of news’ positive and negative reasoning requested via LLMs prompting. Current studies are
devoted to avoiding the occurrence of negative reasoning,
yet we initially propose to leverage the ability of LLM hallucinations to generate negative reasoning coupled with positive reasoning for adversarial semantic consistency learning.

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT-4o,
Claude 3, and Llama 3.1 represent a significant lead forward
in the field of AI, especially for NLP. The LLMs trained
on vast amounts of human-generated text can deeply understand and interpret prompts as well as generate comprehensive, coherent, and contextually relevant reasoning for the
prompts (Yang et al. 2024; Bang et al. 2023), which allow
them to be applicable to various NLP downstream tasks including fake news detection. Specifically, LLMs can provide multi-aspect aids for fake news detection, including
contextual analysis, content understanding, fact-checking,
source verification, reasoning generation, and others (Liu
et al. 2024b; Pelrine et al. 2023). However, some limitations
caused by the problem of ”knowledge hallucination” (Chen
et al. 2023) are still unavoidable while applying LLMs
to identify fake news. The up-to-date related studies are

devoted to eliminating hallucinations via RAG (RetrievalAugmented Generation) (Boumber et al. 2024), knowledge
graph (Guo et al. 2023), or other tricks, yet it is a kind of
food for thought that is it possible to use hallucination to
do something for news? For example, can we leverage both
news’ correct (a.k.a., positive) reasoning and the incorrect
(a.k.a., negative) reasoning generated through LLM hallucinations for adversarial semantic consistency learning?
Generally, knowledge hallucination is a response generated by LLM, which contains ”false or misleading information presented as fact” (Ji et al. 2023). Classical LLM reasoning usages for the tasks of fake news detection attempt to

* Yun Li is the corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1031

