The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UniMuMo: Unified Text, Music and Motion Generation
Han Yang1 , Kun Su2 , Yutong Zhang3 , Jiaben Chen4 , Kaizhi Qian5 , Gaowen Liu6 , Chuang Gan4
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
2
University of Washington,
3
The University of British Columbia
4
University of Massachusetts Amherst,
5
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,
6
Cisco Research

Abstract
We introduce UniMuMo, a unified multimodal model capable of taking arbitrary text, music, and motion data as input
conditions to generate outputs across all three modalities. To
address the lack of time-synchronized data, we align unpaired
music and motion data based on rhythmic patterns to leverage
existing large-scale music-only and motion-only datasets. By
converting music, motion, and text into token-based representation, our model bridges these modalities through a unified
encoder-decoder transformer architecture. To support multiple
generation tasks within a single framework, we introduce several architectural improvements. We propose encoding motion
with a music codebook, mapping motion into the same feature
space as music. We introduce a music-motion parallel generation scheme that unifies all music and motion generation
tasks into a single transformer decoder architecture with a
single training task of music-motion joint generation. Moreover, the model is designed by fine-tuning existing pre-trained
single-modality models, significantly reducing computational
demands. Extensive experiments demonstrate that UniMuMo
achieves competitive results on all unidirectional generation
benchmarks across music, motion, and text modalities.

Code — https://github.com/hanyangclarence/UniMuMo
Website —
https://hanyangclarence.github.io/unimumo demo/
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.04534

Introduction
Music and body movements are synchronized and inseparable. The beat and metrical structures in rhythm encourage the spontaneous coordination of body motion with music (Large 2000), activating the motor-related areas of human
brains (Keller and Rieger 2009). Dance particularly exemplifies this connection through choreography that aligns with
the music’s rhythm, melody and emotion. Meanwhile, even
though most people are not professional musicians or dancers,
they often interpret music and dance using simple, natural
language. This descriptive text serves as a vital bridge between understandable ideas and abstract concepts in music
and motion.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25615

The synergy between music, motion, and text provides
a natural motivation to create a model capable of understanding and creating contents across all these modalities.
Moreover, building a framework that can flexibly generate music, motion, and text in arbitrary combinations is
crucial for real-world applications, even though existing
models already achieve impressive results in unidirectional
generation tasks such as text-to-music (Copet et al. 2023),
music-to-motion (Tseng, Castellon, and Liu 2023), motionto-music (Zhu et al. 2022a) and motion-to-text (Jiang et al.
2023). In the real world, there is a demand for diverse generative abilities, and more complex generation tasks may be
necessary, such as creating dance sequences based on both
music and textual descriptions. Training individual models
for each unique combination, although potentially yielding
better output quality, would significantly increase training
costs, deployment efforts and storage requirements. Thus, a
unified model that supports all combinations of conditioning and generation tasks, rather than a collection of separate
models or training adapters to incorporate individual models,
offers a more cost-effective solution. To this end, we introduce a novel task of dynamically generating music, motion,
and text in a multitude of combinations unifiedly. As demonstrated in Fig. 1, this task is designed to handle diverse generative scenarios, ranging from text-to-music, text-to-motion, to
more complex combinations like text-to-music-plus-motion
or music-plus-text-to-motion.
However, the task could be challenging, especially in two
aspects: i) the lack of comprehensive datasets that include
all three modalities - music, motion, and text - limits the
development of a general and unified model. While there
are individual datasets for music-only (Santana et al. 2020),
motion-only (Mahmood et al. 2019), music to motion (Li
et al. 2021b) and text to motion (Guo et al. 2022a), a holistic
and large-scale dataset that encompasses all three modalities
still remains absent; ii) designing a unified architecture that
supports both the conditioning and generation of all three
modalities is challenging, mainly due to the significant differences between the neural representations for the three
modalities and the multiplicity of desired generation tasks.
To address the first challenge of lacking paired data, we
propose to align unpaired music and motion sequences based
on their rhythmic patterns. Specifically, we extract both music beats and motion visual beats, then employ dynamic time

