The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Ambiguity-Restrained Text-Video Representation Learning
for Partially Relevant Video Retrieval
Cheol-Ho Cho, WonJun Moon, Woojin Jun, MinSeok Jung, and Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{hoonchcho, wjun0830, junwoojinjin, minseokjung0328, jaepilheo}@gmail.com

Text Query: Sheldon sits down in his spot on the couch.

Abstract
Partially Relevant Video Retrieval (PRVR) aims to retrieve
a video where a specific segment is relevant to a given text
query. Typical training processes of PRVR assume a one-toone relationship where each text query is relevant to only
one video. However, we point out the inherent ambiguity
between text and video content based on their conceptual
scope and propose a framework that incorporates this ambiguity into the model learning process. Specifically, we propose Ambiguity-Restrained representation Learning (ARL)
to address ambiguous text-video pairs. Initially, ARL detects
ambiguous pairs based on two criteria: uncertainty and similarity. Uncertainty represents whether instances include commonly shared context across the dataset, while similarity indicates pair-wise semantic overlap. Then, with the detected
ambiguous pairs, our ARL hierarchically learns the semantic
relationship via multi-positive contrastive learning and dual
triplet margin loss. Additionally, we delve into fine-grained
relationships within the video instances. Unlike typical training at the text-video level, where pairwise information is provided, we address the inherent ambiguity within frames of the
same untrimmed video, which often contains multiple contexts. This allows us to further enhance learning at the textframe level. Lastly, we propose cross-model ambiguity detection to mitigate the error propagation that occurs when a single model is employed to detect ambiguous pairs for its training. With all components combined, our proposed method
demonstrates its effectiveness in PRVR.

(a) Positive untrimmed video

: Relevant moment

(b) Negative untrimmed video 1

: Relevant moment

(c) Negative untrimmed video 2

: Relevant moment

Figure 1: The illustration of ambiguous relationships between text-video pair. For the text query, ‘Sheldon sits down
in his spot on the couch.’, all three untrimmed videos contain
relevant scenes. However, only video (a) is learned as positive, while videos (b) and (c) are typically treated as negative
in prior techniques. Such ambiguous relationships between
text and video are more likely to occur with untrimmed
videos that often include diverse contexts.

MS-SL (Dong et al. 2022) initially modeled multi-scale
video features to prepare for various contexts that a text
query might encompass. GMMFormer (Wang et al. 2024),
on the other hand, critiqued the exhaustive multi-scale clip
modeling of MS-SL for its inefficiency and proposed to
use Gaussian attention to encode only the local contexts.
Although these methods have made significant progress in
PRVR, the obscurity in labeling text-video pairs is a yet-tobe-explored problem.
Typically, text and video instances are labeled pair-wise
due to the high costs of exploring relationships between all
text and video instances. This has led previous works to
learn only the paired instance as positive relations, treating
all others as negative, even when similar video-text pairs are
present. However, we argue that pair-wisely labeled retrieval
datasets often introduce ambiguity between text-video instances. For example, as illustrated in Fig. 1, while the text
query is clearly partially relevant to the paired video at the
top, it is also relevant to other video instances in the dataset.

Introduction
With societal advancements, the use of video media for information dissemination has become widespread. Consequently, the field of Text-to-Video Retrieval (T2VR), which
allows users to find desired videos using text queries, has
also been spotlighted. However, existing T2VR approaches
often assume that videos contain only the relevant parts
to the text query. This assumption does not align with
real-world scenarios, where videos can vary in length and
context. To address this issue, partially relevant video retrieval (PRVR) (Dong et al. 2022) is proposed to deal with
untrimmed videos where only specific video segments correspond to the text query.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2500

