The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Active Reinforcement Learning Strategies for Offline Policy Improvement
Ambedkar Dukkipati, Ranga Shaarad Ayyagari* , Bodhisattwa Dasgupta* ,
Parag Dutta* , Prabhas Reddy Onteru
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science
{ambedkar, rangaa, bodhisattwad, paragdutta, prabhasreddy}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Learning agents that excel at sequential decision-making tasks
must continuously resolve the problem of exploration and exploitation for optimal learning. However, such interactions
with the environment online might be prohibitively expensive
and may involve some constraints, such as a limited budget for
agent-environment interactions and restricted exploration in
certain regions of the state space. Examples include selecting
candidates for medical trials and training agents in complex
navigation environments. This problem necessitates the study
of active reinforcement learning strategies that collect minimal additional experience trajectories by reusing existing
offline data previously collected by some unknown behavior policy. In this work, we propose an active reinforcement
learning method capable of collecting trajectories that can
augment existing offline data. With extensive experimentation,
we demonstrate that our proposed method reduces additional
online interaction with the environment by up to 75% over
competitive baselines across various continuous control environments such as Gym-MuJoCo locomotion environments
as well as Maze2d, AntMaze, CARLA and IsaacSimGo1.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that addresses the active learning problem in the context of sequential
decision-making and reinforcement learning.

Figure 1: [Best viewed in color] Consider an offline dataset
as shown in (a). Our method computes uncertainties in various regions of the environment according to the dataset. As
shown in (b), the uncertainties are high in regions where
data is not present in the dataset. We collect new trajectories
starting from the uncertain regions since that provides more
information to the learning algorithm. As can be seen in (c), a
simple online trajectory collection policy collects redundant
trajectories, while our method focuses on previously unobserved regions, as evident from (d).

Code — https://github.com/sml-iisc/ActiveRL
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.13106

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore
1996; Sutton and Barto 2018) tackles the problem of sequential decision-making in unknown environments. This
involves agents exploring the environment to learn from the
interactions online. However, relying solely on online interactions may not be feasible in many practical applications like
navigation and clinical trials. To overcome this limitation,
recently, offline reinforcement learning (Levine et al. 2020;
Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019) has emerged, where
agents can learn from offline interactions with unknown policies. Although this presents significant challenges and some
advancements have been made, a pertinent question arises: In
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16418

the presence of offline data, how can one enhance an agent’s
performance when it is permitted to explore only a limited
number of interactions with the environment?
For example, in the context of clinical trials, determining
the optimal treatment regimen may require access to existing data from related studies while seeking to gather more
relevant and informative data by administering treatments
to new patients. Each prospective patient presents unique
treatment needs and medical histories, often at varying stages
of diagnosis. With a constrained budget, it is essential to
devise algorithms capable of selecting the optimal subset of
participants for treatment, thereby enhancing the utility of
the existing data. While this is similar to active learning in
a supervised learning setting, it is still an open problem to
learn active strategies in reinforcement learning. The main
aim of the paper is to address this problem.
Due to budget limitations, there exists a further challenge
in deciding whether to pursue a lengthy trajectory or to gather
several shorter trajectories across different areas. For instance,
in the context of enhancing the navigation capabilities of
autonomous vehicles, it is unnecessary to collect data in areas
where the existing dataset already contains representative
samples. In such instances, any trajectory that enters these
regions can be truncated, allowing for the initiation of a new

