The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HSOD-BIT-V2: A New Challenging Benchmark
for Hyperspectral Salient Object Detection
Yuhao Qiu, Shuyan Bai, Tingfa Xu† , Peifu Liu, Haolin Qin, Jianan Li†
Beijing Institute of Technology

Spectral Curves Pseudo-Color

Abstract
Salient Object Detection (SOD) is crucial in computer vision, yet RGB-based methods face limitations in challenging scenes, such as small objects and similar color features.
Hyperspectral images provide a promising solution for more
accurate Hyperspectral Salient Object Detection (HSOD) by
abundant spectral information, while HSOD methods are hindered by the lack of extensive and available datasets. In
this context, we introduce HSOD-BIT-V2, the largest and
most challenging HSOD benchmark dataset to date. Five distinct challenges focusing on small objects and foregroundbackground similarity are designed to emphasize spectral advantages and real-world complexity. To tackle these challenges, we propose Hyper-HRNet, a high-resolution HSOD
network. Hyper-HRNet effectively extracts, integrates, and
preserves effective spectral information while reducing dimensionality by capturing the self-similar spectral features.
Additionally, it conveys fine details and precisely locates object contours by incorporating comprehensive global information and detailed object saliency representations. Experimental analysis demonstrates that Hyper-HRNet outperforms
existing models, especially in challenging scenarios.

1

③

①

High
Dynamic
Range

①

②
③

Small Object

②

①

③

Material
Similarity

②

②
①

③
Color
Similarity

(a) Spectral Curves of Pseudo-Color

Complex
Background

(b) Distribution of Challenge Attributes

Figure 1: (a) Exemplary challenging scenarios from HSODBIT-V2, where objects are hard to identify in pseudo-color
images but exhibit salience in spectral curves. (b) Challenge
attributes of HSOD-BIT (2024) and HSOD-BIT-V2, highlighting their capability to represent real-world challenges.

primarily sourced from publicly available HSIs not curated
for HSOD (2002), suffer from imprecise annotation and inadequate quantity and quality. Although the dedicated HSSOD dataset (2018) represents progress, it remains small
and of low quality. The HSOD-BIT dataset (2024) expands
the dataset scale and introduces challenges like non-uniform
lighting and overexposure, yet its limited diversity still hinders the full utilization of spectral advantages.
To bridge these gaps, we construct HSOD-BIT-V2, the
largest and most challenging HSOD dataset to date, featuring 500 high-quality HSIs. This dataset includes eight natural scene backgrounds and, for the first time in HSOD, introduces snowfields and fallen leaves, greatly enhancing diversity. The dataset emphasizes spectral advantages through
five challenging attributes, focusing on small objects and
foreground-background similarities. As depicted in Figure
1 (b), our dataset contains 417 challenging samples and outperforms HSOD-BIT across all attributes. With its expanded
scale and varied challenges, HSOD-BIT-V2 provides enhanced data support for the HSOD task and serves as a new
benchmark for algorithmic evaluation.
HSOD metods currently encounter three main challenges:
(i) Spectral redundancy raises computational costs, reduces
effective information density, and diminishes detection accuracy due to the Hughes phenomenon (2003). Existing dimensionality reduction techniques, such as PCA (2023), often lead to information loss. (ii) Effectively capturing spec-

Introduction

Salient object detection (SOD) is crucial in various applications (2021; 2021), typically using RGB images to identify prominent objects. However, RGB images struggle with
accurate localization in challenging scenes, such as color
similarity between foreground and background, due to reliance on shape and color features (2021). In contrast, spectral curves offer a more detailed characterization of objects’
intrinsic properties (2024; 2024), as shown in Figure 1 (a).
Hyperspectral salient object detection (HSOD) methods utilize the abundant spectral information available in hyperspectral images (HSIs) to capture detailed object features,
delivering enhanced performance even in challenging conditions (2022). Thus, integrating HSIs into SOD shows great
promise for improving accuracy in challenging scenarios.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) enhance feature
representation, boosting performance in HSOD task (2019).
However, deep learning methods require extensive highquality data, which is scarce in HSOD. Previous datasets
† Correspondence to: Tingfa Xu and Jianan Li.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6630

