The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Defeasible Visual Entailment: Benchmark, Evaluator, and Reward-Driven
Optimization
Yue Zhang, Liqiang Jing, Vibhav Gogate
The University of Texas at Dallas
{yue.zhang,vibhav.gogate}@utdallas.edu, jingliqiang6@gmail.com

Abstract
strengthener: The dog
is a hunting dog.

We introduce a new task called Defeasible Visual Entailment
(DVE), where the goal is to allow the modification of the entailment relationship between an image premise and a text
hypothesis based on an additional update. While this concept
is well-established in Natural Language Inference, it remains
unexplored in visual entailment. At a high level, DVE enables
models to refine their initial interpretations, leading to improved accuracy and reliability in various applications such as
detecting misleading information in images, enhancing visual
question answering, and refining decision-making processes
in autonomous systems. Existing metrics do not adequately
capture the change in the entailment relationship brought by
updates. To address this, we propose a novel inference-aware
evaluator designed to capture changes in entailment strength
induced by updates, using pairwise contrastive learning and
categorical information learning. Additionally, we introduce
a reward-driven update optimization method to further enhance the quality of updates generated by multimodal models. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed evaluator and optimization method.

A dog chases a rabbit.
weakener: The ball
bounces once.

Premise

Hypothesis

Update and Type

Figure 1: An example of defeasibility in visual entailment.

Despite progress in this area, existing works on VE have
mostly focused on clear, definite relationships and have not
fully considered the uncertainties that can affect how images
and text relate to each other. These uncertainties stem from
factors such as incomplete information, unseen elements,
image complexity, ambiguity, varying interpretations, differing perspectives, context, and the inherent subjectivity in visual perception.
To address this gap, we introduce the concept of Defeasible Visual Entailment (DVE). The aim of DVE is to provide additional textual information that can either strengthen
or weaken the relationship between an image premise and a
text hypothesis. As illustrated in Figure 1, the premise shows
a brown dog running through a grassy field. A strengthener
could argue that “The dog is a hunting dog,” which strengthens the premise because a hunting dog is more likely to
chase a rabbit. On the other hand, a weakener might state
“The ball bounces once,” suggesting the dog is more likely
chasing the ball than the rabbit.
A key challenge with the DVE task is that existing
datasets used in visual entailment research are not suitable
for evaluating and benchmarking methods designed to solve
the DVE task. More specifically, previous benchmarks in visual entailment have primarily focused on definite relationships, often overlooking the role of defeasibility when uncertainties are present. Therefore, to fully harness the potential of defeasible inference in visual entailment, we introduce a new benchmark. To create this benchmark, we developed a new dataset for the DVE task by replacing the
premises in the δ-NLI dataset (Rudinger et al. 2020) with
images from the Flickr30k dataset (Young et al. 2014). This
approach minimizes costs while maximizing the use of existing resources. In our dataset, each premise-hypothesis pair

Introduction
Natural Language Inference (NLI) (Bos and Markert 2005;
Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2005; MacCartney and
Manning 2009; Bowman et al. 2015) is a fundamental task
that involves determining the logical relationship between
two sentences, specifically identifying whether one sentence
entails, contradicts, or is neutral with respect to the other. To
further investigate the logical relationship across modalities,
researchers have introduced a new inference task called Visual Entailment (VE). In VE, the premise is provided by an
image and the hypothesis by a sentence and the task is to
determine whether the image supports, contradicts, or is unrelated to the statement in the sentence (Xie et al. 2019).
Existing approaches to the VE task typically leverage pretrained vision-language models, such as OFA (Wang et al.
2022), UNITER (Chen et al. 2020c), FGAIF (Jing and Du
2024), and CoCa (Yu et al. 2022). These models are designed to understand and reason across visual and textual
modalities and have greatly improved our ability to accurately link and interpret images and text.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25976

