The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Fine-Grained Alignment for Aerial Vision-Dialog Navigation
Yifei Su1,2 , Dong An3 , Kehan Chen1,2 , Weichen Yu4 ,
Baiyang Ning1,2 , Yonggen Ling5 , Yan Huang1,2 † , Liang Wang1,2 ,
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
MAIS, Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Carnegie Mellon University
5
Robotics X, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
suyifei2022@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

drone agent is required to navigate to a destination precisely,
via the dialog history with humans in aerial environments.
Accurate cross-modal alignment is crucial for the success of language-guided navigation (Moudgil et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2019; Qi et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022), while
the ANDH task poses two unique challenges in this aspect.
First, landmarks in top-down views exhibit geometric diversity, i.e., a wider range of scales and aspect ratios, posing
challenges to the perception of small or narrow objects (e.g.,
the densely arranged small yellow containers in Figure 1
(a). Second, top-down views tend to be broader and contain
more landmarks. Thus, the redundant landmarks are likely
to distract the agent from grounding the target entity mentioned in the dialog. To address these challenges, researchers
have proposed various methods to guide the agent to focus
on potential areas mentioned in the dialog. For instance, Fan
et al. (Fan et al. 2023a) supervise the drone’s visual perception with human attention masks, while Su et al. (Su et al.
2023) enhace the stop policy with a cross-modal target area
grounding task.
Despite the progress, existing methods struggle to handle
fine-grained cross-modal alignment in ANDH. The reasons
mainly lie in the lack of entity-landmark alignment supervision and the coarse visual representation. First, both human
attention (Fan et al. 2023a) and target area (Su et al. 2023)
supervisions are relatively coarse and lack intermediate fine
entity-landmark alignment supervision during navigation.
As a result, the drone is forced to infer involved all landmarks implicitly from the whole dialog history. This scheme
has been shown sub-optimal in ground-based languageguided navigation (Cui et al. 2023; Qi et al. 2021), while
it can be less effective in ANDH due to the landmark redundancy in top-down views. Second, condensed feature vectors are widely adopted by existing methods to represent the
drone’s top-down views, which suppress the representation
of geometrically rich landmarks and environmental spatial
layouts (Chen, Yang, and Chen 2023; Chen et al. 2024).
This further challenges the entity-landmark alignment when
the dialog involves small landmarks or complex spatial relations (Chen et al. 2022a; Hwang et al. 2023).
This paper addresses the above issues by introducing explicit entity-landmark alignment learning for ANDH. To
achieve this goal, we first construct a large-scale FineGrained AVDN dataset (FG-AVDN), which provides rich

Aerial Vision-Dialog Navigation (AVDN) is a new task that
requires drones to navigate to a target location based on
human-robot dialog history. This paper focuses on the critical fine-grained cross-modal alignment problem in AVDN,
requiring the drone to align language entities with visual
landmarks in top-down views. To achieve this, we first
construct a Fine-Grained AVDN (FG-AVDN) dataset via a
semi-automatic annotation pipeline, providing diverse multimodal annotations at the entity-landmark level. Based on this,
a novel Fine-grained Entity-Landmark Alignment (FELA)
method is proposed to learn the cross-modal alignment explicitly. Concretely, FELA first boosts the drone’s visual
understanding with a precise semantic grid representation,
which captures the environmental semantics and spatial
structure simultaneously. Subsequently, to learn the entitylandmark alignment, we devise cross-modal auxiliary tasks
from three perspectives, including grounding, captioning, and
contrastive learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our explicit entity-landmark alignment learning is beneficial
for AVDN. As a result, FELA achieves leading performance
with 3.2% SR and 4.9% GP improvements over prior arts.

Code — https://github.com/yifeisu/FELA

1

Introduction

Language-guided navigation is a fundamental yet challenging problem for autonomous robot task-completion via communication with humans. Recent years have witnessed notable progress towards this goal, marked by the introduction of various tasks (Anderson et al. 2018; Qi et al. 2020;
Thomason et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2019) and navigation
methods (Qiao et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2023c; He et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023d,a; An et al. 2024).
However, a predominant focus on ground-based agents has
overshadowed a crucial application area for robotic systems
- drones. Recently, this gap has been bridged by the introduction of the Aerial Vision-Dialog Navigation (AVDN)
dataset and the corresponding Aerial Navigation from Dialog History (ANDH) task for drones (Fan et al. 2023a; Liu
et al. 2023), which opens up new application chances such as
food delivery and wilderness search and rescue. In ANDH, a
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7060

