The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

All You Need in Knowledge Distillation Is a Tailored Coordinate System
Junjie Zhou, Ke Zhu, Jianxin Wu*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
zhoujj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhuk@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@gmail.com

Abstract

teacher-free, but incurs significantly higher memory and
time costs.
• Inflexible. KD mostly leverages the logits as training signals, which is inflexible, e.g., for complex tasks like object detection (Wang, Ge, and Wu 2021). Difficulties are
also evident when the teacher has huge capacity but the
student is a small network (Mirzadeh et al. 2020).
• Inefficient. Feature-based KD (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola
2019; Chen et al. 2021a; Wang, Ge, and Wu 2021; Miles,
Elezi, and Deng 2024) is more flexible than logit-based
ones by mimicking final and/or intermediate features.
However, both feature- and logit-based KD methods require a well-trained teacher and the teacher’s forward
passes, which nearly doubles the time and memory costs.

Knowledge Distillation (KD) is essential in transferring dark
knowledge from a large teacher to a small student network,
such that the student can be much more efficient than the
teacher but with comparable accuracy. Existing KD methods,
however, rely on a large teacher trained specifically for the
target task, which is both very inflexible and inefficient. In
this paper, we argue that a SSL-pretrained model can effectively act as the teacher and its dark knowledge can be captured by the coordinate system or linear subspace where the
features lie in. We then need only one forward pass of the
teacher, and then tailor the coordinate system (TCS) for the
student network. Our TCS method is teacher-free and applies
to diverse architectures, works well for KD and practical fewshot learning, and allows cross-architecture distillation with
large capacity gap. Experiments show that TCS achieves significantly higher accuracy than state-of-the-art KD methods,
while only requiring roughly half of their training time and
GPU memory costs.

Our goal is to achieve teacher-free, flexible and efficient
knowledge distillation. We will extract knowledge from SSL
pretrained models, which does not require training for any
specific task, that is, being teacher-free for KD. Two key
questions remain open in the literature:

Introduction

1. What is the dark knowledge inside a pretrained model?
2. How to efficiently adapt it for a specific task?

Deep learning has improved areas such as computer vision and natural language processing. However, large model
size and heavy compute make it difficult to deploy them on
devices with limited resources. Model compression methods, especially knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015), effectively compress and accelerate deep networks, as evidenced in various domains (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015; Wang, Ge, and Wu 2021; Yang et al. 2020).
Knowledge Distillation (KD) has emerged as a crucial
technique for enhancing the efficiency of neural networks by
transferring “dark knowledge” from a large complex model
(the teacher) to a smaller one (the student). In spite of its
many successes, KD still encounters many drawbacks and
limitations:
• Reliant on a teacher trained for the specific task, which
is highly costly, cumbersome and inflexible. Utilizing a
self-supervised-learning (SSL) pretrained model as the
teacher is highly desired, but is rarely studied or with
limited accuracy (Koohpayegani, Tejankar, and Pirsiavash 2020). Self distillation by Zhang et al. (2019) is

Our answer to both questions is to propose a tailored coordinate system (TCS). Our key hypothesis is that the dark
knowledge within a SSL pretrained model are at least partly
encoded within the coordinate system (or linear subspace) in
which their features lie in. The linear subspace can be efficiently encoded via PCA (principal component analysis).
To adapt this coordinate system to a specific task and
the student network, we propose to simply compute PCA
of the teacher’s features using one single forward pass on
that task’s training data. Furthermore, the key to adapt the
coordinate system is to tailor it by choosing a subset of the
coordinates specifically for the target task.
Combining both key techniques, we argue that all you
need in knowledge distillation is a tailored coordination system, i.e., the proposed TCS method.
As shown in Figure 1, the proposed TCS achieves the
highest accuracy with lowest memory and compute costs
among KD methods. In addition, it enjoys the following benefits:

* J. Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Teacher-free, i.e., effectively transfers knowledge from
SSL pretrained models.
22946

