The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CREST: An Efficient Conjointly-trained Spike-driven Framework for
Event-based Object Detection Exploiting Spatiotemporal Dynamics
Ruixin Mao* , Aoyu Shen* , Lin Tang , Jun Zhou†
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China
{mao.rx, shen aoyu, tangl}@std.uestc.edu.cn, zhouj@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

leveraging conventional frame-based computer vision techniques (Peng et al. 2023; Zubic, Gehrig, and Scaramuzza
2024). Modern GPUs and TPUs also accelerate ANN training and inference (Nickolls et al. 2008; Jouppi et al. 2017).
However, ANNs struggle with effectively handling the temporal features inherent in event-based data. This arises from
losing crucial temporal dynamics and correlations when encoding events into discrete frames. Additionally, they consume high energy due to numerous MAC operations, which
is problematic for energy-sensitive edge applications.
SNNs mimic the spiking feature of the biological neurons
which are theoretically well-suited for processing eventbased data (Maass 1997; Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019). The
timing and frequency of spikes convey diverse information,
granting SNNs strong spatiotemporal characteristics. Moreover, SNNs perform accumulations (ACs) only when sparse
spikes occur, making them inherently energy-efficient. However, SNNs often struggle with deep network structures due
to inefficient training methods (Zhang et al. 2024; Nagaraj,
Liyanagedera, and Roy 2023). Non-differentiable spikes require surrogate gradients for backpropagation (BP), potentially causing gradient vanishing in deep SNNs (Wu et al.
2018; Neftci, Mostafa, and Zenke 2019). The propagation
of spatiotemporal gradients also greatly increases computation complexity. Some works convert well-trained ANN
models to the same structured SNN. However, they require
a large encoding time-window to approximate the ANN performance, causing a much higher spiking rate and energy
consumption (Kim et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022b). More complex spiking neurons and layers with trainable parameters
are proposed to lower the spiking rate, which add computation complexity for training & inference and are difficult
to implement on existing SNN hardware (Fang et al. 2021;
Cordone, Miramond, and Thierion 2022).
Furthermore, a unified SNN framework is needed to handle the multi-scale spatiotemporal features of event-based
object detection. Existing approaches often fail to effectively
encode the spatiotemporal characteristics of event data, leading to data redundancy and reduced accuracy (Cordone, Miramond, and Thierion 2022; Bodden et al. 2024). Moreover,
the Intersection over Union (IoU) loss (Yu et al. 2016) employed in SNNs are generally adapted from ANNs, neglecting the unique spatiotemporal nature of event-based spike
trains(Su et al. 2023; Fan et al. 2024). This may lead to inac-

Event-based cameras feature high temporal resolution, wide
dynamic range, and low power consumption, which are ideal
for high-speed and low-light object detection. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are promising for event-based object
recognition and detection due to their spiking nature but
lack efficient training methods, leading to gradient vanishing and high computational complexity, especially in deep
SNNs. Additionally, existing SNN frameworks often fail to
effectively handle multi-scale spatiotemporal features, leading to increased data redundancy and reduced accuracy. To
address these issues, we propose CREST, a novel conjointlytrained spike-driven framework to exploit spatiotemporal dynamics in event-based object detection. We introduce the
conjoint learning rule to accelerate SNN learning and alleviate gradient vanishing. It also supports dual operation
modes for efficient and flexible implementation on different
hardware types. Additionally, CREST features a fully spikedriven framework with a multi-scale spatiotemporal event integrator (MESTOR) and a spatiotemporal-IoU (ST-IoU) loss.
Our approach achieves superior object recognition & detection performance and energy efficiency compared with stateof-the-art SNN algorithms on three datasets, providing an efficient solution for event-based object detection algorithms
suitable for SNN hardware implementation.

Extended version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12525

Introduction
Frame-based cameras excel in capturing photometric features but suffer from motion blur with fast-moving objects
and are sensitive to extreme lighting conditions. Continuous full-frame processing also consumes high energy due to
redundant background information. Conversely, event-based
cameras capture changes in light intensity asynchronously at
each pixel (Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2008; Gallego
et al. 2020). This allows them to operate at much higher frequencies and under varied illumination conditions, ideal for
high-speed and real-time object detection.
Deep ANN frameworks for event-based object detection
encode event streams into dense, image-like representations,
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: Jun Zhou

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6072

