The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AFiRe: Anatomy-Driven Self-Supervised Learning for Fine-Grained
Representation in Radiographic Images
Yihang Liu 1 , Lianghua He 12 * , Ying Wen 3 , Longzhen Yang 1 , Hongzhou Chen 1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
Shanghai Eye Diseases Prevention and Treatment Center, Shanghai Eye Hospital, Shanghai, China.
3
School of Communication and Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
{2111131, helianghua, yanglongzhen, chenhonghzou}@tongji.edu.cn, ywen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Current self-supervised methods, such as contrastive learning, predominantly focus on global discrimination, neglecting the critical fine-grained anatomical details required for
accurate radiographic analysis. To address this challenge,
we propose the Anatomy-driven self-supervised framework
for enhancing Fine-grained Representation in radiographic
image analysis (AFiRe). The core idea of AFiRe is to
align the anatomical consistency with the unique tokenprocessing characteristics of Vision Transformer. Specifically, AFiRe synergistically performs two self-supervised
schemes: (i) Token-wise anatomy-guided contrastive learning, which aligns image tokens based on structural and
categorical consistency to enhance fine-grained spatialanatomical discrimination; (ii) Pixel-level anomaly-removal
restoration, which particularly focuses on local anomalies,
thereby refining the learned discrimination with detailed geometrical information. Additionally, we propose the Synthetic
Lesion Mask to enhance anatomical diversity while preserving intra-consistency, which is typically corrupted by traditional data augmentations, such as Cropping and Affine transformations. Experimental results show that AFiRe: (i) provides robust anatomical discrimination, achieving more cohesive feature clusters compared to state-of-the-art contrastive
learning methods; (ii) demonstrates superior generalization,
surpassing 7 radiography-specific self-supervised methods in
multi-label classification tasks with limited labeling; and (iii)
integrates fine-grained information, enabling precise anomaly
detection using only image-level annotations.

Figure 1: Conception of the proposed method. (a) Local
radiographic structures at the same location exhibit anatomical consistency. (b) By aligning anatomical consistency with
the token-processing characteristics of ViT, tokens at the
same position within a batch share similar structural semantics, while those at different positions convey distinct ones.

these models successfully capture high-level representations
across diverse images and achieve invariance to salience
changes, their efficacy is limited when applied to radiographic images (Zhou et al. 2021a; Haghighi et al. 2022).
Natural images exhibit invariance of foreground objects
across diverse backgrounds, which directs contrastive tasks
to emphasize image-level discrimination (Misra and Maaten
2020). In contrast, radiographic images present clinical
salience dispersed throughout the image (Li et al. 2024), necessitating the model’s attention to fine-grained discrimination, including the distribution of densities, the arrangement
of tissues, and the presence of specific pathologies (Agu
et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2021b). For example, faint opacities
may indicate early signs of pneumonia, while fine reticular
patterns can suggest interstitial lung disease. Therefore, incorporating fine-grained details, such as detailed anatomical
structures and complex spatial relationships (Haghighi et al.
2024; Chen et al. 2023), into high-level representations is
essential for accurately identifying normal anatomy and detecting various lesions in radiographic images.
Recent advances in medical contrastive learning (MCL)
have incorporated fine-grained information by focusing on
region discrimination (Chen et al. 2023; Singh, Gorade, and
Mishra 2024; Li et al. 2024). These approaches aim to embed semantically consistent features while distinguishing
them from features with distinct semantics (Taher, Gotway,

Code — https://github.com/LYH-hh/AFiRe

Introduction
Contrastive learning (CL) has emerged as a powerful method
in self-supervised learning (SSL), demonstrating its effectiveness without relying on expert annotations (Caron et al.
2020, 2021). In natural image analysis, prevailing CL methods like SimCLR (Chen et al. 2020a) and MoCo (He et al.
2020) primarily focus on global discrimination. Explicitly,
they consider the entire image and its transformations as
positive pairs, while treating different images as negative
pairs (Wu et al. 2018; Misra and Maaten 2020). Although
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18996

