The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DomCLP: Domain-wise Contrastive Learning with Prototype Mixup
for Unsupervised Domain Generalization
Jin-Seop Lee, Noo-ri Kim, Jee-Hyong Lee*
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea
{wlstjq0602, pd99j, john}@skku.edu

Abstract

Multi-domain source data

Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods based on the instance discrimination tasks with InfoNCE have achieved remarkable success. Despite their success, SSL models often struggle to generate effective representations for unseendomain data. To address this issue, research on unsupervised
domain generalization (UDG), which aims to develop SSL
models that can generate domain-irrelevant features, has been
conducted. Most UDG approaches utilize contrastive learning with InfoNCE to generate representations, and perform
feature alignment based on strong assumptions to generalize domain-irrelevant common features from multi-source
domains. However, existing methods that rely on instance
discrimination tasks are not effective at extracting domainirrelevant common features. This leads to the suppression of
domain-irrelevant common features and the amplification of
domain-relevant features, thereby hindering domain generalization. Furthermore, strong assumptions underlying feature alignment can lead to biased feature learning, reducing the diversity of common features. In this paper, we propose a novel approach, DomCLP, Domain-wise Contrastive
Learning with Prototype Mixup. We explore how InfoNCE
suppresses domain-irrelevant common features and amplifies domain-relevant features. Based on this analysis, we propose Domain-wise Contrastive Learning (DCon) to enhance
domain-irrelevant common features. We also propose Prototype Mixup Learning (PMix) to generalize domain-irrelevant
common features across multiple domains without relying on
strong assumptions. The proposed method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the PACS and DomainNet datasets across various label fractions, showing significant improvements.

Domain label visualization

Encoder

Representation

Class label visualization
Domain-irrelevant Common Features
(Shape, Components, etc.)
Domain-relevant Features
(Style, Background, etc.)
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) In the UDG environment, representations include both domain-irrelevant common features and domainrelevant features. (b) T-SNE visualization for SimCLR.
from the same distribution. This assumption often does not
hold in real-world scenarios, where data distribution shifts
frequently occur, leading to previously unseen data. Consequently, while SSL models are capable of generating highquality representations for in-domain data, they often struggle to generate effective representations for unseen-domain
data (Zhang et al. 2022b; Harary et al. 2022). To address
this challenge, there has been growing interest in the field
of unsupervised domain generalization (UDG), which aims
to develop SSL models that can learn domain-irrelevant features (Zhang et al. 2022b).
In the UDG scenario as depicted in Figure 1a, there
are multi-domain source datasets with only domain labels and no additional class labels. Each sample contains
both domain-irrelevant common features (e.g. shape, components, etc.) and domain-relevant features (e.g. style, background, etc.). To achieve good generalization performance
on unseen domains, unsupervised domain generalization
(UDG) (Zhang et al. 2022b) aims to learn representations
of domain-irrelevant feature. To learn domain-irrelevant
features, most UDG approaches utilize contrastive learning based on InfoNCE to generate feature representations,
and perform feature alignment based on strong assumptions to achieve domain generalization (Zhang et al. 2022b;

Code — https://github.com/JINSUBY/DomCLP

Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods, particularly based
on the instance discrimination task using contrastive
learning with InfoNCE, have shown remarkable performance (Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Chen et al. 2020a; He
et al. 2020; Grill et al. 2020; Caron et al. 2020). Despite
these successes, there is a critical limitation in that they assume pretraining, fine-tuning, and testing data all originate
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18119

