The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Simplifying Control Mechanism in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Zhida Feng1,2,3 , Li Chen1,2,* , Yuenan Sun1,2 , Jiaxiang Liu3 , Shikun Feng3
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Science and Technology
Hubei Province Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing and Real-time Industrial System, Wuhan University of
Science and Technology
3
Baidu Inc.

Abstract

Rao, and Agrawala 2023) emerged as a revolutionary approach by integrating detailed conditions, such as segmentation maps and edge maps, with text-to-image models to improve controllability. However, ControlNet introduced substantial complexity, necessitating nearly half the parameters
of the base U-Net model, complicating training and deployment.
Addressing these challenges, we introduce SimpleControlNet, a streamlined and efficient architecture for controllable text-to-image generation. Unlike previous control
mechanisms (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023; Mou et al.
2024) that rely on condition encoders injecting information
at multiple scales, Simple-ControlNet employs a simpler,
single-scale approach. Specifically, we use a lightweight
projection block consisting of 8 convolutional layers to integrate condition information directly into the U-Net’s toplevel features. This design substantially reduces complexity
while still allowing the model to effectively leverage condition inputs. At the same time, Low-Rank Adapter (LoRA)
parameters facilitate learning condition information embedded in the hidden states. This approach significantly simplifies the integration of control conditions into the diffusion
model.
This paper makes the following contributions.
• We introduce Simple-ControlNet, a model that drastically reduces the parameter count needed for control
mechanisms by nearly a hundredfold (from 344.5M to
2.7M), simplifying deployment and reducing training
complexity.
• Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that
Simple-ControlNet matches and surpasses ControlNet’s
performance across multiple dimensions, including qualitative and quantitative comparisons, efficiency analyses,
and human evaluations.
• Demonstration of Simple-ControlNet’s versatility across
a diverse array of tasks such as depth-to-image,
boundary-to-image conversion, and advanced image processing techniques including inpainting, outpainting, and
Super-Resolution.

ControlNet has significantly advanced controllable image
generation by integrating dense conditions (such as depth
and canny edges) with text-to-image diffusion models. However, ControlNet’s integration requires an additional amount
nearly equal to half of the base diffusion model’s parameters,
making it inefficient. To address this, we introduce SimpleControlNet, an efficient and streamlined network for controllable text-to-image generation. It employs a single-scale
projection layer to incorporate condition information into the
denoising U-Net. It is supplemented by Low-Rank Adapter
(LoRA) parameters to facilitate condition learning. Impressively, Simple-ControlNet requires fewer than 3 million parameters for the control mechanism, substantially less than
the 300 million needed by ControlNet. Our extensive experiments confirm that Simple-ControlNet matches and surpasses
ControlNet’s performance across a broad range of tasks and
base diffusion models, showcasing its utility and efficiency.

Code — https://github.com/feng-zhida/Simple-ControlNet

Introduction
The field of image generation has made significant strides
with deep generative models, particularly diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Song et al. 2020; Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020). These models have unlocked new possibilities to generate highly realistic and diverse images, pushing the frontiers of visual synthesis. However, the quest for
controlled image generation, which allows precise manipulation of generated content to meet specific user requirements, remains a challenge.
Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models (Chen
et al. 2023; Ramesh et al. 2022; Feng et al. 2023; Saharia et al. 2022b; Rombach et al. 2022; Podell et al. 2023;
Pernias, Rampas, and Aubreville 2023) have markedly improved the controllability of image generation, facilitating
the creation of images closely aligned with user-provided
text prompts. Despite their success, relying solely on textual descriptions often fails to convey the detailed controls
required for precise image generation. ControlNet (Zhang,

Related Work

* Corresponding Author

Image-to-Image Translation Numerous GAN-based
image-to-image translation methods (Choi et al. 2018,

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3013

