The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Intra and Inter Parser-Prompted Transformers for Effective Image Restoration
Cong Wang123 Jinshan Pan4 , Liyan Wang5 , Wei Wang1 *
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China
Centre for Advances in Reliability and Safety, Hong Kong
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
4
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
5
Dalian University of Technology, China
supercong94@gmail.com, sdluran@gmail.com, wangwei29@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
We propose Intra and Inter Parser-Prompted Transformers
(PPTformer) that explore useful features from visual foundation models for image restoration. Specifically, PPTformer
contains two parts: an Image Restoration Network (IRNet) for restoring images from degraded observations and
a Parser-Prompted Feature Generation Network (PPFGNet)
for providing IRNet with reliable parser information to boost
restoration. To enhance the integration of the parser within
IRNet, we propose Intra Parser-Prompted Attention (IntraPPA) and Inter Parser-Prompted Attention (InterPPA) to
implicitly and explicitly learn useful parser features to facilitate restoration. The IntraPPA re-considers cross attention between parser and restoration features, enabling implicit perception of the parser from a long-range and intra-layer perspective. Conversely, the InterPPA initially fuses restoration
features with those of the parser, followed by formulating
these fused features within an attention mechanism to explicitly perceive parser information. Further, we propose a parserprompted feed-forward network to guide restoration within
pixel-wise gating modulation. Experimental results show that
PPTformer achieves state-of-the-art performance on image
deraining, defocus deblurring, desnowing, and low-light enhancement.

( )

D

ᆊ

SAM

*

R

IRN

I

Q
K

PPFGN

V
F

( )

( )

P

R
P

F
F

I

Q
K
V

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. Our method is motivated by an interesting observation that SAM (Kirillov et al.
2023) can parse degraded images into useful hierarchical
structures (b) although severely degraded inputs (a). While
extreme degradation may not provide valuable information
for restoration, the parser that benefits from the powerful
ability of SAM can still describe reliable structures well
to facilitate restoration. To better integrate the parser into
the restoration process, we develop Intra Parser-Prompted
Attention and Inter Parser-Prompted Attention to implicitly
and explicitly learn valuable parser content to boost image
recovery.

Code — https://github.com/supersupercong/pptformer

Introduction
Image restoration aims to reconstruct high-quality images
from their degraded counterparts. This task is inherently
challenging because it relies solely on the degraded images themselves while the clear images and degradation factors are unknown. To effectively solve this problem, statistical observations are employed to transform it into a ‘wellposed’ one, as discussed in various studies (Pan et al. 2016).
While traditional methods have achieved some success in
restoration, they are hampered by complex optimization algorithms that struggle with issues of non-convexity and nonsmoothness.
The emergence of convolutional neural networks (He
et al. 2016) and Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021)
has revolutionized image restoration tasks. These advanced

models have excelled by implicitly learning from largescale data. This learning-based strategy has taken precedence in contemporary image restoration, outperforming
previous methods with notable success, as evidenced by a
series of studies (Ren et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018; Wang, Pan,
and Wu 2022; Wang et al. 2020b,a, 2021; Guo et al. 2022;
Peng et al. 2024b,a; Wang et al. 2023, 2024a,b,d,c,e; Xu
et al. 2024b,a). However, we note that most of the existing
state-of-the-art approaches learn the ‘self’ degraded knowledge without considering additional helpful knowledge from
other domains into network designs, limiting model capacity
to some extent.
To address this problem, some conditional modulationdriven networks are suggested (Wang et al. 2018a). These
approaches usually contain a restoration branch for image reconstruction and a conditional branch for providing

* Wei Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7609

