The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

REVECA: Adaptive Planning and Trajectory-Based Validation in Cooperative
Language Agents Using Information Relevance and Relative Proximity
SeungWon Seo∗1 , SeongRae Noh∗1 , Junhyeok Lee1 , SooBin Lim1 ,
Won Hee Lee1 , HyeongYeop Kang◦2
1

Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea
Korea University, Seongbuk-gu, Republic of Korea
{ssw03270, rhosunr99, bluehyena123, dnpcs, whlee}@khu.ac.kr, {siamiz hkang}@korea.ac.kr
2

Abstract

work (Zhang et al. 2023b), we mainly focus on VirtualHome (Puig et al. 2018), the multi-objective household tasks
using well-constructed virtual settings. Specifically, we focus on two decentralized agents cooperating on a multiobjective, long-horizon household task under complex partial observations. Additionally, continuous communication
incurs time costs, and irrelevant dummy objects add noise,
complicating the environment.
The primary advancements of REVECA over previous
works are threefold. Firstly, REVECA significantly reduces
both the computational complexity and memory demands of
the planning by prioritizing information based on its relevance to the task objectives. This allows the agent to focus
on the most pertinent data, thereby maintaining robust performance even in noisy environments typical of real-world
scenarios. Information relevance is assessed at the point of
acquisition, utilizing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs.
Previous research (Zhang et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2023d) stored
all scene information in memory, but this led to performance
issues due to the fixed context window of LLMs. Some studies (Zhang et al. 2023a, 2024) used queues to retain recent
K pieces of information, but this led to suboptimal planning
due to limited historical data.
Secondly, REVECA enhances plan optimality by incorporating the relative proximity between collaborators and task
objectives. This relative proximity is assessed by inferring
potential interaction between collaborators and task objectives, utilizing LLMs and agent’s observation data. Previous
research on distributed cooperation within partially observed
environments (Zhang et al. 2023b,a) has shown that individual agents may be unable to determine whether their optimal
plan aligns with the group’s best outputs, often leading to
suboptimal collective outcomes.
Lastly, REVECA mitigates the occurrence of false plans
by implementing a cost-effective plan validation process. In
partially observable environments with multiple task objectives, a collaborator’s task completion may not be immediately updated in the agent’s memory, leading to the creation
of redundant plans. To address this, REVECA estimates the
likelihood that a collaborator has already completed a given
task by inferring potential interaction trajectories. This inference is based on LLMs and historical observation data
to predict the collaborators’ trajectories, spanning from the
last retrieval of the collaborator’s information to the current

We address the challenge of multi-agent cooperation, where
agents achieve a common goal by cooperating with decentralized agents under complex partial observations. Existing cooperative agent systems often struggle with efficiently
processing continuously accumulating information, managing globally suboptimal planning due to lack of consideration of collaborators, and addressing false planning caused
by environmental changes introduced by other collaborators.
To overcome these challenges, we propose the RElevance,
Proximity, and Validation-Enhanced Cooperative Language
Agent (REVECA), a novel cognitive architecture powered by
GPT-4o-mini. REVECA enables efficient memory management, optimal planning, and cost-effective prevention of false
planning by leveraging Relevance Estimation, Adaptive Planning, and Trajectory-based Validation. Extensive experimental results demonstrate REVECA’s superiority over existing
methods across various benchmarks, while a user study reveals its potential for achieving trustworthy human-AI cooperation.

Introduction
Digital agents collaborating with humans are crucial in
games, educational platforms, and virtual universes. Commonly referred to as Non-Player Characters, these agents
play a crucial role in enhancing user immersion in commercial applications, where they assist users in achieving
desired objectives. However, these agents operate on prescripted behaviors, limiting their adaptability to complex
scenarios and rich conversations with humans. Inspired by
the reasoning and communication capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Li et al. 2023b), we aim to create
agents that use LLMs for more effective cooperation in complex environments and improved communication with humans, surpassing traditional methods relying on static, learnable models or reinforcement learning (RL).
This paper introduces REVECA, a RElevance, Proximity, and Validation-Enhanced Cooperative Language Agent,
an LLM-based agent framework addressing decentralized
control, costly communication, complex tasks, partially observable environments, and noisy settings. Similar to prior
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
◦

23295

