The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reverse Region-to-Entity Annotation for Pixel-Level Visual Entity Linking
Zhengfei Xu1 , Sijia Zhao1 , Yanchao Hao2 , Xiaolong Liu2 ,
Lili Li2 , Yuyang Yin2 , Bo Li2 , Xi Chen2 , Xin Xin1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Platform and Content Group, Tencent, Beijing, China
{zhengfei, sijiazhao, xxin}@bit.edu.cn, {marshao, loongliu, irinali, yuyangyin, ryanbli, jasonxchen}@tencent.com

Visual Mention

Abstract
Visual Entity Linking (VEL) is a crucial task for achieving
fine-grained visual understanding, matching objects within
images (visual mentions) to entities in a knowledge base. Previous VEL tasks rely on textual inputs, but writing queries for
complex scenes can be challenging. Visual inputs like clicks
or bounding boxes offer a more convenient alternative. Therefore, we propose a new task, Pixel-Level Visual Entity Linking (PL-VEL), which uses pixel masks from visual inputs to
refer to objects, supplementing reference methods for VEL.
To facilitate research on this task, we have constructed the
MaskOVEN-Wiki dataset through an entirely automatic reverse region-entity annotation framework. This dataset contains over 5 million annotations aligning pixel-level regions
with entity-level labels, which will advance visual understanding towards fine-grained. Moreover, as pixel masks correspond to semantic regions in an image, we enhance previous patch-interacted attention with region-interacted attention
by a visual semantic tokenization approach. Manual evaluation results indicate that the reverse annotation framework
achieved a 94.8% annotation success rate. Experimental results show that models trained on this dataset improved accuracy by 18 points compared to zero-shot models. Additionally, the semantic tokenization method achieved a 5-point accuracy improvement over the trained baseline.

Knowledge Base
...
Cauliflower(Q7537)
Fruit (Q3314483)
Broccoli (Q47722)
edible cabbage
family plant

How do I refer to the object of interest?

Ambiguity

Text Query (VEL)
✗
what is on the plate?

Pixels Query (PL-VEL)

✗
what is next to the
fries on the plate?
✓
what is the small treelike vegetable next to
the fries on the plate?
Complexity

Figure 1: Overview of comparing text and pixel-based Visual Entity Linking (VEL) tasks

like vegetable next to the fries on the plate? Creating such
queries demands extensive background knowledge and precise comprehension of visual relationships. This adds an additional burden on users, and we cannot assume that downstream models are equipped with such capabilities.
In such complex scenes, visual prompts such as clicks,
boxes, and pixel masks can be supplementary methods for
efficient and accurate reference. Therefore, this work introduces Pixel-Level Visual Entity Linking (PL-VEL), which
uses pixel masks to refer to visual mentions and link them
to knowledge-base entities, as shown in fig. 1. With promptable segmentation models like SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023)
and SEEM (Zou et al. 2023), users or downstream models can create pixel masks through actions such as clicking, and drawing boxes. It makes PL-VEL more practical
than traditional VEL tasks in real-world applications, such
as VQA(Qiu et al. 2024) and visual reasoning (Chen and
Wu 2024). To support the research on this task, an opendomain PL-VEL dataset that aligns pixel-level mask regions
in images with entities in a knowledge base is required.

Datasets — https://github.com/NP-NET-research/PL-VEL

Introduction
Visual Entity Linking (VEL) is an open-domain visual entity recognition task that expands the label space to webscale knowledge bases. As a key task for achieving finegrained visual understanding, VEL contributes to various
tasks such as multimodal knowledge graphs completion (Wu
et al. 2023), visual question answering (VQA) (Qiu et al.
2024), image caption (Zhang et al. 2024c), image retrieval
(Sain et al. 2023; Saito et al. 2023) and so on.
Current VEL tasks (Hu et al. 2023; Caron et al. 2024a) relying on textual queries struggle with some complex scenes.
For example, in fig. 1, a simple query like what is on
the plate? cannot accurately refer to Broccoli, requiring more complex queries, such as what is the small tree* Xin Xin (xxin@bit.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12981

