The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Understanding Individual Agent Importance in Multi-Agent System
via Counterfactual Reasoning
Jianming Chen1,2,3,4 , Yawen Wang1,2,3,4 * , Junjie Wang1,2,3,4 * , Xiaofei Xie5 , Jun Hu1,2,3,4 ,
Qing Wang1,2,3,4 , Fanjiang Xu1,2,3,4 *
1
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Game, Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Singapore Management University, Singapore
{jianming2023, yawen2018, junjie}@iscas.ac.cn, xfxie@smu.edu.sg, {hujun, wq, fanjiang}@iscas.ac.cn
2

Abstract

pronounced in multi-agent systems (MAS) due to the interactions and dependencies among agents. To broaden the
adoption of RL-based applications in critical fields, there is
a pressing need to enhance the transparency of RL agents
through effective explanations.
Although some in-training explainable RL approaches
(e.g., credit assignment) can simultaneously provide intrinsic explanations of the model when accomplishing tasks,
they cannot work in black-box settings. Prior work on posttraining explanations for the black-box agent can be roughly
divided into two categories. The first category offers the
observation-level explanation, i.e., revealing the regions of
features within the observations that exert the most significant influence on the decisions of agent (Greydanus et al.
2018; Puri et al. 2020; McCalmon et al. 2022). The second
category delves into step-level explanations, aiming to identify the time-steps that are most or least pivotal to the agent’s
ultimate reward (Amir and Amir 2018; Huang et al. 2018;
Cheng et al. 2023). Although previous research on posttraining explanation shows great potential in helping users
understand the behavior of the black-box agent, they cannot
assess the importance of an agent at any specific state within
the MAS.
In MAS, the increase in the number of agents significantly
contributes to the complexity of team strategies, and each
agent plays its unique role and cooperates with others towards a common goal. Evaluating the importance of individuals in MAS helps reveal potential issues and vulnerabilities in collaboration, such as low-contributing agents (i.e.,
“lazy” agents) that limit system performance, or excessively
high individual contributions that may indicate a lack of cooperation among agents (Liu et al. 2023a). This can then
potentially lead to a better training strategy for improving
the overall performance of MAS. Additionally, by identifying the important agents at each state, targeted and efficient
interventions (e.g., launching attacks and patching policies)
can be carried out more effectively (Guo et al. 2021; Cheng
et al. 2023).
We propose EMAI, a novel agent-level Explanation approach for the MAS which pinpoints the Importance of each
individual agent at every time-step (i.e., state). In this pa-

Explaining multi-agent systems (MAS) is urgent as these
systems become increasingly prevalent in various applications. Previous work has provided explanations for the actions or states of agents, yet falls short in understanding the
black-boxed agent’s importance within a MAS and the overall team strategy. To bridge this gap, we propose EMAI, a
novel agent-level explanation approach that evaluates the individual agent’s importance. Inspired by counterfactual reasoning, a larger change in reward caused by the randomized
action of agent indicates its higher importance. We model it
as a MARL problem to capture interactions across agents.
Utilizing counterfactual reasoning, EMAI learns the masking agents to identify important agents. Specifically, we define the optimization function to minimize the reward difference before and after action randomization and introduce
sparsity constraints to encourage the exploration of more
action randomization of agents during training. The experimental results in seven multi-agent tasks demonstrate that
EMAI achieves higher fidelity in explanations than baselines
and provides more effective guidance in practical applications concerning understanding policies, launching attacks,
and patching policies.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed sensational advances in reinforcement learning (RL) across many prominent sequential
decision-making problems. As these problems have grown
in complexity, the field has transitioned from using primarily single-agent RL algorithms to multi-agent RL (MARL)
algorithms, which are playing increasingly significant roles
in various domains, e.g., unmanned aerial vehicles (Liu et al.
2023b; Lv et al. 2024; Feng et al. 2023), industrial robots
(Luo et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2022; Qiu et al. 2023), camera
network (Pan et al. 2022; Ci et al. 2023), and auto-driving
(Petrillo et al. 2018). However, deep RL policies typically
lack explainability, making them intrinsically difficult for
humans to comprehend and trust. This issue is even more
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15785

