The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Master Key Filters Hypothesis:
Deep Filters Are General
Zahra Babaiee1 * , Peyman M. Kiassari1 * , Daniela Rus2 , Radu Grosu1
1

Technische Universität Wien
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
zahra.babaiee@tuwien.ac.at, peyman.kiasari@tuwien.ac.at, rus@mit.edu, radu.grosu@tuwien.ac.at
2

Abstract

The highly influential work of (Yosinski et al. 2014) characterized the first layer filters of CNNs as ”general,” and
extended its investigation to deeper layers, examining filter
generality and specificity through innovative layerwise feature transfer experiments. They empirically demonstrated
that when frozen filters from a dissimilar task were transferred, model performance degradation became progressively
more severe as deeper layers were transferred. This led to
the widely accepted conclusion that filters in deeper layers
become increasingly specialized.
Depthwise separable convolutions are an efficient variant of the standard convolution operation, which decouples
the learning of spatial features and channel-wise relationships (Howard et al. 2017, 2019). This separation not only
reduces computational complexity but also provides a unique
lens through which the internal representation of spatial information can be inspected, even in deep layers of the network.
When probing the depthwise filters of trained models on
ImageNet, one observes repeating patterns. Figure 1 shows
depthwise filters randomly sampled from the first, middle,
and last layer of the trained ConvNeXt (Liu et al. 2022) Base
and HorNet (Rao et al. 2022) Small models. The filters have
common characteristics between the two different architectures. Recent study has shown that depthwise convolutions
across different DS-CNN models trained on the ImageNet
dataset are clusterable into distinct categories related to Gaussian functions and derivatives (Babaiee et al. 2024a,b).
Inspired by these observations, our paper seeks to explore
the possibility general filter sets being learned by depthwise
separable convolutions across different domains, architectures, and model sizes.
We hypothesize:
The Master Key Filters Hypothesis. There exist master
key filter sets that are general for visual data, and the depthwise filters in DS-CNNs tend to converge to these master key
filters, regardless of the specific dataset, task, or architecture.
To validate this hypothesis, we conduct a comprehensive
series of experiments across ImageNet and various other
datasets and domains.

This paper challenges the prevailing view that convolutional
neural network (CNN) filters become increasingly specialized in deeper layers. Motivated by recent observations of
clusterable repeating patterns in depthwise separable CNNs
(DS-CNNs) trained on ImageNet, we extend this investigation across various domains and datasets. Our analysis of
DS-CNNs reveals that deep filters maintain generality, contradicting the expected transition to class-specific filters. We
demonstrate the generalizability of these filters through transfer learning experiments, showing that frozen filters from models trained on different datasets perform well and can be further
improved when sourced from larger datasets. Our findings indicate that spatial features learned by depthwise separable
convolutions remain generic across all layers, domains, and
architectures. This research provides new insights into the
nature of generalization in neural networks, particularly in DSCNNs, and has significant implications for transfer learning
and model design.

Introduction
Understanding the mechanisms by which neural networks
generalize across different tasks and datasets is a pivotal aspect of deep learning research (Zhang et al. 2021; Neyshabur
et al. 2017). Generalization, the ability of a model to perform
well on unseen data, is often studied by evaluating a model’s
performance on new, unseen samples or its adaptability to
novel domains. While many approaches focus on test accuracies and domain adaptation, in this work, we investigate the
role of inner structural aspects of neural networks in generalization, particularly examining the properties of depthwise
separable convolutional neural networks (DS-CNNs).
The first layer of traditional convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) is well-documented to develop filters resembling
Gabor functions or color blobs (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012), indicative of their role in capturing basic edge
and color information from the visual stimuli. However, as the
network progresses into deeper layers, these patterns become
more complex and less understood, given the increase in the
number of channels and the entangled nature of spatial and
channel representations in traditional CNNs.

1. Semantically Divided ImageNet: First, we repeat the wellknown experiment from (Yosinski et al. 2015), by dividing ImageNet into ”man-made” and ”natural” classes that
are semantically different from each other. We then transfer and freeze filters from the model trained on man-made

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1809

