The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Acting Beyond Learning: Imagination-Assisted Decision-Making in the
Visual-based Multi-Agent Cooperative Scenarios
Huanhuan Yang1 , Dianxi Shi2 * , Songchang Jin2 ,
Guojun Xie3 , Yang Chen4,5 , Chunping Qiu2 , Shaowu Yang1
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Academy of Military Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
4
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Tianjin Artificial Intelligence Innovation Center, Tianjin, China
yanghh94@126.com, dxshi@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

simulated environments (Lowe et al. 2017; Vinyals et al.
2017; Berner et al. 2019), one significant weakness is the
lower sample efficiency. This implies that agents must collect substantial data to learn optimal policies. For instance,
AlphaStar requires 44 days of cumulative training (200
years of gameplay) to defeat professional StarCraft players (Arulkumaran, Cully, and Togelius 2019), and OpenAI
Five undergoes ten months of training (over 11,000 years of
gameplay) to best Dota 2 world champions (OpenAI 2018).
Furthermore, the lower sample efficiency intensifies when
agents face high-dimensional observation spaces, which not
only slows down policy convergence speed but also significantly restricts the practical application of MARL. In realworld multi-agent systems, agents utilize multiple sensors
to perceive the environment information described by complex features. To learn policies and make decisions more efficiently, they should first perform state representation learning (SRL) to map high-dimensional observations into the
low-dimensional latent space. Then, these abstract representations can help agents better understand the inner structure
of the environment and improve learning efficiency.
However, there has been limited exploration of multiagent SRL, primarily due to some inherent challenges of
MARL. The major is the non-stationarity (Hernandez-Leal
et al. 2017). In MARL, multiple agents concurrently optimize their policies, resulting in an unstable environment
from the perspective of each agent. The next is the curse of
dimensionality (Hernandez-Leal, Kartal, and Taylor 2019),
where the joint state-action space exponentially grows with
increased agents. In addition, agents in MARL also face
partial observability, coordination, and other challenges.
The presence of these challenges exacerbates the optimal
policies’ learning difficulty. Therefore, how to characterize
agents’ high-dimensional observations and optimize their
policies in visual-based multi-agent settings is a crucial issue
that needs to be resolved and well-researched. Aiming at this
problem, inspired by the superior performance of modelbased reinforcement learning (MBRL) in single-agent domain (Wang et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019), we focus on multiagent cooperative tasks and propose the CLWPO method.
CLWPO aims to learn optimal policies via a heuristic policy
optimization (HPO) scheme in the latent world constructed

Learning optimal policies in multi-agent cooperative settings with visual observations is significant and challenging.
Agents must first perform state representation learning for
their image observations and then learn policies in the abstracted state space. Aiming at this problem, we propose a
novel model-based MARL method named Contrastive Latent
World for Policy Optimization (CLWPO). In CLWPO, we
first design a state representation model to facilitate learning
in the latent state space. With the support of this model, we
construct the latent world and introduce a contrastive variational bound (CVB) to optimize it. Subsequently, we develop
a heuristic policy optimization (HPO) scheme, incorporating
model-free learning with model-based planning to obtain robust policies that predict future behaviors. In particular, in
the planning, we maintain a queue of teammate models and
calculate an adaptive rollout length for each agent to support
their self-imagination and reduce the model-based return discrepancy. Finally, we conducted extensive experiments in the
PettingZoo benchmark, and results show that CLWPO significantly enhances learning efficiency and improves agent performance compared to state-of-the-art MARL methods.

Introduction
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), where multiple agents interact with the environment through trial and error to learn efficient policies, recently has witnessed significant advancements in tackling complex multi-agent tasks,
spanning domains like real-time strategy games (OpenAI
2018), sports games (Kurach et al. 2020), autonomous driving (Zhou et al. 2020), etc. There are mainly three learning
paradigms in MARL: centralized learning (Ye et al. 2020),
independent learning (de Witt et al. 2020), and centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) (Lowe
et al. 2017). Among them, CTDE is a prevalent paradigm
commonly used by researchers, utilizing global information
for agents’ training while local observations for decisionmaking. With CTDE, numerous model-free learning approaches have been developed (Sunehag et al. 2017; Rashid
et al. 2018; Lowe et al. 2017). While they perform well in
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21947

