The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Reprogramming Visual-Language Model for
General Deepfake Detection
Kaiqing Lin1 * , Yuzhen Lin1 * , Weixiang Li1 , Taiping Yao2 , Bin Li1†
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Media Security,
and SZU-AFS Joint Innovation Center for AI Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
linkaiqing2021@email.szu.edu.cn, libin@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
AUC in WildDeepFake (%)

87.5

The proliferation of deepfake faces poses huge potential negative impacts on our daily lives. Despite substantial advancements in deepfake detection over these years, the generalizability of existing methods against forgeries from unseen
datasets or created by emerging generative models remains
constrained. In this paper, inspired by the zero-shot advantages of Vision-Language Models (VLMs), we propose a
novel approach that repurposes a well-trained VLM for general deepfake detection. Motivated by the model reprogramming paradigm that manipulates the model prediction via input perturbations, our method can reprogram a pre-trained
VLM model (e.g., CLIP) solely based on manipulating its
input without tuning the inner parameters. First, learnable
visual perturbations are used to refine feature extraction for
deepfake detection. Then, we exploit information of face embedding to create sample-level adaptative text prompts, improving the performance. Extensive experiments on several
popular benchmark datasets demonstrate that (1) the crossdataset and cross-manipulation performances of deepfake detection can be significantly and consistently improved (e.g.,
over 88% AUC in cross-dataset setting from FF++ to WildDeepfake); (2) the superior performances are achieved with
fewer trainable parameters, making it a promising approach
for real-world applications.

Ours: (0.078 M)

85.0

Ours
SBI
ViT-B

MoE FFD: (15.51 M)
CFM: (15.51 M)

82.5
80.0

ViT-B: (85.8 M)
RECCE: (25.83 M)

77.5

DCL: (19.35 M)

75.0
72.5

SBI: (19.34 M)

70.0
0

20

MoE FFD
CFM
DCL
RECCE

40
60
80
100
Learnable Parameters (M)

120

Figure 1: Comparison between our method and open-source
deepfake detection models on the WildDeepfake dataset
(trained on FF++). Our method with the fewest learnable parameters while achieves the best performance.

frequency) or supervision (e.g., forgery masks) information
for learning subtle forgery artifacts. Despite these advancements, evaluating forgeries from unseen datasets and synthesized by unseen methods beyond the training data still poses
a significant challenge for practical deepfake detection.
Vision Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training) (Radford et al. 2021),
demonstrate robust zero-shot and few-shot generalization
capabilities across diverse downstream tasks. To improve
deepfake detector generalization, VLFFD (Sun et al. 2023)
fully fine-tunes a CLIP-based model, suggesting the effectiveness of CLIP. However, excessive adjustment of parameters in pre-trained models can disrupt the great pre-trained
knowledge, potentially leading to suboptimal performance.
Thus, developing a cost-efficient approach is demanding.
Due to the inherent vulnerability of deep networks to adversarial attacks, a novel concept called model reprogramming (Elsayed, Goodfellow, and Sohl-Dickstein 2019; Chen
2024) has been proposed to re-purpose a well-trained model
trained in a source domain to perform a target-domain task,
just through learning universal input perturbations without
modifying the source-domain model parameters. In other

Introduction
Deepfake refers to a series of deep learning-based facial
forgery techniques(Li et al. 2020a; Xu et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2024a) that can swap or reenact the face of one person in a video to another. In recent years, deepfake videos
(a.k.a, deepfakes) have gained substantial attention due to
their potential by creating and spreading false information.
Thus, detecting deepfakes has emerged as a crucial research
topic to reduce such security risks.
Existing methods treat deepfake detection as a binary
classification problem and predominantly utilize CNNs
(e.g., Xception or EfficientNet) as the backbones of classifier. In addition, some works (Qian et al. 2020; Li et al.
2020b; Zhao et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2023b, 2024b) propose to introduce auxiliary clues, including modalities (e.g.,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5262

