The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Denoising Diffusion Variational Inference:
Diffusion Models as Expressive Variational Posteriors
Wasu Top Piriyakulkij* 1 , Yingheng Wang* 1 , Volodymyr Kuleshov1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
The Jacobs Technion-Cornell Institute, Cornell Tech
{wp237, yw2349, kuleshov}@cornell.edu

2

minϕ KL(qϕ (z|x)||pθ (z|x)), which motivates the design of
expressive classes of posteriors qϕ (z|x) that reduce this
gap. Recent efforts leverage modern generative models—
including normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed 2015;
Kingma et al. 2016) and generative adversarial networks
(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Makhzani et al. 2015)—as expressive model families for qϕ that tighten the ELBO.
This work seeks to further improve variational inference
via expressive posteriors based on diffusion models (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song et al. 2020). Diffusion methods
have become the de-facto standard for high-quality image
synthesis (Rombach et al. 2022; Gokaslan et al. 2024). Here,
we use diffusion in latent space to parameterize qϕ (z|x).
We train this distribution with a denoising diffusion-like objective that does not involve adversarial training (Makhzani
et al. 2015) or constrained invertible normalizing flow architectures (Kingma et al. 2016). Samples from qϕ (z|x) are obtained via iterative refinement of z, starting from a Gaussian
distribution, and gradually forming one that is multi-modal
and complex.
Our work expands upon existing diffusion-based approximate inference methods (Berner, Richter, and Ullrich 2022; Zhang and Chen 2021; Vargas, Grathwohl, and
Doucet 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Richter, Berner, and Liu
2023; Sendera et al. 2024; Akhound-Sadegh et al. 2024)
that focus on the task of drawing samples from unnormalized R
distributions p̃(z) and estimating the partition function
Z = z p̃(z)dz. While these methods are applicable in our
setting—we set the unnormalized p̃(z) to pθ (x, z) such that
Z = pθ (x)—they do not make use of characteristics of pθ
that are common in many types of models (VAEs, Bayes
networks, etc.), namely the factorization pθ (x|z)pθ (z) and
efficient sampling. We find that leveraging these properties yields simpler algorithms that avoid backpropagating
through a sampling process, and that are fast enough to perform learning in addition to inference.
Specifically, we propose denoising diffusion variational
inference (DDVI), an approximate inference algorithm defined by a class of approximate posterior distribution based
on diffusion and a learning objective inspired by the wakesleep algorithm (Hinton et al. 1995) that implements regularized variational inference. We also derive extensions of
our method to semi-supervised learning and clustering.
Our method is easy to implement (it fits a regularized ex-

Abstract
We propose denoising diffusion variational inference
(DDVI), a black-box variational inference algorithm for latent variable models which relies on diffusion models as flexible approximate posteriors. Specifically, our method introduces an expressive class of diffusion-based variational posteriors that perform iterative refinement in latent space; we
train these posteriors with a novel regularized evidence lower
bound (ELBO) on the marginal likelihood inspired by the
wake-sleep algorithm. Our method is easy to implement (it
fits a regularized extension of the ELBO), is compatible with
black-box variational inference, and outperforms alternative
classes of approximate posteriors based on normalizing flows
or adversarial networks. We find that DDVI improves inference and learning in deep latent variable models across common benchmarks as well as on a motivating task in biology—
inferring latent ancestry from human genomes—where it outperforms strong baselines on the Thousand Genomes dataset.

1

Introduction

We are interested in amortized black-box variational inference problems of the form
log pθ (x) ≥ max Eqϕ (z|x) [log pθ (x, z) − log qϕ (z|x)]
ϕ

:= max ELBO(x, θ, ϕ),
ϕ

(1)

in which we approximate the marginal likelihood log pθ (x)
of a latent variable model pθ (x, z) with an evidence lower
bound ELBO(x, θ, ϕ) that is a function of an approximate
variational posterior qϕ (z|x). We assume that pθ factorizes
as pθ (x|z)pθ (z) and admits efficient sampling: examples
of such pθ include Bayesian networks, topic models (Blei,
Ng, and Jordan 2003), variational autoencoders (VAEs), and
broad classes of pθ defined via modern probabilistic programming frameworks (Gordon et al. 2014).
Maximizing ELBO(x, θ, ϕ) over ϕ yields a variational posterior qϕ (z|x) that approximates pθ (z|x) as
well as a tight bound on log pθ (x) that serves as
a learning objective for pθ . The approximation gap
log
pθ (x) − maxϕ ELBO(x, θ, ϕ) equals precisely
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19921

