The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DR-VAE: Debiased and Representation-enhanced Variational Autoencoder for
Collaborative Recommendation
Fan Wang1 , Chaochao Chen1 , Weiming Liu1 , Minye Lei2 , Jintao Chen1 , Yuwen Liu3 , Xiaolin
Zheng1 * , Jianwei Yin1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China), China
{fanwang97, zjuccc, 21831010} @zju.edu.cn, Minye.Lei@outlook.com, chenjintao@zju.edu.cn, yuwenliu97@gmail.com,
xlzheng@zju.edu.cn, zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Recommender Systems (RSs) are widely applied for navigating information, and Collaborative Filtering (CF) is one
of prominent recommendation techniques due to the advantages of domain independence and easy interpretation.
Among the numerous CF methods, Variational Autoencoders
(VAE), benefiting from modeling in a probabilitistic way,
stands out in capturing user preferences through representation learning. Despite the superiority, VAE-based CF models still suffer from two challenging problems: (1) Exposure bias: models in training state are narrowly exposed to
a limited, biased sample of data, leading to a skewed understanding of users’ true preferences; (2) Posterior collapse:
models excessively simplify the learned latent variable distributions, generating na”ive representations that are unable
to encapsulate the complex data patterns and thereby resulting improper recommendations. In this paper, we propose a
Debiased and Representation-enhanced Variational AutoEncoder (DR-VAE) framework for collaborative recommendations. Specifically, for exposure bias problem, DR-VAE incorporates a Debiasing Estimator, mitigating the impact of exposure bias. For poster collapse issue, DR-VAE innovatively
introduces a Flow-based Representation Enhancement module, ensuring us to encapsulate complex data patterns by fitting complex and intricate posterior distributions directly. We
provide experimental validations over four datasets to substantiate the efficacy of our DR-VAE framework.

Figure 1: Given the limited view of the user, it remains uncertain whether an unobserved interaction is due to the user
simply being unaware of the item, or if they have seen it and
decided they don’t like it.

Among representation-based CF techniques, Variational
Autoencoders (VAE) (Liang et al. 2018) have achieved significant performance improvements and drawn extensive research attention for CF because of their superior modeling
capability (Kingma and Welling 2013; Liang et al. 2018;
Truong, Salah, and Lauw 2021). Specifically, VAE introduces a probabilistic framework that uses stochastic encoders and decoders to learn the latent probability distributions rather than fixed points in the latent space. This approach allows VAE to capture the uncertainty and variability in user preferences, enabling effective generalization on
unseen data and ensuring robust recommendations (Truong,
Salah, and Lauw 2021).
However, current VAE-based CF models often face two
challenges. CH1-exposure bias: This refers to the fact that
users are exposed to only a subset of items, so unobserved
interactions do not necessarily indicate negative preferences
(Chen et al. 2023), as illustrated in Fig. 1. Moreover, popular items are more likely to be seen by users while longtail items struggle to attract attention. Consequently, the
learned user representations might not accurately reflect true
preferences, leading to suboptimal recommendations. Although some researchers have explored debiasing in RSs
(Saito et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2023), they often focus solely on fixed latent embeddings, overlooking the data’s inherent probabilistic nature,
which can weaken model robustness and generalization.
CH2-posterior collapse: This phenomenon occurs when the
learned latent representation ignores the input data and relies

Introduction
As essential instruments to counteract information overload
problems, Recommender Systems (RSs) have been extensively applied in the areas of e-commerce, education, health,
etc (Qi et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024f,g; Gong et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2024a). Among the various techniques employed
in RSs, Collaborative Filtering (CF) (Li et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2024c; Chen et al. 2024b) stands out as a pivotal method
due to its accuracy and interpretability. The core idea of CF
(e.g., user-based CF) is to learn user representations from
past user-item interactions (Liu et al. 2024a,b) and then predict users’ preferences towards items.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12703

