The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3SAT: A Simple Self-Supervised Adversarial Training Framework
Jiang Fang * 1,2 , Haonan He * 1,2 , Jiyan Sun 1 , Jiadong Fu 1,2 , Zhaorui Guo 1,2 ,
Yinlong Liu †1,2 , Wei Ma 1
2

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{fangjiang, hehaonan,sunjiyan, fujiadong, guozhaorui, liuyinlong, mawei}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

particularly concerning in high-risk domains such as autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2021; Sautier et al. 2022) and
medical diagnosis (Chaitanya et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2021),
where a lack of robustness in neural network models can result in severe threats to life and significant property damage.
Numerous prior studies suggest that Adversarial Training
(AT) (Madry et al. 2017) is a commonly employed method to
improve the robustness of DNNs. It involves a game between
attackers and defenders. The attacker uses carefully crafted
samples with adversarial perturbations (known as adversarial examples) to maximize the model training loss. The defender then minimizes the model training loss to improve
the model’s robustness to adversarial perturbations. Previous
studies on adversarial training have mainly focused on supervised learning (Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021; Pang
et al. 2020). However, despite the fact that self-supervised
learning (SSL) has achieved performance comparable to or
even surpassing state-of-the-art supervised learning in various tasks (Devlin et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2019; Grill et al.
2020; He et al. 2021) , research on improving the robustness
of self-supervised models remains relatively limited.
In SSL , Contrastive Learning (CL) is a commonly used
visual self-supervised method. It trains an encoder to project
input samples into an embedding space, where positive sample pairs (two different augmented versions of the same image) are closer to each other (Grill et al. 2020; Chen and
He 2020), while maintaining a greater distance from other
randomly selected images (optional) (Chen et al. 2020; He
et al. 2020). Contrastive learning relies on positive sample pairs that are semantically consistent but visually diverse. Otherwise, it may lead to representation collapse (He
et al. 2021). To achieve this, techniques like random cropping (Takahashi, Matsubara, and Uehara 2019), color distortion (Howard 2013), and Gaussian blur (Gedraite and Hadad
2011) are typically employed to create positive sample pairs.
Considering that encoders trained with contrastive learning can produce transferable visual representations, they
are often used as base models for a variety of downstream
tasks, including object detection and semantic segmentation
. Therefore, having a base model that is both secure and
robust, while possessing excellent representational capabilities, is crucial for the safe application of multiple downstream tasks.
Recently, to improve the robustness of encoders, ACL

The combination of self-supervised learning and adversarial
training (AT) can significantly improve the adversarial robustness of self-supervised models. However, the robustness
of self-supervised adversarial training (self-AT) still lags behind that of state-of-the-art (SOTA) supervised AT (sup-AT),
even though the performance of current self-supervised learning models has already matched or even surpassed that of
SOTA supervised learning models. This issue raises concerns
about the secure application of self-supervised learning models. As a result of the incorporation of adversarial training,
self-AT becomes a challenging joint optimisation problem.
Furthermore, recent studies have shown that the data augmentation methods necessary for constructing positive pairs
in self-supervised learning negatively impact the robustness
improvement in self-AT. Inspired by this, we propose 3SAT, a
simple self-supervised adversarial training framework. 3SAT
conducts adversarial training on original, unaugmented samples, reducing the difficulty of optimizing the adversarial
training subproblem and fundamentally eliminating the negative impact of data augmentation on robustness improvement.
Additionally, 3SAT introduces a dynamic training objective
scheduling strategy to address the issue of model training collapse during the joint optimization process when using original samples directly. 3SAT is not only structurally simple and
computationally efficient, reducing self-AT training time by
half, but it also improves the SOTA self-AT robustness accuracy by 16.19% and standard accuracy by 11.41% under
Auto-Attack on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Even more impressively, 3SAT surpasses the SOTA sup-AT method in robust
accuracy by a significant margin of 11.25%. This marks the
first time that self-AT has outperformed SOTA sup-AT in robustness, indicating that self-AT is a superior method for improving model robustness.

Introduction
Enhancing the robustness of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
is a critical challenge for their practical deployment. It is
well-known that DNNs are vulnerable to small and imperceptible perturbations, which can lead to incorrect predictions with high confidence (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2017). This vulnerability is
* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16523

