The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedSA: A Unified Representation Learning via Semantic Anchors for
Prototype-based Federated Learning
Yanbing Zhou1 , Xiangmou Qu2 , Chenlong You1 , Jiyang Zhou1 , Jingyue Tang1 , Xin Zheng1 ,
Chunmao Cai1,3 , Yingbo Wu1 *
1

Chongqing University
OPPO Research Institute
3
Chongqing Changan Automobile Co., Ltd
{202124021011, wyb}@cqu.edu.cn, lokinko@oppo.com, {ycl}@stu.cqu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

leveraging the benefits of FL rather than pursuing a global
model. Many researchers have concentrated on model-based
FL approaches that split the model into a body for universality and a head for personalization, requiring the same
model architectures across all clients to facilitate the aggregation of the body at the server (Oh, Kim, and Yun 2021).
However, model heterogeneity frequently arises when clients
may design their own local model architectures to meet individual requirements and hardware constraints. Such modelbased FL approaches not only incur significant communication costs but also risk exposing model details, which may
further raise concerns about privacy and commercial proprietary information (Ye et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023).
To address these issues, knowledge-based FL approaches
have emerged as a novel FL paradigm that transfers various types of global knowledge among clients with heterogeneous data and diverse model architectures (Tan et al.
2022b). For example, knowledge distillation (KD)-based FL
methods transfer logits outputs from a teacher model as
global knowledge to instruct the student models (Li and
Wang 2019; Lin et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). However,
these methods require a public dataset to align the outputs and are highly dependent on the quality of this dataset
(Zhang et al. 2023a). Researchers further explore KD in a
data-free manner by employing additional auxiliary models
as global knowledge (Wu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022), but
the communication costs for transmitting the auxiliary models remain considerable. Recently, prototype learning has
garnered increasing interest due to its exemplar-driven nature and intuitive interpretation (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel
2017). Prototypes, which are essentially averages of class
representations, serve as abstract concepts that can effectively integrate feature representations from diverse data distributions. By transferring lightweight prototypes as global
knowledge, prototype-based FL methods significantly address privacy concerns and reduce communication costs
(Tan et al. 2022b,c; Zhang et al. 2024).
However, existing prototype-based FL methods directly
collect prototypes from biased data distributions of clients,
which inherently introduces inconsistencies into representation learning (Zhou, Zhang, and Tsang 2023). Moreover,
the prototypes extracted from different model architectures
have diverse scales and separation margins (Zhang et al.
2024), further exacerbating these inconsistencies. These is-

Prototype-based federated learning has emerged as a promising approach that shares lightweight prototypes to transfer
knowledge among clients with data heterogeneity in a modelagnostic manner. However, existing methods often collect
prototypes directly from local models, which inevitably introduce inconsistencies into representation learning due to
the biased data distributions and differing model architectures
among clients. In this paper, we identify that both statistical and model heterogeneity create a vicious cycle of representation inconsistency, classifier divergence, and skewed
prototype alignment, which negatively impacts the performance of clients. To break the vicious cycle, we propose a
novel framework named Federated Learning via Semantic
Anchors (FedSA) to decouple the generation of prototypes
from local representation learning. We introduce a novel perspective that uses simple yet effective semantic anchors serving as prototypes to guide local models in learning consistent representations. By incorporating semantic anchors,
we further propose anchor-based regularization with marginenhanced contrastive learning and anchor-based classifier calibration to correct feature extractors and calibrate classifiers
across clients, achieving intra-class compactness and interclass separability of prototypes while ensuring consistent
decision boundaries. We then update the semantic anchors
with these consistent and discriminative prototypes, which
iteratively encourage clients to collaboratively learn a unified data representation with robust generalization. Extensive
experiments under both statistical and model heterogeneity
settings show that FedSA significantly outperforms existing
prototype-based FL methods on various classification tasks.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has been proposed to collaboratively train a global model to address the increasingly significant privacy concerns (Li et al. 2020; Kairouz et al. 2021).
Despite its advantages, traditional FL methods (McMahan
et al. 2017) struggle with statistical heterogeneity, where
heterogeneous data among clients can bias the global model
towards clients with dominant data characteristics (Wang
et al. 2020). To remedy this, personalized FL (Tan et al.
2022a) aims to train a personalized model for each client by
* Prof. Yingbo Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23009

