The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Power of Strategic Corpus Enrichment in Content Creation Games
Haya Nachimovsky, Moshe Tennenholtz
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
haya.nac@campus.technion.ac.il, moshet@technion.ac.il

Abstract

the line of work we consider, content creators aim to promote their content rather than serve as malicious attackers in
the system (as in, e.g., (Chen et al. 2023a,b; Liu et al. 2023)).
Existing competitive content creation models emphasize the
search ecosystem (Raifer et al. 2017) and the recommendation ecosystem (Ben-Porat and Tennenholtz 2018; BenPorat et al. 2018). Different models also vary in their representation of users and content, which can be explicit (Yao
et al. 2023; Eilat and Rosenfeld 2023; Jagadeesan, Garg, and
Steinhardt 2023; Hron et al. 2023) or via queries (Goren
et al. 2021). Others discuss a more general notion of topics of interest (Ben-Basat, Tennenholtz, and Kurland 2017).
However, all call for game-theoretic analysis of strategic
content creation games, where publishers aim that some content ranking algorithm will select their content.
One property that is crucial for the above efforts is the
general observation that in order to lead to high user social
welfare, we need to care for publishers’ utility (Mladenov
et al. 2020), and that in order to maintain publishers, the
game should converge to some stable deterministic equilibrium (Ben-Basat, Tennenholtz, and Kurland 2017; Yao et al.
2023; Ben-Porat and Tennenholtz 2018; Ben-Porat, Rosenberg, and Tennenholtz 2019). The related stability concept
is captured by the requirement that the corresponding content ranking algorithm determines a game with pure Nash
equilibrium, a deterministic content profile where unilateral
deviations are not beneficial. Moreover, if that equilibrium
can be shown to be obtained under best response learning
dynamics, the system is especially appealing as any reasonable behavior (starting with any contents and with arbitrary
order of modifications) will result in such a stable situation.
Given the above, a central theme of foundational work
on strategic recommendation and search ecosystems originates from the fact that existing content ranking algorithms
are unstable when facing such competition. Namely, given
an information need, recommending the content closest to it
(according to some well-crafted distance function estimating
relevance) determines a game that does not possess a pure
Nash equilibrium, hence might lead to harmful fluctuations.
Indeed, most recent literature on strategic search and recommendation ecosystems attempts to offer alternative content
ranking algorithms that do provide such stability (Yao et al.
2023; Ben-Porat and Tennenholtz 2018; Ben-Basat, Tennenholtz, and Kurland 2017).

Search and recommendation ecosystems exhibit competition
among content creators. This competition has been tackled
in a variety of game-theoretic frameworks. Content creators
generate documents with the aim of being recommended by
a content ranker for various information needs. In order for
the ecosystem, modeled as a content ranking game, to be effective and maximize user welfare, it should guarantee stability, where stability is associated with the existence of pure
Nash equilibrium in the corresponding game. Moreover, if the
contents’ ranking algorithm possesses a game in which any
best-response learning dynamics of the content creators converge to equilibrium of high welfare, the system is considered
highly attractive. However, as classical content ranking algorithms, employed by search and recommendation systems,
rank documents by their distance to information needs, it has
been shown that they fail to provide such stability properties.
As a result, novel content ranking algorithms have been devised. In this work, we offer an alternative approach: corpus
enrichment with a small set of fixed dummy documents. It
turns out that, with the right design, such enrichment can lead
to pure Nash equilibrium and even to the convergence of any
best-response dynamics to a high welfare result, where we
still employ the classical/current content ranking approach.
We show two such corpus enrichment techniques with tight
bounds on the number of documents needed to obtain the desired results. Interestingly, our study is a novel extension of
Borel’s Colonel Blotto game.

1

Introduction

Content creators aim that their content will be recommended
by search and recommendation systems when faced with information needs expressed either implicitly or explicitly by
the users (Kurland and Tennenholtz 2022). In abstract terms,
a content creator (publisher) creates a content item (document) with the aim of being selected by a content ranking
algorithm to be shown to a user with a particular topic of interest. At first approximation, a content creator aims that his
document will be selected for as many topics (e.g., relevant
queries) taken from a given set (Nachimovsky et al. 2024).
This general setup has been widely acknowledged by the
AI community and various models have been advocated. In
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14019

