The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Event-Enhanced Blurry Video Super-Resolution
Dachun Kai1 , Yueyi Zhang1,2 * , Jin Wang1 , Zeyu Xiao3 , Zhiwei Xiong1,2 , Xiaoyan Sun1,2
1

MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
National University of Singapore
{dachunkai, jin01wang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zeyuxiao@nus.edu.sg, {zhyuey, zwxiong, sunxiaoyan}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the task of blurry video superresolution (BVSR), aiming to generate high-resolution (HR)
videos from low-resolution (LR) and blurry inputs. Current
BVSR methods often fail to restore sharp details at high resolutions, resulting in noticeable artifacts and jitter due to insufficient motion information for deconvolution and the lack of
high-frequency details in LR frames. To address these challenges, we introduce event signals into BVSR and propose
a novel event-enhanced network, Ev-DeblurVSR. To effectively fuse information from frames and events for feature deblurring, we introduce a reciprocal feature deblurring module
that leverages motion information from intra-frame events to
deblur frame features while reciprocally using global scene
context from the frames to enhance event features. Furthermore, to enhance temporal consistency, we propose a hybrid deformable alignment module that fully exploits the
complementary motion information from inter-frame events
and optical flow to improve motion estimation in the deformable alignment process. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that Ev-DeblurVSR establishes a new state-of-the-art
performance on both synthetic and real-world datasets. Notably, on real data, our method is +2.59dB more accurate and
7.28× faster than the recent best BVSR baseline FMA-Net.

Figure 1: An example (a) from a challenging blurry video
enhanced by (b) SOTA methods in video deblurring (Zhang,
Xie, and Yao 2024) + VSR (Xu et al. 2024); (c) a SOTA
BVSR method (Youk, Oh, and Kim 2024); and (e) our eventenhanced approach. Our method can restore the license plate
with finer details, sharper edges, and less aliasing.
propagated and amplified in the subsequent VSR step, thus
degrading the overall performance. To address this, some
works (Fang and Zhan 2022; Youk, Oh, and Kim 2024)
have proposed joint learning methods of VSR and deblurring. For instance, FMA-Net (Youk, Oh, and Kim 2024) proposes jointly estimating the degradation and restoration kernels through sophisticated representation learning. However,
as shown in Fig. 1, these methods still suffer from blurry artifacts, jitter effects, and temporal aliasing.
Relying solely on blurry LR frames to restore high-quality
HR videos is a highly ill-posed problem. This is due to the
inherent lack of motion information needed to deconvolve
blurred images and the lack of high-frequency details in
LR frames. Recently, event signals captured by event cameras have been used for image deblurring (Xu et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2023). Compared to standard cameras, event
cameras have very high temporal resolution, high dynamic
range (Gallego et al. 2020), and rich “moving edge” information (Mitrokhin et al. 2020). These characteristics enable events to provide complementary motion information,
as well as high-frequency details, for BVSR. Motivated by
these advantages, we propose including event signals as auxiliary information to enhance BVSR performance.
In this paper, we present Ev-DeblurVSR, a novel eventenhanced network for BVSR. To effectively fuse informa-

Code — https://github.com/DachunKai/Ev-DeblurVSR

Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to recover a highresolution (HR) video from its low-resolution (LR) counterpart. While existing methods (Xu et al. 2024; Zhou et al.
2024) get good results for general videos, they struggle with
hard cases involving severe motion blur. Yet, such a setting
is very common in practical VSR applications, like sports
broadcasting (Liu et al. 2021) and video surveillance (Shamsolmoali et al. 2019). For example, in sports videos, fastmoving objects often cause unwanted motion blur.
To achieve VSR from a blurry video, i.e., blurry VSR
(BVSR), a straightforward approach is to perform video deblurring, followed by VSR methods, which we refer to as the
cascade strategy. However, this approach has a drawback in
that the pixel errors introduced in the deblurring stage are
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4175

