The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DR-Encoder: Encode Low-rank Gradients with Random Prior for Large
Language Models Differentially Privately
Huiwen Wu 1 , Deyi Zhang 1 , Xiaohan Li 1 , Xiaogang Xu 2 * , Jiafei Wu 1 † , Zhe Liu 1
1

Research Center for Data Hub and Security, Zhejiang Laboratory, Hangzhou, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
{whw,zhangdeyi,xiaohan}@zhejianglab.org, xiaogangxu00@gmail.com, {wujiafei,zhe.liu}@zhejianglab.org

Abstract

introduces a practical differential private gradient descent
for fine-tuning pre-trained LLMs in a parallel manner with
a pre-trained AutoEncoder to encode gradients based on a
Gaussian prior. The aim is to achieve differential privacy at
a client-level while preserving utility when using LLMs in
downstream tasks.
In this paper, we propose a learning-based random prior
gradient encoding method for federated LLM, called DREncoder. In our design of the pretraining AutoEncoder with
a random prior, intermediate gradients are initially collected
using low-rank decomposition (LoRA (Hu et al. 2021)) during individual training sessions. Afterward, we calculate the
mean and variance from the low-rank gradients collected for
each layer and training epoch. Subsequently, we create synthetic gradient data derived from the Gaussian distribution
with the previously determined mean and standard deviations. This synthetic gradient-shaped data are then employed
to train the Auto-Encoder for gradient compression and decompression. Next, we illustrate the process when applying the Auto-Encoder to fine-tune a Large Language Model
(LLM). The first step involves placing the encoder and decoder on the client side. During federated LLM fine-tuning,
original gradients are first perturbed, and then compressed
into a subspace representation. This subspace gradient feature is transmitted to the global server, which then decompresses the gradients back into the LoRA shape and aggregates them. After aggregating the local gradients, the server
sends back the aggregated gradients, which the client uses
for the local gradient descent.
Compared to current methods that employ learning-based
gradient compression (Wu et al. 2024; Lin et al. 2018; Li and
Han 2019; Abrahamyan et al. 2021), our proposed method
significantly enhances the privacy of the associated contributors. First, the gradient data used for training the AutoEncoder is synthesized from data generated using a Gaussian distribution rather than the real gradients, ensuring a
strong privacy guarantee for the system. We rely solely on
statistical information of gradients per layer and epoch for
pre-training the AutoEncoder. Second, we apply a differential privacy mechanism to compressed gradients to maintain client-level differential privacy in the Federated Learning (FL) training setting. Finally, we offer accurate privacy
for the entire federated system by considering randomness
in client selection.

The emergence of the large language model (LLM) has
shown its superiority in a wide range of disciplines, including
language understanding and translation, relational logic reasoning, and even partial differential equations solving. The
transformer is the pervasive backbone architecture for the
foundation model construction. It is vital to research how
to adjust the Transformer architecture to achieve an end-toend privacy guarantee in LLM fine-tuning. This paper investigates three potential information leaks during a federated
fine-tuning procedure for LLM (FedLLM). Based on the potential information leakage, we insert two-stage randomness
into FedLLM to provide an end-to-end privacy guarantee solution. The first stage is to train a gradient auto-encoder with a
Gaussian random prior based on the statistical information of
the gradients generated by local clients. The second stage is
fine-tuning the overall LLM with a differential privacy guarantee by adopting appropriate Gaussian noises. We show our
proposed method’s efficiency and accuracy gains with several
foundation models and two popular evaluation benchmarks.
Furthermore, we present a comprehensive privacy analysis
with Gaussian Differential Privacy (GDP) and Rényi Differential Privacy (RDP).

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated their
strong capabilities in real-life applications, such as language
understanding (Karanikolas et al. 2023), mathematical reasoning (Imani, Du, and Shrivastava 2023), and even differential equation solving (Herde et al. 2024). LLM-based applications provide a variety of convenient tools, including chatbots, virtual assistants, article writing, creative writing, and
translation services. However, the extensive use of LLMs in
daily work also poses a significant risk of unintentional leakage of personal information.
One typical approach to address privacy concerns in daily
LLM usage is to use differential privacy during model training, achieved by adding extra Gaussian noise to the training
data or intermediate gradients. However, these methods may
lose their effectiveness when dealing with extensive input
data and billions of model parameters in LLMs. This paper
* corresponding author
†

corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27706

