The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiveR-CT: Diversity-enhanced Red Teaming
Large Language Model Assistants with Relaxing Constraints
Andrew Zhao1 * , Quentin Xu1 , Matthieu Lin1 , Shenzhi Wang1 ,
Yong-Jin Liu1 , Zilong Zheng2 , Gao Huang1
2

1
Tsinghua University
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
zqc21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zlzheng@bigai.ai
gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in large language model assistants have made
them indispensable, raising significant concerns over managing their safety. Automated red teaming offers a promising
alternative to the labor-intensive and error-prone manual probing for vulnerabilities, providing more consistent and scalable
safety evaluations. However, existing approaches often compromise diversity by focusing on maximizing attack success
rate. Additionally, methods that decrease the cosine similarity
from historical embeddings with semantic diversity rewards
lead to novelty stagnation as history grows. To address these
issues, we introduce DiveR-CT, which relaxes conventional
constraints on the objective and semantic reward, granting
greater freedom for the policy to enhance diversity. Our experiments demonstrate DiveR-CT’s marked superiority over
baselines by 1) generating data that perform better in various
diversity metrics across different attack success rate levels, 2)
better-enhancing resiliency in blue team models through safety
tuning based on collected data, 3) allowing dynamic control of
objective weights for reliable and controllable attack success
rates, and 4) reducing susceptibility to reward overoptimization. Overall, our method provides an effective and efficient
approach to LLM red teaming, accelerating real-world deployment. . WARNING: This paper contains examples of
potentially harmful text.

Project Page — https://andrewzh112.github.io/diver-ct

1

Introduction

Deploying large language model (LLM) assistants often requires extensive testing on its output behavior to meet societal
standards. One de facto paradigm to validate model integrity,
robustness, and safety is using red teaming, where a group of
experts (the “red team”) proactively identify and mitigate potential issues of LLMs (the “blue team”) to prevent harmful
responses, e.g., provide private information or instructions to
make a bomb. Additionally, red teaming data is often used to
further adapt LLM chat assistants using safety tuning (Ganguli et al. 2022). In particular, extensive stress testing LLMs
*Work done during an internship at BIGAI.
† Corresponding author(s).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26021

with red teaming focuses on a diverse set of scenarios. While
traditional red teaming (Ganguli et al. 2022) has been effective in uncovering flaws, it often requires extensive manual
effort from highly skilled experts, making it labor-intensive,
error-prone, and inherently subjective. In response, automatic
red teaming (Perez et al. 2022; Samvelyan et al. 2024; Hong
et al. 2024; Deng et al. 2023; Ge et al. 2023; Beutel et al.
2024; Zhang et al. 2024) has emerged as a preferred alternative to manual efforts. These methods harness LLMs as the
red team, using iterative algorithms to generate effective attacks automatically. Through continuous interaction with the
blue team, these methods amass data for analysis, identifying vulnerabilities, and areas for improvement. Additionally,
these interactions provide valuable training data, enhancing
the robustness and safety protocols of the blue team model.
Existing works on automatic red teaming treat the problem
as an optimization task aimed at maximizing the expected
attack success rate (ASR), achieved by optimizing the unsafe
proxy score against the blue team model, as detailed in Section 2. However, this emphasis on ASR overshadows another
crucial aspect of red teaming: generating a semantically
rich set of diverse test queries. Such diversity is essential for
exhaustive testing of robustness and reliability across a broad
spectrum of scenarios, accurately reflecting the wide range
of use cases encountered upon deployment (Radharapu et al.
2023). Furthermore, employing adversarial safety training
or Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
on these comprehensive red teaming datasets allows LLMs
to improve their performance by fortifying their defenses
against potential exploits and enhancing their ability to
generalize effectively. This comprehensiveness promotes interpolation within known scenarios rather than extrapolation
in unknown situations, ultimately increasing their reliability
in real-world situations (Ouyang et al. 2022; Bianchi et al.
2023; Ganguli et al. 2022; Ge et al. 2023). In Figure 4, we
demonstrate empirically that increasing diversity among red
teaming prompts enhances safety tuning, resulting in safer
models when using our generated prompts.
We contend that ➊ the prevalent approach to red teaming by maximizing unsafe reward misrepresents its broader
objective, leading to compromised data diversity and quality. Ideally, the red team should remain impartial during

