The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Extract Free Dense Misalignment from CLIP
JeongYeon Nam1 * , Jinbae Im1 , Wonjae Kim2 , Taeho Kil1
1

NAVER Cloud AI
NAVER AI Lab

2

Caption: A man riding snowboard
down a snow covered slope.
CLIPScore: 61.3
Ours: A man riding snowboard
down a snow covered slope.
Misaligned word: snowboard

Abstract
Recent vision-language generative models still frequently
produce outputs misaligned with their inputs, evidenced by
object hallucination in captioning and prompt misalignment
in the text-to-image generation model. Recent studies have
explored methods for identifying misaligned elements, aiming not only to enhance interpretability but also to improve
model performance. However, current approaches primarily rely on large foundation models in a zero-shot manner
or fine-tuned models with human annotations, which limits
scalability due to significant computational costs. This work
proposes a novel approach, dubbed CLIP4DM, for detecting dense misalignments from pre-trained CLIP, specifically
focusing on pinpointing misaligned words between image
and text. We carefully revamp the gradient-based attribution
computation method, enabling negative gradient of individual text tokens to indicate misalignment. We also propose FCLIPScore, which aggregates misaligned attributions with a
global alignment score. We evaluate our method on various
dense misalignment detection benchmarks, covering various
image and text domains and misalignment types. Our method
demonstrates state-of-the-art performance among zero-shot
models and competitive performance with fine-tuned models
while maintaining superior efficiency. Our qualitative examples show that our method has a unique strength to detect
entity-level objects, intangible objects, and attributes that can
not be easily detected for existing works. We conduct ablation
studies and analyses to highlight the strengths and limitations
of our approach.

Figure 1: Overview of our work. CLIPScore indicates the
alignment between the image and text in a single scalar
score, limiting the interpretation of the score. Our approach
extracts both positive and negative attributions to identify
misaligned tokens between the image and text caption.

To measure the alignment between an image and text,
the similarity score from CLIP (Radford et al. 2021; Hessel et al. 2021) has become a de facto approach. However, as
shown in Figure 1, this simple score lacks the granularity
needed to identify specific misaligned words, limiting interpretability (Hu et al. 2023; Cho et al. 2024). To address
this limitation, recent studies (Petryk et al. 2024; Gordon
et al. 2024) have focused on detecting misalignments at a
dense level (e.g., word, phrase) and provide feedback to the
models (Yu et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2024) for further enhancement. These approaches either employ a pipeline comprising
multiple foundation models in zero-shot or fine-tuned configurations, leveraging costly human-annotated data. While
these methods show promising results, their computational
expense limits their applicability in practical scenarios.
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach that leverages pre-trained CLIP for detecting dense misalignments efficiently. Specifically, our work aims at pinpointing words
inconsistent with the image, offering richer explanations
for text-image misalignments. While CLIP’s final output is
a single similarity score, we hypothesize that rich tokenspecific information is embedded within the model’s intermediate representations, such as attention maps and gradients with respect to them. We propose a new method, dubbed
as CLIP4DM(CLIP for dense misalignment), which carefully modifies existing gradient-based attribution assignment techniques (Selvaraju et al. 2017; Chefer, Gur, and
Wolf 2021a,b). We compute attribution scores for each text
token primarily based on relevance propagation methods,
where our method is modified so that each relevance score
can also be a negative attribution value. Then, we predict

Code — https://github.com/naver-ai/CLIP4DM

Introduction
While recent advancements in generative models have garnered unprecedented progress, large-scale models still produce outputs misaligned with their inputs, exemplified by
object hallucination (Li et al. 2023; Gunjal, Yin, and Bas
2024) in image-to-text (captioning) models and misalignment with text description (Rassin, Ravfogel, and Goldberg
2022; Chefer et al. 2023) in text-to-image generation models. It is crucial to effectively detect these misalignments in
order to develop a more reliable system.
* Corresponding author: jy.nam@navercorp.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6173

