The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Shape Matching with Cycle Consistency Basis via Functional Maps
Yifan Xia1 * , Tianwei Ye1 * , Huabing Zhou2 , Zhongyuan Wang3 , Jiayi Ma1†
1
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430205, China
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
xiayifan@whu.edu.cn, twye2001@gmail.com, zhouhuabing@gmail.com, wzy hope@163.com, jyma2010@gmail.com

CCuantuMM

2

Abstract

Ours

Multi-shape matching is a central problem in various applications of computer vision and graphics, where cycle consistency constraints play a pivotal role. For this issue, we propose a novel and efficient approach that models multi-shapes
as directed graphs for two-stage optimization, i.e., optimizing pairwise correspondence accuracy using landmarks, and
refining matching consistency through cycle consistency basis. Specifically, we utilize local mapping distortion to identify landmarks and extract the dimension of the functional
space, which is then used to upsample in the spectral domain, thereby producing smoother results. Next, to optimize
the consistency of correspondences, we introduce the cycle consistency basis, which succinctly describes all consistent cycles in the collection. We then propose cycle consistency refinement, which resolves inconsistencies in cycles
efficiently via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Our approach simultaneously balances the accuracy and
consistency of multi-shape matching, achieving lower correspondence errors. Extensive experiments on several public
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach over current state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Example of a qualitative comparison between our
method and the representative state-of-the-art multi-shape
matching method CCuantuMM (Bhatia et al. 2023) using
color transfer. Notably, our method demonstrates more accurate and consistent results.

points, functional maps represent the correspondence based
on the spectral space of each shape, typically using the
eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator. Subsequent works have significantly enhanced the accuracy (Kovnatsky et al. 2013; Nogneng and Ovsjanikov 2017), efficiency (Burghard, Dieckmann, and Klein 2017), and robustness (Rodolà et al. 2017) of the functional maps pipeline.
However, in practice, we often acquire multiple shapes
in a collection, such as multiple poses of the same target,
which naturally leads to the need for multi-shape matching
(Van Kaick et al. 2011). Meanwhile, a fundamental challenge of shape matching is that the limited information between pairs of shapes restricts the accuracy of the generated mapping. By considering the information from multiple
shapes, this problem can be effectively mitigated (Van Kaick
et al. 2011). In multi-shape matching, there is also a natural
constraint called cycle consistency (Huang and Guibas 2013;
Huber 2002), which states that composite mapping along a
cycle should be identity map. As a global map prior, cycle
consistency has long been used to jointly improve the effectiveness of maps between multiple shapes. Considering the
cycle consistency constraint is key to achieving successful
multi-shape matching.
Given this background, many multi-shape matching
methods focus on better-leveraging cycle consistency constraints to achieve higher-quality correspondences. Early ap-

Code — https://github.com/YeTianwei/CyCoMatch

Introduction
Finding correspondences between non-rigid 3D shapes is a
fundamental and critical task in computer vision and graphics (Van Kaick et al. 2011; Sahillioğlu 2020), with applications in shape analysis (Hartman et al. 2023), texture transfer (Aigerman, Poranne, and Lipman 2015), and pose estimation (Jiang et al. 2022). Unlike correspondences between
rigid shapes, which can be achieved through simple parameter deformations, correspondences between non-rigid shapes
have to address more unpredictable deformations.
Near-isometric mappings between shapes have been
widely studied due to the characteristics of approximately
isometric deformations in the real world (Sahillioğlu 2020).
One highly emphasized approach is the functional maps
framework (Ovsjanikov et al. 2012). By establishing correspondences between real-valued functions rather than
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8575

