The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridge Diffusion Model: Bridge Chinese Text-to-Image Diffusion Model with
English Communities
Shanyuan Liu, Bo Cheng, Yuhang Ma, Liebucha Wu
Ao Ma, Xiaoyu Wu, Dawei Leng* , Yuhui Yin
360 AI Research
{liushanyuan, chengbo1, mayuhang, wuliebucha}@360.cn
{maao, wuxiaoyu1, lengdawei, yinyuhui}@360.cn
Abstract

and community-driven technology. It maps images from
pixel space to latent space, resulting in impressive image
quality while significantly reducing memory usage. The SD
community has made important progress, introducing various LoRA(Hu et al. 2021) models and checkpoints. These
additions enhance the base model’s capabilities, enabling
it to generate more refined or personalized content within
specific domains. It’s worth noting that the rapid progress
of these technologies is mainly centered around Englishlanguage communities.
However, current models exhibit language-related biases.
As pointed out by (Luccioni et al. 2023; Miller et al. 2023),
Text-to-Image (TTI) models designed for English speakers, such as DALL-E 2(Ramesh et al. 2022), Stable Diffusion(Rombach et al. 2022) versions 1.4 and 2, tend to
disproportionately emphasize characteristics associated with
white individuals and males. These language-related biases
are inherent and widespread in current TTI models, primarily because they are predominantly trained on data from the
English-speaking world, as exemplified by the commonly
used LAION dataset(Schuhmann et al. 2022). Consequently,
there is an over-representation of English-speaking figures
and an inadequate representation of non-English-speaking
counterparts.
The primary focus of this work is to design a TTI model
that is compatible with multiple languages. By ”compatible”, we mean not only supporting non-English prompt input but also capable of generating images that align with
common sense in non-English languages. While translationbased methods are straightforward and cost-effective, they
can only address the non-English input capability, leaving
the inherent model bias untouched. Another approach involves alignment-based strategies, which align the embedding space of different language text encoders with parallel
translation text corpus. However, this method is essentially
another form of ”translation”. Taiyi-Stable-Diffusion-1BChinese-EN-v0.1(Zhang et al. 2022) took this route, finetuning the TTI model with Chinese-native data based on an
aligned text encoder. This allows the English-native model
to incorporate Chinese-native language semantics at a low
cost while maintaining some level of compatibility between
the English and Chinese TTI communities, although achieving the right balance is challenging. However, when tasked
with capturing intricate nuances of native language seman-

Text-to-Image generation (TTI) technologies are advancing
rapidly, especially in the English language communities.
However, apart from the user input language barrier problem,
English-native TTI models inherently carry biases from their
English world centric training data, which creates a dilemma
for development of other language-native TTI models. One
common choice is to fine-tune the English-native TTI model
with translated samples. It falls short of fully addressing the
model bias problem. Alternatively, training non-English language native models from scratch can effectively resolve the
English world bias, but model trained this way would diverge
from the English TTI communities, thus not able to utilize
the strides continuously gaining in the English TTI communities any more. To build Chinese TTI model meanwhile keep
compatibility with the English TTI communities, we propose
a novel model structure referred as ”Bridge Diffusion Model”
(BDM). The proposed BDM employs a backbone-branch network structure to learn the Chinese semantics while keep the
latent space compatible with the English-native TTI backbone, in an end-to-end manner. The unique advantages of
the proposed BDM are that it’s not only adept at generating images that precisely depict Chinese semantics, but also
compatible with various English-native TTI plugins, such as
different checkpoints, LoRA, ControlNet, Dreambooth, and
Textual Inversion, etc. Moreover, BDM can concurrently generate content seamlessly combining both Chinese-native and
English-native semantics within a single image, fostering cultural interaction.

Code — https:
//github.com/360CVGroup/Bridge Diffusion Model
Model — https://huggingface.co/qihoo360/BDM1.0

Introduction
The latest advancements in diffusion models have significantly transformed the process of text-to-image generation. With extensive training data and model parameters,
diffusion models(Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) can now
vividly depict visual scenes based on written prompts, allowing users to effortlessly generate beautiful images using natural language. Among these models, Stable Diffusion(Rombach et al. 2022) has emerged as a widely adopted
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5541

