The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Enhanced Contextual Information for Video-Level Object Tracking
Ben Kang1,2 , Xin Chen1 , Simiao Lai1 , Yang Liu1 * , Yi Liu3 , Dong Wang1,2
1
Dalian University of Technology
Ningbo Institute of Dalian University of Technology
3
Baidu Inc.
kangben@mail.dlut.edu.cn, chenxin3131@mail.dlut.edu.cn, laisimiao@mail.dlut.edu.cn, ly@dlut.edu.cn,
liuyi22@baidu.com, wdice@dlut.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Update

Contextual information at the video level has become increasingly crucial for visual object tracking. However, existing
methods typically use only a few tokens to convey this information, which can lead to information loss and limit their
ability to fully capture the context. To address this issue,
we propose a new video-level visual object tracking framework called MCITrack. It leverages Mamba’s hidden states
to continuously record and transmit extensive contextual information throughout the video stream, resulting in more robust object tracking. The core component of MCITrack is
the Contextual Information Fusion module, which consists
of the mamba layer and the cross-attention layer. The mamba
layer stores historical contextual information, while the crossattention layer integrates this information into the current visual features of each backbone block. This module enhances
the model’s ability to capture and utilize contextual information at multiple levels through deep integration with the
backbone. Experiments demonstrate that MCITrack achieves
competitive performance across numerous benchmarks. For
instance, it gets 76.6% AUC on LaSOT and 80.0% AO on
GOT-10k, establishing a new state-of-the-art performance.

Encoder & Head

Encoder & Head

Tracking Result
(a) Dynamic Template

Tracking Result

(b) Extra Token

Encoder & Head

Tracking
Result

Hidden State Layer

Update

(c) Hidden State (Ours)

Update

Search Region
Template
Dynamic Template
Extra Token

Figure 1: Comparison of different contextual information
propagation methods. (a) Using dynamic templates. (b) Using extra tokens. (c) Using hidden state layers.

Code — https://github.com/kangben258/MCITrack

updating the dynamic template. While these methods have
achieved some success, they still primarily focus on the appearance information of the target and do not fully utilize
the contextual information in the video sequence.
Recently, some works (Chang et al. 2024; Zheng et al.
2024; Bai et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2024) have
begun to explore video-level object tracking. Unlike previous methods focusing solely on the target’s appearance,
these works utilize more contextual information to enhance
model performance. As shown in Figure 1 (b), these methods typically use a small number of extra tokens to capture
and transmit contextual information, continuously updating
as the video sequence progresses. Although these methods
show superior performance compared to earlier approaches,
the limited number of tokens can only transmit a limited
amount of contextual information, leading to information
loss. Therefore, efficiently transmitting richer contextual information remains an urgent challenge.
Temporal models like LSTM (Graves 2012) and state
space models (Gu et al. 2021) are adept at preserving crucial information in their hidden states, making them suitable
for recording important contextual information in video se-

Introduction
Visual object tracking is a crucial task in computer vision,
aiming to identify an object in the initial frame of a video
and predict its location in subsequent frames. Existing tracking methods (Danelljan et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020, 2022;
Zhu et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2022) typically employ imagelevel matching techniques, using template and search region
images for feature matching and then making predictions
based on the matching results. These methods primarily focus on the initial appearance of the target and do not utilize
the contextual information available in the video sequence.
To improve performance, some methods (Yan et al.
2021a; Mayer et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023b) use dynamic
templates to record the appearance information of objects.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), these methods obtain more appearance information and enhance the model’s robustness by
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4194

