The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Teaching Models to Improve on Tape
Liat Bezalel1 , Eyal Orgad1 , Amir Globerson1,2
1

Tel Aviv University
2
Google Research
liatbezalel@mail.tau.ac.il, eyalorgad@mail.tau.ac.il, gamir@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract

Building on the potential of feedback, we aim to explore
whether LLMs can use this signal more effectively. We focus on controlled generation tasks, where LLMs often struggle (Sun et al. 2023). Specifically, we consider the important
subclass of tasks where it is easy to check if the generated
text satisfies the desired control requirements (e.g., the “generate sentence with six words” example above). We hypothesize that LLMs can be trained to more effectively use corrective feedback in these cases, and we approach this goal
through Reinforcement Learning (RL).

Large Language Models (LLMs) often struggle when
prompted to generate content under specific constraints.
However, in such cases it is often easy to check whether these
constraints are satisfied or violated. Recent works have shown
that LLMs can benefit from such “corrective feedback”. Here
we claim that this skill of LLMs can be significantly enhanced
via training. We introduce an RL framework for teaching
models to use such rewards, by simulating interaction sessions, and rewarding the model according to its ability to
satisfy the constraints. We refer to our method as CORGI
(Controlled Generation with RL for Guided Interaction), and
evaluate it on a variety of controlled generation tasks. We
find that CORGI consistently outperforms the baseline reinforcement learning method that does not incorporate conversational feedback. Furthermore, CORGI’s interactive framework enables meta-learning, allowing the LLM to better generalize to guided interaction in new tasks. Our results clearly
show that conversational optimization, when combined with
reinforcement learning, significantly improves the effectiveness of LLMs in controlled generation contexts.

We implement an RL based approach for training LLMs
to improve their corrective skills. To do so, our training
data consists of several controlled generation tasks. During
training we let the model interact with corrective feedback
over multiple iterations, and provide a reward corresponding
to the provided feedback. Specifically, the delivered reward
corresponds to the best feedback obtained in the interaction
session. To understand why this is the reward chosen, consider a controlled generation task, where the corrective feedback says how many constraints are satisfied. Then, one can
always choose the output that satisfied the most constraints.
See Figure 1 for an illustration of an interaction session and
corresponding reward.

Code — https://github.com/Liat-Bezalel/corgi

Introduction

For the above reward scheme, we train the model using
RL, to obtain a model that can better use corrective signals. Our first observation is that on the tasks that the model
was trained on, there is a significant improvement in performance, as compared to baselines that are not trained to
use feedback. An even more surprising finding is that these
trained models also improve when using feedback in tasks
they were not trained on. This supports our conjecture that
LLMs can improve on the “meta-skill” of using corrective
feedback.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have become quite effective at following instructions from users. Despite this
progress there are still many tasks where LLMs will not respond correctly. A particular subclass of cases is those where
it is relatively easy to judge whether a response is correct or
not. For example, if the task is to generate a sentence with
six words, it is fairly easy for to check if this constraint is
violated.
A natural question is whether such feedback can be used
in order to make the LLM produce a correct response. This
exciting prospect has been considered in several works recently, including Madaan et al. (2023) and Shinn et al.
(2024). Indeed, these works show that feedback can be
“written to the LLM context”, and the LLM can use this to
improve its generation. Furthermore, it has been shown that
LLMs can learn to utilize external tools (Schick et al. 2023;
Lu et al. 2023), thereby improving their accuracy.

Our results demonstrate the significant potential of teaching LLMs to effectively incorporate feedback into their output generation processes. By demonstrating improvements
in controlled generation tasks, we highlight how LLMs can
learn to refine their outputs based on corrective input, leading to more accurate and reliable results. This suggests that
the ability to utilize feedback is not merely a task-specific
enhancement but may represent a more generalizable skill
that would demonstrate gains across a wide range of tasks.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15550

