The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

High-Resolution Frame Interpolation with Patch-based Cascaded Diffusion
Junhwa Hur∗ , Charles Herrmann∗ , Saurabh Saxena, Janne Kontkanen, Wei-Sheng Lai,
Yichang Shih, Michael Rubinstein, David J. Fleet† , Deqing Sun
Google

Abstract

enables the synthesis of new frames between existing ones
to enhance a video’s frame rate. Despite the progress, the latest techniques struggle in the high resolution setting, where
challenging cases such as repetitive textures, detailed or thin
objects become more common place.
Existing methods often design models using strong domain knowledge, e.g., correspondence matching (Ilg et al.
2017; Sun et al. 2018; Teed and Deng 2020) and synthesis
based on warping (Jiang et al. 2018; Niklaus and Liu 2020;
Park, Lee, and Kim 2021; Xue et al. 2019). Domain knowledge enables small models to perform well when trained on
a small amount of data but may restrict their capabilities. For
example, when motion cues are incorporated into the model,
the final quality are bounded by the accuracy of the motion.
This is particularly evident on high resolution inputs with
large motion, repetitive texture, and thin structures, where
motion estimation often struggles (see Fig. 1).
To address these challenges, we advocate a domainagnostic diffusion approach, relying on model capacity and
training data at scale for performance gains and generalization. Some recent work have explored diffusion for frame
interpolation but towards generative aspect, e.g. better perceptual quality (Danier, Zhang, and Bull 2024) or complex
and non-linear motion (Jain et al. 2024) between two frames
very further apart in time. Their performance, however, falls
behind in the classical setting which predicts an intermediate frame and evaluates its fidelity to the ground truth using
standard metrics, e.g., PSNR or SSIM.
We instead introduce a patch-based cascaded pixel diffusion approach for High resolution Frame Interpolation,
dubbed HiFI. HiFI generalizes across diverse resolutions up
to 8K images, a wide range of scene motions, and a broad
spectrum of challenging scenes. The diffusion framework allows us to scale both the model capacity and data size. We
also show that our model can effectively utilize large-scale
video datasets. While cascades offer significant benefits for
processing diverse input resolutions with different levels of
motion, standard cascades, which denoise the entire highresolution image, often struggle with memory issues at very
high resolutions such as 8K. To save memory during inference, we propose a new patch-based cascade for frame interpolation, which always denoises the same resolution but
is applied to patches of high resolution frames. This also allows us to use one model for both base and super-resolution

Despite the recent progress, existing frame interpolation
methods still struggle with processing extremely high resolution input and handling challenging cases such as repetitive textures, thin objects, and large motion. To address these
issues, we introduce a patch-based cascaded pixel diffusion
model for high resolution frame interpolation, HiFI, that excels in these scenarios while achieving competitive performance on standard benchmarks. Cascades, which generate a
series of images from low to high resolution, can help significantly with large or complex motion that require both global
context for a coarse solution and detailed context for high
resolution output. However, contrary to prior work on cascaded diffusion models which perform diffusion on increasingly large resolutions, we use a single model that always
performs diffusion at the same resolution and upsamples by
processing patches of the inputs and the prior solution. At
inference time, this drastically reduces memory usage and allows a single model, solving both frame interpolation (base
model’s task) and spatial up-sampling, saving training cost as
well. HiFI excels at high-resolution images and complex repeated textures that require global context, achieving comparable or state-of-the-art performance on various benchmarks
(Vimeo, Xiph, X-Test, and SEPE-8K). We further introduce a
new dataset, LaMoR, that focuses on particularly challenging
cases, and HiFI significantly outperforms other baselines.

Project page — https://hifi-diffusion.github.io

Introduction
In a short amount of time, smartphone cameras have become both ubiquitous and significantly higher quality, capturing spatially higher resolution images and videos. However, the temporal resolution—i.e. video frame rate—of captured videos has lagged behind the spatial resolution, due
to a combination of computational and memory costs and
limited exposure time. The conflict between increased user
interest in creative video content and technical limitations
for capturing high frame-rate video has increased interest
in techniques for high-resolution frame interpolation, which
∗

These authors contributed equally.
DF is also affiliated with the University of Toronto and the
Vector Institute.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3868

