The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SS-GEN: A Social Story Generation Framework with Large Language Models
Yi Feng1 , Mingyang Song2 , Jiaqi Wang3 * , Zhuang Chen4 , Guanqun Bi5
Minlie Huang5 , Liping Jing1 * , Jian Yu1
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Tencent Hunyuan, Beijing
3
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
5
CoAI Group, DCST, IAI, BNRIST, Tsinghua University
yifeng@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) often misunderstand social situations and struggle to participate in
daily routines. Social Stories™ are traditionally crafted by
psychology experts under strict constraints to address these
challenges but are costly and limited in diversity. As Large
Language Models (LLMs) advance, there’s an opportunity to
develop more automated, affordable, and accessible methods
to generate Social Stories in real-time with broad coverage.
However, adapting LLMs to meet the unique and strict constraints of Social Stories is a challenging issue. To this end,
we propose SS-GEN, a Social Story GENeration framework
with LLMs. Firstly, we develop a constraint-driven sophisticated strategy named S TAR S OW to hierarchically prompt
LLMs to generate Social Stories at scale, followed by rigorous human filtering to build a high-quality dataset. Additionally, we introduce quality assessment criteria to evaluate the effectiveness of these generated stories. Considering that powerful closed-source large models require very
complex instructions and expensive API fees, we finally finetune smaller language models with our curated high-quality
dataset, achieving comparable results at lower costs and with
simpler instruction and deployment. This work marks a significant step in leveraging AI to personalize Social Stories
cost-effectively for autistic children at scale, which we hope
can encourage future research on special groups.

Figure 1: A Social Story excerpted from The New Social
Story Book written by Carol Gray (Gray 2010), which adhere to strict constraints that we summarized based on professional guidelines: Structural Clarity, Descriptive Orientation, Situational Safety.

Introduction
1

Social Story™ , pioneered by Gray and Garand (1993),
helps children with autism2 define the social context of anticipated or experienced situations, putting them into perspective and then developing statements on how they feel

and what actions to take in response, thereby positively improving their social understanding and behavioral outcomes.
For example, the story in Figure 1 helps autistic children
understand and manage the stress and anxiety triggered by
mistakes.
These stories are traditionally created by psychologists
following the 10.2 tutorial (Gray 2010), which we summarize as three strict constraints: Structural Clarity to organize the title, introduction, main body and conclusion for
clear social cues; Descriptive Orientation to describe more
than direct, being patient and humility; Situational Safety to
emphasize an appropriate perspective, positive tone, unambiguous language and precise vocabulary, ensuring the re-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
As the social-skill intervention tool, Social Stories™ are
widely used to specifically help individuals with ASD understand
and navigate specific social situations. When capitalized, a Social
Story refers to a Social Story™ following the criteria in 10.2 Tutorial (Gray 2010).
2
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a lifelong neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impairments in social interaction, communication, and restricted or repetitive behaviors, affecting millions of children (approximately 1/100) worldwide with the
number continuously growing (Zeidan et al. 2022).

1300

