The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Structural Pruning via Spatial-aware Information Redundancy
for Semantic Segmentation
Dongyue Wu1 , Zilin Guo1 , Li Yu2 , Nong Sang1 , Changxin Gao1 *
1

National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology, School of Artifcial Intelligence and
Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{dongyue wu, zilin guo, hustlyu, nsang, cgao}@hust.edu.cn
81

Abstract

SIRFP-Deeplabv3+

SCTNet-B-Seg100

DCFP-Deeplabv3

80

In recent years, semantic segmentation has flourished in various applications. However, the high computational cost remains a significant challenge that hinders its further adoption. The filter pruning method for structured network slimming offers a direct and effective solution for the reduction
of segmentation networks. Nevertheless, we argue that most
existing pruning methods, originally designed for image classification, overlook the fact that segmentation is a locationsensitive task, which consequently leads to their suboptimal
performance when applied to segmentation networks. To address this issue, this paper proposes a novel approach, denoted as Spatial-aware Information Redundancy Filter Pruning (SIRFP), which aims to reduce feature redundancy between channels. First, we formulate the pruning process as a
maximum edge weight clique problem (MEWCP) in graph
theory, thereby minimizing the redundancy among the remaining features after pruning. Within this framework, we
introduce a spatial-aware redundancy metric based on feature maps, thus endowing the pruning process with location
sensitivity to better adapt to pruning segmentation networks.
Additionally, based on the MEWCP, we propose a low computational complexity greedy strategy to solve this NP-hard
problem, making it feasible and efficient for structured pruning. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we conducted extensive comparative experiments on various challenging datasets. The results demonstrate the superior performance of SIRFP for semantic segmentation tasks.

PIDNet-S

mIoU (%)

78

DDRNet-23
77 CABiNet

FPGM-Deeplabv3

75

SCTNet-S-Seg75

MTP-BiSeNet

73
2

7

CAP-PSPNet

STDC1-Seg75

BiSeNetV2-L

74

STDC2-Seg75

SeaFormer-B-Seg100

HyperSeg-M
TopFormer-B
SwiftNetRN-18
RTFormer-S

76

72

DDRNet-23
RTFormer-B
SFNet-ResNet18
HyperSeg-S

SIRFP-Deeplabv3

79

SIRFP(Ours)
FPGM
MTP

12

17
Params(M)

DCFP
CAP
Real-time Methods

22

27

Figure 1: Params vs mIOU on Cityscapes dataset. The proposed Spatial-aware Information Redundancy Filter Pruning
(SIRFP) method achieves an outstanding trade-off between
parameter efficiency and accuracy. The pruning methods are
connected with lines while real-time methods are colored in
grey. Best viewed in color.

costs, which enable them to extract high-quality features
for pixel representation. However, the intimidating computational cost also hinders their deployment on resourceconstrained devices widely used on autonomous vehicles,
mobile phones, wearable devices, and robots. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to develop efficient neural network
compression methods for semantic segmentation.
Currently, network compression methods can be broadly
categorized into three types: parameter quantization (Han,
Mao, and Dally 2015; Xu et al. 2018; Esser et al. 2019),
low-rank approximation (Yang et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2017),
and network pruning (Luo, Wu, and Lin 2017; Lin et al.
2020b; Molchanov et al. 2019). Network pruning can be further divided into weight pruning (Han et al. 2015; CarreiraPerpinán and Idelbayev 2018) and filter pruning (Zhuang
et al. 2018; Molchanov et al. 2019; Li et al. 2016). Weight
pruning eliminates individual weight elements to achieve
unstructured sparsity, requiring specialized libraries to accelerate sparse matrix computations. In contrast, filter prun-

Code — https://github.com/dywu98/SIRFP.git

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a classic and challenging task in
the field of computer vision. Its goal is to assign category
labels to each pixel in an image. Recently, with the advent of Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), numerous deep learning-based
methods (Chen et al. 2017a; Ding et al. 2018; Ronneberger,
Fischer, and Brox 2015; Zhao et al. 2017; Pang et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2018) have been proposed and applied to semantic segmentation. These methods often involve networks
with a large number of parameters and high computational
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8368

