The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Digging into Intrinsic Contextual Information for
High-fidelity 3D Point Cloud Completion
Jisheng Chu1 , Wenrui Li1 , Xingtao Wang1, 2 * , Kanglin Ning1, 2 , Yidan Lu1 and Xiaopeng Fan1, 2, 3
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
Harbin Institute of Technology Suzhou Research Institute
3
Pengcheng Laboratory
23B936009@stu.hit.edu.cn; liwr618@163.com; xtwang@hit.edu.cn;
23B936010@stu.hit.edu.cn; 24S103311@stu.hit.edu.cn; fxp@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Completed

Mix
Sampling

DCG

Similarity
Modeling

Refinement

Partial

The common occurrence of occlusion-induced incompleteness in point clouds has made point cloud completion (PCC)
a highly-concerned task in the field of geometric processing. Existing PCC methods typically produce complete point
clouds from partial point clouds in a coarse-to-fine paradigm,
with the coarse stage generating entire shapes and the fine
stage improving texture details. Though diffusion models
have demonstrated effectiveness in the coarse stage, the fine
stage still faces challenges in producing high-fidelity results
due to the ill-posed nature of PCC. The intrinsic contextual
information for texture details in partial point clouds is the
key to solving the challenge. In this paper, we propose a highfidelity PCC method that digs into both short and long-range
contextual information from the partial point cloud in the fine
stage. Specifically, after generating the coarse point cloud via
a diffusion-based coarse generator, a mixed sampling module introduces short-range contextual information from partial point clouds into the fine stage. A surface freezing module
safeguards points from noise-free partial point clouds against
disruption. As for the long-range contextual information, we
design a similarity modeling module to derive similarity with
rigid transformation invariance between points, conducting
effective matching of geometric manifold features globally.
In this way, the high-quality components present in the partial
point cloud serve as valuable references to refine the coarse
point cloud with high fidelity. Extensive experiments have
demonstrated the superiority of the proposed method over
SOTA competitors.

Coarse

Sampled

Dissimilar Similar

Figure 1: The workflow of the proposed method. In the middle of the figure, we visualize the matching of non-local
regions based on the similarity of geometric structures. A
higher degree of similarity is represented by a more intense
yellow color. The green point in the sampled point cloud is
refined refering to the heatmap in the partial point cloud.
task filling in missing regions given partial point clouds, is
of paramount importance.
With advancements in deep learning, notable progress has
been achieved in the field of PCC. Existing PCC networks
(Yuan et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2023) generally produce complete point clouds from partial ones following a coarse-to-fine paradigm. The coarse stage produces
a preliminary shape based on learned prior knowledge from
training samples, and the fine stage enhances geometric texture details. Recently, diffusion probabilistic models (Luo
and Hu 2021) have been extended to address the coarse
stage, yielding impressive performance (Lyu et al. 2022).
However, the fine stage still faces challenges as recovering the miss regions is actually an ill-posed problem. Fortunately, real-world objects often exhibit symmetries and regularities, making the intrinsic contextual information of texture details within partial point clouds invaluable for refining
the coarse point cloud with high fidelity.
In this paper, we propose a high-fidelity PCC method adhering to a two-stage completion strategy: coarse point cloud
generation followed by a refinement network. The proposed
method digs into both short-range and long-range contex-

Code — github.com/JS-CHU/ContextualCompletion

Introduction
Point cloud, a widely used representation for object geometry in 3D space, offers a simple and flexible data structure. However, raw point clouds obtained through devices
like laser scanners, often exhibit missing regions due to
factors such as occlusion, surface reflectivity, and scanning
range limitations. The incompleteness of point clouds adversely affects 3D model quality and effectiveness of higherlevel tasks like classification, segmentation, and object detection. Consequently, point cloud completion (PCC), the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2573

