The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sequence Matters: Harnessing Video Models in 3D Super-Resolution
Hyun-kyu Ko1 * , Dongheok Park2 * , Youngin Park3 , Byeonghyeon Lee1 , Juhee Han1 ,
Eunbyung Park1,2†
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
3
Visual Display Division, Samsung Electorics

Abstract

Utilizing high-quality or high-resolution multi-view input images is crucial for obtaining high-fidelity 3D models from these techniques. However, meeting this requirement in real-world settings is often infeasible due to various constraints, e.g., equipment limitations or adverse environmental conditions. To overcome these challenges, several recent studies have investigated the 3D super-resolution
task, which aims to generate high-fidelity 3D models from
low-resolution multi-view images (Wang et al. 2022; Han
et al. 2023; Yoon and Yoon 2023; Lin et al. 2024; Feng et al.
2024a; Lee, Li, and Lee 2024; Wu et al. 2024; Feng et al.
2024b; Shen et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024a). The early approaches have utilized single-image super-resolution (SISR)
models. They first upscale low-resolution (LR) input images to high-resolution (HR) images and then apply NeRF
or 3DGS techniques to represent the 3D models. However,
they face a critical limitation; the generated HR images usually lack 3D consistency since the input view images are
processed individually. Although numerous works have improved 3D consistency using refinement stages, these solutions introduced additional computational complexity and
could not fully resolve the problems.
A recent work (Shen et al. 2024) has explored the use
of Video Super-Resolution (VSR) models (Xu et al. 2024b)
to improve the 3D consistency. Inspired by the latest studies showing video generative models can achieve highly accurate 3D spatial consistency across the generated video
frames (Voleti et al. 2024; Zuo et al. 2024), it repurposes
VSR models to upsample LR multi-view images. This approach first constructs a low-resolution 3D representation
using 3DGS from LR input images and then generates an LR
video (a sequence of multi-view LR images) rendered from
a ‘smooth’ camera trajectory. This VSR-friendly ‘smooth’
LR video serves as the input for the VSR model, and it is upscaled to an HR video (a sequence of multi-view HR images)
from which the HR 3D model is subsequently produced.
While promising, the empirical evaluation has revealed
certain limitations of this approach. The distribution shift between the training data (natural LR videos) and the testing
data (the rendered LR videos from 3D models, e.g., 3DGS)
negatively impacted the pre-trained VSR models. The rendered images from 3DGS frequently introduce stripy or
blob-like artifacts, degrading the VSR models’ performance.
Although fine-tuning the VSR models on the rendered im-

3D super-resolution aims to reconstruct high-fidelity 3D
models from low-resolution (LR) multi-view images. Early
studies primarily focused on single-image super-resolution
(SISR) models to upsample LR images into high-resolution
images. However, these methods often lack view consistency
because they operate independently on each image. Although
various post-processing techniques have been extensively explored to mitigate these inconsistencies, they have yet to fully
resolve the issues. In this paper, we perform a comprehensive study of 3D super-resolution by leveraging video superresolution (VSR) models. By utilizing VSR models, we ensure a higher degree of spatial consistency and can reference
surrounding spatial information, leading to more accurate and
detailed reconstructions. Our findings reveal that VSR models can perform remarkably well even on sequences that lack
precise spatial alignment. Given this observation, we propose
a simple yet practical approach to align LR images without
involving fine-tuning or generating ‘smooth’ trajectory from
the trained 3D models over LR images. The experimental results show that the surprisingly simple algorithms can achieve
the state-of-the-art results of 3D super-resolution tasks on
standard benchmark datasets, such as the NeRF-synthetic and
MipNeRF-360 datasets.

Project Page — https://ko-lani.github.io/Sequence-Matters

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in 3D reconstruction from multi-view
images, e.g., Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), have demonstrated outstanding performance across various tasks, such as novel view synthesis (Mildenhall et al. 2021; Müller et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2022; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2022; Kerbl et al. 2023) and surface reconstruction (Wang et al. 2021; Yariv et al. 2021,
2023; Guédon and Lepetit 2024; Huang et al. 2024; Fan et al.
2024). In addition, these techniques have proved highly effective in creating 3D scenes and assets when combined with
the generative model approaches (Poole et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2023). The versatility of these methods and their ability to
generate accurate and detailed 3D models have broadened
their applicability to various tasks (Wang et al. 2024; Yu
et al. 2024b).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.

4356

