The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ProsodyTalker: 3D Visual Speech Animation via Prosody Decomposition
Zonglin Li, Xiaoqian Lv, Qinglin Liu, Quanling Meng, Xin Sun* , Shengping Zhang
Harbin Institute of Technology
{zonglin.li, xiaoqian.lv}@hit.edu.cn, qinglin.liu@outlook.com,
{quanling.meng, sunxintyc, s.zhang}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

since existing 4D face datasets have no head poses and real
audiovisual animation data is challenging to collect, the data
scarcity problem is intrinsically inevitable.
Our initial analysis focuses on discerning specific signals
that correlate with lip movements and head poses within
speech. In cognitive science and psycholinguistics research
(Yehia, Kuratate, and Vatikiotis-Bateson 2002; Graf et al.
2002), it has been demonstrated that lip movements are
closely tied to content semantics, whereas head poses are
more intricately linked to speech intonation. For instance,
emphasis on a word is frequently accompanied by a nod of
the head, and a rising voice at the end of a phrase is often
underlined with an upward head movement, analogous to
variations in F0 within speech prosody. Drawing inspiration
from prosody decomposition in speech processing, we conduct a statistical analysis to demonstrate how lip movements
and head pose correlate with the language content and F0.
These findings support the integration of language content
and F0 in 3D visual speech animation.
Given these observations, we propose a novel framework,
dubbed ProsodyTalker, which simultaneously leverages language content and F0 to synthesize co-speech lip movements
and head poses. We begin by applying information perturbation to distinctly decompose speech prosody into poserelated F0 and lip-related language content. Given the correlation between lip movements and language content, we
combine multi-head attention with inductive biases to align
content-lip modalities and integrate temporal motion context
for enhanced lip synchronization. Meanwhile, we leverage
the strengths of latent space-based and conditional diffusionbased methods and propose an F0-conditioned latent diffusion model to learn a probabilistic mapping from F0 to
pose-related latent codes. Different from GeneFace++ (Ye
et al. 2023), the continuous nature of F0 embedding enables
a more accurate representation of F0 variations, resulting in
more expressive head pose synthesis, with temporal smoothness ensured by the latent diffusion model.
Existing 3D visual speech animation approaches continue to rely on 4D face datasets for model training. However, capturing high-quality audiovisual data remains notably time-intensive and resource-demanding. Existing 4D
face datasets (e.g., VOCASET (Cudeiro et al. 2019) and
BIWI (Fanelli et al. 2010)) generally lack head pose variations, making it hard to train the models to capture plausible

Most existing 3D visual speech animation methods synthesize lip movements synchronized with speech, which however neglect head poses and therefore degrade the animation realism. The animation of head poses presents two primary challenges: (1) the intricate mapping between speech
and head poses remains poorly understood and (2) the absence of 4D face datasets featuring realistic head poses. Inspired by prosody decomposition in speech processing, we
discern that head movements correlate with the fundamental
frequency (F0) of speech prosody, while lip movements align
with the language content. These observations motivate us to
propose a novel framework, dubbed ProsodyTalker, that concurrently synthesizes lip and head movements, grounded in
the principles of prosody decomposition. The core idea is first
to adopt information perturbation to explicitly decompose the
speech prosody into pose-related F0 and lip-related language
content. Then, an autoregressive content-oriented fusion decoder is employed to enhance lip synchronization in the synthesized facial sequences. To synthesize head poses, we design a transformer-based variational autoencoder to learn a
latent distribution of facial sequences and propose an F0conditioned latent diffusion model to establish a probabilistic mapping from F0 to pose-related latent codes. Furthermore, we contribute a large-scale 4D face dataset containing
bunches of variations in identities, head poses, and facial motions. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves
more realistic animation than state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
3D visual speech animation has experienced notable growth
in academia and industry, owing to its diverse applications
in virtual reality, film, and game production. Several methods (Cudeiro et al. 2019; Fan et al. 2022; Peng et al. 2023a)
have shown promising performance in lip synchronization,
whereas they neglect head pose synthesis and therefore degrade the animation realism in real-world scenarios. As for
head pose synthesis, there are two main challenges: (1)
speech is an implicit control signal for head poses (Henter, Alexanderson, and Beskow 2020; Zhang et al. 2021a),
indicating that directly learning mappings on such signals
inherently introduces uncertainty in head pose synthesis. (2)
* Corresponding author (sunxintyc@hit.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5110

