The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Understanding Emotional Body Expressions via Large Language Models
Haifeng Lu1,2 , Jiuyi Chen3,4 , Feng Liang1 , Mingkui Tan3 , Runhao Zeng1,5∗ , Xiping Hu1,6∗
1

Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Emotional Intelligence and Pervasive Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University,
2
Lanzhou University,
3
South China University of Technology,
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory,
5
Shenzhen University,
6
Beijing Institute of Technology
luhf18@lzu.edu.cn, zengrh@smbu.edu.cn, huxp@smbu.edu.cn
Abstract

Numerous studies have shown that full-body motion is
a significant means of expressing emotion (Noroozi et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2024). Additionally, the large surface area
of the human torso facilitates data collection from a distance,
laying the foundation for more extensive emotion recognition scenarios (Wang et al. 2024). With recent advancements
in motion capture technology and human pose estimation algorithms (Peng, Zheng, and Chen 2024; Zheng et al. 2023;
Zhang 2012), the acquisition of 2D and 3D skeleton data has
become more convenient. Notably, 3D skeleton data offer
the advantage of being resistant to variations in viewpoint,
lighting, and background clutter (Lu, Hu, and Hu 2023). As
a result, emotion recognition based on 3D full-body skeleton
data has garnered significant attention in recent years.
Most existing skeleton-based emotion recognition methods rely on handcrafted features (Fourati, Pelachaud, and
Darmon 2019; Daoudi et al. 2017; Oğuz and Ertuğrul 2024).
In addition, deep learning approaches such as those in
(Beyan et al. 2023), ST-Gait++ (Lima et al. 2024), and
BPM-GCN (Zhai et al. 2024) are also significant for learning emotion representations. However, these methods share
some common limitations: (i) Traditional emotion recognition techniques primarily focus on improving classification
accuracy and often lack the capability to provide textual
explanations that support their classifications. (ii) Due to
variations in data collection methods, 3D skeleton datasets
are often heterogeneous, with differences in the number of
joints and frame lengths. This heterogeneity impedes effective knowledge transfer between datasets and restricts the
potential for improving classification accuracy within individual datasets.
Motivation. Inspired by the remarkable capabilities of
large language models (LLMs) across various domains (Li
et al. 2024; Qu, Cai, and Liu 2024), we are intrigued by the
potential of utilizing LLMs as emotion recognizers that can
not only classify emotions from skeleton data but also generate corresponding classification criteria. Several studies have
shown that LLMs hold some features that are useful for emotion recognition. Specifically, these models are pre-trained
on vast corpora that include descriptions of emotional actions (Qiu et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023a). Therefore, converting 3D full-body skeleton data into tokens recognizable by

Emotion recognition based on body movements is vital
in human-computer interaction. However, existing emotion
recognition methods predominantly focus on enhancing classification accuracy, often neglecting the provision of textual
explanations to justify their classifications. In this paper, we
propose an Emotion-Action Interpreter powered by Large
Language Model (EAI-LLM), which not only recognizes
emotions but also generates textual explanations by treating
3D body movement data as unique input tokens within large
language models (LLMs). Specifically, we propose a multigranularity skeleton tokenizer designed for LLMs, which separately extracts spatio-temporal tokens and semantic tokens
from the skeleton data. This approach allows LLMs to generate more nuanced classification descriptions while maintaining robust classification performance. Furthermore, we treat
the skeleton sequence as a specific language and propose a
unified skeleton token module. This module leverages the extensive background knowledge and language processing capabilities of LLMs to address the challenges of joint training on heterogeneous datasets, thereby significantly enhancing recognition accuracy on individual datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that our model achieves recognition
accuracy comparable to existing methods. More importantly,
with the support of background knowledge from LLMs, our
model can generate detailed emotion descriptions based on
classification results, even when trained on a limited amount
of labeled skeleton data.

1

Introduction

In the field of human-computer interaction, a machine’s
ability to understand human emotions directly impacts the
user’s interaction experience (Fragopanagos and Taylor
2005; Mandryk, Atkins, and Inkpen 2006; Narayanan et al.
2020). Traditionally, the most common methods for emotion recognition involve analyzing facial expressions and vocal tones (Li and Deng 2022; El Ayadi, Kamel, and Karray
2011). However, accurately recognizing a user’s emotions
becomes particularly challenging when the user is distant
from the camera or when a microphone is unavailable.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1447

