The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Out of Length Text Recognition with Sub-String Matching
Yongkun Du1 , Zhineng Chen1 * , Caiyan Jia2 , Xieping Gao3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
3
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence and International Communication, Hunan Normal University, China
ykdu23@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhinchen, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, cyjia@bjtu.edu.cn, xpgao@hunnu.edu.cn
2

0.9

Abstract

0.8

Scene Text Recognition (STR) methods have demonstrated
robust performance in word-level text recognition. However,
in real applications the text image is sometimes long due to
detected with multiple horizontal words. It triggers the requirement to build long text recognition models from readily available short (i.e., word-level) text datasets, which has
been less studied previously. In this paper, we term this task
Out of Length (OOL) text recognition. We establish the first
Long Text Benchmark (LTB) to facilitate the assessment of
different methods in long text recognition. Meanwhile, we
propose a novel method called OOL Text Recognition with
sub-String Matching (SMTR). SMTR comprises two crossattention-based modules: one encodes a sub-string containing multiple characters into next and previous queries, and
the other employs the queries to attend to the image features,
matching the sub-string and simultaneously recognizing its
next and previous character. SMTR can recognize text of arbitrary length by iterating the process above. To avoid being
trapped in recognizing highly similar sub-strings, we introduce a regularization training to compel SMTR to effectively
discover subtle differences between similar sub-strings for
precise matching. In addition, we propose an inference augmentation strategy to alleviate confusion caused by identical
sub-strings in the same text and improve the overall recognition efficiency. Extensive experimental results reveal that
SMTR, even when trained exclusively on short text, outperforms existing methods in public short text benchmarks and
exhibits a clear advantage on LTB.

Long Text Benchmark
(L>25)

0.7
Accuracy

0.6

CTC
NRTR
PARSeq
LISTER
Ours

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58 61 64 67 70
Length of Text

Figure 1: Attention-based methods like NRTR (Sheng,
Chen, and Xu 2019) and PARSeq (Bautista and Atienza
2022) perform well in short text recognition, while the CTCbased FocalSVTR (CTC) and the length-insensitive LISTER
(Cheng et al. 2023) outperform them in long text but worse
in short text. Our proposed SMTR gets superior performance
in both short and long text recognition.

existing STR datasets are predominantly compromised of
word-level text, where long text like the aforementioned is
scarce. Therefore, accurately recognizing long text by utilizing solely short (i.e., word-level) datasets has emerged as a
promising yet challenging frontier in STR, which we term
Out of Length (OOL) text recognition in this paper.
Existing STR models are mostly designed towards recognizing short text with no more than 25 characters, i.e.,
L ≤ 25. We establish the first Long Text Benchmark (LTB)
that focuses on the long text (L > 25). As shown in Fig. 1,
we evaluate several popular STR models (Sheng, Chen, and
Xu 2019; Du et al. 2022; Bautista and Atienza 2022; Cheng
et al. 2023) on LTB. The results show that the CTC-based
method (Du et al. 2022) and LISTER (Cheng et al. 2023)
can recognize long text due to their length extrapolation capabilities. However, their accuracy declines rapidly as text
length increases. Additionally, these methods show a noticeable performance gap in short text recognition compared
to the competitors (Sheng, Chen, and Xu 2019; Bautista
and Atienza 2022), due to not being equipped with an advanced decoder. On the other hand, NRTR (Sheng, Chen,
and Xu 2019) and PARSeq (Bautista and Atienza 2022), as
representatives of the attention-based methods, employ the

Code — https://github.com/Topdu/OpenOCR

1

Union14M Benchmarks
(L≤25)

Introduction

Extracting text from natural images is a crucial and wellestablished task, typically encompassing scene text detection and recognition. In scene text recognition (STR), past
research has achieved significant progress in word-level text
recognition. However, in real-world applications, the text is
not always detected as individual words, but a line-level text
sometimes. That is, the text instance detected by scene text
detectors may contain multiple horizontal words, presenting a long text recognition challenge. It is worth noting that
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2798

