The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Math-PUMA: Progressive Upward Multimodal Alignment to Enhance
Mathematical Reasoning
Wenwen Zhuang1 * , Xin Huang2 * , Xiantao Zhang3 * , Jin Zeng1
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
zhuangwenwen23@mails.ucas.ac.cn, huangxin@bit.edu.cn, zhangxiantao@buaa.edu.cn, zengjing2she327@gmail.com
Abstract

Text-only

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) excel in solving text-based mathematical problems, but they struggle with
mathematical diagrams since they are primarily trained on
natural scene images. For humans, visual aids generally enhance problem-solving, but MLLMs perform worse as information shifts from textual to visual modality. This decline is mainly due to their shortcomings in aligning images and text. To tackle aforementioned challenges, we propose Math-PUMA, a methodology focused on Progressive
Upward Multimodal Alignment. This approach is designed
to improve the mathematical reasoning skills of MLLMs
through a three-stage training process, with the second stage
being the critical alignment stage. We first enhance the language model’s mathematical reasoning capabilities with extensive set of textual mathematical problems. We then construct a multimodal dataset with varying degrees of textual and visual information, creating data pairs by presenting each problem in at least two forms. By leveraging the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence of next-token prediction
distributions to align visual and textual modalities, consistent
problem-solving abilities are ensured. Finally, we utilize multimodal instruction tuning for MLLMs with high-quality multimodal data. Experimental results on multiple mathematical
reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that the MLLMs trained
with Math-PUMA surpass most open-source MLLMs. Our
approach effectively narrows the performance gap for problems presented in different modalities.

In ∆ABC, ∠ A = 80°, ∠ B
= 60°, D ∈ AB, E ∈ AC,
DE∥BC, find ∠ CED.
..., the size of angle
CED is 140°

Text-dominant
In ∆ABC, ∠ A =
80°, ∠ B = 60°,
DE ∥ BC, find
∠ CED.

..., the size of angle
CED is 40°

Vision-dominant
As shown in the
figure, DE ∥ BC,
find ∠ CED.
..., the size of angle
CED is 40°.

Figure 1: (Top) Three examples of GPT-4o solving multimodal math problems. These examples represent different
modalities of the same question. (Bottom) Results of several
open-source MLLMs and human on five different tasks of
M ATH V ERSE (Zhang et al. 2024a).

Code — https://github.com/wwzhuang01/Math-PUMA

2022; Liu et al. 2023), their training predominantly relies on
datasets comprising natural scene images. This reliance engenders a substantial domain discrepancy when these models are applied to mathematical diagrams, thereby resulting
in inferior performance.
For humans, regardless of the modality in which information is presented, problems with equivalent amounts of
information tend to have similar levels of difficulty. Furthermore, incorporating images into problem-solving tasks can
enhance human comprehension and resolution abilities. As
illustrated in Figure 1, an increase in visual data often correlates with a decline in the efficacy of most MLLMs. Additionally, there is a notable disparity in effectiveness between text-centric and exclusively visual problems. For example, GPT-4o (OpenAI 2024b) demonstrates strong proficiency in solving text-only mathematical problems, but its
effectiveness diminishes progressively as the modality tran-

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable reasoning capabilities, particularly when tackling
mathematical problems in textual form (Wei et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2022; Gou et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023; Shao
et al. 2024). However, Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) face greater challenges when tackling problems
that involve images. These models need to not only interpret textual information but also comprehend mathematical
diagrams and identify details crucial for solving problems.
Although MLLMs have exhibited notable efficacy in general visual question answering (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26183

