The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revisiting Projection-Free Online Learning with Time-Varying Constraints
Yibo Wang1,2 , Yuanyu Wan3,1, * , Lijun Zhang1,2, *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo 315048, China
{wangyb, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wanyy@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

defined as the difference between the cumulative loss of the
learner and that of the best fixed decision.
In the literature, there have been
√ abundant theoretical appeals for OCO, such as the O( T ) regret bound for general convex losses (Zinkevich 2003) and the O(log T ) regret
bound for strongly convex losses (Hazan, Agarwal, and Kale
2007). In practice, besides the hard and fixed domain K, the
decisions made by the learner are typically governed by a
series of soft and time-varying constraints, which may be
violated in several rounds but should be satisfied on average
over the long term. For example, in wireless communication systems, operators manage varying transmission power
consumption to ensure the reception of messages (Mannor,
Tsitsiklis, and Yu 2009); in online advertisement systems,
advertisers employ dynamic budgets to maximize the clickthrough-rates for their advertisements (Liakopoulos et al.
2019). These practical applications thus motivate the development of constrained online convex optimization (COCO)
(Mahdavi, Jin, and Yang 2012; Neely and Yu 2017).
In the framework of COCO, the time-varying constraints
are typically captured by the inequality gt (x) ≤ 0 where
gt (·) : K 7→ R is a convex function revealed by the adversary at the end of each round t. Consequently, in addition to
minimizing (1), the learner also aims to ensure the cumulative constraint violation (CCV):
XT
QT =
gt+ (xt )
(2)

We investigate constrained online convex optimization, in
which decisions must belong to a fixed and typically complicated domain, and are required to approximately satisfy additional time-varying constraints over the long term. In this setting, the commonly used projection operations are often computationally expensive or even intractable. To avoid the timeconsuming operation, several projection-free
methods have
√
been proposed with an O(T 3/4 log T ) regret bound and an
O(T 7/8 ) cumulative constraint violation (CCV) bound for
general convex losses. In this paper, we improve this result
and further establish novel regret and CCV bounds when loss
functions are strongly convex. The primary idea is to first construct a composite surrogate loss, involving the original loss
and constraint functions, by utilizing the Lyapunov-based
technique. Then, we propose a parameter-free variant of the
classical projection-free method, namely online Frank-Wolfe
(OFW), and run this new extension over the online-generated
surrogate loss. Theoretically, for general convex losses, we
achieve an O(T 3/4 ) regret bound and an O(T 3/4 log T )
CCV bound, both of which are order-wise tighter than existing results. For strongly convex losses, we establish new guarantees of an O(T 2/3 ) regret bound and an O(T 5/6 ) CCV
bound. Moreover, we also extend our methods to a more
challenging setting with bandit feedback, obtaining similar
theoretical findings. Empirically, experiments on real-world
datasets have demonstrated the effectiveness of our methods.

Introduction

t=1

Online convex optimization (OCO) has become a popular
paradigm for modeling online decision-making problems
(Shalev-Shwartz 2012; Hazan 2016; Orabona 2019), such as
online portfolio optimization (Agarwal et al. 2006) and online advertisement system (McMahan et al. 2013). Formally,
OCO can be viewed as a structured iterative game between
a learner and an adversary. Specifically, at each round t, the
learner first chooses a decision xt from a convex and fixed
domain K ⊆ Rd . Then, the adversary reveals a convex loss
function ft (·) : K 7→ R, and the learner suffers the cost
ft (xt ). The goal of the learner is to minimize the regret:
XT
XT
RegretT =
ft (xt ) − min
ft (x), (1)
t=1

x∈K

to be sublinear with respect to the time horizon T , where
gt+ (x) ≜ max{0, gt (x)}. To optimize (1) and (2) concurrently, various efforts have been made recently (Cao and Liu
2019; Yu and Neely 2020; Yi et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2022; Yi
et al. 2023; Sinha and Vaze 2024), and established plentiful
√
guarantees, including the regret and CCV bounds of O( T )
for general convex losses (Yu, Neely, and Wei 2017).
The key operation in these COCO methods is the projection that pulls an infeasible decision back into the hard
constraint K. In many practical scenarios, the domain K is
typically high-dimensional and complex, rendering projections onto K computationally expensive or even intractable,
which significantly limits the applicability of these methods. To address this issue, several studies (Lee, Ho-Nguyen,
and Lee 2023; Garber and Kretzu 2024) propose projectionfree methods for COCO, which replace the time-consuming

t=1

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21339

