The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CasFT: Future Trend Modeling for Information Popularity Prediction with
Dynamic Cues-Driven Diffusion Models
Xin Jing1 , Yichen Jing1 , Yuhuan Lu1 Bangchao Deng1 , Xueqin Chen2 , Dingqi Yang1 *
1

The State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau, China
2
Kash Institute of Electronics and Information Industry
{yc27431, mc35259, yc17462, yc37980, dingqiyang}@um.edu.mo, nedchen0728@gmail.com

Abstract

Original tweet

Observed retweet
prediction

The rapid spread of diverse information on online social platforms has prompted both academia and industry to realize
the importance of predicting content popularity, which could
benefit a wide range of applications, such as recommendation
systems and strategic decision-making. Recent works mainly
focused on extracting spatiotemporal patterns inherent in the
information diffusion process within a given observation period so as to predict its popularity over a future period of time.
However, these works often overlook the future popularity
trend, as future popularity could either increase exponentially
or stagnate, introducing uncertainties to the prediction performance. Additionally, how to transfer the preceding-term
dynamics learned from the observed diffusion process into
future-term trends remains an unexplored challenge. Against
this background, we propose CasFT, which leverages observed information Cascades and dynamic cues extracted via
neural ODEs as conditions to guide the generation of Future popularity-increasing Trends through a diffusion model.
These generated trends are then combined with the spatiotemporal patterns in the observed information cascade to make
the final popularity prediction. Extensive experiments conducted on three real-world datasets demonstrate that CasFT
significantly improves the prediction accuracy compared to
state-of-the-art approaches.

Incremental Popularity

Observed Cascade Graph

u1

P=

u4
u2

u0

∫t

∑

P2

P4

P3

Pi

i

{
{
{
{

P1

l

λ*(τ)dτ =

o

u3

ts = 0 t1

tp

t2

t3

t4

to

tp

Time

Growth Rate

to

tp

to

tp

Figure 1: A toy example of information popularity prediction problem (top) and the variations of average growth rates
after observation time in Weibo and APS datasets, respectively (bottom), where t0 represents the observation time and
tp represents the prediction time.

Introduction
The advent of the digital age has led to the emergence of
various online social platforms (OSNs). Users on OSNs can
freely post and share their interests, which can then be followed or re-posted by others, resulting in the widespread
dissemination of content in the form of information cascades (Cheng et al. 2014). In such an era of information
explosion, understanding future trends in information —
predicting its future popularity — can aid social management (Shen et al. 2014) and benefit various applications, including recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2021), fake
news detection (Lazer et al. 2018), social event organization
(Yu et al. 2015), and personalized user experiences (Li et al.
2014). Specifically, this prediction task, known as information popularity prediction, aims at forecasting the future increase in the popularity of given content, such as predicting

the number of retweets that may occur within a specified
period in the future for a tweet.
State-of-the-art approaches mainly focus on capturing
spatiotemporal patterns from observed cascades by adopting
various deep learning techniques, such as Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) (Lu et al. 2023), attention mechanism (Yu
et al. 2022) or Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Wang et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2019). However, existing approaches predominantly focus on modeling cascades before an observation time, neglecting their evolution of trends between
the observation time and the prediction time, which is vital for popularity prediction. For instance, Figure 1 illustrates the average popularity growth rates between observation (to ) and prediction (tp ) times in Twitter and APS
datasets, where the growth rate represents the increase of
popularity per unit of time. Notably, during this period, the

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11906

