The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fine-Grained Perception in Panoramic Scenes: A Novel Task, Dataset, and
Method for Object Importance Ranking
Jia Song1,2,3 , Chenglizhao Chen1,2,3 * , Xu Yu1,2,3 , Shanchen Pang1,2,3
1

2

Qingdao Institute of Software, China University of Petroleum (East China)
College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China)
3
Shandong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Oil & Gas Industry Software

Abstract

(a) SOTA Object-level Ranking Methods

Existing Salient Object Ranking (SOR) aims to infer ranking of salient objects based on their saliency degree. However, it tends to only focus on salient objects while neglecting non-salient ones. This coarse-grained ranking limits the
performance of downstream tasks. For instance, in image
retrieval tasks, focusing solely on the relationship between
salient objects is insufficient for achieving fine-grained scene
analysis, which may result in retrieved results that do not satisfy user requirements. High-quality retrieval requires finegrained analysis, making it essential to rank non-salient objects. Based on this need, we propose a new task: Finegrained Object Importance Ranking in 360o Scenes (FOIR360), which focus on predicting the relative importance of
“ALL objects” at the instance-level. Our task takes into account all objects, allowing us to refine the original “coarsegrained” to a “fine-grained” level. Currently, the main challenge for this new task is the lack of supervised data for model
training or even for model testing. Therefore, we propose a
novel weakly supervised method to address the shortage of
datasets. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, there is
no existing suitable annotation protocol for this new task. The
main reason is that annotating fine-grained rankings is extremely difficult, especially in panoramic scenes that contain
numerous instances where even humans are unable to determine which one is more important than others. As the first
attempt, we introduce a new annotation protocol designed to
highlight the ranking of objects that are non-salient yet still
important. Based on this protocol, we construct the first finegrained 360Rank dataset. In summary, all these new task,
weakly supervised method, annotation protocol, and dataset
have the potential to drive advancements in the field.

1

2

Salient Object Detection

Human Eye Fixations

3

Salient Object Ranking
10
Ranks 9 4

3

2

17 6 8

5

V.S.

High
Importance

Low
Importance

(b) Our New FOIR-360
(Fine-grained Object Importance Ranking in 360o Scenes)

Figure 1: Motivation demonstration of our new task. Current
SOTA object-level ranking methods (a) often rank the most
salient objects while overlooking those less-salient ones,
limiting the performance of downstream tasks (e.g., image
retrieval, see details in the Fig. 2). Therefore, we introduce
a novel task, FOIR-360 (b), which is more fine-grained than
SOR, as it places no limits on the number of important objects, thereby aligning more closely with real human visual.

Code — https://github.com/noname965/FOIR-360

Introduction
Compared to conventional 2D images, 360o images (a.k.a.
panoramic images) offer a more comprehensive perspective by capturing a full range of views (Duan et al. 2024),
which is critical for various real-world applications (Kiran
et al. 2021; DeSouza and Kak 2002). Panoramic images typically comprise wider scenes and more objects, posing challenges in processing the entire image efficiently. Existing

tools (see Fig. 1a), e.g., fixation prediction (FP) (Xie et al.
2024), salient object detection (SOD) (Ma et al. 2020) and
salient object ranking (SOR) (Qiao et al. 2024) can localize
which objects are worthy of more attention in the panoramic
images, thereby optimizing computational resources. Unfortunately, these state-of-the-art (SOTA) tools can only localize the most salient objects while ignoring those less-

* Corresponding Author: Chenglizhao Chen, cclz123@163.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6950

