The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SMMF: Square-Matricized Momentum Factorization for Memory-Efficient
Optimization
Kwangryeol Park1 , Seulki Lee2
1

2

Artificial Intelligence Graduate School UNIST, South Korea
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UNIST, South Korea

Abstract

weight parameter. Despite their lack of theoretical convergence guarantee in non-convex settings of many deep learning tasks, those adaptive learning rate optimizers have been
empirically found to outperform SGD in practice.
However, since the momentum value of each weight parameter, which linearly increases over the size of a deep
learning model, should be maintained in memory during
the whole training process, the adaptive learning rate optimizers can easily limit the size of models that can be
trained on memory-constrained platforms, e.g., embedded
systems. Even when training small models like Transformerbase (Vaswani et al. 2017), 1.4 GiB of memory is required.
This means it would be unusable in environments with extremely limited memory devices, such as Raspberry Pi (1
GiB). To tackle the memory challenge of the adaptive learning rate optimization, several memory-efficient optimizers
have been proposed. Adafactor (Shazeer and Stern 2018)
and CAME (Luo et al. 2023) factorize the 2nd momentum
in the form of a matrix into a set of vectors to decrease
the memory space required to store momentums, achieving
comparable performance to Adam. SM3 (Anil et al. 2019)
reduces memory usage by approximating the similar elements of the 2nd momentum into a smaller set of variables.
Although they effectively reduce the memory space of adaptive learning rate optimizers by projecting a gradient tensor
onto several rank-one vectors, 1) they apply only to a specific rank (shape) and pattern of momentum tensors, 2) their
memory space is still huge (1.1 GiB) making them unsuitable for memory constrained devices, and 3) their optimization performance has not been theoretically analyzed and
compared to that of Adam family (Kingma and Ba 2014).
In this paper, we propose SMMF (Square-Matricized Momentum Factorization), a memory-efficient optimizer amicable to an arbitrary rank (shape) and pattern of both the 1st
and 2nd momentum tensors, i.e., a vector, matrix, and rankd tensor, which reduces the amount of memory required
in model optimization by up to 96% compared to existing
memory-efficient optimizers, e.g., Adafactor, CAME, and
SM3. Unlike such existing memory-efficient optimizers, either confined to a particular 1) momentum rank (shape) (i.e.,
a rank-2 matrix) and/or 2) momentum pattern (i.e., a set of
similar elements in a matrix) (Anil et al. 2019), the proposed
SMMF performs competitive optimization without being restricted by the rank (shape) and pattern of momentums al-

We propose SMMF (Square-Matricized Momentum Factorization), a memory-efficient optimizer that reduces the memory requirement of the widely used adaptive learning rate optimizers, such as Adam, by up to 96%. SMMF enables flexible and efficient factorization of an arbitrary rank (shape) of
the first and second momentum tensors during optimization,
based on the proposed square-matricization and one-time single matrix factorization. From this, it becomes effectively applicable to any rank (shape) of momentum tensors, i.e., bias,
matrix, and any rank-d tensors, prevalent in various deep
model architectures, such as CNNs (high rank) and Transformers (low rank), in contrast to existing memory-efficient
optimizers that applies only to a particular (rank-2) momentum tensor, e.g., linear layers. We conduct a regret bound
analysis of SMMF, which shows that it converges similarly to
non-memory-efficient adaptive learning rate optimizers, such
as AdamNC, providing a theoretical basis for its competitive
optimization capability. In our experiment, SMMF takes up
to 96% less memory compared to state-of-the-art memoryefficient optimizers, e.g., Adafactor, CAME, and SM3, while
achieving comparable model performance on various CNN
and Transformer tasks.

Code — https://github.com/eai-lab/SMMF
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08894

1

Introduction

To identify the optimal weight parameters of deep neural networks, various optimization methods (Abdulkadirov,
Lyakhov, and Nagornov 2023; Martens 2016; Amari 2010;
Liu and Nocedal 1989) have been studied. One of the
most popular approaches is SGD (Stochastic Gradient Descent) (Ruder 2016) which takes the weight update direction
towards the current gradient with a learning rate uniformly
applied to all weight parameters. To further improve SGD’s
optimization performance, many adaptive learning rate optimizers, such as Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014) and RMSProp (Hinton, Srivastava, and Swersky 2012), have been
proposed to leverage 1) history of the gradients to compute
the momentum direction (Ruder 2016) and 2) the squared
gradients to compute the adaptive learning rate for each
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19848

