The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Hypergraph Neural Networks with Tight Framelets
Ming Li1,2 , Yujie Fang3,1 , Yi Wang3,1 * , Han Feng4 , Yongchun Gu1 , Lu Bai5* , Pietro Lio6
1

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application, Zhejiang Normal University
2
Zhejiang Institute of Optoelectronics
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University
4
Department of Mathematics, City University of Hong Kong
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, and Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology and Educational Application,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University
6
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Cambridge University
{mingli, yjfang, wangyi, guyongchun}@zjnu.edu.cn, hanfeng@cityu.edu.hk, bailu@bnu.edu.cn, pl219@cam.ac.uk

80
Test Accuracy (%)

Hypergraphs provide a flexible framework for modeling highorder (complex) interactions among multiple entities, extending beyond traditional pairwise correlations in graph structures.
However, deep hypergraph neural networks (HGNNs) often
face the challenge of oversmoothing with increasing depth,
similar to issues in graph neural networks (GNNs). While
oversmoothing in GNNs has been extensively studied, its implications in relation to hypergraphs are less explored. This
paper addresses this gap by first theoretically exploring the
reasons behind oversmoothing in deep HGNNs. Our novel
insights suggest that a spectral-based hypergraph convolution,
equipped with both low-pass and high-pass filters, can potentially mitigate these effects. Motivated by these findings, we
introduce FrameHGNN, a framework that utilizes frameletbased hypergraph convolutions integrating tight framelet transforms with both low-pass and high-pass components, as well
as the commonly used strategies in designing deep GNN architecture: initial residual and identity mappings. The experiment
results on diverse benchmark datasets demonstrate that FrameHGNN outperforms several state-of-the-art models, effectively
reducing oversmoothing while improving predictive accuracy.
Our contributions not only advance the theoretical understanding of deep hypergraph learning but also provide a practical
spectral-based approach for HGNNs, emphasizing the design
of multifrequency channels.

70
60
50
40
30
1

2

4
8
The Number of Layers

16

32

Figure 1: Illustration of oversmoothing effects in various
classic HGNNs on the Cora-CA dataset.

Appendix — https://mingli-ai.github.io/FrameHGNN.pdf

1

Cora-CA

90

Abstract

Introduction

Hypergraphs offer a favorable framework for modeling highorder interactions among multiple entities, surpassing the capabilities of traditional graphs which are limited to pairwise
correlations. This flexibility makes hypergraphs particularly
well-suited for representing complex relationships in diverse
real-world datasets. Recently, hypergraphs have gained significant attention in various fields, including recommendation systems (Li et al. 2024a; Xia, Huang, and Zhang 2022),
social network analysis (Sun et al. 2023), cross-modal retrieval (Li et al. 2024b), and bioinformatics (Murgas, Saucan,
* Corresponding authors: Yi Wang, Lu Bai
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18385

and Sandhu 2022). Their broad applicability underscores the
value of hypergraphs in providing richer and more detailed
data representations.
Most existing hypergraph neural networks (HGNNs), however, suffer from the issue of oversmoothing, a challenge
also well-recognized in graph neural networks (Rusch, Bronstein, and Mishra 2023). As the number of network layers
increases, node representations in the hypergraph tend to
become homogenized, leading to a significant decline in performance. Figure 1 illustrates this phenomenon, showing how
the performance of four classic HGNN models, i.e., vanilla
HGNN (Feng et al. 2019), ED-HNN (Wang et al. 2023),
AllDeepSets and AllSetTransformer (Chien et al. 2022), degrades as the number of layers increases, with each model
experiencing varying degrees of performance deterioration.
While the problem of oversmoothing in GNNs has been extensively studied (Xu et al. 2018; Zhao and Akoglu 2020;
Chen et al. 2020), there has been limited research specifically
addressing why oversmoothing occurs in hypergraphs and
how it can be prevented (Chen et al. 2022). To fill this gap,
we offer a new theoretical perspective on why deep HGNNs
are prone to oversmoothing, and then, motivated by these
theoretical insights, explore how to develop deep HGNNs
that effectively alleviate the oversmoothing problem.
In this paper, we introduce a framework for construct-

