The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Nearly Tight Bounds on Approximate Equilibria in Spatial
Competition on the Line
Umang Bhaskar and Soumyajit Pyne
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai
umang@tifr.res.in, soumyajit.pyne@tifr.res.in

Abstract

identical good, and each customer then chose to purchase
from the merchant which minimized the sum of distance and
price paid. The primary message of Hotelling’s work was
that, in such competition in duopolies, competition leads to
minimum differentiation, where at equilibrium the two competitors end up being very close to each other.
Downs adopted Hotelling’s basic model to examine electoral competition, even in scenarios involving more than two
candidates (Downs 1957). Since then, the model, and variations of it, have been very influential in political economics.
This is then a spatial competition among the candidates,
where each candidate seeks to maximize the number of votes
they receive, in the presence of the other candidates. With
more than three candidates, however, there may not be an
equilibrium (and in fact, for three candidates there is never
an equilibrium!) (Eaton and Lipsey 1975; Osborne 1995).
Despite its shortcomings, equilibria is a fundamental and
very appealing solution. However, exact equilibrium may be
too demanding a notion and the non-existence of equilibria may not be interesting if one could get very close to an
equilibrium. On the other hand, if any strategy profile is far
from an equilibrium, then the game is highly unstable, and
equilibrium may not be a suitable model for the behaviour
of agents. In this work, we hence focus on the question of
how close can one get to an equilibrium or how stable the
instance is within the basic model of spatial competition
motivated by Hotelling’s work. For a unit mass of voters
we call a strategy profile an (additive) ϵ-equilibrium if no
candidate can increase their votes by ϵ, and provide tight or
nearly-tight bounds on the approximation ϵ achievable. Despite the vast literature on this model and extensions to it,
work on quantifying the instability in the absence of equilibria is lacking.
We note that in many practical applications where exact solutions do not exist or are difficult to obtain, additive approximate solutions are commonly used. An example of this from social choice theory is the use of
EF1 (envy-free up to one good) allocations for indivisible goods, which is an additive approximation (Caragiannis et al. 2019). For mixed Nash equilibria in bimatrix (i.e.,
two-person normal-form) games, additive approximations
are more commonly studied. In bimatrix games, for constant ϵ, quasi-polynomial time algorithms giving an additive ϵ-approximation to Nash equilibria were known prior

In Hotelling’s model of spatial competition, a unit mass of
voters is distributed in the interval [0, 1] (with their location
corresponding to their political persuasion), and each of m
candidates selects as a strategy their distinct position in this
interval. Each voter votes for the nearest candidate, and candidates choose their strategy to maximize their votes. It is
known that if there are more than two candidates, equilibria
may not exist in this model. It was unknown, however, how
close to an equilibrium one could get. Our work studies approximate equilibria in this model, where a strategy profile
is an (additive) ϵ-equilibria if no candidate can increase their
votes by ϵ, and provides tight or nearly-tight bounds on the
approximation ϵ achievable.
We show that for 3 candidates, for any distribution of the voters, ϵ ≥ 1/12. Thus, somewhat surprisingly, for any distribution of the voters and any strategy profile of the candidates, at least 1/12th of the total votes is always left “on
the table.” Extending this, we show that in the worst case,
there exist voter distributions for which ϵ ≥ 1/6, and this
is tight: one can always compute a 1/6-approximate equilibria in polynomial time. We then study the general case of m
candidates, and show that as m grows large, we get closer to
an exact equilibrium: one can always obtain a 1/(m + 1)approximate equilibria in polynomial time. We show this
bound is asymptotically tight, by giving voter distributions
for which ϵ ≥ 1/(m + 3).

Introduction
In elections, strategic positioning by candidates is a common phenomenon. Candidates try to estimate where voters
lie on a particular issue, such as through polls, past experience, or media reports, and then adopt positions accordingly. Depending on the opinion of the voters, candidates
may position themselves to appear more conservative, liberal, or moderate, often even contradicting their earlier or
stated positions.
Hotelling’s seminal model, introduced in 1929, has been
very influential in studying such strategic positioning by
candidates (Hotelling 1929). The initial model by Hotelling
studied two merchants selling an identical good that sought
to attract customers distributed in the interval [0, 1]. Each
merchant chose both a strategic location and a price for the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13641

