The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Global-Topological Relation Graph for
Inductive Knowledge Graph Completion
Ling Ding, Lei Huang, Zhizhi Yu* , Di Jin, Dongxiao He
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
{dltjdx2022, huanglei, yuzhizhi, jindi, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are structured data presented as directed graphs. Due to the common issues of incompleteness
and inaccuracy encountered during construction and maintenance, completing KGs becomes a critical task. Inductive
Knowledge Graph Completion (KGC) excels at inferring patterns or models from seen data to be applied to unseen data.
However, existing methods mainly focus on new entities,
while relations are usually randomly initialized. To this end,
we propose TARGI, a simple yet effective inductive method
for KGC. Specifically, we first construct a global relation
graph for each topology from a global graph perspective, thus
leveraging the in-variance of relation structures. We then utilize this graph to aggregate the rich embeddings of new relations and new entities, thereby performing KGC robustly in
inductive scenarios. This successfully addresses the excessive
reliance on the degree of relations and resolves the high complexity and limited scope of enclosing subgraph sampling in
existing fully inductive algorithms. We conduct KGC experiments on six inductive datasets using inference data where
entities are entirely new and new relations at 100 percent, 50
percent, and 0 percent radios. Extensive results demonstrate
that our model accurately learns the topological structures
and embeddings of new relations, and guides the embedding
learning of new entities. Notably, our model outperforms 15
SOTA methods, especially in two fully inductive datasets.

Figure 1: Inductive KGC scenario (Lee, Chung, and Whang
2023). For instance, if the inference data contains only new
entities, it falls under the traditional inductive scenario. If
both relations and entities are new, it means fully inductive.
based methods TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) and RotatE (Sun
et al. 2019). However, these methods fall under transductive learning with all entities and relations known during the
training and inference stages, struggling to handle the emergence of inductive scenarios with new entities and relations.
(Teru, Denis, and Hamilton 2020) introduce inductive
KGC to predict missing triples between new entities not
observed during training. They categorize entities and relations by seen entity or relation (observed in training) and
unseen entity or relation (not observed in training) (Liang
et al. 2024). However, unlike handling unseen entities, existing inductive KGC methods assume that all relations are
known, thus performing transductive reasoning on the relations. This assumption poses limitations in real-world applications as new relations may continue to emerge. More
importantly, we find that most inductive methods focus on
learning embeddings of new entities such as (Liang et al.
2023). In contrast, embeddings of relations are often obtained through random initialization or straightforward processing, inevitably overlooking the semantic correlations between relations. To this end, we emphasize a more realistic
scenario of inductive learning that simultaneously addresses
new relations and new entities. As shown in Figure 1, the
fully-inductive scenario involves entirely unseen relations,
while the semi-inductive scenario involves both seen and unseen relations during inference.
Recently, some research indicates that the semantic corre-

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are structured directed graph
datasets, where data is organized in triples. In these graphs,
nodes denote the head or tail entities, and edges capture the
relations between nodes (Ji et al. 2022). KGs serve a foundational role in various applications, such as recommendation
systems (Wang et al. 2019) and question-answering systems
(Huang et al. 2019), as they enhance data interoperability,
reasoning capabilities, and semantic query abilities (Paulheim 2017). Owing to inherent incompleteness and inaccuracies during construction and maintenance, Knowledge
Graph Completion (KGC) came into being.
Traditional KGC methods primarily focus on link prediction or entity completion by leveraging existing knowledge to address missing information, such as embedding* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11581

