The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EFSkip: A New Error Feedback with Linear Speedup for Compressed Federated
Learning with Arbitrary Data Heterogeneity
Hongyan Bao1 * , Pengwen Chen1 , Ying Sun2 , Zhize Li1†
1

Singapore Management University, Singapore
2
Pennsylvania State University, USA

def

Abstract

where fi (x; Di ) = Eξi ∼Di [fi (x; ξi )]. Here, n denotes the
number of clients and each client i ∈ [n] has a local (nonconvex) loss function fi associated with a local data distribution Di . In particular, fi (x; ξi ) denotes the loss function
of model x on a random data sample ξi on client i. For simplicity, we may use f (x) and fi (x) to denote f (x; D) and
fi (x; Di ), respectively.
In this work, we consider both distributed (where a central server exists and communicates with all n clients) and
decentralized (where there is no server and clients can only
communicate with their neighbors over a network) settings.

Due to the communication bottleneck in distributed and decentralized federated learning applications, algorithms using
compressed communication have attracted significant attention. The Error Feedback (EF) is a widely-studied compression framework for convergence with biased compressors
such as top-k sparsification. Although various improvements
have been obtained in recent years, the theoretical guarantee for EF-type framework is still limited. Previous works
either 1) rely on strong assumptions such as bounded gradient/dissimilarity assumptions, thus can not deal with arbitrary
data heterogeneity and also slow the convergence speed, or 2)
can not enjoy linear speedup in the number of clients. In this
work, we propose a new EFSkip framework which removes
the strong assumptions to allow arbitrary data heterogeneity
and enjoys linear speedup for significantly improving upon
previous results. In particular, EFSkip achieves the complexσ2
1
ity result O( nϵ
4 + ϵ2 ) while previous EF21 only obtains

1.1

A standard approach to solve (1) in the distributed setting
is using gradient-type algorithms, i.e., each client computes
the (stochastic) gradient of the model on its local dataset and
transmits the gradient to the server, and the server aggregates
all gradient information to update the model and then broadcasts the updated model to all clients. The steps are repeated
until a stopping criterion is achieved. However, modern machine learning models are often overparameterized and have
a huge number of parameters (Arora, Cohen, and Hazan
2018), for instance, the language model GPT-3 (Brown et al.
2020) has billions of parameters. The communication cost
forms a main bottleneck of the distributed training system.
A typical method for communication-efficient distributed
learning is compression (Alistarh et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020),
i.e., compress the communicated messages with fewer bits
to reduce the communication cost. For example, each client
can compress its local gradient and transmit the compressed
message to the server. However, naively integrating the compression framework into the communication steps of distributed algorithms cannot guarantee convergence, as shown
in the following example.

2

O( δσ3 ϵ4 + δϵ12 ), i.e., EFSkip enjoys the linear speedup in the
number of clients n (reducing the result linearly using more
clients) and also removes the compression factor δ (matching the result without compression). We also show that EFSkip enjoys linear speedup and achieves faster convergence
for nonconvex problems satisfying Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL)
condition. We believe that the new EFSkip framework will
have a large impact on the communication- and computationefficient distributed and decentralized federated learning.

1

Communication compression and error
feedback

Introduction

With the proliferation of mobile and edge devices, federated
learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Konečný et al. 2016b)
has recently emerged as a disruptive paradigm for training
large-scale machine learning models over a vast amount of
distributed and heterogeneous devices/clients. FL is usually
modeled as a distributed optimization problem (Konečný
et al. 2016a,b; McMahan et al. 2017; Kairouz et al. 2019;
Zhao, Li, and Richtárik 2021; Wang et al. 2021), aiming to
solve
n
n
o
X
def 1
min f (x; D) =
fi (x; Di ) ,
(1)
d
n i=1
x∈R

A counter-example. The number of clients is n = 3. The
local loss functions are given by fi (x) = 12 x⊤ Λi x, where
the Λi s are diagonal matrices with Λ1 = diag(−4, 3, 3),
Λ2 = diag(3, −4, 3), and Λ3 = diag(3, 3, −4). The algorithm is initialized at x0 = (1, 1, 1)⊤ and the compressor C(·) is top-1 (See Example 1 for the definition of topk sparsification). The local gradients for these three clients
at x0 are ∇f1 (x0 ) = Λ1 x0 = (−4, 3, 3)⊤ , ∇f2 (x0 ) =

* The work of Hongyan Bao was conducted during her stay in
Zhize Li’s group at SMU.
†
Corresponding author (zhizeli@smu.edu.sg).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15489

