The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

(Almost Full) EFX for Three (and More) Types of Agents
Pratik Ghosal1 , Vishwa Prakash HV2 , Prajakta Nimbhorkar2 , Nithin Varma3
1

Indian Institute of Technology Palakkad*
2
Chennai Mathematical Institute, India
3
University of Cologne, Germany†
pratik@iitpkd.ac.in, vishwa@cmi.ac.in, prajakta@cmi.ac.in, nithvarma@gmail.com

Abstract

* Part of this work was done when the author was at Chennai

EF allocations may not exist in general, the simplest instance being that of two agents and one valuable good. Various relaxations of envy-freeness have been proposed. The
concept of envy-freeness up to one good (EF1) was proposed
in (Budish 2011). An allocation X is said to be EF1, if for
each i, j ∈ [n] there exists some good g ∈ Xj such that
vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (Xj \ {g}). EF1 allocations are known to exist
and can be found in polynomial time (Lipton et al. 2004).
In between the notions of EF and EF1 allocations, lies
envy-freeness up to any good (EFX), introduced by (Caragiannis et al. 2019). Given an allocation X, an agent ai
strongly envies agent aj if there exists g ∈ Xj such that
vi (Xj \ {g}) > vi (Xi ), i.e., ai envies the bundle Xj of
aj even after removing the good g from Xj . The allocation is EFX if no agent strongly envies another agent. In
other words, for each pair of agents ai and aj , we have
vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (Xj \ {g}) for any good g ∈ Xj .
Unlike EF and EF1, the question of whether EFX allocations always exist is far from settled and is one of the important open questions in the field of discrete fair allocation.
EFX allocations exist when all agents have the same valuation function, or when there are only two agents (Plaut
and Roughgarden 2020). In (Mahara 2023a, 2021), the authors improved on this result and showed the existence of
EFX for multiple agents when there are only two valuation
functions. In a breakthrough result, (Chaudhury, Garg, and
Mehlhorn 2024) showed that EFX always exists for 3 agents
when the valuation functions of agents are additive.1
All of the aforementioned results are for complete allocations that allocate each good to some agent. In (Chaudhury
et al. 2021), the authors considered incomplete allocations
that leave some goods unallocated and showed that an EFX
allocation exists for n agents when at most n − 1 goods can
remain unallocated, while guaranteeing that no agent envies
the bundle of unallocated goods. This result was improved
in (Berger et al. 2022) where the authors show existence of
EFX allocation for n agents with at most n − 2 unallocated
goods, and also an EFX allocation for the special case of 4
agents, with at most one unallocated good. In both cases, no

Mathematical Institute.
†
Part of the work was done when the author was at Chennai
Mathematical Institute and Max Planck Institute for Informatics,
Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A valuation v : 2GP→ R≥0 is additive if, for each bundle S ⊆
G of goods, v(S) =
g∈S v({g}). The result of (Akrami et al.
2023), which simplifies (Chaudhury, Garg, and Mehlhorn 2024),
holds for more general valuation functions, which they call MMSfeasible valuations (see Definition 9).

We study the problem of determining an envy-free allocation
of indivisible goods among multiple agents with additive valuations. EFX, which stands for envy-freeness up to any good,
is a well-studied relaxation of the envy-free allocation problem and has been shown to exist for specific scenarios. EFX is
known to exist for three agents, and for any number of agents
when there are only two types of valuations. EFX allocations
are also known to exist for four agents with at most one good
unallocated.
In this paper, we show that EFX exists with at most k − 2
goods unallocated for any number of agents having k distinct
valuations. Additionally, we show that complete EFX allocations exist when all but two agents have identical valuations.

Introduction
Fair division of indivisible goods is a fundamental problem
in the study of multi-agent systems. The problem concerns
distributing indivisible resources fairly among agents. Several real-life scenarios reflect the importance of this problem. Examples include inheritance division, allocation of
slots on computing machines to jobs etc. Maintaining fairness is challenging, especially when agents have heterogeneous preferences over subsets of items. Formally, the problem is to allocate a set G = {g1 , . . . gm } of m goods to a
set A = {a1 , . . . an } of n agents such that each good is allocated to at most one agent and each agent thinks of the
overall allocation as being fair.
One of the most well-studied fairness notions is envyfreeness. To formalize this notion, we model each agent
ai , i ∈ [n], as having a valuation function vi : 2G →
R≥0 on subsets (bundles) of goods. An allocation X =
(X1 , X2 , . . . Xn ), where the bundle Xi is allocated to agent
ai , i ∈ [n], is envy-free (EF) if each agent values their
own bundle at least as much as that of any other agent, i.e.,
vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (Xj ) for all i, j ∈ [n].

13889

