The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Expensive Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization Based on Diffusion Models
Bingdong Li1, 2 , Zixiang Di1, 2 , Yongfan Lu1, 2 , Hong Qian1 ,
Feng Wang3 * , Peng Yang4, 5 , Ke Tang5 , Aimin Zhou1 *
1

Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Molecule Intelligent Syntheses, Shanghai Institute of AI for Education, and School of
Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China
2
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science, Ministry of Education
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
4
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
5
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
bdli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, 51265901113@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, 51255901053@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, hqian@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
fengwang@whu.edu.cn, yangp@sustech.edu.cn, tangk3@sustech.edu.cn, amzhou@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract

global optimization, particularly noted for its success in addressing black-box optimization issues (Snoek, Larochelle,
and Adams 2012; Qian, Xiong, and Xue 2020; Huang et al.
2024; Wang et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024a). The core principle of BO involves creating probabilistic surrogate models, typically Gaussian processes (GP), that closely represent the black-box functions. These models are utilized in
conjunction with acquisition functions to seek out globally
optimal solutions. BO has been widely used in a variety
of fields, including hyperparameter tuning (Bergstra et al.
2011), A/B testing (Letham et al. 2019), combinatorial optimization (Zhang et al. 2015), among others. MOBO represents a fusion of Bayesian optimization with multi-objective
optimization. A widely adopted MOBO approach is the random scalarization technique, which effectively translates a
multi-objective optimization problem into several singleobjective optimization problems. Another noteworthy strategy in MOBO involves the use of sophisticated acquisition
functions, such as the expected hypervolume improvement
(EHVI) (Couckuyt, Deschrijver, and Dhaene 2014) and predictive entropy search (PESMO) (Hoffman and Ghahramani
2015; Hernández-Lobato et al. 2016). Among them, Pareto
set learning (PSL) based methods (e.g. (Lin et al. 2022)),
which aim to modeling the Pareto set via machine learning
techniques, have shown promising performance.

Multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) has shown
promising performance on various expensive multi-objective
optimization problems (EMOPs). However, effectively modeling complex distributions of the Pareto optimal solutions
is difficult with limited function evaluations. Existing Pareto
set learning algorithms may exhibit considerable instability
in such expensive scenarios, leading to significant deviations
between the obtained solution set and the Pareto set (PS). In
this paper, we propose a novel Composite Diffusion Model
based Pareto Set Learning algorithm (CDM-PSL) for expensive MOBO. CDM-PSL includes both unconditional and conditional diffusion model for generating high-quality samples
efficiently. Besides, we introduce a weighting method based
on information entropy to balance different objectives. This
method is integrated with a guiding strategy to appropriately
balancing different objectives during the optimization process. Experimental results on both synthetic and real-world
problems demonstrates that CDM-PSL attains superior performance compared with state-of-the-art MOBO algorithms.

Code — https://github.com/ilog-ecnu/CDM-PSL

Introduction
Expensive multi-objective optimization problems are commonly seen in various fields, such as antenna structure
design (Ding et al. 2019), financial cloud services (Yang
et al. 2024), and clinical drug trials (Yu, Ramakrishnan, and
Meinzer 2019). Handling EMOPs involves optimizing multiple (often conflicting) objectives simultaneously with limited function evaluations due to time or financial reasons.
To meet these challenges, multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) (Laumanns and Ocenasek 2002), an
extension of single-objective Bayesian Optimization (BO)
(Močkus 1975) for expensive multi-objective optimization
problems, has emerged as a promising paradigm. BO itself is recognized as an exceedingly effective strategy for

However, effectively capturing and modeling distributions of limited samples is difficult when faced with expensive multi-objective Bayesian optimization problems
(EMOPs). Existing PSL algorithms may exhibit considerable instability in expensive scenarios. This instability can
lead to substantial deviations between the obtained solution
set and the true Pareto set (PS). In other words, the quality of the resulting solution set is highly influenced by the
performance of the PSL model, which is largely limited on
EMOPs. On the other hand, Diffusion model (DM), inspired
by the natural diffusion of gases, has been successfully applied in various domains such as computer vision (Dhariwal
and Nichol 2021; Baranchuk et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022),
natural language processing (Austin et al. 2021a), and wave-

* Corresponding authors: Feng Wang and Aimin Zhou.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27063

