The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hand1000: Generating Realistic Hands from Text with Only 1,000 Images
Haozhuo Zhang1 , Bin Zhu2 * , Yu Cao2 , Yanbin Hao3
1
Peking University
Singapore Management University
3
University of Science and Technology of China
2100013132@stu.pku.edu.cn, binzhu@smu.edu.sg, yu.cao.2022@msc.smu.edu.sg, haoyanbin@hotmail.com
2

Abstract
Text-to-image generation models have achieved remarkable
advancements in recent years, aiming to produce realistic images from textual descriptions. However, these models often
struggle with generating anatomically accurate representations of human hands. The resulting images frequently exhibit issues such as incorrect numbers of fingers, unnatural
twisting or interlacing of fingers, or blurred and indistinct
hands. These issues stem from the inherent complexity of
hand structures and the difficulty in aligning textual descriptions with precise visual depictions of hands. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel approach named Hand1000
that enables the generation of realistic hand images with target gesture using only 1,000 training samples. The training of
Hand1000 is divided into three stages with the first stage aiming to enhance the model’s understanding of hand anatomy by
using a pre-trained hand gesture recognition model to extract
gesture representation. The second stage further optimizes
text embedding by incorporating the extracted hand gesture
representation, to improve alignment between the textual descriptions and the generated hand images. The third stage utilizes the optimized embedding to fine-tune the Stable Diffusion model to generate realistic hand images. In addition, we
construct the first publicly available dataset specifically designed for text-to-hand image generation. Based on the existing hand gesture recognition dataset, we adopt advanced image captioning models and LLaMA3 to generate high-quality
textual descriptions enriched with detailed gesture information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Hand1000 significantly outperforms existing models in producing anatomically correct hand images while faithfully representing other
details in the text, such as faces, clothing and colors.

Figure 1: Comparison of hand image generation results
between Stable Diffusion and our Hand1000. Given the
same text prompt, Stable Diffusion produces deformed and
chaotic hands. In contrast, our proposed Hand1000 manages
to generate anatomically correct and realistic hands while
preserving details such as character, clothing, and colors.

However, these models often struggle when generating images involving human bodies, particularly hands. The generated images frequently exhibit distorted or misaligned body
parts that do not conform to normal physical characteristics. As shown in the top of Figure 1, this problem is especially pronounced with hands, which often appear blurry,
with fingers twisted or interlaced, and an incorrect number
of fingers. Despite capturing the color and texture of human
hands, these generated images clearly display noticeable inaccuracies.
The underlying causes of this phenomenon can be attributed to two primary factors: (a) The inherent complexity
of the human hand’s structure, along with the occlusions between fingers, means that the Stable Diffusion model lacks
the necessary prior knowledge of the precise physical structure of human hands, resulting in its inability to generate
anatomically correct hands. (b) When the text prompt includes information related to human hands (e.g., “thumbs
up” and “phone call gesture”), the model struggles to as-

Project Page —
https://haozhuo-zhang.github.io/Hand1000-project-page/

Introduction
In recent years, text-to-image generation models have
achieved significant progress, such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022; Esser et al. 2024), Multimodal Large Language Model (MM-LLM) (Koh, Fried,
and Salakhutdinov 2024), and DiT (Peebles and Xie 2023).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www..org). All rights reserved.

9905

