The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motion Prior Knowledge Learning with Homogeneous Language Descriptions
for Moving Infrared Small Target Detection
Shengjia Chen, Luping Ji* , Weiwei Duan, Shuang Peng, Mao Ye
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
shengjiachen@std.uestc.edu.cn, jiluping@uestc.edu.cn, {dww, shuangpeng}@std.uestc.edu.cn, maoye@uestc.edu.cn
Input image

Abstract

Coarse motion (classical)

With significant
Entire
background
image
interference
With
minimal background Target
region
interference

Different from traditional object detection, pure vision is not
enough to infrared small target detection, due to small target size and weak background contrast. For promoting detection performance, more target representations are needed.
Currently, motion representations have been proved to be one
of the most potential feature kinds for infrared small target
detection. Existing methods have an obvious weakness, that
besides vision features, they could only capture coarse motion representations from temporal domain. With vision features, fine motion representations could be more effective to
enhance detection performance. To overcome this weakness,
inspired by prevalent vision-language models, we propose the
first vision-language framework with motion prior knowledge
learning (MoPKL). Breaking through traditional pure-vision
modality, it utilizes homogeneous language descriptions, formatted for moving targets, to directionally guide vision channel learning motion prior knowledge. With the facilitation of
motion-vision alignment and motion-relation mining, the motion of infrared small targets is further refined by graph attention, to generate more fine motion representations. The extensive experiments on datasets ITSDT-15K and IRDST show
that our framework is effective. It could often obviously outperform other methods.

Area ratio

Missed detection
?

Fine motion (ours)

Accurate detection

Figure 1: Typical limitation of coarse target motion capturing in existing classic schemes.
could typically have low contrast against backgrounds and
may even lack distinct brightness, shape, or texture features
(Zeng, Li, and Peng 2006; Zhang et al. 2022). Given these
two characteristics above, it is often an extremely challenging issue for ISTD models to effectively learn and accurately
detect small targets from highly complex infrared application scenarios (Hou et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2024).
At present, single-frame schemes seem insufficient to the
increasing demand for video signals (Yan et al. 2023). Some
recent works have begun to explore ISTD on video signals,
leading to the emergence of a new research branch: moving
infrared small target detection (MISTD). Limited by weak
visual features, auxiliary motion representations have shown
impressive potential in moving infrared target detection.
Existing classical MISTD approaches mainly capture differences between consecutive frames of entire images to
compute motion representations (Li et al. 2023b). However,
despite their simplicity and efficiency, these approaches to
computing motion features could be pregnant with a potential limitation: coarse motion representations, as shown in
Figure 1. In infrared images, targets occupy only a small
portion of images, with the vast majority consisting of background information. This leads to classical methods being
highly susceptible to background changes or diverting significant attention to background motion, resulting in only
coarse motion representations (Chen et al. 2024a,c).
Humans tend to understand new concepts by the vision
information under the guiding of language prompts (Jack-

Code — https://github.com/UESTC-nnLab/MoPKL

Introduction
Infrared small target detection (ISTD), benefiting from its
independence from external light sources and its all-weather
visibility capability, has found increasingly wide and important applications, including military use, autonomous vehicles and maritime monitoring (Liu et al. 2024b). It has
garnered extensive research attention over the past decades
(Zeng, Li, and Peng 2006; Dai et al. 2021b).
Compared to general RGB objects (Chen, Li, and Tang
2020; Chen, Yang, and Li 2023), infrared small targets possess two unique characteristics: Small and Dim (Chen et al.
2023), although their real-world sizes could be large (Deshpande et al. 1999), such as the vehicles in infrared images (Fu et al. 2022). Sometimes, impacted by target distances and imaging means, these targets in infrared images
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2186

