The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ProtoArgNet: Interpretable Image Classification
with Super-Prototypes and Argumentation
Hamed Ayoobi 1 , Nico Potyka2 , Francesca Toni1
1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
2
Cardiff University, United Kingdom
h.ayoobi@imperial.ac.uk, potykan@cardiff.ac.uk, f.toni@imperial.ac.uk
Test Image (Input):
Baird Sparrow

Abstract
We propose ProtoArgNet, a novel interpretable deep neural architecture for image classification in the spirit of
prototypical-part-learning as found, e.g., in ProtoPNet. While
earlier approaches associate every class with multiple
prototypical-parts, ProtoArgNet uses super-prototypes that
combine prototypical-parts into a unified class representation.
This is done by combining local activations of prototypes
in an MLP-like manner, enabling the localization of prototypes and learning (non-linear) spatial relationships among
them. By leveraging a form of argumentation, ProtoArgNet
is capable of providing both supporting (i.e. ‘this looks like
that’) and attacking (i.e. ‘this differs from that’) explanations.
We demonstrate on several datasets that ProtoArgNet outperforms state-of-the-art prototypical-part-learning approaches.
Moreover, the argumentation component in ProtoArgNet is
customisable to the user’s cognitive requirements by a process of sparsification, which leads to more compact explanations compared to state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Train Image:
Baird Sparrow

Train Image:
Rusty Blackbird

(a) Prototypes
This looks like that
This differs from that
This differs
from that

This looks like that
(b) Super-Prototypes

Figure 1: Conventional prototypes (a) versus the proposed super-prototypes (b) for a test image in the CUB
dataset (Wah et al. 2011) with the tail intentionally coloured
black. Class-specific super-prototypes encode spatial correlation between prototypical-parts by combining the lowlevel prototypes. They provide both ‘this looks like that’ and
‘this differs from that’ explanations.

Introduction

Deep neural models are successful in many tasks (LeCun,
Bengio, and Hinton 2015), including image classification
(our focus). However, they tend to be mostly inscrutable
black-boxes. In high-stakes settings, interpretability is crucial and interpretable models are advocated, especially if
they achieve comparable performance (Rudin 2019).
Prototypical-part-learning for image classification
amounts to learning prototypical-parts of classes in images
by introducing a prototype layer between a convolutional
backbone and a classifier (Chen et al. 2019). Prototypicalparts are latent representations of patches in images, like the
beak or tail of a bird (see Figure 1 (a)). The prototype layer
determines the similarity between prototypical-parts and
patches in the latent space that the convolutional backbone
maps to. While some prototypical-parts may be meaningless
for humans, the same can be said about some of the latent
features learnt by black-box models (Jo and Bengio 2017).
The transparency of protypical-part approaches allows
detecting if a decision has been made based on meaningful
patterns or statistical artefacts.

We propose ProtoArgNet (Section 4, overviewed in Figure 2), a novel interpretable deep neural architecture for image classification in the spirit of prototypical-part-learning.
Similar to ProtoPShare (Rymarczyk et al. 2021) and ProtoTrees (Nauta, van Bree, and Seifert 2021), ProtoArgNet
shares prototypes among classes. However, while existing
prototypical-part-learning approaches associate every class
with multiple prototypical parts, ProtoArgNet summarizes
them in a single super-prototype per class. Intuitively, the
super-prototype combines local activations of prototypes to
encode spatial relationships amongst them (see Figure 1 (b)
for an illustration). As we will demonstrate in the experiments with the SHAPES dataset (Hu et al. 2017), these relationships are essential for some classification tasks but stateof-the-art prototypical-part-learning approaches are unable
to capture them. This localization of prototypical-parts can
be particularly useful in medical diagnosis (Kim et al. 2021)
where the model can predict the location of disease indica-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1791

