The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Regularization for Graph Inverse Problems
Moshe Eliasof1 , Md Shahriar Rahim Siddiqui2 , Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb1 , Eldad Haber3
1

Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
3
Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
me532@cam.ac.uk, shahsiddiqui@phas.ubc.ca, cbs31@cam.ac.uk, ehaber@eoas.ubc.ca
2

Abstract

However, despite their high and vast utilization, in many
practical scenarios, the direct observation of properties of
the graph is not feasible or limited. For example, the knowledge of node labels might be partial. Instead, we often have
access only to the outcomes of certain operations or processes that act upon the graph properties to be recovered.
Additional examples are, in road network systems, where
we might observe traffic patterns rather than the underlying
network features, or, in social networks, we might see interaction patterns without having direct access to the strength
of the network’s relationships. This observation poses a significant research question: how can we recover or infer the
original graph properties from these observed outcomes?
Further complexity typically arises from the fact that this
question is often ill-posed. This implies that given the data,
there is more than one answer to the question and the solutions can be unstable with respect to even small perturbations in the data.
To address this question and its challenges, we begin by
defining Graph Inverse Problems (GRIPs), highlighting a
key difference between classical inverse problems that are
commonly solved on structured grids and those on graphs.
This difference directly stems from the presence of the
graph, which provides additional structure. Furthermore, in
many GRIP cases, there exist additional features on the
graphs (throughout this paper, we will refer to these features as meta-data) which may not be directly related to the
observed data associated with the inverse problem, but can
be leveraged to obtain better estimates for the solution of
the inverse problem. Following the definition of such problems, and a number of examples, we discuss several viable
approaches, from classical to neural methods, and evaluate
them on several datasets and GRIPs.
Importantly, we note that, although different GRIPs share
many characteristics, existing methods to solve them, such
as the seminal works in Yan, Fang, and He (2023); Huang
et al. (2023); Ling et al. (2024) are specialized for solving specific problems, as we discuss in Appendix A. In this
work, we focus on extending these ideas to a general framework that can be applied to various GRIPs. Previous works
on solving similar problems do not use any meta-data as additional features, and consider the likelihood (i.e., data fit)
as a part of the network; Rather, they focus on applying various GNN architectures to solve the problem directly from

In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been
utilized for various applications ranging from drug discovery to network design and social networks. In many applications, it is impossible to observe some properties of the
graph directly; instead, noisy and indirect measurements of
these properties are available. These scenarios are coined as
Graph Inverse Problems (GRIPs). In this work, we introduce
a framework leveraging GNNs to solve GRIPs. The framework is based on a combination of likelihood and prior terms,
which are used to find a solution that fits the data while adhering to learned prior information. Specifically, we propose to
combine recent deep learning techniques that were developed
for inverse problems, together with GNN architectures, to formulate and solve GRIPs. We study our approach on a number
of representative problems that demonstrate the effectiveness
of the framework.

1

Introduction

Graphs represent an elegant and powerful way to describe
and analyze connected data, capturing the relationships and
interactions between different entities in a structured manner. This mathematical framework allows for the exploration
and exploitation of both the structure and the intrinsic properties of the data, enabling the discovery of hidden connections and dependencies that may not be evident by directly
processing each data point. In contrast, by representing data
as nodes and their relationships as edges, i.e., as graphs,
we can facilitate a deeper understanding of complex systems, ranging from social networks and biological systems
to communication networks, as well as financial markets.
In recent years, graph machine learning frameworks
were developed, predominantly, Graph Neural Networks
(Scarselli et al. 2008; Bronstein et al. 2021), which are
able to model and learn complex patterns in graph data.
These recent advancements make it possible to perform a
wide array of applications, such as node classification (Kipf
and Welling 2016; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016), community detection (Chen, Li, and Bruna 2019),
drug discovery (Jiang et al. 2021), and solving combinatorial
problems (Schuetz, Brubaker, and Katzgraber 2022; Eliasof
and Haber 2024).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16471

