The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robots Learning Through Physical Interactive Intelligence
Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
robertomm@cs.utexas.edu

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has advanced significantly in
fields like computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP), fueled by breakthroughs in machine learning. However, these strides have yet to fully extend to
robotics, which faces unique challenges in long-horizon
decision-making. Predicting and utilizing physical interactions to alter the environment remains complex for artificial
agents. Consequently, robots minimize physical interaction
to avoid risks in uncontrolled environments, relying heavily
on computation for perception, planning, and control.
In contrast, humans demonstrate that autonomy and intelligent behavior arise from exploiting rich interactions with
the environment, reducing reliance on precise computation.
My research aims to balance interaction and computation in
robot learning systems that reason, perceive, and plan within
the interaction loop, emphasizing physical interaction as essential in unstructured environments. To that end, my work
spans three complementary research directions:
Imitation Learning for Physical Interactive Intelligence: Humans excel at tasks in complex environments like
homes and offices. Imitating human behavior is promising
for enabling robots to interact with their surroundings. My
work has introduced methods for robots to learn from a
single video demonstration of bimanual tasks by projecting
perception into the screw space of relative hand motion (Bahety et al. 2024). I also developed teleoperation interfaces
to collect demonstrations tailored to a robot’s embodiment,
enabling human-in-the-loop learning algorithms (Mandlekar
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2024).
Physical Interactive Intelligence in Navigation: Navigation in human environments inherently involves physical
interactions —pushing obstacles, opening doors, or pressing elevator buttons. However, conventional robotic navigation systems are restricted to search for collision-free paths
between locations. In my research, I introduced a new AI
concept, Interactive Navigation, navigation problems that
require physical interaction to be solved, and several hierarchical reinforcement learning architectures that allow robots
to address them (Li et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2021).
Perceiving Through Physical Interactions: Humans
and other biological agents interact with the environment to
obtain task-relevant information (Gibson 1979). Differently,

robots are “afraid” of contacting the environment, strongly
relying on passive modes of information gathering. This restricts their ability to acquire rich models of the environment. I equipped robots with the algorithms to perceive
their environment through interaction, enabling tasks such
as object search (Danielczuk et al. 2019) or understanding
and manipulating articulated objects like doors, drawers, and
scissors (Martı́n-Martı́n and Brock 2014, 2017), critical for
robots operating in human spaces.
Ever Improving Physically Interacting Robots: Looking ahead, I aim to build on this work by developing continual learning algorithms that allow robots to incrementally
acquire new skills through imitation and exploration, leveraging increasingly rich representations derived from physical interactions.

References
Bahety, A.; et al. 2024. ScrewMimic: Bimanual Imitation from
Human Videos with Screw Space Projection. In Robotics: Science
and Systems (RSS). Best Student Paper Finalist.
Danielczuk, M.; et al. 2019. Mechanical search: Multi-step retrieval of a target object occluded by clutter. In IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
Gibson, J. J. 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception:
classic edition. Psychology press.
Li, C.; et al. 2020. Hrl4in: Hierarchical reinforcement learning for
interactive navigation with mobile manipulators. In Conference on
Robot Learning (CoRL), 603–616. PMLR.
Liu, H.; et al. 2024. Model-based runtime monitoring with interactive imitation learning. In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 4154–4161. IEEE.
Mandlekar, A.; et al. 2020. Learning to generalize across longhorizon tasks from human demonstrations. In Robotics: Science
and Systems (RSS).
Martı́n-Martı́n, R.; and Brock, O. 2014. Online interactive perception of articulated objects with multi-level recursive estimation
based on task-specific priors. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2494–2501. IEEE.
Best Paper, Best Student Paper and Best Cognitive Paper Finalist.
Martı́n-Martı́n, R.; and Brock, O. 2017. Building Kinematic and
Dynamic Models of Articulated Objects with Multi-Modal Interactive Perception. In AAAI Spring Symposium Series. AAAI Pubs.
Xia, F.; et al. 2021. ReLMoGen: Leveraging motion generation in
reinforcement learning for mobile manipulation. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28721

