The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Future Sight and Tough Fights: Revolutionizing Sequential Recommendation with
FENRec
Yu-Hsuan Huang1 , Ling Lo1 , Hongxia Xie2 , Hong-Han Shuai1 , Wen-Huang Cheng3
1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University,
2
Jilin University,
3
National Taiwan University
{shan.ee08, linglo.ee08}@nycu.edu.tw, hongxiaxie@jlu.edu.cn, hhshuai@nycu.edu.tw, wenhuang@csie.ntu.edu.tw
Abstract
Sequential recommendation (SR) systems predict user preferences by analyzing time-ordered interaction sequences. A
common challenge for SR is data sparsity, as users typically
interact with only a limited number of items. While contrastive learning has been employed in previous approaches to
address the challenges, these methods often adopt binary labels, missing finer patterns and overlooking detailed information in subsequent behaviors of users. Additionally, they rely
on random sampling to select negatives in contrastive learning, which may not yield sufficiently hard negatives during
later training stages. In this paper, we propose Future data utilization with Enduring Negatives for contrastive learning in
sequential Recommendation (FENRec). Our approach aims
to leverage future data with time-dependent soft labels and
generate enduring hard negatives from existing data, thereby
enhancing the effectiveness in tackling data sparsity. Experiment results demonstrate our state-of-the-art performance
across four benchmark datasets, with an average improvement of 6.16% across all metrics.

Figure 1: An illustration of binary labels compared to the
Time-Dependent Soft Labeling we propose.

et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Qiu et al. 2022). These methods create positive pairs through augmentation strategies
and maximize their agreement. For instance, CL4SRec (Xie
et al. 2022) uses data augmentations such as masking and
cropping to generate positive pairs. DuoRec (Qiu et al. 2022)
utilizes model-level augmentation and regards user sequence
with the same next item as augmented positive view.
While contrastive learning has proven effective, we contend that sparse data can be used more efficiently within
these methods due to two reasons. First, they use only the
last item in sequence as a binary label and overlook the upcoming interactions. Second, they adopt random sampling
for selecting negatives in contrastive learning, which may
not yield sufficiently challenging samples later in training,
reducing their effectiveness in addressing data sparsity issue. Therefore, to better utilize sparse data, we propose
Future data utilization with Enduring Negatives for contrastive learning in sequential Recommendation (FENRec)
including two components: Time-Dependent Soft Labeling
and Enduring Hard Negatives Incorporation. For the first issue, we propose Time-Dependent Soft Labeling akin to using future interactions as labels, even though these interactions are rooted in the past. Our method traces back previous
subsequences to generate labels based on interactions resembling potential future events, capturing finer patterns in user
behavior. Unlike previous methods that assign identical binary labels to the two user sequences in Fig. 1, our approach
incorporates subsequent events, allowing the model to capture more detailed insight in user behavior. Additionally, to
address the second issue, we introduce Enduring Hard Negatives Incorporation. We generate hard negatives by mixing
anchors with negatives throughout training, ensuring they
remain consistently challenging. Fig. 2 shows how the similarity between original negatives and the anchor declines

Introduction
Recommendation systems enhance user experience by providing personalized suggestions tailored to individual preferences. Given their wide applications in online shopping,
streaming services, and social media, extensive research
has focused on optimizing their performance and effectiveness (Lu et al. 2015; Sharma et al. 2024; Alamdari
et al. 2020). Among them, Sequential Recommendation
(SR) stands out for its ability to capture and utilize the temporal dynamics of user behavior (Yu et al. 2019; Xie et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2022; Qiu et al. 2022).
Despite the strength of SR, they still face the common
challenge of recommendation systems: the limited nature
of user-item interaction. Usually, users only interact with a
small subset of all available items. The sparsity in interaction
data can impede the training of SR, making them struggle to
learn meaningful preferences, which can affect the accuracy
and the relevance of the generated recommendations. To address the data sparsity issue, previous methods have proposed incorporating contrastive learning, which leverages
self-supervised signals to improve model performance (Xie
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11826

