The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalized Implicit Neural Representations for Dynamic Molecular Surface
Modeling
Fang Wu1 , Bozhen Hu2 , Stan Z. Li†2
1

Computer Science Department, Stanford University
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University
fangwu97@stanford.edu, {hubozhen,stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

crystallography or cryo-electron microscopy, offering average structural data, MD can capture the sequential behavior of molecules with atomic-level detail and high temporal
resolution, enabling measuring various molecular regions’
movement and structural fluctuations at equilibrium. In drug
discovery, MD is pivotal for assessing the mobility and flexibility of crucial areas, facilitating observations of key functional processes such as ligand binding (Shan et al. 2011; Wu
et al. 2023e, 2024d,b; Wu 2024; Wu et al. 2023c; Cui et al.
2023), conformational changes induced by voltage, protein
folding (Lindorff-Larsen et al. 2011; Wu et al. 2024a; Lai
et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2024a), protein folding (LindorffLarsen et al. 2011), and membrane transport (Suomivuori
et al. 2017) However, its computational cost typically scales
cubically with the number of electronic degrees of freedom,
presenting challenges for simulating large systems or processes that occur on timescales longer than classical allatom MD can achieve. Enhanced sampling (Bernardi et al.
2015) has been developed to capture longer-timescale events
but introduces trade-offs between accuracy and efficiency.
Besides, MD requires small integration time steps to accurately capture fast motions, such as hydrogen bond vibrations within a few femtoseconds. This necessity restricts
MD’s ability to achieve higher speeds. To address them,
deep learning (DL) is used to approximate high-dimensional
functions and integrate physical principles such as symmetry constraints (Chmiela et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2022b, 2024c,
2023a). It can optimize force fields (FF) or potential energy
surfaces, significantly expediting FF-based methods compared to ab initio ones with extensive quantum mechanical
calculations. Despite successes, they face limitations in scalability, accuracy, and reliability (Wang et al. 2020).

Molecular dynamics (MD) has long been the de facto choice
for simulating intricate physical systems from first principles.
Recent efforts utilize the implicit neural representation (INR)
to directly learn surface point clouds’ signed distance function (SDF) with promising outcomes. However, INR’s temporal generalization to unexplored molecular systems remains
limited, which poses a significant barrier to applying INR
to a broader range of real-world scenarios. This study introduces MoE-DSR, an enhanced version of dynamic surface
representations (DSR) that effectively integrates the mixtureof-experts (MoE) strategy. Specifically, the router employs a
novel geometric surface cloud network to extract the structural information from the initial static protein conformation
as the prior knowledge. Meanwhile, experts compromising a
team of equivariant implicit neural networks (E-INNs), each
responsible for distinct protein families, ensure precise SDF
estimation across varied protein data landscapes. We showcase the ability of MoE-DSR to model dynamic protein surface shapes using ensembles from ATLAS, the largest available protein MD simulations database. Extensive experiments
validate its effectiveness in analyzing complex molecular systems across continuous space and time domains.

Introduction
Proteins are essential macromolecules in living organisms,
composed of chains of amino acids (Tang et al. 2024b).
They assume specific 3D structures that enable them to perform critical biological functions, including catalyzing enzymatic reactions, facilitating molecular transport, and providing structural support to cells and tissues. In biological systems, proteins exhibit dynamic behavior, with amino
acids continuously vibrating, rotating, and shifting in response to environmental changes (Zheng et al. 2023). This
dynamic nature is crucial to proteins’ biological roles, and
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are often employed
to study these movements and their effects on function.
MD is a robust technique for simulating trajectories of
complex atomic systems based on fundamental physical
principles (Hollingsworth and Dror 2018). It adopts the density functional theory and calculates forces from electronic
states by solving the Schrödinger equation (Car and Parrinello 1985). Unlike experimental methods such as X-ray

Instead of describing dynamic proteins as discrete particles, a recent line (Sun et al. 2024) explores modeling the
dynamic shapes of proteins by implicit neural representations (INR) on molecular surfaces, which holds a more direct relevance to biomolecular interactions than buried structures (Leem et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2023). INR can encode
complex geometric shapes via a continuous function without
relying on explicit discrete representations (De Luigi et al.
2023), particularly effective for modeling dynamic protein
shapes as they exhibit intricate and diverse conformations.
Although great progress is made in pushing the frontier of
INR targeting MD simulations of substantial proteins, cur-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

877

