The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bagging-Expert Network for Multi-Task Learning: A Depolarization Solution in
Multi-Gate Mixture-of-Experts
Gong-Duo Zhang* , Ruiqing Chen, Qian Zhao, Zhengwei Wu,
Fengyu Han, Huan-Yi Su, Ziqi Liu, Lihong Gu, Lin Zhou
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
{gongduo.zgd,chenruiqing.crq,zq317110}@antgroup.com, zhengwei wu@yeah.net,
{hanfengyu.hfy,suhuanyi.shy,ziqiliu,lihong.glh,lin.zhou}@antgroup.com
Abstract

Multi-gate Mixture-of-Experts (MMoE) (Ma et al. 2018a)
is a popular MTL model that has been widely used in various
applications. To derive the final output, the model employs
a gate mechanism that selectively combines the outputs of
these experts. This integration process enables MMoE to effectively capture intricate patterns and dependencies within
the data. Despite its advantages, MMoE suffers from the polarization problem(Zhao et al. 2019), where the weights of
some experts tend to converge to 0 during the training process.
Polarization in gate network has been discussed in prior
works (Ma et al. 2018a; Zhao et al. 2019; Ravaut, Joty, and
Chen 2022). In paper (Zhao et al. 2019), authors highlight
the polarization phenomenon in MMoE during distributed
training, occurring with a probability of 20%. This phenomenon has the potential to negatively impact the performance of the gate networks, and subsequently, the overall
performance of the model (Zhao et al. 2019). To address
this issue, the authors propose a solution by incorporating
drop-out into the gate networks. SummaReranker (Ravaut,
Joty, and Chen 2022) also employs a drop-out strategy for
the expert networks in MMoE model, with the dropout rate
for experts set at 50%.
Polarization also occurs in MoE (Mixture-of-Experts), often caused by load imbalance. In cases of load imbalance,
MoE-layers converge towards the state where only a few
experts are frequently used (Zhou et al. 2022). This could
cause both the redundancy of expert parameters and the undermining of training efficiency. Regularization approaches
are proposed to encourage the experts to have balanced
weights and workload during the training process (Shazeer
et al. 2017; Nie et al. 2021; Dai et al. 2024). However, such
approaches can bring about drop in performance of MoE
models (Chen et al. 2024).
In this paper, we propose the Bagging-Expert network
(BEnet), a novel method to effectively tackle polarization
problem and enhance the performance of MMoE in MTL.
BEnet incorporates a bagging layer to enable experts and
gates to randomly generate differences and use attention
layer in experts to filter out irrelevant information. By leveraging diverse feature sets, experts can develop unique areas of expertise, thereby ensuring their individual value
and reducing the risk of polarization. Bootstrap aggregating(Breiman 1996) abbreviated as bagging, is an ensemble

Multi-task learning (MTL) is widely utilized across a variety of real-world applications, including recommendation
systems. For instance, in the field of e-commerce, MTL is
commonly employed to simultaneously model click, conversion, and user dwelling time. Among a various of MTL models, the Multi-gate Mixture-of-Experts (MMoE) has gained
significant popularity. However, MMoE suffers from the polarization issue during training, where the weights of certain
experts tend to converge towards 0. To address this issue,
we propose a novel method called Bagging-Expert network
(BEnet) for multi-task learning. BEnet effectively mitigates
the problem of polarization and achieves excellent performance in multi-task learning. It incorporates a bagging layer
and an attention mechanism to encourage experts focusing
on diverse knowledge domains. Simultaneously, polarization
is avoided as different experts execute respective duties and
specialize in distinct domains. Experimental results on realworld datasets demonstrate that BEnet has strong robustness
and outperforms other state-of-the-art (SOTA) MTL methods.

Introduction
In recent years, multi-task learning (MTL) has gained significant attention due to its potential to solve complex
and diverse real-world industrial problems. For instance, ecommerce and mobile payment application developers often
promote to motivate customer retention and consumption by
allocating online coupons (Li et al. 2020a; Wetprasit, Cao,
and Seow 2022; Huan et al. 2022; Zhang and Yang 2022;
Fang et al. 2023). Typical model tasks for these coupon
recommendation systems involve estimating click-through
rate (CTR) and conversion rate (CVR) (Fang et al. 2024b,a;
Zhao et al. 2024). CTR and CVR tasks are directly linked to
the effectiveness of coupon recommendations, while there
are indirect application-related tasks, such as daily active
use (DAU) and user dwelling time on apps (TOA). These
tasks are different but interconnected. For example, users
who tend to click on certain coupons tend to redeem them
which in return makes them more active in apps. Employing
a multi-task model can learn commonalities among the tasks
to improve the efficiency and accuracy of the recommendation systems (Li et al. 2020b; Huangfu et al. 2022).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22389

