The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Focus Image Fusion via Explicit Defocus Blur Modelling
Yuhui Quan1 , Xi Wan1 , Zitao Tang1 , Jinxiu Liang2# , Hui Ji3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore
yhquan@scut.edu.cn, csxwan@mail.scut.edu.cn, zitaotang007@gmail.com, cssherryliang@pku.edu.cn, matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Multi-focus image fusion (MFIF) enhances depth of field in
photography by generating an all-in-focus image from multiple images captured at different focal lengths. While deep
learning has shown promise in MFIF, most existing methods
overlooked the physical properties of defocus blurring in their
network design, limiting their interoperability and generalization. This paper introduces a novel framework that integrates
explicit defocus blur modelling into the MFIF process, improving both interpretability and performance. Using an atombased spatially-varying parameterized defocus blurring model,
our approach calculates pixel-wise defocus descriptors and
initial focused images from multi-focus source images in a
scale-recurrent manner to estimate soft decision maps. Fusion
is then performed using masks derived from these decision
maps, with special treatment for pixels likely defocused in
all source images or near boundaries of defocused/focused regions. The model is trained with a fusion loss and a cross-scale
defocus estimation loss. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach.

(c) DMANet (Ours)

(d) IFCNN

(e) GACN

(f) FusionDiff

as in the object plane. As a result, the defocused image Y
with blurring effects can be expressed as

Introduction
Defocus blur is a prevalent challenge in photography, often
resulting from a shallow depth of field (DoF) when capturing
scenes with varying depths. This type of blur occurs when
objects in an image fall outside the camera’s focal plane,
yielding a loss of sharpness and detail in the image.
Formally, we can express the object field Z as a sum over
weighted impulses:

Z Z
Y (x, y) =

Z(u, v)Du,v (x − u, y − v)dudv,

(2)

where Du,v represents the per-pixel defocus PSFs (also called
defocus kernels) determined by scene depths.
The challenge of maintaining sharpness across varying
depths is particularly significant in fields such as macro
photography (Gallo, Muzzupappa, and Bruno 2014), medical imaging (Basak, Kundu, and Sarkar 2022), and microscopy (Zhou et al. 2022), where precision and clarity
are crucial. While reducing aperture size increases DoF, it
compromises light gathering and introduces diffraction artifacts (Horn 1968). Multi-focus image fusion (MFIF) offers
an alternative by merging multiple photographs captured at
varying focal lengths into an all-in-focus (AIF) image with
enhanced clarity and detail, particularly applicable to complex scenes where objects are at various focal distances.

Z Z
Z(u, v)δ(u − x, y − y)dudv,

(b) Input #2

Figure 1: (a)&(b): Input image pair. (c)-(f) MFIF results
obtained from our approach and several existing methods.
Below each image, two zoomed-in regions are shown, corresponding to the focused regions of the two input images.
Our approach recovers more details around the boundaries
between defocused and focused regions.

Code — https://github.com/Tangzitao/DMANet
Extended version — https:
//github.com/Tangzitao/DMANet/raw/main/paper.pdf

Z(x, y) =

(a) Input #1

(1)

where δ denotes the impulse function, corresponding to a
Dirac delta PSF. Then, the image plane field can be calculated as a superposition over weighted point spread functions
(PSFs) in the image plane using the same weighting function
#

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6657

