The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SCKD: Semi-Supervised Cross-Modality Knowledge Distillation for 4D Radar
Object Detection
Ruoyu Xu1 , Zhiyu Xiang1,2 * , Chenwei Zhang1 , Hanzhi Zhong1 , Xijun Zhao3 , Ruina Dang3 , Peng
Xu1 , Tianyu Pu1 , Eryun Liu1
2

1
Zhejiang University, China
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Multi-Modal Communication Networks and Intelligent Information Processing
3
China North Artificial Intelligence & Innovation Research Institute
{xuruoyu, xiangzy, zhangchenwei, zhonghanzhi, xxxupeng, 3190105835, eryunliu}@zju.edu.cn
{heejunzhao, ruinadang}@163.com

Abstract
3D object detection is one of the fundamental perception
tasks for autonomous vehicles. Fulfilling such a task with a
4D millimeter-wave radar is very attractive since the sensor is
able to acquire 3D point clouds similar to Lidar while maintaining robust measurements under adverse weather. However, due to the high sparsity and noise associated with the
radar point clouds, the performance of the existing methods is still much lower than expected. In this paper, we propose a novel Semi-supervised Cross-modality Knowledge
Distillation (SCKD) method for 4D radar-based 3D object
detection. It characterizes the capability of learning the feature from a Lidar-radar-fused teacher network with semisupervised distillation. We first propose an adaptive fusion
module in the teacher network to boost its performance.
Then, two feature distillation modules are designed to facilitate the cross-modality knowledge transfer. Finally, a semisupervised output distillation is proposed to increase the effectiveness and flexibility of the distillation framework. With
the same network structure, our radar-only student trained by
SCKD boosts the mAP by 10.38% over the baseline and outperforms the state-of-the-art works on the VoD dataset. The
experiment on ZJUODset also shows 5.12% mAP improvements on the moderate difficulty level over the baseline when
extra unlabeled data are available.

Figure 1: Comparison of the current mainstream crossmodality knowledge distillation approaches (a): BEVDistill(2022c),MonoDistill(2022) and (b): DistillBEV(2023),
UniDistill(2023), RadarDistill(2024) with our SCKD (c).

Code — https://github.com/Ruoyu-Xu/SCKD
merely provide two-dimensional point clouds and Doppler
velocity, which makes it difficult for 3D object detection.
In recent years, with the development of high-resolution 4D
millimeter-wave radar, exploring the 4D radar point clouds
for scene understanding task becomes very attractive.
Despite promising prospects, point clouds of 4D radar still
suffer from the issues of high sparsity and flickering noise.
The point density of existing 4D radar is only less than onetenth of that of Lidar, and the “ghost point” caused by the
multi-path effect also largely degrades its range measurements. Existing approaches based on pure radar(Xu et al.
2021; Yan and Wang 2023; Zheng et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2023) typically employ classical backbones that are originally designed for Lidar. Without special consideration of
the nature of sensors, the performance of these approaches
still leaves much to be desired. Multi-modality fusion based
methods(Nabati and Qi 2021; Kim et al. 2023a,b; Xiong
et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2022b) usually be-

Introduction
3D object detection is an essential perception task for autonomous vehicles operating in real traffic scenes. Thanks to
the dense point clouds acquired and the development of deep
learning technology, Lidar-based 3D object detection methods(Yang et al. 2020; Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Lang et al.
2019; Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021) have made remarkable progress in recent years. However, constrained by its
short wavelength, Lidar performs poorly in adverse weather
conditions such as rain and fog(Sheeny et al. 2021). In contrast, millimeter-wave radar has gained widespread attention
due to its resistance to adverse weather and long measurement distance. Traditional 3D millimeter-wave radar could
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8933

