The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Data-Free Black-Box Federated Learning via Zeroth-Order Gradient Estimation
Xinge Ma, Jin Wang* , Xuejie Zhang
School of Information Science and Engineering
Yunnan University
Kunming, China
maxinge@mail.ynu.edu.cn, {wangjin, xjzhang}@ynu.edu.cn

Abstract

as a privacy-preserving decentralized training paradigm that
delivers a “centralized” model by periodically sharing the
parameters of models locally trained by individual clients on
their private data with a central server for aggregation. However, the iterative exchange of model parameters between the
server and clients exposes FL to several inherent challenges:
1) Degeneration to data heterogeneity resulting from the significant divergence between model parameters caused by the
non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) data
among clients (Zhu et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2022); 2) Failure
to model heterogeneity when clients individually design personalized models to meet distinct specifications rather than
replicating a homogeneous model architecture for parameter
aggregation (Gao, Yao, and Yang 2022; Ye et al. 2023); 3)
Exorbitant communication overhead that scales up with the
number of model parameters hinders its application to larger
models or client populations (Konečný et al. 2016; Almanifi et al. 2023); 4) Vulnerability to privacy attacks where the
shared model parameters can be maliciously exploited to reconstruct clients’ private data in a white-box manner (Lyu
et al. 2022; Sharma and Marchang 2024).
To tackle these challenges, distillation-based FL (Li and
Wang 2019; Chang et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2021; Itahara et al.
2021; Gong et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2021; Sattler et al. 2022;
Gong et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023) extends knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) to the context of FL by exchanging model outputs associated with a
public auxiliary dataset for knowledge transfer, offering a
diverse range of benefits such as model-agnostic collaboration, lower communication overhead, and less exposure of
sensitive information. However, a desirable auxiliary dataset
is not always available since its construction requires careful
deliberation and even prior knowledge about clients’ private
data to achieve satisfactory performance, which is inconsistent with the privacy-preserving nature of FL.
Instead of assuming a pre-determined auxiliary dataset,
data-free FL (Zhu, Hong, and Zhou 2021; Zhang et al. 2022;
Zhang, Wu, and Yuan 2022; Luo et al. 2023) eliminates the
need for auxiliary data by training a server-side generator
to directly synthesize task-specific data samples for knowledge transfer. However, the update rule of the generator depends on the availability of clients’ local models, which involves backpropagating first through local models and then
through the generator to yield the gradients. Consequently,

Federated learning (FL) enables decentralized clients to collaboratively train a global model under the orchestration of
a central server without exposing their individual data. However, the iterative exchange of model parameters between the
server and clients imposes heavy communication burdens,
risks potential privacy leakage, and even precludes collaboration among heterogeneous clients. Distillation-based FL tackles these challenges by exchanging low-dimensional model
outputs rather than model parameters, yet it highly relies on
a task-relevant auxiliary dataset that is often not available
in practice. Data-free FL attempts to overcome this limitation by training a server-side generator to directly synthesize task-specific data samples for knowledge transfer. However, the update rule of the generator requires clients to share
on-device models for white-box access, which greatly compromises the advantages of distillation-based FL. This motivates us to explore a data-free and black-box FL framework
via Zeroth-order Gradient Estimation (FedZGE), which estimates the gradients after flowing through on-device models
in a black-box optimization manner to complete the training
of the generator in terms of fidelity, transferability, diversity,
and equilibrium, without involving any auxiliary data or sharing any model parameters, thus combining the advantages of
both distillation-based FL and data-free FL. Experiments on
large-scale image classification datasets and network architectures demonstrate the superiority of FedZGE in terms of
data heterogeneity, model heterogeneity, communication efficiency, and privacy protection.

Code — https://github.com/maxinge8698/FedZGE

Introduction
The remarkable success of deep neural networks is largely
attributed to data-driven centralized training schemes, which
consolidate data scattered across decentralized clients onto
a central server to build high-performing models. However,
growing data concerns and regulations impose stringent limitations on data collection and transmission, leading to isolated data silos where clients keep their data locally to ensure privacy and security. To break down this dilemma, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) has emerged
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19314

