The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AugRefer: Advancing 3D Visual Grounding via Cross-Modal Augmentation and
Spatial Relation-based Referring
Xinyi Wang1 , Na Zhao2 * , Zhiyuan Han1 , Dan Guo3 , Xun Yang1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
Hefei University of Technology
{wxy1, aaronhan,xyang21}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, na zhao@sutd.edu.sg, guodan@hfut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

“There is a square beige table,
it is next to a green couch.”

3D visual grounding (3DVG), which aims to correlate a natural language description with the target object within a 3D
scene, is a significant yet challenging task. Despite recent advancements in this domain, existing approaches commonly
encounter a shortage: a limited amount and diversity of text3D pairs available for training. Moreover, they fall short in effectively leveraging different contextual clues (e.g., rich spatial relations within the 3D visual space) for grounding. To
address these limitations, we propose AugRefer, a novel approach for advancing 3D visual grounding. AugRefer introduces cross-modal augmentation designed to extensively generate diverse text-3D pairs by placing objects into 3D scenes
and creating accurate and semantically rich descriptions using foundation models. Notably, the resulting pairs can be
utilized by any existing 3DVG methods for enriching their
training data. Besides, AugRefer presents a language-spatial
adaptive decoder that effectively adapts the potential referring objects based on the language description and various
3D spatial relations. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets clearly validate the effectiveness of AugRefer.

3D Visual
Grounder
Spatial
Injection

Original Sample

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

Augmented Sample

…
…

…

…

1

“The table is brown in color, made
of wood, and in front of the wall.”

Cross-Modal
Augmentation

…

Figure 1: A brief illustration of our proposed AugRefer.

used LLMs to enrich linguistic descriptions but have not addressed 3D data scarcity, while other studies (Ge et al. 2024;
Zhao et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2020) have explored 3D augmentation to introduce objects into existing scenes. However, these single-modal augmentation techniques cannot be
directly applied to cross-modal 3DVG due to two unique
prerequisites inherent in augmenting text-3D pairs: 1) Ensuring accurate correspondence between 3D targets and
linguistic descriptions, and 2) Providing rich clues necessary for locating the target, differentiating from other objects
by incorporating both semantic and spatial information.
To tackle these limitations, we propose a novel approach
for advancing 3D visual grounding, named AugRefer, as depicted in Fig. 1. In AugRefer, our initial step involves devising a cross-modal augmentation mechanism to enrich 3D
scenes by injecting objects and furnishing them with diverse and precise descriptions. This augmentation process
involves three main steps: inserting objects into 3D scenes,
rendering these scenes into 2D images, and using foundation models to generate detailed captions. Furthermore, we
design a multi-granularity rendering strategy to capture intricate textures and tailored prompts to produce diverse captions for each level. As a result, our cross-modal augmentation addresses the issue of data scarcity in 3DVG by significantly increasing the quantity and diversity of text-3D pairs.
In generated text-3D pairs, more complex situations arise.
As shown in Fig. 1, if a scene already contains a table
and our augmentation introduced an external table as the
grounded target, the original one may become a distractor1 ,

Introduction

3D visual grounding (3DVG) stands as an important and
challenging task, aimed at locating objects within 3D scenes
based on provided textual descriptions. As an advancement
of 3D object detection (Zhao et al. 2020; 2022; Sheng et al.
2022; Han et al. 2024), it plays a critical perceptual role in
various downstream applications, thus attracting increasing
research attention. The emergence of large language models
(LLMs) adds further allure to this field, offering a pathway
to connect LLMs with the physical 3D world seamlessly.
Existing 3DVG methods commonly encounter a shortage
of diverse training data pairs, consisting of the 3D scene with
the referred object and the corresponding language description. This issue inherently arises from limitations on the 3D
data side, where collecting and annotating 3D data is complex, costly, and time-consuming (Dai et al. 2017; Ding et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023). For example, the popular 3DVG
dataset (Achlioptas et al. 2020) only contains 1.5k scenes.
Recent works (Hong et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023) have
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8006

Distractors refers to objects of the same category as the target.

