The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

NBA3D: Neighbor-Based Confidence Adjustment
for 3D Rare Object Detection Using LiDAR
Jooyoung Lee1 , Jaeyoon Lee1 , Jongwon Choi1,2 *
1

Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
Dept. of Advanced Imaging, GSAIM, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
{juyeoe, leejaeyoon}@vilab.cau.ac.kr, choijw@cau.ac.kr

Abstract

Linear
Linear

ReLU

Droupout

Linear

Global Mean Pool

BN2

GATConv

NNConv

Droupout

True Positive Discrimination GNN (TPDGNN)

Recent research on LiDAR-based 3D object detectors has
shown strong performance; however, evaluations typically focus on dominant classes, overlooking rare classes, such as
strollers, which could be critical in real autonomous driving scenarios. This oversight is problematic because stateof-the-art 3D object detectors show significantly lower performance on rare classes compared to dominant ones when
trained on both. To address this issue and achieve accurate 3D
rare object detection using only LiDAR data, we propose the
Neighbor-Based confidence Adjustment for 3D rare class predictions (NBA3D). NBA3D utilizes a graph neural network
to analyze the surrounding environment of rare class prediction boxes, enabling a more effective distinction between true
positives and false positives based on their local context. Our
approach utilizes both 3D prediction box characteristics and
CLIP-based class semantic information to better contextualize neighboring objects. Various experiments demonstrate
that NBA3D effectively improves the detection performance
of rare class objects, regardless of the type of 3D object detectors used.

BN1

2

TP Score

0.8

GT Distance

0.1

Introduction
Among the various sensors used for 3D object detection in
autonomous vehicles, LiDAR stands out due to its robustness against varying weather and lighting conditions, precise distance measurement, and accurate object shape identification. Autonomous vehicles rely on data from multiple sensors, including cameras, Radar, and LiDAR, to navigate safely through diverse and unpredictable road environments (Mao et al. 2023). While cameras offer rich visual
information, they are susceptible to weather and lighting
challenges and struggle with accurate distance estimation.
Radar, which uses electromagnetic waves, provides reliable
detection across various conditions but is limited in object
identification due to its low resolution. In contrast, LiDAR
excels in both distance measurement and detailed object
shape recognition by generating 3D point clouds through
laser pulses, making it a crucial sensor in autonomous driving systems.

Figure 1: Performance Before and After NBA3D Application. Regardless of the type of state-of-the-art LiDAR-based
3D object detector, our NBA3D significantly improves the
performance of the Stroller class, which is one of the rare
classes while maintaining performance on dominant classes.

Although state-of-the-art LiDAR-based 3D object detectors (Zhan et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023c; Zhang et al. 2023)
have demonstrated impressive performance, they encounter
significant challenges when dealing with a diverse range of
objects that follow a long-tail distribution (Liu et al. 2019).
This distribution is characterized by a few frequently occurring dominant object categories (‘head’) and a wide variety
of rare objects (‘tail’). Despite the prevalence of this distribution in real-world scenarios, current detectors (Lu et al.
2023; Lai et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023b) commonly focus on
evaluating the performance on dominant classes. This focus
reveals a critical limitation: when rare categories are trained
alongside dominant ones, detection performance on the rare

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4508

