The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Highly Efficient Rotation-Invariant Spectral Embedding for Scalable Incomplete
Multi-View Clustering
Xinxin Wang1 , Yongshan Zhang2 , Yicong Zhou1 *
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences
xinxinwang1024@gmail.com, yszhang.cug@gmail.com, yicongzhou@um.edu.mo
View 1

Abstract
Incomplete multi-view clustering presents significant challenges due to missing views. Although many existing graphbased methods aim to recover missing instances or complete
similarity matrices with promising results, they still face several limitations: (1) Recovered data may be unsuitable for
spectral clustering, as these methods often ignore guidance
from spectral analysis; (2) Complex optimization processes
require high computational burden, hindering scalability to
large-scale problems; (3) Most methods do not address the
rotational mismatch problem in spectral embeddings. To address these issues, we propose a highly efficient rotationinvariant spectral embedding (RISE) method for scalable incomplete multi-view clustering. RISE learns view-specific
embeddings from incomplete bipartite graphs to capture the
complementary information. Meanwhile, a complete consensus representation with second-order rotation-invariant property is recovered from these incomplete embeddings in a unified model. Moreover, we design a fast alternating optimization algorithm with linear complexity and promising convergence to solve the proposed formulation. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the effectiveness,
scalability, and efficiency of RISE compared to the state-ofthe-art methods.

View 2

Instance-level

View 1

View 1

View 2

View 2

Graph-level

Embedding-level

Figure 1: Different completion stages for IMVC. Filling
missing data at the feature embedding level is computationally efficient and provides robust performance.
is referred to as incomplete multi-view data. When existing
MVC methods are applied to such incomplete datasets, they
may experience significant performance degradation or even
complete failure (Xia et al. 2022; Shen et al. 2023).
To solve this problem, incomplete multi-view clustering
(IMVC) has gained increasing attention. Recently, a variety of IMVC methods have been proposed (Wen, Xu, and
Liu 2020; Wen et al. 2021a; Li et al. 2022). These methods
can be divided into three categories: instance-level, graphlevel, and embedding-level methods. As shown in Fig. 1 (a),
instance-level methods are natural and intuitive, as they recover missing instances to facilitate subsequent clustering
(Hao et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2023a; Liu et al. 2021). Typical
recovery strategies include simple averaging (Shao, He, and
Yu 2015; Gao, Peng, and Jian 2016), matrix factorization
(Yin and Sun 2023; Wen et al. 2019), and deep learningbased imputation (Lin et al. 2021). As shown in Fig. 1 (b),
graph-level methods aim to fill in incomplete similarity matrices rather than directly recovering missing instances (Wen
et al. 2023a; Cui et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2023a; Lv et al. 2022; Zhang, Huang, and Wang 2024).
During the learning process, the recovered similarity matrices can either be used in spectral clustering or employed
to directly output clustering results based on the connected
components. Unlike instance-level and graph-level completion methods, as shown in Fig. 1(c), embedding-level methods perform completion in the latent feature space (Zhang
et al. 2023b). This approach efficiently recovers missing data
from low-dimensional embeddings, and the recovered representations naturally align with clustering tasks.
Although there are viable precedents for filling in miss-

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) explores the affinity relationships of samples among multiple views and groups similar samples into the same cluster (Zhang et al. 2018). Over
the past decade, a variety of MVC methods have been proposed for various real-world applications (Chen et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2024a). Although these methods achieve superior
clustering performance, most of them strictly rely on the assumption that all instances in each view are available and
complete. However, in real-world scenarios, some instances
may be inaccessible from certain views due to transmission loss or sensor malfunctions (Wen et al. 2020). For instance, in medical diagnosis, patients may undergo various
pathology tests, such as MRI, CT, and genetic testing. Only
a small percentage of patients require all these tests, while
others may need only a few targeted assessments. The resulting multi-view data, which contains missing instances,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21312

