The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evaluating LLM Reasoning in the Operations Research Domain with ORQA
Mahdi Mostajabdaveh 1 , Timothy Tin Long Yu 1 , Samarendra Chandan Bindu Dash 1,2 ,
Rindranirina Ramamonjison 1 , Jabo Serge Byusa 1 , Giuseppe Carenini 3 , Zirui Zhou 1 , Yong
Zhang 1 ,
1

Huawei Technologies Canada, 4321 Still Creek Dr, Burnaby, BC, V5C 6S7, Canada
2
University of Toronto, 40 George St, Toronto, ON, M5S 2E4, Canada
3
University of British Columbia, 2366 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada
{mahdi.mostajabdaveh1, timothy.yu, rindranirina.ramamonjison, jabo.byusa, zirui.zhou, yong.zhang3}@huawei.com,
carenini@cs.ubc.ca, dashsam1@cs.toronto.edu.
Abstract

To evaluate an LLM’s ability to generalize to a new domain, we focus on the field of Operations Research (OR).
The choice of this domain is deliberate and significant.
First, OR is important for making decisions in various industries (Petropoulos et al. 2024). Second, there are many
types of optimization problems applied to real-world applications ranging from production scheduling (Mostajabdaveh, Salman, and Tahmasbi 2022) to creating efficient
delivery routes for trucks (Vidal, Laporte, and Matl 2020).
Third, optimization modeling presents a unique challenge
due to the expert-level knowledge and reasoning skills it
requires (Hillier and Lieberman 2015), adding a layer of
complexity to the automation of this task. Some recent
studies also report modest performances of SOTA LLMs
such as GPT-4 and Llama2 for optimization model building tasks (AhmadiTeshnizi, Gao, and Udell 2024; Mostajabdaveh et al. 2024b). Finally, OR is a niche field with limited
publicly available text corpora or optimization model code
(Xiao et al. 2023; AhmadiTeshnizi, Gao, and Udell 2024),
making it an ideal testbed to assess the generalizability of
LLMs, reducing the risk of data contamination.

In this paper, we introduce and apply Operations Research
Question Answering (ORQA), a new benchmark, to assess the generalization capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) in the specialized technical domain of Operations Research (OR). This benchmark is designed to evaluate whether LLMs can emulate the knowledge and reasoning skills of OR experts when given diverse and complex
optimization problems. The dataset, crafted by OR experts,
presents real-world optimization problems that require multistep reasoning to build their mathematical models. Our evaluations of various open-source LLMs, such as LLaMA 3.1,
DeepSeek, and Mixtral reveal their modest performance, indicating a gap in their aptitude to generalize to specialized
technical domains. This work contributes to the ongoing discourse on LLMs’ generalization capabilities, providing insights for future research in this area. The dataset and evaluation code are publicly available.

Code and Dataset — https://developer.huaweicloud.com/
develop/aigallery/notebook/detail?id=6b98c56e-913b47ef-8d9f-3266c8aec06a

To assess an LLM’s knowledge and reasoning skills
on unseen, diverse, and complex optimization problems, we propose ORQA (Operations Research Question
Answering), a new multi-choice Question Answering (QA)
benchmark dataset, crafted and verified by OR experts. Each
dataset instance (Figure 1; left) presents a natural language
description of an optimization problem along with a question that requires multi-step reasoning (Figure 1; right) to
answer correctly.

Introduction
The ability of Large Language Models (LLMs) to follow human instructions and perform diverse tasks has made them
an exciting area of investigation. Moreover, the considerable
interest in adopting LLMs across various complex technical
domains (e.g., medicine (Gao et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023))
highlights their potential for significant societal impact. A
particularly compelling driver for this adoption is the potential of LLMs to automate many tasks, reducing human
intervention and improving productivity. However, as LLMs
are becoming integrated into the workflow of various industries, it is important to thoroughly understand their capabilities and limitations (Khatun and Brown 2024a; Baktash and
Dawodi 2023; Truong et al. 2023). Of particular interest is
their ability to reason and perform new challenging tasks
across different domains, which are reported critical limitations of LLMs (Arkoudas 2023; Shen and Kejriwal 2023).
Our work addresses this need by introducing a new benchmark dataset and applying it to assess these limitations.

Our study is significant for several reasons. First, it contributes to the ongoing dialogue on the generalizability of
LLMs. Although many benchmarks claim that LLMs can
replicate expert-level knowledge across various technical
domains, the actual extent of these models’ generalization capabilities remains an open question (Alzahrani et al.
2024). Our benchmark offers a new perspective by focusing on a specialized technical domain that lacks a largescale, high-quality dataset. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first multi-choice QA dataset in the field of Operations Research. Second, this study has implications for
understanding the potential and limitations of LLMs in automating tasks in niche technical fields like OR, where ex-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24902

