The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Graph Structure Refinement with Energy-based Contrastive Learning
Xianlin Zeng1, 2 , Yufeng Wang1 , Yuqi Sun1 , Guodong Guo3 , Wenrui Ding1 , Baochang Zhang1
2

1
Beihang University, Beijing, P.R.China
Postdoctoral Research Station at China RongTong Academy of Sciences Group Corporation Limited, Beijing, P.R.China
3
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, P.R.China
zengxianlin@buaa.edu.cn, wyfeng@buaa.edu.cn, sunyuqi@buaa.edu.cn, guodong.guo@mail.wvu.edu,
ding@buaa.edu.cn, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

topology to compute graph representations. The strong representational capacity of most GNNs hinges on the assumption that graph structure is sufficiently reliable and perfectly
noise-free (Szegedy et al. 2013), considered as ground-truth
information for model training. However, this assumption
may hardly hold in real-world applications. This is due to
the fact: i) Raw structure is typically derived from complex interactive systems, leading to inherent uncertainties
and incomplete connections. Even worse, the GNN iterative mechanism with cascading effects repeatedly aggregates
neighborhood features. Minor noises in the graph can propagate to adjacent nodes, influencing other node embeddings
and potentially introducing further inaccuracies (Dai et al.
2018). ii) Graph representation containing explicit structure
is not informative enough to improve task performance. Raw
topology only incorporates necessary physical connections,
such as chemical bonds in molecules, and fails to capture
abstract or implicit links among nodes. Furthermore, in various graph-related tasks, such as text graph in natural language processing (Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019) or scene graph
for images in computer vision (Suhail et al. 2021), the explicit structure may either be absent or unavailable.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently gained
widespread attention as a successful tool for analyzing graphstructured data. However, imperfect graph structure with
noisy links lacks enough robustness and may damage graph
representations, therefore limiting the GNNs’ performance in
practical tasks. Moreover, existing generative architectures
fail to fit discriminative graph-related tasks. To tackle these
issues, we introduce an unsupervised method based on a joint
of generative training and discriminative training to learn
graph structure and representation, aiming to improve the
discriminative performance of generative models. We propose an Energy-based Contrastive Learning (ECL) guided
Graph Structure Refinement (GSR) framework, denoted as
ECL-GSR. To our knowledge, this is the first work to combine energy-based models with contrastive learning for GSR.
Specifically, we leverage ECL to approximate the joint distribution of sample pairs, which increases the similarity between representations of positive pairs while reducing the
similarity between negative ones. Refined structure is produced by augmenting and removing edges according to the
similarity metrics among node representations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ECL-GSR outperforms the stateof-the-art on eight benchmark datasets in node classification.
ECL-GSR achieves faster training with fewer samples and
memories against the leading baseline, highlighting its simplicity and efficiency in downstream tasks.

To tackle these challenges mentioned above, Graph Structure Refinement (GSR) involves learning invariant underlying relationships by extracting general knowledge from
graph data, rather than relying solely on task-specific information. Therefore, the primary concern of GSR lies in graph
representation learning, which can be broadly classified into
two categories (Wang et al. 2018a). On one hand, graph generative models (Grover and Leskovec 2016; Dong, Chawla,
and Swami 2017; Zheng et al. 2020) assume that each
node follows an inherent connectivity distribution. Edges are
viewed as samples from these distributions, with the models
enhancing node representations by optimizing the likelihood
of these observed edges. However, most downstream tasks
are inherently discriminative, such as node classification
and graph prediction. The state-of-the-art generative models have significantly deviated from discriminative architectures (Grathwohl et al. 2020). On the other hand, discriminative models (Veličković et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018b;
Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020) focus on learning a classifier to predict the presence of edges directly. They output a
single scalar to represent the probability between node pair,
thereby differentiating the connectivity of edges. Nonethe-

Introduction
With the explosive growth of graph-structured data, Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) (Zhu et al. 2019; Zhang and Zitnik
2020; Zhang et al. 2019a; Xu et al. 2018) have emerged as
a potent deep learning tool, experiencing notable advancements across diverse applications, such as node classification (Veličković et al. 2017; Kipf and Welling 2016), node
clustering (Wang et al. 2019a; Zhang et al. 2019b), graph
classification (Duvenaud et al. 2015; Lee, Lee, and Kang
2019), link prediction (Peng et al. 2020; Srinivasan and
Ribeiro 2019), recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2019b;
Yu et al. 2021b), drug discovery (Wang et al. 2021b), and
anomaly detection (Ding et al. 2019). GNNs usually adopt
a message-passing scheme (Gilmer et al. 2017), aggregating information from neighboring nodes within the observed
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22326

