The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Paid with Models: Optimal Contract Design for Collaborative Machine Learning
Bingchen Wang1 * , Zhaoxuan Wu1,2 , Fusheng Liu1 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low3
1
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, Republic of Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
bingchen@nus.edu.sg, {wu.zhaoxuan, fusheng}@u.nus.edu, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

accuracy levels based on the parties’ contributions. Practically, this could be achieved through the design of contracts,
where the scheme coordinator acts as the principal and each
participating party of the scheme acts as the agent.
Prior to our work, there has been a line of research that resorts to contract theory to address the incentive issue in collaborative machine learning (Kang et al. 2019; Ding, Fang,
and Huang 2020; Karimireddy, Guo, and Jordan 2022; Liu
et al. 2023), but most of them focus on using money as the
reward for the collaboration. Karimireddy, Guo, and Jordan
(2022) attends to the administration of models with different
accuracy levels as rewards, while their primary focus is on
the case where the scheme coordinator can directly observe
each party’s data collection costs. However, in reality, the
cost of contribution is typically private information known
only to the contributing party. For instance, consider a CML
scheme where private computing firms pull together their
GPUs for the training of a language model for code generation. Each firm could face a different vendor price and
incur dissimilar maintenance cost of the chips. As another
example, consider the CML scheme where investment firms
join their privately curated data for the training of an investment model. To gather the data, each firm needs to recruit
analysts, the overheads of which are usually determined by
conditions of the local labor market and the firm’s own incentive policies. The differences in the operating environments cause the parties of a CML scheme to have a wide
range of per-unit contribution costs. While the scheme coordinator can be an expert in the domain field, thereby possessing some general information about the process, it remains challenging for them to gauge the exact costs borne
by the parties. Even if the parties willingly inform the coordinator of their costs, the coordinator cannot verify the
truthfulness of these reports without incurring significant auditing expenses. Worse still, a rent-seeking party may cheat
by misreporting their cost if it leads to higher profits being gained from the scheme. This information asymmetry
results in what is known as a principal-agency problem in
economic literature (see Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green
1995; Laffont and Martimort 2002; Bolton and Dewatripont
2004 for a comprehensive treatment of the subject).
In the presence of private information, optimal contract
design with models as the rewards poses unique challenges
that distinguish it from its economic counterparts. For one,

Collaborative machine learning (CML) provides a promising paradigm for democratizing advanced technologies by enabling cost-sharing among participants. However, the potential for rent-seeking behaviors among parties can undermine
such collaborations. Contract theory presents a viable solution by rewarding participants with models of varying accuracy based on their contributions. However, unlike monetary
compensation, using models as rewards introduces unique
challenges, particularly due to the stochastic nature of these
rewards when contribution costs are privately held information. This paper formalizes the optimal contracting problem
within CML and proposes a transformation that simplifies the
non-convex optimization problem into one that can be solved
through convex optimization algorithms. We conduct a detailed analysis of the properties that an optimal contract must
satisfy when models serve as the rewards, and we explore the
potential benefits and welfare implications of these contractdriven CML schemes through numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Training a state-of-the-art machine learning (ML) model is
a Herculean task due to the requirement of an enormous
amount of data and computational resources. The exorbitant
cost often precludes budget-constrained small parties from
training a model on their own, resulting in a high industrial concentration where top-performing models are owned
by big firms (AI Index Steering Committee 2024). In this
regard, collaborative machine learning (CML) provides a
promising crowdsourcing paradigm. The advent of CML
schemes like federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017;
Kairouz et al. 2021; Sheller et al. 2020; Nguyen et al. 2022)
allows participants to join their resources for model training and share the training cost that would otherwise be insurmountable at an individual level. Despite their great potential, such schemes might not make economic sense. As
is shown by Karimireddy, Guo, and Jordan (2022), catastrophic freeriding can occur when profit-maximizing parties
in a collaboration have the ability to observe each other’s
data collection costs. This issue can be mitigated through
the role of a scheme coordinator who conducts model training on the parties’ behalf and rewards models with modified
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14176

