The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Asymmetric Visual Semantic Embedding Framework for Efficient
Vision-Language Alignment
Yang Liu1, 2 , Mengyuan Liu3 * , Shudong Huang1, 2 , Jiancheng Lv1, 2
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Chengdu, China
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
liuyyy111@gmail.com, liumengyuan@pku.edu.cn, huangsd@scu.edu.cn, lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Text 1: A man and woman talking are
interrupted and a man covers his face.

Learning visual semantic similarity is a critical challenge in
bridging the gap between images and texts. However, there
exist inherent variations between vision and language data,
such as information density, i.e., images can contain textual
information from multiple different views, which makes it
difficult to compute the similarity between these two modalities accurately and efficiently. In this paper, we propose a
novel framework called Asymmetric Visual Semantic Embedding (AVSE) to dynamically select features from various regions of images tailored to different textual inputs for
similarity calculation. To capture information from different
views in the image, we design a radial bias sampling module
to sample image patches and obtain image features from various views, Furthermore, AVSE introduces a novel module for
efficient computation of visual semantic similarity between
asymmetric image and text embeddings. Central to this module is the presumption of foundational semantic units within
the embeddings, denoted as “meta-semantic embeddings.”
It segments all embeddings into meta-semantic embeddings
with the same dimension and calculates visual semantic similarity by finding the optimal match of meta-semantic embeddings of two modalities. Our proposed AVSE model is extensively evaluated on the large-scale MS-COCO and Flickr30K
datasets, demonstrating its superiority over recent state-ofthe-art methods.

Text 2: A construction worker holds a
sign about bicycling .

Text 1

encoder

encoder

Patch sampling

Shared Encoder

Text 2
Dynamic Similarity

Figure 1: (Top) Information density varies in vision and language data, e.g., an image can be described from multiple
different views using language. (Bottom) The conceptual diagram of our proposed method. We first sample different
patches (Radial Bias Sampling) to the shard encoder (Vision
Transformers) to get two group embedding, and compute
dynamic similarity for different text by selecting different
parts of the image feature (Asymmetric Embedding Optimal
Matching).(Best viewed in color).

Code — https://github.com/liuyyy111/AVSE

To bridge the semantic gap between images and texts,
mainstream image-text matching methods follow a common
procedure of encoding images and texts into a shared embedding space and measuring the similarity between them,
typically optimizing the model using a triplet loss that enforces a greater similarity between matched image-text pairs
compared to unmatched pairs. For global-level matching
methods, most works (Faghri et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2021) calculate the visual semantic similarity via
the inner product (cosine similarity). For local-level matching methods, many works (Lee et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2020;
Diao et al. 2021) adopt cross-modal attention mechanism
to compute the similarity. Therefore, global-level matching
methods have faster inference speed, while local matching
methods obtain higher accuracy through cross-modal interaction but also bring high inference costs.
However, the inherent information density difference between images and text, that is, visual data usually contains

Introduction
Understanding the correspondence between the visual world
and human language is one of the fundamental capabilities
of artificial intelligence (Gong, Yuan, and Bao 2021; Liu
et al. 2023; Liu and Tsang 2015). It motivates much research on vision-and-language tasks. As a foundation task in
the vision-and-language domain, image-text matching (Qin
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022) is devoted to bridging the semantic gap between these two different modalities, which aims
to search images for a given textual description or vice versa.
The key challenge of image-text matching is to measure the
semantic similarity between images and texts.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5676

