The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

StableVC: Style Controllable Zero-Shot Voice Conversion with
Conditional Flow Matching
Jixun Yao1 , Yang Yuguang2 , Yu Pan2 , Ziqian Ning1 , Jianhao Ye2 , Hongbin Zhou2 , Lei Xie1 *
1

Audio, Speech and Language Processing Group (ASLP@NPU), Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Ximalaya Inc, China
{yaojx,ningziqian,lxie}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {yuguang.yang,yu.pan,jianhao.ye,hongbin.zhou}@ximalaya.com

Abstract
Zero-shot voice conversion (VC) aims to transfer the timbre from the source speaker to an arbitrary unseen speaker
while preserving the original linguistic content. Despite recent advancements in zero-shot VC using language modelbased or diffusion-based approaches, several challenges remain: 1) current approaches primarily focus on adapting timbre from unseen speakers and are unable to transfer style and
timbre to different unseen speakers independently; 2) these
approaches often suffer from slower inference speeds due
to the autoregressive modeling methods or the need for numerous sampling steps; 3) the quality and similarity of the
converted samples are still not fully satisfactory. To address
these challenges, we propose a Style controllable zero-shot
VC approach named StableVC, which aims to transfer timbre and style from source speech to different unseen target
speakers. Specifically, we decompose speech into linguistic
content, timbre, and style, and then employ a conditional
flow matching module to reconstruct the high-quality melspectrogram based on these decomposed features. To effectively capture timbre and style in a zero-shot manner, we
introduce a novel dual attention mechanism with an adaptive gate, rather than using conventional feature concatenation. With this non-autoregressive design, StableVC can efficiently capture the intricate timbre and style from different unseen speakers and generate high-quality speech significantly faster than real-time. Experiments demonstrate that our
proposed StableVC outperforms state-of-the-art baseline systems in zero-shot VC and achieves flexible control over timbre and style from different unseen speakers. Moreover, StableVC offers approximately 25× and 1.65× faster sampling
compared to autoregressive and diffusion-based baselines.

Figure 1: The concept of style-controllable zero-shot voice
conversion. It aims to build a VC system capable of adapting timbre to unseen speakers and transferring the style to
another unseen speaker. Here, “unseen” refers to speakers
not present in the training set.
Choi, Lee, and Lee 2024). However, these approaches primarily focus on adapting timbre to unseen speakers while
often overlooking style attributes. Style refers to how a person expresses themselves, including pitch variation, speaking rate, intonation, and emotion. It can vary significantly
across different contexts to enhance speech expressiveness.
Additionally, most current approaches come at a cost, such
as more complicated training setups and computationally expensive autoregressive formulations.
Inspired by the recent successes in the zero-shot capabilities of large-scale language models like GPT (Radford et al.
2019), a similar approach is widely believed to achieve comparable results in zero-shot speech generation. Notably, recent works such as LM-VC (Wang et al. 2023b) can synthesize high-quality personalized speech with a 3-second enrolled recording from an unseen speaker. However, the style
information (such as speaking rate, tone, etc.) is also derived
from the 3-second prompt and cannot be independently controlled. An ideal approach would allow for the simultaneous
conversion of both timbre and style from the source speech
to various arbitrary unseen speakers, enabling free combination, as illustrated in Figure 1. Although some works (Yao
et al. 2024; Li, Han, and Mesgarani 2023b; Yuan et al. 2021)
have investigated stylistic voice conversion, most focus on
many-to-many scenarios or directly serve timbre as a particular style. Converting both style and timbre to different

Introduction
Zero-shot voice conversion (VC) aims to transfer the timbre from the source speaker to an arbitrary unseen speaker
while keeping the linguistic content unchanged. Currently,
numerous impressive zero-shot VC techniques demonstrate
remarkable efficacy in converting realistic and natural sound
samples, finding crucial applications in both professional audiobook production and entertainment short videos (Popov
et al. 2021; Ning et al. 2023b; Yao et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25669

