The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diffusion-based Semantic Outlier Generation via Nuisance Awareness for
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Suhee Yoon1 * , Sanghyu Yoon1 * , Ye Seul Sim1 ,
Sungik Choi1 , Kyungeun Lee1 , Hye-Seung Cho1 , Hankook Lee2† , Woohyung Lim1†
1
LG AI Research
Sungkyunkwan University
{suhee.yoon, sanghyu.yoon, ysl.sim, sungik.choi, kyungeun.lee, hs.cho, w.lim}@lgresearch.ai
hankook.lee@skku.edu
2

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, which determines
whether a given sample is part of the in-distribution (ID),
has recently shown promising results through training with
synthetic OOD datasets. Nonetheless, existing methods often produce outliers that are considerably distant from the
ID, showing limited efficacy for capturing subtle distinctions
between ID and OOD. To address these issues, we propose
a novel framework, Semantic Outlier generation via Nuisance Awareness (SONA), which notably produces challenging outliers by directly leveraging pixel-space ID samples through diffusion models. Our approach incorporates
SONA guidance, providing separate control over semantic
and nuisance regions of ID samples. Thereby, the generated
outliers achieve two crucial properties: (i) they present explicit semantic-discrepant information, while (ii) maintaining various levels of nuisance resemblance with ID. Furthermore, the improved OOD detector training with SONA outliers facilitates learning with a focus on semantic distinctions.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework, achieving an impressive AUROC of 88% on nearOOD datasets, which surpasses the performance of baseline
methods by a significant margin of approximately 6%.

1

Figure 1: OOD examples with Grad-CAM highlighting
crucial regions for OOD detection. DreamOOD, a recent
baseline, succeed in far-OOD detection, yet near-OOD cases
pose challenge as crucial semantic region become more focused. SONA, however, allows the detector to capture these
subtle semantic distinctions.
et al. 2023a), they suffers from the outlier acquisition problem since determining whether a sample qualifies as an outlier is difficult.
To mitigate the issue, recent research has explored synthesizing outliers to help the model to learn a precise decision boundary between ID and OOD. For example, VOS
(Du et al. 2022) synthesizes outliers from the low-likelihood
region within a latent space under a distributional assumption (e.g., Gaussian) regarding the ID latent variables. However, this assumption is often inadequate, leading to a failure in capturing the informative features for OOD detection, such as class-specific object details (Bai et al. 2024).
Another recently emerging direction is to synthesize outliers within the pixel-space via diffusion models (Mirzaei
et al. 2022; Du et al. 2024), which provides not only highresolution samples but also visual interpretability. However,
the existing works often suffers from volatility in the OOD
detection performance as the quality of outliers heavily relies on generation targets (e.g., OOD prompts in DreamOOD
(Du et al. 2024) or blurry images in Fakeit (Mirzaei et al.

Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a fundamental machine learning task which aims to detect whether a given
sample is drawn from the in-distribution (ID) or not. Among
a number of OOD detection methods (Lee et al. 2018; Liu
et al. 2018; Bevandic et al. 2018; Malinin and Gales 2018;
Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017), one promising approach is
to learn a detector using auxiliary OOD samples, as pioneered by Outlier Exposure (OE; Hendrycks, Mazeika, and
Dietterich 2019). This makes learning relatively easier since
such outliers can provide practical heuristics for OOD detection. Although this approach has achieved outstanding performance in the recent literature (Ravikumar et al. 2020; S.
et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021; Jinyu and Fan 2022; Zhang
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13078

