The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Recoverable Facial Identity Protection via Adaptive
Makeup Transfer Adversarial Attacks
Xiyao Liu1 , Junxing Ma1 , Xinda Wang2 , Qianyu Lin1 , Jian Zhang1 * ,
Gerald Schaefer3 , Cagatay Turkay4 , Hui Fang3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, China
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Loughborough University, U.K.
4
Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies, University of Warwick, U.K.
{lxyzoewx, mjx2021}@csu.edu.cn, 2401210713@stu.pku.edu.cn, {8212220928, jianzhang}@csu.edu.cn,
gerald.schaefer@ieee.org, cagatay.turkay@warwick.ac.uk, h.fang@lboro.ac.uk
Abstract
Unauthorised face recognition (FR) systems have posed significant threats to digital identity and privacy protection. To
alleviate the risk of compromised identities, recent makeup
transfer-based attack methods embed adversarial signals in
order to confuse unauthorised FR systems. However, their
major weakness is that they set up a fixed image unrelated
to both the protected and the makeup reference images as the
confusion identity, which in turn has a negative impact on
both attack success rate and visual quality of transferred photos. In addition, the generated images cannot be recognised
by authorised FR systems once attacks are triggered. To address these challenges, in this paper, we propose a Recoverable Makeup Transferred Generative Adversarial Network
(RMT-GAN) which has the distinctive feature of improving
its image-transfer quality by selecting a suitable transfer reference photo as the target identity. Moreover, our method offers a solution to recover the protected photos to their original
counterparts that can be recognised by authorised systems.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method provides
significantly improved attack success rates while maintaining higher visual quality compared to state-of-the-art makeup
transfer-based adversarial attack methods. Our code and supplementary materials are available on Github.

Figure 1: Comparison of our proposed RMT-GAN with existing adversarial attacks on FR systems with a black box
attack setting. The numbers indicate the verification confidence of the target identity given by the commercial FR API
Face++ and Aliyun. Our proposed method provides better
visual quality and a higher attack success rate compared to
current SoTA methods.

Github — github.com/tttianyu/RMT-GAN

Introduction
Face recognition is one of the core identity authentication
techniques with wide applications (Huang and Chen 2022;
Huang et al. 2023). Meanwhile its privacy protection has
raised increasing research attention since unauthorised face
recognition (FR) systems pose a significant threat to recent
FR applications (Zhong and Deng 2022; Shan et al. 2020).
When a large number of facial images are collected from
social media, the identity and privacy of individuals are in
danger of getting compromised by unauthorised FR systems
(Hill 2020; Shoshitaishvili, Kruegel, and Vigna 2015). Consequently, there is an urgent need to defend applications
against such FR systems in order to protect user privacy.

Recently, various methods have been proposed to enhance
privacy protection. For example, data poisoning attacks on
training data of malicious FR models are an effective way
to alleviate the identity and privacy leakage problem (Shan
et al. 2020; Cherepanova et al. 2021). In practice, however, it
is difficult to inject such poisonous data in the training phase
since attackers can hardly access the training datasets (Hu
et al. 2022). Another strategy is to generate adversarial photos to avoid identity compromise (Cherepanova et al. 2021;
Dong et al. 2019b). As illustrated in Figure 1, patch-based
adversarial attacks (Sharif et al. 2019; Xiao et al. 2021) and
perturbation-based attacks (Yang et al. 2021) are exploited
to alleviate the privacy issue. They are capable of reducing
the recognition confidence of true identities, thus yielding a

* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

514

