The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motif Guided Graph Transformer with Combinatorial Skeleton Prototype
Learning for Skeleton-Based Person Re-Identification
Haocong Rao, Chunyan Miao*
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY), NTU, Singapore
{haocong001,ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Person re-identification (re-ID) via 3D skeleton data is a challenging task with significant value in many scenarios. Existing skeleton-based methods typically assume virtual motion
relations between all joints, and adopt average joint or sequence representations for learning. However, they rarely explore key body structure and motion such as gait to focus on
more important body joints or limbs, while lacking the ability
to fully mine valuable spatial-temporal sub-patterns of skeletons to enhance model learning. This paper presents a generic
Motif guided graph transformer with Combinatorial skeleton
prototype learning (MoCos) that exploits structure-specific
and gait-related body relations as well as combinatorial features of skeleton graphs to learn effective skeleton representations for person re-ID. In particular, motivated by the locality
within joints’ structure and the body-component collaboration in gait, we first propose the motif guided graph transformer (MGT) that incorporates hierarchical structural motifs
and gait collaborative motifs, which simultaneously focuses
on multi-order local joint correlations and key cooperative
body parts to enhance skeleton relation learning. Then, we
devise the combinatorial skeleton prototype learning (CSP)
that leverages random spatial-temporal combinations of joint
nodes and skeleton graphs to generate diverse sub-skeleton
and sub-tracklet representations, which are contrasted with
the most representative features (prototypes) of each identity
to learn class-related semantics and discriminative skeleton
representations. Extensive experiments validate the superior
performance of MoCos over existing state-of-the-art models.
We further show its generality under RGB-estimated skeletons, different graph modeling, and unsupervised scenarios.

Figure 1: Our approach exploits various graph motifs to enhance skeletal relation learning, and utilizes diverse spatial
(S.) and temporal (T.) combinatorial skeleton features to perform skeleton prototype learning for person re-ID.

the collecting of 3D skeletons to make them as a popular
and generic data modality for gait analysis and person re-ID
(Liao et al. 2020; Rao et al. 2021b; Rao, Leung, and Miao
2024). Compared with traditional person re-ID methods that
rely on appearance features (Wang et al. 2016), skeletonbased models typically utilize body structural features and
motion patterns of key body joints to identify different persons, which could possess many merits such as lighter inputs
and models, better privacy protection (e.g., without using
appearances or faces), and more robust performance under
view, scale, and background variations (Han et al. 2017).
Early skeleton-based methods (Andersson and Araujo
2015) extract hand-crafted anthropometric and gait descriptors (e.g., kinematic parameters) based on domain expertise,
while they are often incapable of exploiting latent skeleton
features beyond human cognition. Recent years have witnessed the great success of deep neural networks such as
graph transformers for skeleton-based person re-ID (Liao
et al. 2020; Rao and Miao 2023). A common practice in
these studies is to combine body-joint relation modeling
and skeleton prototype learning (e.g., class feature clustering and contrasting) (Rao and Miao 2022; Rao and Miao
2023). However, most methods learn body joint or component relations with the assumption of virtual motion connections among all joints (Rao et al. 2021c; Rao and Miao
2023), while they typically lack a specific focus on key body

Code — https://github.com/Kali-Hac/MoCos

Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at matching and retrieving a person-of-interest from different views or scenes,
which assumes an essential role in security authentication,
smart surveillance, human tracking, and robotics (Vezzani,
Baltieri, and Cucchiara 2013; Ye et al. 2021). Recent advancements in low-cost and accurate skeleton-tracking devices (e.g., Kinect (Shotton et al. 2011)) have streamlined
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6703

