The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

B2Opt: Learning to Optimize Black-box Optimization with Little Budget
Xiaobin Li1 , Kai Wu1 * , Xiaoyu Zhang2 , Handing Wang1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University
2
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University
22171214784@stu.xidian.edu.cn, kwu@xidian.edu.cn, xiaoyuzhang@xidian.edu.cn, hdwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Wichrowska et al. 2017; Bello et al. 2017), multilayer perceptron (Metz et al. 2019), or Transformer (Gärtner et al.
2023) as the optimizer to develop optimization methods,
aiming at reducing the laborious iterations of hand engineering (Vicol, Metz, and Sohl-Dickstein 2021; Flennerhag et al.
2022; Li and Malik 2016). The core of L2O is constructing a solid mapping from the initial solutions to the optimal
solution. Moreover, several efforts (Cao et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2017; Lange et al. 2022) have coped with the blackbox problems, their effectiveness may be hindered by the
limited representation capabilities of optimization strategy
and a large number of evaluations on expensive black-box
functions. As such, they often deal with low-dimensional
problems.
The GA uses a static sequence of operators for blackbox optimization, which can result in inefficient sampling.
Drawing from a recent study (Zhang et al. 2021) that compares the transformer architecture to EAs, noting parallels between genetic operators and transformer components,
we’ve adapted the transformer’s core module. This insight
led to the creation of B2Opt, a parameterized optimization
strategy representation.
We design three modules for mapping random solutions to
optimal solutions. The Self-Attention (SA)-based Crossover
module (SAC) generates potential individuals. Its output
feeds into the Feed-Forward Network (FFN)-based Mutation
module (FM) to avoid local optima. The Residual and Selection module (RSSM) selects the fittest individuals. These
modules form a B2Opt Block (OB). By stacking OBs, we
simulate GA iteration rules to represent robust optimization
strategies.
Adapting B2Opt strategy for target tasks involves updating its parameters using task info. To minimize costly function evaluations, we create a cheap surrogate function set
for B2Opt training. This set, resembling target BBO problems, includes initial populations and designed surrogates.
Training uses gradient-based methods like SGD and Adam,
eliminating the need for expensive function queries.
B2Opt undergoes rigorous testing on six standard functions, BBOB challenges (Finck et al. 2010) in high dimensions, neural network training, and the planar mechanical arm problem (Wang et al. 2022). The experimental results position B2Opt at the forefront, showcasing its superior performance compared to five leading EA baselines,

The core challenge of high-dimensional and expensive blackbox optimization (BBO) is how to obtain better performance
faster with little function evaluation cost. The essence of the
problem is how to design an efficient optimization strategy
tailored to the target task. This paper designs a powerful optimization framework to automatically learn the optimization
strategies from the target or cheap surrogate task without human intervention. However, current methods are weak for
this due to poor representation of optimization strategy. To
achieve this, 1) drawing on the mechanism of genetic algorithm, we propose a deep neural network framework called
B2Opt, which has a stronger representation of optimization
strategies based on survival of the fittest; 2) B2Opt can utilize
the cheap surrogate functions of the target task to guide the
design of the efficient optimization strategies. Compared to
the state-of-the-art BBO baselines, B2Opt can achieve multiple orders of magnitude performance improvement with less
function evaluation cost.

1 Introduction
Many tasks, such as neural architecture search (Elsken,
Metzen, and Hutter 2019) and hyperparameter optimization (Hutter, Kotthoff, and Vanschoren 2019; Golovin et al.
2017), can be abstracted as black-box optimization (BBO),
which means that although we can evaluate f (x) for any
x ∈ X, we have no access to any other information about
f , such as the Hessian and gradients. Moreover, it is expensive to evaluate f (x) in most cases. Various hand-designed
algorithms, such as genetic algorithms (GAs) (Khadka and
Tumer 2018), Bayesian optimization(Mutny and Krause
2018; Eriksson et al. 2019), and evolution strategy (ES)
(Wierstra et al. 2014; Salimans et al. 2017), have been designed to solve BBO. Their purpose is to design optimization strategies that allow them to continuously sample better
solutions.
Recently, the learning to optimize (L2O) framework
(Andrychowicz et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2022) gives a new
insight into optimization. They leverage the recurrent neural network (Chen et al. 2020, 2017; Li and Malik 2016;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18502

