The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sequential Preference Optimization: Multi-Dimensional Preference Alignment with
Implicit Reward Modeling
Xingzhou Lou1,2 , Junge Zhang1,2 * , Jian Xie3 , Lifeng Liu3 , Dong Yan3 , Kaiqi Huang1,2
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Baichuan Inc.
louxingzhou2020@ia.ac.cn, jgzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, xiejian1990@gmail.com, sproblvem@gmail.com,
liulifeng@baichuan-inc.com, kqhuang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Human preference alignment is critical in building powerful
and reliable large language models (LLMs). However, current methods either ignore the multi-dimensionality of human
preferences (e.g. helpfulness and harmlessness) or struggle
with the complexity of managing multiple reward models. To
address these issues, we propose Sequential Preference Optimization (SPO), a method that sequentially fine-tunes LLMs
to align with multiple dimensions of human preferences. SPO
avoids explicit reward modeling, directly optimizing the models to align with nuanced human preferences. We theoretically
derive closed-form optimal SPO policy and loss function. Gradient analysis is conducted to show how SPO manages to
fine-tune the LLMs while maintaining alignment on previously optimized dimensions. Empirical results on LLMs of
different size and multiple evaluation datasets demonstrate
that SPO successfully aligns LLMs across multiple dimensions of human preferences and significantly outperforms the
baselines.

Introduction
Pretrained large language models (LLM) like GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023) and Llama (Touvron et al. 2023a,b; Dubey et al.
2024) are trained on very large corpus of text and demonstrate surprising capabilities in multiple domains, such as
natural language processing (Jiao et al. 2023; Singhal et al.
2023), programming (Nijkamp et al. 2022; Qian et al. 2023)
and decision making (Wang et al. 2023a; Zhang et al. 2023).
These models are fine-tuned with humans’ feedback to align
with certain human preferences, e.g. harmlessness and helpfulness. Human preference alignment improves LLM’s ability to generate responses preferred by humans and is essential in building AI assistants (OpenAI 2023; Touvron et al.
2023b; Anthropic 2023; Jiang et al. 2024; Dubey et al. 2024).
Specifically, Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Ouyang et al. 2022) learns a reward model to discriminate preferred and less preferred responses, and then
optimizes LLMs with the reward model and RL algorithms.
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al. 2023)
omits fitting an explicit reward model and directly optimizes
* Correspondence
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27509

LLMs to adhere to human preferences, and thus is known as
implicit reward modeling.
Prevalent preference alignment methods focus on finetuning LLMs based on ranked response pairs, which only
indicate which response is generally better (Zheng et al. 2023;
Chiang et al. 2024). However, instead of solely good or bad,
texts usually have multi-dimensional properties. For instance,
a concise text summary generated by LLMs may not be as
informative as a relatively longer, but highly specific response.
In this case, the concise response is preferred brevity-wise,
while the specific response is preferred informativity-wise.
In other words, preferences on different dimensions may
contradict each other.
The most straightforward approach to deal with multidimensional preferences is to mix them into one single dimension to indicate which response is generally better. In this
case, the alignment results could be significantly influenced
by the annotators’ subjective perception and ranking inconsistency across dimensions. Therefore, it is necessary to align
LLMs on each dimension and strive a balance that accommodates preferences across all dimensions. Current methods (Jang et al. 2023; Dai et al. 2023) decouple preferences
along dimensions and align LLMs on each of the dimension by RLHF. However, they demand a reward model for
each dimension. Fine-tuning LLMs with one reward model
is already notoriously challenging. Multiple reward models
further exaggerate this issue.
To address these issues, we propose Sequential Preference
Optimization (SPO) to align LLMs with multi-dimensional
preferences in a sequential manner. Specifically, SPO incorporates multi-round fine-tuning, optimizing one specific
preference dimension for each round. SPO adopts additional
constraints to guarantee alignment on previous dimensions
in the learning objective. Consequently, LLMs acquire the
skill to align with one specific aspect of human preference in
each round, while staying aligned with preferences in previous rounds. Also, SPO omits explicit reward modeling and
directly optimizes preferences, thereby avoiding the issues of
multiple reward models in RLHF-based methods.
Theoretically, closed-form optimal policy and loss function
for SPO are derived. The loss function is a simple classification loss and can be optimized efficiently. Furthermore, we
perform gradient analysis to illustrate how SPO effectively

