The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Complete Symmetry Breaking for Finite Models
Marek Dančo1 , Mikoláš Janota1 , Michael Codish2 , João Jorge Araújo3
2

1
Czech Technical University in Prague, Czechia
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
3
Department of Mathematics, NOVA FCT, Portugal
dancomar@cvut.cz

Abstract

enormous number of isomorphic, i.e. symmetric, algebras.
For a finite algebra over a domain of size n, each permutation of the n domain elements introduces a symmetry. So
there are a super-exponential number of symmetries. A complete symmetry breaking constraint for an algebraic structure is satisfied exactly for the canonical representations of
the structure.
Complete symmetry breaks for algebraic structures, as
computed in this paper, are not found in the literature. Applying these enables to answer, via computation, questions
about properties of the models so that computation and
search are restricted to the set of canonical representations.
For instance, we can answer the question: How many nonisomorphic semigroups of size n are there? — As long as
we can calculate the complete symmetry-break. Questions
of this type can be answered by counting the satisfying assignments of a SAT formula encoding both the property of
the algebraic class and the complete symmetry break. Like
this, it already filters out non-isomorphic models. This enables us to use out-of-the-box model counters (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2021) to calculate the non-isomorphic
structures without enumerating them.
Our approach can be seen as “constrain and generate”,
whereas pure enumeration is “generate and prune”. Applying our approach enables us to calculate numbers of algebraic structures not present in the literature and that go beyond the possibilities of pure enumeration approaches.
We mention also partial symmetry breaks. These are constraints which are satisfied by at least one element from each
equivalence class of objects. Partial symmetry breaks are
typically smaller in size than complete breaks but admit redundant (isomorphic) solutions.
The symmetry breaks we compute are lex-leader symmetry breaks. Namely, from each class of isomorphic (or symmetric) objects, we select a canonical representative which is
the minimal object, with respect to a lexicographic ordering,
in its class. So, in theory, a complete lex-leader symmetry
break is obtained by introducing a constraint that imposes
that an algebraic structure must not be larger than any of
its permutations. A symmetry break defined in this way involves a super-exponential number of constraints and is too
large to be of practical use.
In this paper we show that symmetry breaks can be often
more compact in practice. However, we also show that un-

This paper introduces a SAT-based technique that calculates a
compact and complete symmetry-break for finite model finding, with the focus on structures with a single binary operation (magmas). Classes of algebraic structures are typically
described as first-order logic formulas and the concrete algebras are models of these formulas. Such models include an
enormous number of isomorphic, i.e. symmetric, algebras.
A complete symmetry-break is a formula that has as models,
exactly one canonical representative from each equivalence
class of algebras. Thus, we enable answering questions about
properties of the models so that computation and search are
restricted to the set of canonical representations.
For instance, we can answer the question: How many nonisomorphic semigroups are there of size n? Such questions
can be answered by counting the satisfying assignments of a
SAT formula, which already filters out non-isomorphic models. The introduced technique enables us calculating numbers
of algebraic structures not present in the literature and going
beyond the possibilities of pure enumeration approaches.

Introduction
Finite model finding has a longstanding tradition in automated reasoning: often a user is interested in a model rather
than proving a theorem (McCune 1994). Models serve as
counterexamples to invalid conjectures (Blanchette 2010)
but are also interesting on their own. Indeed, Forsythe (1955)
enumerates semigroups of order 4 on a computer as early
as 1955. A large body of research exists that tackles finite model finding, enumeration, and counting, using constraint programming (CP) and SAT techniques (Audemard
and Benhamou 2002; Distler and Kelsey 2014; Distler, Shah,
and Sorge 2011; Audemard and Henocque 2001; Zhang
1996; Zhang and Zhang 1995; McCune 2003; Claessen and
Sörensson 2003; Araújo, Chow, and Janota 2023; Reger,
Riener, and Suda 2019).
This paper computes compact and complete symmetry
breaking constraints for a wide range of algebraic structures
with a single binary operation, known as magmas. Classes
of algebraic structures, such as semigroups, are typically described as first order logic formulas and the concrete algebras are models of these formulas. These models include an
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11194

