The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ENCODER: Entity Mining and Modification Relation Binding for Composed
Image Retrieval
Zixu Li1 , Zhiwei Chen1 , Haokun Wen2,3 , Zhiheng Fu1 , Yupeng Hu1 * , Weili Guan2
1

School of Software, Shandong University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
3
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong
{Lzx, zivchen, fuzhiheng0215}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, huyupeng@sdu.edu.cn, {whenhaokun, honeyguan}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
The objective of Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) is to identify a target image that meets the requirement based on a multimodal query (including the reference image and the modification text) provided by the user. Despite the notable success of existing approaches, they fail to adequately address
the modification relation between visual entities and modification actions. This limitation is non-trivial due to three
challenges: 1) irrelevant factor perturbation, 2) vague semantic boundaries, and 3) implicit modification relations. To
address the above challenges, we propose an Entity miNing
and modifiCation relatiOn binDing nEtwoRk (ENCODER),
which has been designed to mine visual entities and modification actions, and then bind modification relations. Among
the various components of the proposed ENCODER, we have
initially designed the Latent Factor Filter (LFF) module to
filter visual and textual latent factors related to modification semantics based on a threshold gating mechanism. Secondly, we propose Entity-Action Binding (EAB), which comprises modality-shared Learnable Relation Queries (LRQ)
that are capable of mining visual entities and modification
actions, as well as learning implicit modification relations for
entity-action binding. Finally, the Multi-scale Composition
module is introduced to achieve multi-scale feature composition, with guidance provided by entity-action binding. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate
the superiority of our proposed method.

1

Figure 1: (a) provides an illustrative example of the CIR
task. (b) illustrates the phenomenon of modification relation
correspondence in the CIR task, whereby the modification
text frequently comprises a series of modification actions,
each of which is associated with a visual entity in the reference image through a corresponding modification relation.
For example, the modification actions “in front of the rock”
and “dog stands” correspond to the visual entities “trees”
and “dog” in the reference image, respectively.

2024a), moment localization (Wang et al. 2024; Hu et al.
2021a,b, 2023), and dialogue robotics (Chen et al. 2023;
Gosselin et al. 2022).
The key to CIR lies in accurately identifying the modification requirements and locating the corresponding regions
in the reference image where these modifications should
be made. It is also noteworthy that some pioneering efforts (Yang et al. 2023b; Deng et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023)
have been made to address the issue of cross-modal semantic
alignment of image regions and phrases, with encouraging
results. However, due to the inherent text-visual semantic
asymmetry of the CIR task (Zhao, Song, and Jin 2022), the
entities included in the modification actions may not necessarily have a semantic correspondence in the reference image. In such cases, the effectiveness of the aforementioned
approach is constrained. As illustrated in Figure 1(b), the
conventional semantic alignment methodology is only capable of correlating the term “dog” (highlighted in orange)
in the reference image with “dog” in the modification text.
However, it is unable to establish a connection with the com-

Introduction

Composed Image Retrieval (Vo et al. 2019) (CIR) serves
as an emerging image retrieval paradigm, with the objective of retrieving the target image based on a multimodal
query. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), in the CIR task, the multimodal query comprises a reference image and a modification text. The reference image conveys the fundamental retrieval requirements, while the modification text articulates
the user’s specific modifications to the reference image. CIR
has gained considerable attention (Chen et al. 2024; Han
et al. 2023b; Yang et al. 2024) in recent years due to its
capacity to express intricate retrieval requirements in a flexible manner. It indeed facilitates various applications, including multimodal recommendation (Li et al. 2024; Liu et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5101

