The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PowerMLP: An Efficient Version of KAN
Ruichen Qiu1,2 , Yibo Miao2,3 , Shiwen Wang3 , Yifan Zhu2,3 , Lijia Yu4,5 , Xiao-Shan Gao2,3 *
1

School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Sciences, UCAS, Beijing 100049, China
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China
4
Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
5
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
qiuruichen20@mails.ucas.ac.cn, miaoyibo@amss.ac.cn, xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn
2

Abstract
The Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN) is a new network
architecture known for its high accuracy in several tasks such
as function fitting and PDE solving. The superior expressive
capability of KAN arises from the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem and learnable spline functions. However,
the computation of spline functions involves multiple iterations, which renders KAN significantly slower than MLP,
thereby increasing the cost associated with model training
and deployment. The authors of KAN also noted that “the
biggest bottleneck of KANs lies in their slow training. KANs
are usually 10x slower than MLPs, given the same number
of parameters.” To address this issue, we propose a novel
MLP-type neural network PowerMLP that employs simpler
non-iterative spline function representation, offering approximately the same training time as MLP while theoretically
demonstrating stronger expressive power than KAN. Furthermore, we compare the FLOPs of KAN and PowerMLP, quantifying the faster computation speed of PowerMLP. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that PowerMLP generally achieves higher accuracy and a training speed about 40
times faster than KAN in various tasks.

1

Kd,w,k,G,p

Pd,w,k,p

Pd,w2 (G+k),k,p
over Rn

K2d,2w,k,2,O(kp)
over [−E, E]n

Figure 1: PowerMLPs define a strictly larger function space
than KANs over Rn (Corollary 3), and define the same function space over [−E, E]n for any E ∈ R+ (Corollary 7),
where n is the input dimension. Pd,w,k,p is the set of all
PowerMLPs with depth d, width w, k-th power ReLU activation function, and p nonzero parameters. Kd,w,k,G,p is the
set of all KANs with depth d, width w, using (k, G)-spline
(see Eq. (3)), and p nonzero parameters.

Unfortunately, despite the impressive performance of
KAN, it faces a critical drawback: slow inference and training speeds, which increase the cost associated with training and deploying the model. Liu et al. (2024) highlight in
the KAN paper that “the biggest bottleneck of KANs lies
in their slow training. KANs are usually 10x slower than
MLPs, given the same number of parameters.” The inefficient training and inference latency of KAN plays a crucial
role in ensuring a positive user experience and low computational resource requirements.
Upon examining the structure of KAN, we contribute the
primary cause of the slow computation speed to the spline
activation function. Specifically, a k-order spline function
is a linear combination of k-order B-splines, and each korder B-spline requires construction through O(k 2 ) iterations by the de Boor-Cox formula in KAN’s paper, resulting in slow computation. To address this issue, we need to
identify a more efficient method to obtain B-splines, moving away from the recursive computation of the de Boor-Cox
formula.
The k-order B-spline was initially defined as k-th divided difference of the truncated power function (Curry and
Schoenberg 1947). Consequently, B-splines can also be expressed as linear combinations of powers of ReLUs (Greville 1969). Inspired by this, we introduce a novel MLP-type
nueral network by incorporating a basis function into the
MLP with powers of ReLU as activation function, termed
PowerMLP, as shown in Figure 2. From Figure 1, Pow-

Introduction

A long-standing problem of deep learning is the identification of more effective neural network architectures. The
Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN), introduced by Liu
et al. (2024), presents a new architecture. Unlike traditional MLP that places activation functions on nodes, KAN
employs learnable univariate spline functions as activation
functions placed on edges. The expressive power of KAN
is derived from the Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem and the property of spline functions. Due to its exceptional expressiveness, KAN achieves high accuracy and
interpretability in multiple tasks such as function fitting and
PDE solving. Significant performance improvements using
KAN have been observed in time series prediction (Inzirillo and Genet 2024), graph data processing (Kiamari et al.
2024), and explainable natural language processing (Galitsky 2024).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20069

