The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Surgical Workflow Recognition and Blocking Effectiveness Detection
in Laparoscopic Liver Resections with Pringle Maneuver
Diandian Guo1 * , Weixin Si2 * , Zhixi Li3 , Jialun Pei1† , Pheng-Ann Heng1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University
jialunpei@cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

Pringle maneuver (PM) in laparoscopic liver resections aims
to reduce blood loss and provide a clear surgical view by
intermittently blocking blood inflow of the liver, whereas
prolonged PM may cause ischemic injury. To comprehensively monitor this surgical procedure and provide timely
warnings of ineffective and prolonged blocking, we suggest
two complementary AI-assisted surgical monitoring tasks:
workflow recognition and blocking effectiveness detection
in liver resections. The former presents challenges in realtime capturing of short-term PM, while the latter involves
the intraoperative discrimination of long-term liver ischemia
states. To address these challenges, we meticulously collect a novel dataset, called PmLR50, consisting of 25,037
video frames covering various surgical phases from 50 laparoscopic liver resection procedures. Additionally, we develop an online baseline for PmLR50, termed PmNet. This
model embraces Masked Temporal Encoding (MTE) and
Compressed Sequence Modeling (CSM) for efficient short
and long-term temporal information modeling, and embeds
Contrastive Prototype Separation (CPS) to enhance action
discrimination between similar intraoperative operations. Experimental results demonstrate that PmNet outperforms existing state-of-the-art surgical workflow recognition methods on
the PmLR50 benchmark. Our research offers potential clinical applications for the laparoscopic liver surgery community.

Figure 1: Overview of two typical features of surgical workflows in laparoscopic liver resections with Pringle maneuver in PmLR50. (1) The Knotting and Releasing operations are relatively rapid and similar in the entire surgical procedure. (2) Blocking effectiveness detection involves
long-term monitoring of liver ischemic states and bleeding
of blocking-irrelevant frames, which have little impact on
short-term operation integration. Zoom in for details.

resections, involves using the Foley catheter or Nylon urinary catheter to clamp the hepatoduodenal ligament, thereby
intermittently blocking blood inflow to the liver (Khajeh
et al. 2021; Man et al. 1997). However, prolonged blocking
may cause liver ischemic injury leading to liver dysfunction, while ineffective blocking increases the risk of intraoperative bleeding and mishandling due to unclear surgical
view. In this regard, comprehensive monitoring and early
warning for this high-risk surgical procedure are essential
to enhance the safety of liver resections and alleviate the
decision-making pressure on surgeons.
AI-assisted surgical workflow recognition has proven effective in intraoperative decision-making and workflow optimization (Cao et al. 2023; Tao, Zou, and Zheng 2023; Ding
et al. 2023; Ramesh et al. 2023). However, while numerous excellent methods exist for surgical workflow recognition (Zisimopoulos et al. 2018; Jin et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2023b,a), research dedicated to monitoring high-risk liver
resection procedures remains limited, especially on process
monitoring and early warning of PM. In contrast to other

Code — https://github.com/RascalGdd/PmNet

Introduction
With the advancement of minimally invasive surgery, laparoscopic procedures have gained widespread acceptance
among surgeons with advantages such as smaller incisions,
reduced pain, and faster recovery (Sidaway 2024; Lu et al.
2024). However, the limited surgical field and complex surrounding environment increase the risks associated with intraoperative actions (Okamura et al. 2019). Particularly in
liver resections, it is critical to reduce blood loss and maintain a clear operative view during surgery due to the complex vascular anatomy of the liver. Pringle maneuver (PM),
a regular and gold standard technique in laparoscopic liver
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3220

