The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Divide-and-Conquer: Tree-structured Strategy with Answer Distribution
Estimator for Goal-Oriented Visual Dialogue
Shuo Cai1,2 , Xinzhe Han3* , Shuhui Wang1,4 * ,
1

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
China Academy of Aerospace Science and Innovation, Beijing, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
shuo.cai@vipl.ict.ac.cn, geraldhan@163.com, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

See an example from GuessWhat?! (De Vries et al. 2017)
in Figures 1 (a), the specific goal is to find the correct object (green box) from all objects (detected by object detection) in the image at the end. Towards this goal, the Questioner, responsible for generating question by its Question
Generator (QGen) only seeing the whole image and the goal
description, generates several rounds of questions, and Answerer, either machine Oracle in the training stage or human
in testing stage, gives answer prompt by knowing what kind
of objects beforehand. After multiple rounds of Q&A, the
Guesser, as another submodule of the Questioner, guesses
which object is correct. Obviously, the bottleneck problem
in this process is the dialogue strategy, i.e., how the questions are generated by QGen.
To enable agents to learn appropriate dialogue strategy
and find the target object in a visual scene, mainstream solution is based on Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Le, Chen,
and Hoi 2022) on benchmarks such as GuessWhat?!. These
works (Strub et al. 2017; Shukla et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2018; Abbasnejad et al. 2018, 2019; Zhao and Tresp 2018)
usually design reward functions to achieve higher success
rate or information gain based on the policy gradient (Sutton et al. 1999). Other works improve the dialogue mechanism based on attention mechanism (Anderson et al. 2018)
and the state of visual information in Supervised Learning
(SL) (Pang and Wang 2020a,b; Tu et al. 2021). Despite the
progress already made, existing mechanisms still need further investigation. First, existing SL and RL methods only
consider whether the target can be found in each round. As
shown in Figures 1 (b), their questioning strategies usually
do not follow a clear path, thus questions are repeatedly
and aimlessly asked to exclude a fraction of objects in each
round. Second, even if the agent successfully identifies the
target, the scope of the final candidate objects may not be
reduced to a single object. The issue may be tolerable when
there are only a few objects in the image. However, it would
be difficult for the agent to find the target via aimless questions within limited rounds of Q&A if there are dozens or
even hundreds of objects, which is very common under realworld situations. In addition, the Questioner also encounters
a high question repetition rate under these methods, lacking
clear guidance for producing meaningful questions.
To address the above issues, in this paper, we propose a
Tree-structured Strategy with Answer Distribution Estima-

Goal-oriented visual dialogue involves multi-round interaction between artificial agents, which has been of remarkable
attention due to its wide applications. Given a visual scene,
this task occurs when a Questioner asks an action-oriented
question and an Answerer responds with the intent of letting
the Questioner know the correct action to take. The quality
of questions affects the accuracy and efficiency of the target
search progress. However, existing methods lack a clear strategy to guide the generation of questions, resulting in the randomness in the search process and inconvergent results. We
propose a Tree-Structured Strategy with Answer Distribution
Estimator (TSADE) which guides the question generation by
excluding half of the current candidate objects in each round.
The above process is implemented by maximizing a binary
reward inspired by the “divide-and-conquer” paradigm. We
further design a candidate-minimization reward which encourages the model to narrow down the scope of candidate
objects toward the end of the dialogue. We experimentally
demonstrate that our method can enable the agents to achieve
high task-oriented accuracy with fewer repeating questions
and rounds compared to traditional ergodic question generation approaches. Qualitative results further show that TSADE
facilitates agents to generate higher-quality questions.

Code — https://github.com/caishuo-C/TSADE

Introduction
Information-seeking through interaction is one of the most
important abilities of artificial intelligence (Matsumori
2022). In recent years, goal-oriented visual dialogue has received increasing attention. This task is to generate questions by one agent and provide answer by users (or another
agent) towards specific goal, as exemplified in many benchmarks, such as Guesswhat?! (De Vries et al. 2017), GuessWhich (Das et al. 2017b) and VisDial (Das et al. 2017a).
The key of facilitating this task is how well the machine can
mimic humans to raise questions about objects and seek answers about the visual scene. In fact, the efficiency and quality of the visual dialogue is measured by whether and how
quickly the specific goal is achieved.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1917

