The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Diffusion-Based Degradation Modeling for Real-World
Super-Resolution
Yuying Chen1 , Mingde Yao2 , Wenbo Li3 , Renjing Pei3 , Jinjing Zhao4 , Wenqi Ren1 *
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information System Security, China
elvin.chenyuying@gmail.com, mingdeyao@foxmail.com, fenglinglwb@gmail.com, peirenjing@huawei.com,
zhjj0420@126.com, renwq3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

Real-world LR

Physics-based


Single image super-solution (SR) aims to restore a highresolution (HR) image from a degraded low-resolution (LR)
image. However, existing SR models still face a significant
domain gap between synthetic and real-world datasets due
to the mismatched degradation distributions, hindering SR
models from achieving optimal results. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised diffusion-based degradation modeling
framework (UDDM) to effectively capture real-world degradation distributions. Specifically, given unpaired LR and HR
images, a diffusion-based degradation module (DDM) first
models the degradation distribution by diffusing real-world
LR images to downsampled LR images, which does not require HR images. It then applies reverse diffusion to generate real-world LR images from extremely downsampled HR
images. This approach allows DDM to model and generate
real-world degradation distributions without requiring paired
data, by using extreme downsampling to link unpaired LR and
HR images. Additionally, we introduce a physics-based dynamic degradation module (P-DDM) that adaptively models
content-aware degradation, ensuring both content and structural accuracy. Finally, the LR images generated by DDM and
P-DDM are adaptively weighted to produce the final LR images, which are paired with the given HR images for training the SR network. Extensive experiments across multiple
real-world datasets demonstrate that our framework achieves
state-of-the-art performance in both qualitative and quantitative comparison.

Camera Capture


Learning-based


 Scalability

Real-ESRGAN

DDM (Ours)


 Consistency

Syn-Real

Ours

 Fidelity

GT

Figure 1: Degradation distribution of different generation
methods and their SR results. Our method matches the realworld distribution and achieves the best SR result.
2022; Chen et al. 2022), which differ significantly from the
synthetic conditions used in training.
Existing methods for real-world SR can be broadly divided into four categories. The most straightforward way is
capturing paired real-world datasets to train SR models (Cai
et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2020). However, it is costly (Liu et al.
2022) and faces challenges such as spatial misalignment and
color shift (Chen et al. 2022). Another way is to use unsupervised learning to model the distribution from LR to HR images (Yuan et al. 2018; Maeda 2020), which might mismatch
the HR distribution due to unstable adversarial learning (Liu
et al. 2022). Recently, generating LR data from existing HR
images to create training pairs has shown promising results
(Liu et al. 2023). Yet, these methods often rely on handcrafted degradation models (Zhang et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2021) or the unstable generative capabilities of GANs (Bulat, Yang, and Tzimiropoulos 2018; Wei et al. 2021), which
fail to accurately model LR degradation distributions (Zhang
et al. 2023), thereby limiting the performance of SR model

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct
high-resolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR) ones,
which is a fundamental problem in low-level vision. Previous SR methods (Dong et al. 2014, 2016; Ledig et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018b; Chen et al. 2021; Liang et al. 2021)
leverage deep learning to learn mappings from LR to HR
images, achieving good results on known LR degradations
(e.g., Bicubic, Gaussian). However, these methods may not
perform well on real-world images due to the complex and
unknown characteristics of real-world degradation (Liu et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2348

