The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Confidence Estimation for Error Detection in Text-to-SQL Systems
Oleg Somov1,2 and Elena Tutubalina1,3,4
1

AIRI, Moscow, Russia
MIPT, Dolgoprudny, Russia
3
Sber AI, Moscow, Russia
4
ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia
somov@airi.net, tutubalina@airi.net
2

Abstract
Text-to-SQL enables users to interact with databases through
natural language, simplifying the retrieval and synthesis of
information. Despite the success of large language models
(LLMs) in converting natural language questions into SQL
queries, their broader adoption is limited by two main challenges: achieving robust generalization across diverse queries
and ensuring interpretative confidence in their predictions. To
tackle these issues, our research investigates the integration
of selective classifiers into Text-to-SQL systems. We analyse
the trade-off between coverage and risk using entropy based
confidence estimation with selective classifiers and assess its
impact on the overall performance of Text-to-SQL models.
Additionally, we explore the models’ initial calibration and
improve it with calibration techniques for better model alignment between confidence and accuracy. Our experimental results show that encoder-decoder T5 is better calibrated than
in-context-learning GPT 4 and decoder-only Llama 3, thus
the designated external entropy-based selective classifier has
better performance. The study also reveal that, in terms of
error detection, selective classifier with a higher probability
detects errors associated with irrelevant questions rather than
incorrect query generations.

Figure 1: The interaction scenario with Text-to-SQL system.
There are three major scenarios where confidence is crucial
- good generation detection, error generation, and unanswerable query detection.

Code — https://github.com/runnerup96/error-detection-intext2sql
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09527

1

Our work explores how model uncertainty estimates can
be leveraged to detect erroneous predictions (Fig. 1). We focus on scenarios where models struggle to generalize, such
as low compositional generalization, where the model cannot form novel structures not seen in the training set, or
low domain generalization, where the model fails to adapt
to new schema elements or novel databases. We categorize
these errors as low-generalization. Additionally, we address
cases where questions are unanswerable by the underlying
database or require external knowledge, which we refer to
as unanswerable. Typically, models are trained on questionSQL pairs, so encountering such samples is considered outof-distribution (OOD), and the model should ideally avoid
generating a query. Both types of errors result in incorrect
responses, whether as non-executable SQL queries or executable queries that return false responses.
To study compositional and domain generalization in
Text-to-SQL, several benchmarks and datasets have been
developed over the years to better approximate real-world
scenarios, address various aspects of model performance:
complex queries involving join statements across multiple

Introduction

Text-to-SQL parsing (Zelle and Mooney 1996; Zettlemoyer and Collins 2005) aims at converting a natural language (NL) question to its corresponding structured query
language (SQL) in the context of a relational database
(schema). To effectively utilize Text-to-SQL models, users
must clearly understand the model’s capabilities, particularly the range of questions it can accurately respond to. In
this context, generalization ability is crucial for ensuring accurate SQL query generation, while interpretative trustworthiness is essential for minimizing false positives—instances
where the model generates incorrect SQL queries that might
be mistakenly perceived as correct.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25137

