The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Continual Unsupervised Generative Modelling via Online Optimal Transport
Fei Ye1 , Adrian G. Bors2 , Kun Zhang3,4
1

School of Information and Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu
2
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
3
MBZUAI, Abu Dhabi, UAE,
4
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
feiye@uestc.edu.cn, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk, kunz1@cmu.edu
Abstract

Lately, deep generative models have achieved excellent results after learning pre-defined and static data distribution.
Meanwhile, their performance on continual learning suffers
from degeneration, caused by catastrophic forgetting. In this
paper, we study the unsupervised generative modelling in a
more realistic continual learning scenario, where class and
task information are absent during both training and inference learning phases. To implement this goal, the proposed
memory approach consists of a temporary memory system,
which stores data examples while a dynamic expansion memory system would gradually preserve those samples that are
crucial for long-term memorization. A novel memory expansion mechanism is then proposed, by employing optimal
transport distances between the statistics of memorized samples and each newly seen datum. This paper proposes the
Sinkhorn-based Dual Dynamic Memory (SDDM) method, by
considering Sinkhorn distance as an optimal transport measure, for evaluating the significance of the data to be stored in
the memory buffer. The Sinkhorn transport algorithm leads to
preserving a diversity of samples within a compact memory
capacity. The memory buffering approach does not interact
with the model’s training process and can be optimized independently in both supervised and unsupervised learning without any modifications. Moreover, we also propose a novel dynamic model expansion mechanism to automatically increase
the model’s capacity whenever necessary, which can deal
with infinite data streams and further improve the model’s
performance. Experimental results show that the proposed
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in both supervised and unsupervised learning.

Figure 1: The proposed memory management approach consists of two memory buffer systems with different storage
mechanisms for short-term and long-term information.

ResNet (He et al. 2016) or the Vision Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) have achieved excellent processing performances on individual tasks (Lin et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2015),
training them in CL remains challenging, resulting in significant performance degeneration on past data, caused by
catastrophic forgetting (Parisi et al. 2019).
Several approaches to address network forgetting in CL
have been proposed so far. Among these, using a fixed-size
memory buffer for storing important data samples represents
a natural choice (Bang et al. 2021). These memory-based
methods usually require knowing the task boundaries and
therefore would fail to deal with the challenges of most realworld applications, where data are unsupervised, (Aljundi,
Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019). Some recent studies
have explored memory-based approaches in a more realistic continual learning scenario, called the Online TaskFree Continual Learning (OTFCL) (Aljundi, Kelchtermans,
and Tuytelaars 2019; Zhou, Sohn, and Lee 2012), where
task identity information is not available during the training. These memory systems usually design a sample selection algorithm using gradient information (Jin et al. 2021) or
mutual information (Guo, Liu, and Zhao 2022), while they
still rely on supervised signals such as class labels or model
prediction, making them unsuitable for unsupervised learn-

Code — https://github.com/dtuzi123/DualMemorySystem

Introduction
Learning data from a dynamically changing environment
is very important, yet challenging, for an artificial intelligence system. Such an ability would enable the machine to
continually capture new knowledge over time. In Continual Learning (CL) a model can only access a subset during
each task learning while past data are not available (Ye and
Bors 2024). Although modern deep learning models such as
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22092

