The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Max-Mahalanobis Anchors Guidance for Multi-View Clustering
Pei Zhang1,2,3 , Yuangang Pan2,3 , Siwei Wang4 , Shengju Yu1 , Huiying Xu5 * , En Zhu1 *
Xinwang Liu1 * , Ivor Tsang2,3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410073, China
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 138632, Singapore
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 138632, Singapore
4
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, 100091, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, 321004, China
{jeaninezpp, yuangang.pan, ivor.tsang}@gmail.com, {wangsiwei13, yu-shengju, enzhu, xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

The rapid growth of technology has led to a surge of
multi-view data, providing new insights but posing challenges in large-scale data processing. Efficient clustering has
emerged as a critical research focus, with mainstream approaches leveraging anchors to avoid associating all samples. This paper categorizes these anchor-based MVC methods into two groups: fixed-anchor-based MVC (Li et al.
2015; Li and He 2020; Kang et al. 2020b) and optimizedanchor-based MVC (Wang et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022b;
Li et al. 2023b; Ou et al. 2024). Fixed-anchor-based MVC
typically generates anchors through pre-processing methods
such as k-means or sampling strategies. Sampling methods,
whether random or heuristic, are simple and efficient but often lead to poor and unstable performance due to randomness and weak structural relevance (Xia et al. 2022; Li et al.
2020). Besides, sampling may introduce more challenges,
such as discrepancies in anchor correspondence across
views. Instead, using k-means cluster centers as the anchors
generally improves performance by leveraging clusteringrelevant information in anchors (Kang et al. 2020b; Li and
He 2020; Yang et al. 2022). However, k-means is sensitive to initialization, requiring multiple runs to mitigate randomness, and incorrect anchor initialization may cause disappointed clustering results. Optimized-anchor-based MVC
improves upon the fixed-anchor strategy by incorporating
anchors directly into the multi-view clustering optimization
process. These methods typically employ the self-expression
concept but use representative points to establish relationships with all samples. To ensure anchor representativeness,
they generally impose orthogonal constraints to enforce diversity among anchors (Wang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022).

Anchor selection or learning has become a critical component in large-scale multi-view clustering. Existing anchorbased methods, which either select-then-fix or initialize-thenoptimize with orthogonality, yield promising performance.
However, these methods still suffer from instability of initialization or insufficient depiction of data distribution. Moreover, the desired properties of anchors in multi-view clustering remain unspecified. To address these issues, this paper first formalizes the desired characteristics of anchors,
namely Diversity, Balance and Compactness. We then devise
and mathematically validate anchors that satisfy these properties by maximizing the Mahalanobis distance between anchors. Furthermore, we introduce a novel method called MaxMahalanobis Anchors Guidance for multi-vIew Clustering
(MAGIC), which guides the cross-view representations to
progressively align with our well-defined anchors. This process yields highly discriminative and compact representations, significantly enhancing the performance of multi-view
clustering. Experimental results show that our meticulously
designed strategy significantly outperforms existing anchorbased methods in enhancing anchor efficacy, leading to substantial improvement in multi-view clustering performance.

1

Introduction

In the information era, various data forms provide distinct
perspectives, but single perspective often overlooks the complexity and heterogeneity of data. For instance, in bioinformatics, behaviors of organisms are influenced by gene expression, protein-protein interaction and phenotypic characteristics. Isolating any single view may lead to incomplete conclusions (Rappoport and Shamir 2018). Multi-view
clustering (MVC) tackles this by jointly analyzing multiple
views to uncover their interrelations, with current methodologies focus on three core objectives: better representation
(Gao et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023), better
alignment (Zhang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022) and better
fusion (Kang et al. 2020a; Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2023),
which are also essential for handling missing views (Li et al.
2023b; Jin et al. 2023; Wen et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2024).

In summary, fixed-anchor-based MVC and optimizedanchor-based MVC each have distinct advantages and limitations. Fixed-anchor methods, derived from the original
data space, aim to select anchors that better fit the data but
face challenges with initialization instability and the complexity of heuristic design strategies. On the other hand,
optimized-anchor methods learn anchors dynamically, making the acquisition of anchors less manual and more diverse through orthogonal constraints. However, these constraints can overly restrict anchor fitting performance, especially when the number of anchors is large.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22488

