The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Imitate Before Detect: Aligning Machine Stylistic Preference for Machine-Revised
Text Detection
Jiaqi Chen1,2 * , Xiaoye Zhu3,4 * , Tianyang Liu5 * , Ying Chen6 , Chen Xinhui7,8 ,
Yiwen Yuan9 , Chak Tou Leong10 , Zuchao Li7† , Long Tang1,3 , Lei Zhang5 ,
Chenyu Yan11 , Guanghao Mei5 , Jie Zhang1† , Lefei Zhang7†
1

Fudan University
Stanford University
3
South China University of Technology
4
NUS (Chongqing) Research Institute
5
University of California, San Diego
6
University of lllinois at Urbana-Champaign
7
Wuhan University
8
Fenz AI
9
Carnegie Mellon University
10
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
11
Georgia Institute of Technology
2

Abstract

Homepage — machine-text-detection.github.io/ImBD
Code — github.com/Jiaqi-Chen-00/ImBD
Extended version — arxiv.org/abs/2412.10432

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized text generation, making detecting machine-generated text increasingly
challenging. Although past methods have achieved good performance on detecting pure machine-generated text, those
detectors have poor performance on distinguishing machinerevised text (rewriting, expansion, and polishing), which can
have only minor changes from its original human prompt. As
the content of text may originate from human prompts, detecting machine-revised text often involves identifying distinctive
machine styles, e.g., worded favored by LLMs. However, existing methods struggle to detect machine-style phrasing hidden
within the content contributed by humans. We propose the
“Imitate Before Detect” (ImBD) approach, which first imitates
the machine-style token distribution, and then compares the
distribution of the text to be tested with the machine-style
distribution to determine whether the text has been machinerevised. To this end, we introduce style preference optimization (SPO), which aligns a scoring LLM model to the preference of text styles generated by machines. The aligned scoring
model is then used to calculate the style-conditional probability curvature (Style-CPC), quantifying the log probability
difference between the original and conditionally sampled
texts for effective detection. We conduct extensive comparisons across various scenarios, encompassing text revisions
by six LLMs, four distinct text domains, and three machine
revision types. Compared to existing state-of-the-art methods,
our method yields a 13% increase in AUC for detecting text
revised by open-source LLMs, and improves performance by
5% and 19% for detecting GPT-3.5 and GPT-4o revised text,
respectively. Notably, our method surpasses the commercially
trained GPT-Zero with just 1, 000 samples and five minutes
of SPO, demonstrating its efficiency and effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generating text that is difficult to distinguish from human writing (Brown et al. 2020; Chowdhery
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023a,b; OpenAI
2022; Achiam et al. 2023; Bi et al. 2024; Lozhkov et al.
2024).
With the widespread application of these models, their
misuse in exams, academic papers, publications, and other
contexts has led to concerns in areas such as academic integrity, fake news, and online information verification. As a
result, determining whether a text is LLM-assisted or entirely
human-written has become crucial (Bao et al. 2023).
In practice, the landscape of LLM-assisted writing extends beyond the widely studied pure generation to also include machine-revised text, where LLMs enhance or modify
human-written content (Zhang et al. 2024). This shift results
in a more nuanced challenge for detection, as the boundaries between human and machine contributions become
increasingly intertwined. Figure 1 (upper) provides comparative examples of human-written, machine-generated text, and
machine-revised text. This evolution in LLM-assisted writing
necessitates a reevaluation of existing detection approaches.
Previous detection methods (Hans et al. 2024; Mitchell
et al. 2023; Bao et al. 2023; Su et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023;
Zhu et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024) for identifying machinegenerated text rely on calculating classification metrics based
on token probabilities from pre-trained language models.
These methods are built on the assumption that machinegenerated texts typically exhibit higher log-likelihoods (He

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23559

