The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A2 RNet: Adversarial Attack Resilient Network for
Robust Infrared and Visible Image Fusion
Jiawei Li1 * , Hongwei Yu1 * , Jiansheng Chen1† , Xinlong Ding1 , Jinlong Wang1 ,
Jinyuan Liu2 , Bochao Zou1 , Huimin Ma1
1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
2
School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
ljw19970218@163.com, yuhongwei22@xs.ustb.edu.cn, jschen@ustb.edu.cn, {dingxl22, M202320974}@xs.ustb.edu.cn,
atlantis918@hotmail.com, {zoubochao, mhmpub}@ustb.edu.cn
Abstract
Infrared and visible image fusion (IVIF) is a crucial technique
for enhancing visual performance by integrating unique information from different modalities into one fused image. Exiting methods pay more attention to conducting fusion with
undisturbed data, while overlooking the impact of deliberate interference on the effectiveness of fusion results. To investigate the robustness of fusion models, in this paper, we
propose a novel adversarial attack resilient network, called
A2 RNet. Specifically, we develop an adversarial paradigm
with an anti-attack loss function to implement adversarial attacks and training. It is constructed based on the intrinsic nature of IVIF and provide a robust foundation for future research advancements. We adopt a Unet as the pipeline with
a transformer-based defensive refinement module (DRM) under this paradigm, which guarantees fused image quality in
a robust coarse-to-fine manner. Compared to previous works,
our method mitigates the adverse effects of adversarial perturbations, consistently maintaining high-fidelity fusion results.
Furthermore, the performance of downstream tasks can also
be well maintained under adversarial attacks.

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of different adversarial operations. Clearly, fused images generated by attacked image pairs exhibit superior qualitative, quantitative and downstream task performance when conducting the proposed
framework.

Code — https://github.com/lok-18/A2RNet

Introduction
The purpose of infrared and visible image fusion (IVIF)
aims to integrate salient information from different sensors
for obtaining well-performing fused images, which can alleviate the imaging limitations of a single sensor. The fused
image simultaneously contains thermal target information
and texture contents from different modalities. In some computer vision tasks, e.g., autonomous driving (Sun et al. 2022)
and salient object detection (Wang et al. 2023), IVIF technology is applied to assist in achieving more accurate and
detailed results.
The primary challenge of this task is how to effectively extract features from different modalities (Zhang et al.
2021). Early traditional methods employ techniques such
as wavelet transforms (Li, Manjunath, and Mitra 1995) and

sparse representation (Liu, Liu, and Wang 2015) to perform
matrix operations on source images. However, their complex
manual adjustment strategies are time-consuming and cumbersome to implement. Recently, deep learning-based methods have gradually replaced traditional approaches (Huang
et al. 2022). These methods possess powerful feature extraction capabilities to learn salient information from source images (Li et al. 2022, 2023c; Liu et al. 2023a), which has
entered an efficient and rapidly evolving stage.
In general, existing IVIF methods are based on nondestructive data to construct. They only focus on extracting
useful information from source images without considering
the potential presence of interference (Liu et al. 2024b). In
other words, these networks become fragile under adversarial perturbations, which may obtain poor fusion results.
Without any robust operations in the network, fused images generated by adversarial examples (AEs) exhibit noticeable artifact regions in Fig. 1. The segmentation accu-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4770

