The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unified Knowledge Maintenance Pruning and Progressive Recovery with Weight
Recalling for Large Vision-Language Models
Zimeng Wu1,2 , Jiaxin Chen1,2 * , Yunhong Wang1,2
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{zimengwu, jiaxinchen, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Probablity Density

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM), leveraging Large
Language Model (LLM) as the cognitive core, has recently become one of the most representative multimodal
model paradigms. However, with the expansion of unimodal
branches, i.e. visual encoder and LLM, the storage and computational burdens intensify, posing challenges for deployment. Structured pruning has proved promising in compressing large models by trimming a large portion of insignificant
network structures. Nevertheless, most of them are predominantly designed for LLMs, either relying on unitary importance metrics that fail to deal with modality-wise imbalances
or adopting generic pruning and recovery paradigms that
overlook the unique calibration status and capability requirements of large models, leading to substantial performance
degradation. To address these issues, we propose a novel
structured pruning approach for LVLMs, dubbed Unified
Knowledge Maintenance Pruning and Progressive Recovery
with Weight Recalling (UKMP). Specifically, we design a
Unified Knowledge Maintenance Importance (UKMI) metric, which simultaneously considers balancing the block-wise
and modality-wise importance by adaptive normalization,
optimizing the importance estimation by refining gradientbased criteria, and maintaining the knowledge capacity of
LVLMs by using the angle distribution information entropy.
Moreover, we develop a LoRA-based Progressive Distillation
(LPD) method that recalls the pruned weights and performs
progressive distillation for comprehensive recovery. Extensive experimental results across various vision-language tasks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, comparing to
the state-of-the-art structured pruning methods.

1e 3
Vision MHA
Language MHA

2
1
0

0

2000
Importance

4000

Probablity Density

1

1e 1
Vision FFN
Language FFN

2

0

0

5

10
15
Importance

20

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Main challenges in pruning LVLMs. (a) Existing
works generate severely imbalanced parameter importance
for distinct modalities and network modules. (b) The pretraining of LVLMs mostly optimizes a part of parameters
for efficiency with the rest frozen before pruning, resulting
in unconvergence of the frozen parameters (i.e. unfrozen parameters converge to the black dot along the red line, but the
model can still improve along the blue line), which violates
the convergence assumption of existing pruning methods.

Code — https://github.com/Wuzimeng/UKMP.git
answering, image-text retrieval and image captioning (Li
et al. 2023b). However, the ever-expending scale of models
for both vision and language modalities inevitably increases
computational demands and inference latency, limiting their
deployment on resource-constrained platforms.
In order to reduce model size and computational complexity, various model compression techniques have been
explored for adaptating large models, including quantization (Frantar et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2025), token pruning
(Cao et al. 2024), and more. Structured network pruning,
offering flexibility in scaling without relying on hardwarespecific optimizations, emerges as a promising solution for

Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs), which are built
upon Large Language Models (LLMs) by aligning visual
features to the frozen language feature space, have recently
emerged as a prevalent paradigm (Dai et al. 2023; Alayrac
et al. 2022). Leveraging their powerful language generation
and zero-shot learning capabilities, LVLMs deliver exceptional performance on various tasks such as visual question
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8550

