The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FaceSpeak: Expressive and High-Quality Speech Synthesis from Human Portraits
of Different Styles
Tian-Hao Zhang1, * , Jiawei Zhang1 , Jun Wang2 , Xinyuan Qian1,† , Xu-Cheng Yin1
1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
tianhaozhang@xs.ustb.edu.cn, jiaweizhang@xs.ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Humans can perceive speakers’ characteristics (e.g., identity,
gender, personality and emotion) by their appearance, which
are generally aligned to their voice style. Recently, visiondriven Text-to-speech (TTS) scholars grounded their investigations on real-person faces, thereby restricting effective
speech synthesis from applying to vast potential usage scenarios with diverse characters and image styles. To solve this
issue, we introduce a novel FaceSpeak approach. It extracts
salient identity characteristics and emotional representations
from a wide variety of image styles. Meanwhile, it mitigates the extraneous information (e.g., background, clothing, and hair color, etc.), resulting in synthesized speech
closely aligned with a character’s persona. Furthermore, to
overcome the scarcity of multi-modal TTS data, we have devised an innovative dataset, namely Expressive Multi-Modal
TTS (EM2 TTS), which is diligently curated and annotated to
facilitate research in this domain. The experimental results
demonstrate our proposed FaceSpeak can generate portraitaligned voice with satisfactory naturalness and quality.

Figure 1: Our proposed multi-modal speech synthesis framework, namely FaceSpeak, which performs expressive and
high-quality speech synthesis, given image prompt of different styles and the content text (Note: image-speech data from
various characters are encoded with distinct color codecs).

In recent years, growing research interest has focused on
the controllability of synthesized speeches. To this end, one
solution is to introduce an auxiliary reference input to model
the style features of speech. For example, PromptTTS (Guo
et al. 2023) and InstructTTS (Yang et al. 2023) leverage
textual descriptions to control the speech synthesis style.
In contrast, the input text description still needs human
crafting efforts and expertise, while some individuals may
struggle to accurately express their intended synthesis goals.
Other works employ vision as a reference. For example, visualTTS (Lu et al. 2022) generates temporal synchronized
speech sequences for visual dubbing, and MM-TTS (Guan
et al. 2024) transfers multi-modal prompts (i.e., text, human
face, pre-recorded speech) into a unified style representation
to control the generation process. Despite both works using images (real human faces) as the reference, thus cannot
adapt to nonphotorealistic portraits which are widespread in
digital assistants, video games, and virtual reality scenarios.
Although previous attempts have been made to generate
speech based on visual cues, they have faced notable limitations. One such limitation is the predominant reliance on
real-face datasets, which lack diversity in image styles necessary for comprehensive speech synthesis guidance. This
significantly restricts the potential applications of synthesizing speech from portrait images. Additionally, prior methods often employ entangled embeddings of facial images to

Demos — https://facespeak.github.io

Introduction
Human voices contain munificent information in aspects
such as age (Grzybowska and Kacprzak 2016; Singh et al.
2016), gender (Li et al. 2019), emotional nuances (Wang and
Tashev 2017; Zhang, Wu, and Schuller 2019), physical fitness (Verde et al. 2021), and speaker identity (Deaton 2010;
Ravanelli and Bengio 2018). These vocal characteristics are
intrinsically related to an individual’s physical and psychological makeup (Xu et al. 2024; Hardcastle, Laver, and Gibbon 2012), offering a unique profile of the speaker. For example, the emotional content conveyed through speech is
often mirrored in facial expressions. This inherent correlation between voice and image sparked research exploration
in various fields, including emotion recognition (Zhou et al.
2021; Lei and Cao 2023; Zhang et al. 2021), speaker verification (Qian, Chen, and Wang 2021; Nawaz et al. 2021),
face-speech retrieval (Li et al. 2023a), and speech separation (Gao and Grauman 2021; Lee et al. 2021).
* Work done during internship at Tencent AI Lab.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25922

