The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SADBA: Self-Adaptive Distributed Backdoor Attack Against Federated Learning
Jun Feng* 1 , Yuzhe Lai* 1 , Hong Sun†2 , Bocheng Ren3
1

Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Economics, Wuhan Textile University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hainan University
junfeng@hust.edu.cn, laiyuzhe@hust.edu.cn, hsun@wtu.edu.cn, bc.revincent@gmail.com
Abstract
Backdoor attacks in federated learning (FL) face challenges
such as lower attack success rates and compromised main
task accuracy (MA) compared to local training. Existing
methods like distributed backdoor attack (DBA) mitigate
these issues by modifying malicious clients’ updates and partitioning global triggers to enhance backdoor persistence and
stealth. The recent full combination backdoor attack (FCBA)
further improves backdoor efficiency with a full combination strategy. However, these methods are mainly applicable
in small-scale FL. In large-scale FL, small trigger patterns
weaken impact, and scaling them requires controlling exponentially more clients, which poses significant challenges,
while simply reverting to DBA may decrease backdoor performance. To overcome these challenges, we propose the
self-adaptive distributed backdoor attack (SADBA), which
achieves similar performance to FCBA with a lower percentage of malicious clients (PMC). It also adapts more flexibly through an optimized model poisoning strategy and a
self-adaptive data poisoning strategy. Experiments demonstrate SADBA outperforms state-of-the-art methods, achieving higher or comparable backdoor performance and MA
across various datasets with limited PMC.

Figure 1: Background of SADBA.

train a better model, its distributed learning methodology
and inherently heterogeneous (i.e., non-i.i.d.) data distribution (Huang, Ye, and Du 2022; Cai et al. 2023) across different parties may unintentionally provide a venue for new
attacks. The limitation of access to individual parties’ data
due to privacy concerns or regulatory constraints can facilitate backdoor attacks on the shared model trained with
FL or allow modification of the local dataset to a malicious type (Feng et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024a; Jia, Fang,
and Gong 2023). For example, attackers can change the
model’s behavior only on specific attacker-chosen inputs via
data poisoning (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017; Chen
et al. 2017). However, methods that purely insert backdoors through data poisoning are inefficient. Subsequently,
the model replacement-based (MR) approach (Bagdasaryan
et al. 2020) was introduced, which improves backdoor performance by scaling up the malicious clients’ model updates
in FL, achieving the same attack success rate (ASR) with
fewer malicious clients. For instance, in a picture classification task with the CIFAR dataset, an attacker who controls 1% of the participants achieves the same ASR as a
data-poisoning attacker who controls 20% (Ji et al. 2018).
Nonetheless, the MR method’s trigger insertion strategy is
a centralized static insertion, which does not fully exploit

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
framework that allows multiple clients to train collaboratively without revealing their local data to protect privacy
(Smith et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2024b; Wei et al. 2023). However, recent study has shown that it is vulnerable to backdoor
attacks (Zhang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024a; Nasr et al.
2021), which aim to manipulate a subset of local training
data by injecting a unique trigger (Wang et al. 2022) so that
the model trained with poisoning data will predict target label for the data injected with trigger in the test period while
predicting normally for the benign data (Ning et al. 2022).
This dual nature makes backdoor attacks particularly insidious and challenging to detect (Dong et al. 2021; Sun et al.
2019) and mitigate (Wang et al. 2019).
Although FL is capable of aggregating dispersed and often restricted information provided by different parties to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16568

