The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CAMSIC: Content-aware Masked Image Modeling Transformer
for Stereo Image Compression
Xinjie Zhang1,2 * , Shenyuan Gao1 , Zening Liu1 , Jiawei Shao1,3 ,
Xingtong Ge2 , Dailan He4 , Tongda Xu5 , Yan Wang5 , Jun Zhang1†
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
SenseTime Research
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
{xzhangga, sygao, zhening.liu}@connect.ust.hk, shaojw2@chinatelecom.cn, xingtong.ge@gmail.com,
hedailan@link.cuhk.edu.hk, x.tongda@nyu.edu, wangyan202199@163.com, eejzhang@ust.hk
(a) Content-irrelevant encoder-decoder (b) Content-aware decoder-free
Transformer entropy model
Transformer entropy model

Abstract

prior information

Transformer
Encoder

Existing learning-based stereo image codec adopt sophisticated transformation with simple entropy models derived
from single image codecs to encode latent representations.
However, those entropy models struggle to effectively capture the spatial-disparity characteristics inherent in stereo images, which leads to suboptimal rate-distortion results. In
this paper, we propose a stereo image compression framework, named CAMSIC. CAMSIC independently transforms
each image to latent representation and employs a powerful decoder-free Transformer entropy model to capture both
spatial and disparity dependencies, by introducing a novel
content-aware masked image modeling (MIM) technique.
Our content-aware MIM facilitates efficient bidirectional interaction between prior information and estimated tokens,
which naturally obviates the need for an extra Transformer
decoder. Experiments show that our stereo image codec
achieves state-of-the-art rate-distortion performance on two
stereo image datasets Cityscapes and InStereo2K with fast
encoding and decoding speed.

M

[MASK]
token

Transformer
Decoder
M
Contentaware token

Transformer
Encoder

M
Estimated
token

prior information

Figure 1: Comparison of two different mask image modeling
Transformer entropy models. [MASK] token is a learnable
parameter, which is irrelevant to specific image content. Tokens within the same red rectangle have bidirectional interactions. The vanilla content-irrelevant masked image modeling uses uniform [MASK] tokens to fill the unestimated
positions and relies on an inefficient encoder-decoder Transformer to propagate the prior information. Differently, our
content-aware masked image modeling replaces the uninformative [MASK] tokens with proposed content-aware tokens, which enables an efficient decoder-free Transformer
architecture with more sufficient information interactions.

Introduction
Stereo Image Codec (SIC) compresses a pair of stereoscopic
images captured from distinct viewpoints by the same camera. SIC has attracted significant interest due to the growing demand for high-quality stereo image transmission and
storage across applications such as autonomous driving (Yin
et al. 2020), virtual reality (Fehn 2004) and video surveillance (Stepanov and Tishchenko 2016). By leveraging the
inherent correlation between views, they achieve higher coding efficiency compared with single image codecs.
Over the past decades, classical multi-view image coding standards, such as H.264-based MVC (Vetro, Wiegand,
and Sullivan 2011) and H.265-based MV-HEVC (Tech et al.
2015), have catalyzed the development of learning-based

stereo image compression approaches (Liu, Wang, and Urtasun 2019; Deng et al. 2021; Wödlinger et al. 2022; Zhai
et al. 2022; Deng et al. 2023). Given a reference view, these
methods, rooted in the predictive coding paradigm, employ
disparity-compensated prediction in either pixel or feature
space to compress current view. Additionally, recent advancements have introduced a bidirectional coding framework (Lei et al. 2022; Wödlinger et al. 2024) that utilizes
a cross-attention mechanism, further enhancing content correlation exploitation between stereo images. Albeit remarkable, the odyssey of stereo image compression research concentrates on producing compact representations through various information flows or network designs before entropy
coding. However, an orthogonal direction, which reduces
redundancy by devising a superior spatial-disparity entropy

* This work was partially performed when Xinjie Zhang was an

Intern at SenseTime.
†
Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10239

