The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Subgraph Invariant Learning Towards Large-Scale Graph Node Classification
Leilei Wang1,2 , Si Shi1 * , Fei Ma1 , Fei Richard Yu2,3 * , Pengteng Li4 , Ying Tiffany He2
1

Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
3
School of Information Technology, Carleton University, Canada
4
HKUST (GZ), AI Thrust
{wangleilei, shisi, mafei}@gml.ac.cn, {yufei,heying}@szu.edu.cn, pengteng.li@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
Abstract

A natural solution is graph reduction learning, which includes graph sparsification, graph coarsening, and graph
condensation (Hashemi et al. 2024). These methods create
a smaller graph that can be used during testing to achieve
performance comparable to the original large-scale graph.
However, transforming a large-scale graph into a smaller one
faces three limitations. First, high computational resources
are still required during the transformation process, as the
large-scale graph remains necessary during training. Second, the smaller graph often fails to generalize to out-ofdistribution graphs, since the goal of these methods is to
match the performance of the large graph rather than to enhance generalization. Third, obtaining a large number of labeled nodes that represent the entire graph is often impractical, and in many cases, only a small subset of labeled nodes
is available during training.
To address these limitations, we suppose that a largescale graph can be viewed as an aggregation of numerous small-scale subgraphs, consistent with the small-world
paradigm (Watts and Strogatz 1998; Kleinberg 2000). In this
paradigm, nodes within each subgraph are densely interconnected, while connections between subgraphs are relatively
sparse. Despite the potential differences among these subgraphs, it is possible to use models robust enough to generalize from individual subgraphs to the overall graph structure, guided by the principle of invariance (Jia et al. 2024;
Ahuja et al. 2021). This principle suggests that capturing invariant information across varying conditions requires only
a subset of the available data, and this invariance can be generalized across the entire graph. Based on this, we propose
subgraph invariant learning, which enables the model to be
trained on labeled subgraphs and tested on unlabeled subgraphs by extrapolating invariance from certain subgraphs
to others with superior performance. Since models in subgraph invariant learning are applied exclusively to individual
subgraphs, without needing the entire graph during either
the training or testing phases, it offers two key advantages:
a substantial reduction in computational resource consumption and the ability to increase model complexity due to the
smaller scale of the subgraphs.
To ensure that invariance is learned effectively, we aim
to maximize the log-likelihood of the invariance and derive its lower bound. Consequently, the InVariance (InVar)
loss is strategically proposed as a proxy objective to max-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown efficacy in
graph node classification, but face computational challenges
on large-scale graphs. Although existing graph reduction
methods address these issues, they still require high computational resources and fail to prioritize robust performance on
out-of-distribution data. To tackle these challenges, we introduce the subgraph invariant learning paradigm, inspired by
the small-world phenomenon. This approach enables models trained on specific subgraphs to generalize across diverse subgraphs, reducing computational demands, and enhancing scalability. To promote generalization, we maximize
the invariance log-likelihood by deriving a theoretical lower
bound of it and formulating the InVar loss. This loss minimizes the discrepancy between node representations and
their corresponding invariance representations while maximizing the entropy of the node representation. In response
to InVar loss, we propose the Invariance Facilitation Model
(IFM), comprising the Invariance Representation Encoder
(IRE) and Node Representation Encoder (NRE). IRE, capturing the invariance representations, utilizes Invariance ATTention (InvarATT) to compress long-range dependencies, while
NRE learns the node representation, by integrating invariance representations via Telematic ATTention (TeleATT) and
exchanging local information within each subgraph through
GNNs. Evaluations on four large-scale graph datasets demonstrate the effectiveness, computational efficiency, and interpretability of IFM for large-scale graph node classification.

Code — https://github.com/wleilei/SIL-IFM

Introduction
Graph structures are prevalent in complex systems across
diverse domains, including social, biological, transportation,
and communication networks. The widespread use of graphstructured data has driven the adoption of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al.
2018), significantly enhancing the modeling and analysis capabilities in various fields. However, the high computational
demands of modeling large-scale graphs limit the deployment of GNNs, preventing their full potential from being
realized in real-world applications.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21144

