The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Identity-Text Video Corpus Grounding
Bin Huang1 , Xin Wang* 1, 2 , Hong Chen1 , Houlun Chen1 , Yaofei Wu3 , Wenwu Zhu* 1, 2
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
BNRIST, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing University of Technology
{huangb23, h-chen20, chenhl23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn, 23027313@emails.bjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Video1

Video corpus grounding (VCG), which aims to retrieve relevant video moments from a video corpus, has attracted significant attention in the multimedia research community. However, the existing VCG setting primarily focuses on matching
textual descriptions with videos and ignores the distinct visual identities in the videos, thus resulting in inaccurate understanding of video content and deteriorated retrieval performances. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel
task, Identity-Text Video Corpus Grounding (ITVCG), which
simultaneously utilize textual descriptions and visual identities as queries. As such, ITVCG benefits in enabling more
accurate video corpus grounding with visual identities, as
well as providing users with more flexible options to locate relevant frames based on either textual descriptions or
textual descriptions and visual identities. To conduct evaluations regarding the novel ITVCG task, we propose the
TVR-IT dataset, comprising 463 identity images from 6 TV
shows, with 68,840 out of 72,840 queries containing at least
one identity image. Furthermore, we propose Video-Locator,
the first model designed for the ITVCG task. Our proposed
Video-Locator integrates video-identity-text alignment and
multi-modal fine-grained fusion components, facilitating a
video large language model (Video LLM) to jointly understand textual descriptions, visual identities, as well as videos.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed Video-Locator model and highlight the importance of
identity-generalization capability for ITVCG.

Video2
......

......

Video Corpus

• Tradtional Query : Castle and Beckett are slow dancing together.
• Answer:
(Who are Castle and Beckett?)
• Identity-Text Query :

and

are slow dancing together.

• Answer: Video2 (18.0s, 83.2s)

Figure 1: Traditional Video Corpus Grounding fails to identify identities within videos. Our proposed Identity-Text
Video Corpus Grounding task incorporates visual identities into the query, enabling more precise and flexible video
grounding.

solely based on textual descriptions as input, failing to distinguish the visual identities in the videos. For example, a
teenager may desire to locate a video moment that involves
his favorite movie star dancing, while existing works can
only locate video moments of dancing, failing to guarantee
the retrieved videos contain the favorite movie star.
To tackle the problem, in this paper we propose a novel
task, Identity-Text Video Corpus Grounding (ITVCG),
which aims to locate the most relevant segments from video
corpus given both textual descriptions (texts) and visual
identities (images) as shown in Figure 1. Identity-Text Video
Corpus Grounding has a broader range of applications than
traditional Video Corpus Grounding, benefiting in more accurate video corpus grounding with visual identities, as well
as providing users with more flexible options to locate relevant frames based on either textual descriptions or textual
descriptions and visual identities.
However, despite the significance of the novel ITVCG
task, there are currently no existing works in literature, lacking both datasets and models. To solve this issue, we propose the TVR-IT dataset and the Video-Locator model for
Identity-Text Video Corpus Grounding, which we believe
will have a broad impact on following works for Video
Corpus Grounding. Specifically, we construct the TVR-IT

Code — https://github.com/huangb23/Identity-Text-VideoCorpus-Grounding

Introduction
In recent years, the task of Video Corpus Grounding
(VCG)(Escorcia et al. 2019) has garnered significant attention within the multimedia research community, which aims
to retrieve the most relevant video moments from an extensive video corpus. This task holds immense potential for a
variety of downstream applications, including but not limited to video editing, recommendation, and content creation.
Despite the advancements in video corpus grounding, existing works primarily focus on retrieving video moments
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3608

