The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revisiting Change Captioning from Self-supervised Global-Part Alignment
Feixiao Lv1,2 , Rui Wang1,2 * , Lihua Jing1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
lvfeixiao@iie.ac.cn, wangrui@iie.ac.cn, jinglihua@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
The goal of image change captioning is to capture the content
differences between two images and describe them in natural
language. The key is how to learn stable content changes from
noise such as viewpoint and image structure. However, current work mostly focuses on identifying changes, and the influence of global noise leads to unstable recognition of global
features. In order to tackle this problem, we propose a Selfsupervised Global-Part Alignment (SSGPA) network and revisit the image change captioning task by enhancing the construction process of overall image global features, enabling
the model to integrate global changes such as viewpoint into
local changes, and to detect and describe changes in the image
through alignment. Concretely, we first design a Global-Part
Transport Alignment mechanism to enhance global features
and learn stable content changes through a self-supervised
method of optimal transport. Further, we design a Change
Fusion Adapter with pre-trained vision-language model to
enhance the similar parts features of paired images, thereby
enhancing global features, and expanding content changes.
Extensive experiments show our method achieves the stateof-the-art results on four datasets.

Figure 1: The examples of image change captioning. (a) An
example from CLEVR-Change dataset. (b)An example from
Birds-to-Words dataset. The blue box indicates change regions that need attention, and the red box indicates regions
that should not be noticed, respectively.

Although significant progress has been made in the fields
of change detection and image captioning, change captioning, as an emerging task, faces challenging difficulties. The
fundamental challenge is to understand the content of the
image, identify the changed content, and describe it in natural language, while filtering out the unchanged content. As
shown in Figure 1, the change captioning model needs to
have the ability to describe the changes before and after,
rather than the entire content of the image. Moreover, there
is an advanced difficulty, which is to distinguish the overall pseudo changes in the image, such as changes in image
viewpoint and overall chromaticity. As shown in Figure 1,
the objects in (a) undergo pseudo changes in size, position,
etc. due to changes in viewpoint, and the posture of the bird
in (b) change but the class does not.
Despite the pseudo overall changes have received a lot
of attention (Kim et al. 2021; Tu et al. 2023a), most existing methods for dealing with such problems are based on
simple local object matching. This matching-based method
has alleviated the above problems to some extent, but cannot solve the pseudo changes caused by viewpoint changes,
such as big when near and small when far. The reason for
this is that the matching-based method pays less attention to
analyze the global features of the image properly, resulting
in unstable recognition of overall features such as viewpoint
and image structure, which makes it difficult to decouple the

Introduction
With the popularization of intelligence and the expansion
of data in real life, it is crucial to develop automated systems to assist humans in quickly grasping changes in visual
content, such as considering changes in monitoring content
before and after or changes in image content. Change detection (Radke et al. 2005; Chen et al. 2023), as a method to
solve such problems, has received widespread attention from
the academic circles. A more advanced and newly emerging task is called change captioning (Jhamtani and BergKirkpatrick 2018; Park, Darrell, and Rohrbach 2019; Kim
et al. 2021), which allows for summarizing and describing
changes. Compared to traditional change detection, change
captioning not only need to locate changes before and after, but also require high naturalness in language description.
Therefore, this task poses a more severe challenge for deep
understanding of image content, and has profound practical
significance for fields such as monitored facilities (Zhu et al.
2024) and pathological change (Li et al. 2023b).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5892

