The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RoVRM: A Robust Visual Reward Model Optimized via Auxiliary
Textual Preference Data
Chenglong Wang1 * , Yang Gan1∗ , Yifu Huo1∗ , Yongyu Mu1 , Murun Yang1 , Qiaozhi He1 ,
Tong Xiao1,2† , Chunliang Zhang1,2 , Tongran Liu3 and Jingbo Zhu1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
NiuTrans Research, Shenyang, China
3
CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology, CAS, Beijing, China
{clwang1119, zzhu8250}@gmail.com, {xiaotong, zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn
Abstract

Two predominant research approaches aim to address this
problem. The first approach focuses on generating richer
and higher-quality visual instruction data (Li et al. 2023b;
Liu et al. 2023, 2024c), i.e., annotating rich instruction samples on images of mangosteens to enable LVLMs to identify
them more accurately. In contrast, a more sophisticated approach is applying human-preference alignment techniques,
including best-of-n sampling and reinforcement learning
(RL), which can efficiently align models with human preferences on various tasks by optimizing against a reward model
without instruction samples. However, applying these alignment techniques to LVLMs is not a low-hanging fruit. It typically faces the difficulty of training a visual reward model
(VRM) due to the scarcity of high-quality visual preference
data (Sun et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2024a; Zhou et al. 2024b).
This work is motivated by a simple idea: human preferences are well-captured by text and these preferences
can be transferred across different modalities. In this way,
we can make use of rich, high-quality textual preference
data in training VRMs. Building on this idea, we present
a Robust Visual Reward Model (RoVRM), which can improve human-preference alignment for LVLMs in two ways.
For one, we propose a three-phase progressive training approach to gradually bridge the task and modality gaps between textual and visual preference data, which can take
full advantage of auxiliary textual preference data to improve the robustness of RoVRM. Furthermore, considering
the conflict in preferences (Coste et al. 2023; Eisenstein et al.
2023), leveraging textual preference data poses a problem:
not all data is beneficial for training the RoVRM. Addressing this problem, we propose an optimal transport-based
preference data selection approach. This approach can select textual preference data that better aligns with the visionlanguage task preferences, thereby improving the efficacy of
the RoVRM training process. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to investigate the integration of preferences
from different modalities.
Through experiments on commonly used vision-language
tasks, we aim to evaluate RoVRM using two humanpreference alignment techniques: best-of-n sampling and
RL. Our results demonstrate improved performance in each
task when aligned with reward signals from RoVRM. Notably, when performing best-of-n sampling on the LLaVA-

Large vision-language models (LVLMs) often fail to align
with human preferences, leading to issues like generating
misleading content without proper visual context (also known
as hallucination). A promising solution to this problem is using human-preference alignment techniques, such as best-ofn sampling and reinforcement learning. However, these techniques face the difficulty arising from the scarcity of visual
preference data, which is required to train a visual reward
model (VRM). In this work, we continue the line of research.
We present a Robust Visual Reward Model (RoVRM) which
improves human-preference alignment for LVLMs. RoVRM
leverages auxiliary textual preference data through a threephase progressive training and optimal transport-based preference data selection to effectively mitigate the scarcity of
visual preference data. We experiment with RoVRM on the
commonly used vision-language tasks based on the LLaVA1.5-7B and -13B models. Experimental results demonstrate
that RoVRM consistently outperforms traditional VRMs.
Furthermore, our three-phase progressive training and preference data selection approaches can yield consistent performance gains over ranking-based alignment techniques, such
as direct preference optimization.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across various natural language processing tasks (Stiennon et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2022). Recent works tend to fine-tune LLMs using specialized visual instruction tuning datasets, leading to the emergence of
powerful large vision-language models (LVLMs) (Liu et al.
2024a; Lin et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024b). Despite these
advancements, current LVLMs are not well-aligned with human preferences. A glaring problem is that LVLMs sometimes generate misleading content without anchoring to the
given visual context (also known as hallucination) (Leng
et al. 2024). For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, an LVLM
incorrectly identifies a “pitaya” in an image of mangosteens
due to their visual similarity.
* Authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25336

