The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BIG-FUSION: Brain-Inspired Global-Local Context Fusion Framework for
Multimodal Emotion Recognition in Conversations
Yusong Wang1,2, * , Xuanye Fang3, * , Huifeng Yin4, *
Dongyuan Li2 , Guoqi Li5,6 , Qi Xu3,† , Yi Xu3 , Shuai Zhong1 , Mingkun Xu1,4,†
1
Guangdong Institute of Intelligence Science and Technology, Hengqin, Zhuhai, China
Department of Information and Communications Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
4
Center for Brain Inspired Computing Research (CBICR), Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China
5
Institute of Automation, Key Laboratory of Brain Cognition and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China
6
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2

Abstract
Considering the importance of capturing both global conversational topics and local speaker dependencies for multimodal emotion recognition in conversations, current approaches first utilize sequence models like Transformer to
extract global context information, then apply Graph Neural
Networks to model local speaker dependencies for local context information extraction, coupled with Graph Contrastive
Learning (GCL) to enhance node representation learning.
However, this sequential design introduces potential biases:
the extracted global context information inevitably influences
subsequent processing, compromising the independence and
diversity of the original local features; current graph augmentation methods in GCL cannot consider both global and local context information in conversations to evaluate the node
importance, hindering the learning of key information. Inspired by the human brain excels at handling complex tasks
by efficiently integrating local and global information processing mechanisms, we propose an aligned global-local context fusion framework for sequence-based design to address
these problems. This design includes a dual-attention Transformer and a dual-evaluation method for graph augmentation
in GCL. The dual-attention Transformer combines global attention for overall context extraction with sliding-window attention for local context capture. Meanwhile, spiking neuron
dynamics are introduced to enhance the representation capability of the extracted features, supporting the effective the
interaction between different modalities from these global
and local cues. The dual-evaluation method in GCL comprises global importance evaluation to identify nodes crucial
for overall conversation context, and local importance evaluation to detect nodes significant for local semantics, generating augmented graph views that preserve both global and
local information. This approach ensures balanced information processing throughout the pipeline, enhancing biological
plausibility and achieving superior emotion recognition.

Figure 1: An example of the conversation from Harry Potter,
showcasing the interplay between global and local context.

Introduction

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: xuqi@dlut.edu.cn,xumingkun@gdiist.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1574

Multimodal emotion recognition in conversations (MERC)
identifies the emotion state of each utterance in the conversion with visual, audio, and text information (Zhang et al.
2024). It has received increasing attention due to its different
applications like conversational speech synthesis (Liu et al.
2024) and social media analytics (Poria et al. 2019).
As shown in Figure 1, two main factors influence the expression of emotions in a conversation: 1) Global Contextual
Information. The emotion states expressed in utterances are
directly correlated with the overall conversation context. In
Figure 1, the topic “Harry Potter learns he is a wizard” with
its positive tone results in the majority of sentences expressing positive emotions in the conversation. For instance, the
utterance u2 is more likely to indicate excitement when considering the main context of the conversation. 2) Local Context Information. The emotion of the current utterance can be

