The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fast Incomplete Multi-view Clustering with Adaptive Similarity Completion and
Reconstruction
Deng Xu, Chao Zhang* , Cong Guo, Chunlin Chen, Huaxiong Li*
Department of Control Science and Intelligence Engineering, Nanjing University
{dengxu, chzhang, congguo}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {clchen, huaxiongli}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Feng 2024) stands out for its good ability to leverage complementary information across multiple views for clustering.
However, in practical scenarios, some samples may be only
partially available due to detector failure or data corruption.
To effectively group these incomplete data, there has been
considerable attention towards incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC). Numerious existing IMVC approaches have
proven effective, such as those employing matrix factorization (Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014), graph construction (Zhang
et al. 2023a; Wen, Xu, and Liu 2020), subspace learning (Hu
and Chen 2018; Liu et al. 2021), and deep learning (Lin
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2023; Chao, Jiang, and Chu 2024).
For instance, (Liu et al. 2021) proposed jointly performing
data imputation and self-representation learning for better
IMVC results. (Wen, Xu, and Liu 2020) exploits the graph
learning and spectral clustering techniques to learn the common representation for IMVC. Furthermore, the deep IMVC
methods usually try to infer missing data and extract representation with a deep neural network (Wen et al. 2020b).
Although remarkable success achieved by these IMVC approaches, their high storage and computational complexity
pose challenges to their application on large-scale datasets.
Recently, some anchor-based IMVC methods have been
proposed for fast clustering, which are widely applied in
large-scale IMVC tasks (Liu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022;
Yu et al. 2022; Wen et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2024). Anchorbased IMVC focuses on exploring the similarity relations
between some anchors and samples to construct anchor
graphs. As a representative, (Wang et al. 2022) proposed
to learn a consensus anchor matrix and an anchor graph in
a latent subspace. (Wen et al. 2023) learned view-specific
anchors and anchor graphs, and aligned all graphs with a
consensus one. In the latest work by (Yu et al. 2024), they
utilized observed samples to generate view-shared anchors
with multi-dimensions and multi-sizes for large-scale IMVC
tasks. Although these anchor-based IMVC methods have
achieved great success in large-scale IMVC applications,
most of them still encounter some issues: (1) They typically
construct anchor-sample similarity graphs directly from observed samples, neglecting the potentially valuable information of missing samples. (2) Most methods mainly focus on
learning a consensus anchor graph, which might not fully
exploit complementary information and high-order correlations across views. (3) They generally need post-processing

Recently, anchor-based incomplete multi-view clustering
(IMVC) has been widely adopted for fast clustering, but most
existing approaches still encounter some issues: (1) They
generally rely on the observed samples to construct anchor
graphs, ignoring the potentially useful information of missing instances. (2) Most methods attempt to learn a consensus anchor graph, failing to fully excavate the complementary information and high-order correlations across views.
(3) They generally apply post-processing on learned anchor
graph to seek latent embeddings, making them not globallyoptimal. To address these issues, this paper proposes a novel
fast IMVC approach with Adaptive Similarity Completion
and Reconstruction (ASCR), which unifies anchor learning,
anchor-sample similarity construction and completion, and
latent multi-view embedding learning in a joint framework.
Specifically, ASCR learns an anchor-sample similarity graph
for each view, and the missing values are fulfilled to mitigate the adverse effects. To explore the consistent and complementary information across views, ASCR simultaneously
seeks the view-specific anchor embeddings and sample embeddings in a latent subspace by similarity reconstruction,
which not only preserves the semantic information into latent embeddings but also enhances the low-rank property of
similarity graphs, achieving a reliable graph completion process. Furthermore, the high-order cross-view correlations are
explored with tensor-based regularization. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority and efficiency of
ASCR compared with SOTA approaches.

Code — https://github.com/dengxu-nju/ASCR

Introduction
In real-world scenarios, diverse sources and feature collectors generate multi-view data, whose exponential growth
over the past decade has driven significant research in multiview learning, especially in multimedia and machine learning (Lu et al. 2019; Cai et al. 2024; Han et al. 2022;
Fang et al. 2023). Among these tasks, multi-view clustering
(MVC) (Sun et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024; Gu, Li, and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21734

