The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Efficient and Accurate Dynamic Sparse Training Framework
Based on Parameter-Freezing
Lei Li1 * , Haochen Yang1 * , Jiacheng Guo1 , Hongkai Yu1 , Minghai Qin1,2† , Tianyun Zhang1†
1

Cleveland State University, Cleveland, USA
2
Western Digital Research, Milpitas, USA

Abstract

2017) and further explored by (Kairouz et al. 2021), FL enables multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model
without sharing local data. Instead, these clients contribute
by aggregating locally trained parameters, thereby preserving privacy and harnessing the collective power of data distributed across numerous devices.
In FL systems, substantial computational tasks are transferred from centralized cloud servers to edge devices with
constrained resources. To facilitate effective operation at the
edge, an FL system needs to enhance both the efficiency of
local training on the devices and the efficiency of data communication across the network. Current DNNs have large
model sizes and computational requirements which pose
challenges for deployment and training on edge devices.
Some research has explored the use of sparse neural networks to create lightweight models for edge devices, aiming to reduce inference latency(Gale, Elsen, and Hooker
2019; Chen et al. 2020, 2021c). On the other hand, implementing FL frameworks on client devices such as mobile phones often faces severe upload bandwidth limitations,
making it equally crucial to reduce the upload costs of FL
algorithms. Prior work mitigates these constraints by condensing the models or messages into compact formats, such
as gradient compression (Lin et al. 2018; Vogels, Karimireddy, and Jaggi 2019; Albasyoni et al. 2020). Similarly,
parameter-freezing offers another promising avenue for enhancing communication efficiency in FL. This technique,
which involves freezing specific model parameters during
training, has demonstrated the potential to significantly reduce data transfer without compromising accuracy (Chen
et al. 2021a, 2024; Wu et al. 2024).
To address both the computational challenge on edge devices and the necessity for efficient communication in FL,
researchers have shifted their attention to methods that could
not only simplify the model but also ensure the efficiency
of data transmission. Recently, network pruning has been
proposed to alleviate the computation costs of deep models(Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Zhang et al. 2018; Hoefler
et al. 2021), and the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (Frankle and
Carbin 2018) suggests that this pruning has minimal, if any,
impact on model performance. This finding has spurred significant interest in leveraging model pruning within FL to
reduce both computation and communication costs (Li et al.
2020a; Jiang et al. 2022; Bibikar et al. 2022). A notable ex-

Federated learning is a decentralized machine learning approach that consists of servers and clients. It protects data
privacy during model training by keeping the training data locally in each client. However, the requirement for the server
and clients to frequently synchronize the parameters of the
model brings a heavy burden to the communication links,
especially when the model size has grown drastically in recent years. Several methods have been proposed to compress
the model size by sparsification to reduce the communication overhead, albeit with significant accuracy degradation.
In this work, we propose methods to better trade-off between
model accuracy and training efficiency in federated learning. Our first proposed method is a novel sparse mask readjustment rule on the server and the second is a parameterfreezing method during training on the clients. Experimental
results show that the model accuracy has significantly improved when combining our proposed methods. For example, compared with the previous state-of-the-art methods with
the same total amount of communication cost and computation FLOPs, the accuracy increases on average by 4% and
6% in our methods for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets
on ResNet-18, respectively. On the other hand, when targeting the same accuracy, the proposed method can reduce the
communication cost by 4-8 times for different datasets with
different sparsity levels.

Introduction
In the era of ubiquitous computing, training deep neural networks (DNNs) often requires a substantial amount of data,
typically generated at the edge of widely used mobile and Internet of Things (IoT) devices (Zhang, Patras, and Haddadi
2019; Mohammadi et al. 2018; Li, Ota, and Dong 2018).
This raises significant privacy concerns as centralizing such
data for training purposes poses risks to user confidentiality (Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017; Khan et al. 2021;
Nguyen et al. 2021). To deal with these challenges, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a pivotal distributed
machine learning paradigm. Developed by (McMahan et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding authors: Tianyun Zhang and Minghai Qin
(t.zhang85@csuohio.edu and Minghai.Qin@wdc.com)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18350

