The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Diffusion-Based Framework for Occluded Object Movement
Zheng-Peng Duan1, 2 , Jiawei Zhang2 , Siyu Liu1 , Zheng Lin5 * ,
Chun-Le Guo1, 3 , Dongqing Zou2, 4 , Jimmy Ren2 , Chongyi Li1, 3 *
1

VCIP, CS, Nankai University
2
SenseTime Research
3
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
4
PBVR
5
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{adamduan0211, zhjw1988}@gmail.com, liusiyu29@mail.nankai.edu.cn, frazer.linzheng@gmail.com,
guochunle@nankai.edu.cn, dqzou.lhi@gmail.com, rensijie@sensetime.com, lichongyi@nankai.edu.cn
Abstract
Seamlessly moving objects within a scene is a common requirement for image editing, but it is still a challenge for existing editing methods. Especially for real-world images, the
occlusion situation further increases the difficulty. The main
difficulty is that the occluded portion needs to be completed
before movement can proceed. To leverage the real-world
knowledge embedded in the pre-trained diffusion models, we
propose a Diffusion-based framework specifically designed
for Occluded Object Movement, named DiffOOM. The proposed DiffOOM consists of two parallel branches that perform object de-occlusion and movement simultaneously. The
de-occlusion branch utilizes a background color-fill strategy
and a continuously updated object mask to focus the diffusion
process on completing the obscured portion of the target object. Concurrently, the movement branch employs latent optimization to place the completed object in the target location
and adopts local text-conditioned guidance to integrate the
object into new surroundings appropriately. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the superior performance of our method,
which is further validated by a comprehensive user study.

(a) Original Image

(b) Zhan et al.

(c) SD Inpainting

(d) DragDiffusion

(e) DiffEditor

(f) Ours

Figure 1: Comparison with other methods for occluded object movement. Given a real-world image, our method can
seamlessly move the occluded object to a user-specified position while completing the occluded portion.
portion (Liu et al. 2024; Zhan et al. 2024; Ozguroglu et al.
2024; Xu, Zhang, and Shi 2024). One intuitive solution is
to utilize the SD Inpainting model (Rombach et al. 2022) to
complete the missing regions, which is shown in Figure 1(c).
With no constraints on the generated contents, the inpainting
model may generate undesired elements rather than reconstructing the occluded portion of the target object. Recently,
diffusion-based drag-style (Pan et al. 2023) editing methods,
such as DragDiffusion (Shi et al. 2024) and DiffEditor (Mou
et al. 2024), are proposed to drag objects to target positions
with pre-trained diffusion models effectively. As illustrated
in Figure 1(d), DragDiffusion focuses primarily on content
dragging and therefore struggles to move the entire object.
Although DiffEditor successfully moves the little boy to the
target location in Figure 1(e), the occluded parts remain incomplete as de-occlusion is not considered.
Although existing diffusion-based editing methods cannot be directly employed for this task, the comprehensive real-world knowledge embedded in large-scale diffusion models may be useful for this task. To this end, we
propose a diffusion-based framework specifically designed
for the movement of occluded objects, called DiffOOM.
Our method features two parallel Stable Diffusion-based

Project — https://adam-duan.github.io/projects/diffoom/

Introduction
Seamlessly moving objects (Avrahami et al. 2024) within a
scene is a common requirement for image editing (Nguyen
et al. 2024b; Sajnani et al. 2024; Epstein et al. 2023; Brooks,
Holynski, and Efros 2023). To move occluded objects, it
involves three sub-tasks: completing the obscured object,
moving the object to the target position, and inpainting the
original region of the moved objects. To solve object deocclusion, previous work (Zhan et al. 2020) employs two
separate networks: the first predicts the complete mask of the
object, and the second fills in the recovered mask with reasonable content. However, adopting discriminative networks
significantly restricts the ability to generate new content, as
illustrated in Figure 1(b). Recent advances in large-scale diffusion models, known for their powerful generative capability, present a new opportunity to generate the occluded
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2816

