The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Task-level Distributionally Robust Optimization for Large Language Model-based
Dense Retrieval
Guangyuan Ma1,2 * , Yongliang Ma3 , Xing Wu1,2 , Zhenpeng Su1,2 , Ming Zhou3 , Songlin Hu1,2†
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Langboat Technology, Beijing, China
{maguangyuan,wuxing,suzhenpeng,husonglin}@iie.ac.cn, {mayongliang,zhouming}@langboat.com
2

Abstract

Proxy Model

Large Language Model-based Dense Retrieval (LLM-DR)
optimizes over numerous heterogeneous fine-tuning collections from different domains. However, the discussion about
its training data distribution is still minimal. Previous studies rely on empirically assigned dataset choices or sampling
ratios, which inevitably lead to sub-optimal retrieval performances. In this paper, we propose a new task-level Distributionally Robust Optimization (tDRO) algorithm for LLMDR fine-tuning, targeted at improving the universal domain
generalization ability by end-to-end reweighting the data distribution of each task. The tDRO parameterizes the domain
weights and updates them with scaled domain gradients. The
optimized weights are then transferred to the LLM-DR finetuning to train more robust retrievers. Experiments show optimal improvements in large-scale retrieval benchmarks and reduce up to 30% dataset usage after applying our optimization
algorithm with a series of different-sized LLM-DR models.

Weighted
contrastive
learning

Reference Model

Gradient ascent
with relative loss
measurement

Scale

Domain Weights
Multilingual
Wiki
Yahoo
Web
News

Top-rated
datasets
Sample ratio
reweight

Optimized
Retrieval
Models

Figure 1: Task-level Distributionally Robust Optimization
for Large Language Model-based Dense Retrieval.

relies heavily on intuitional assessments. It’s hard to decide
whether an empirical assigned data sampling ratio is optimal for the models to perform well, i.e. robust to all tasks.
Nowadays, the robustness of data distributional optimization
for LLM-DR is still very limited.
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) (Oren et al.
2019; Sagawa et al. 2019; Piratla, Netrapalli, and Sarawagi
2022) receives extensive discussions for battling unbalanced
data composition. GroupDRO (Sagawa et al. 2019), the most
popular algorithm for DRO, optimizes on the worst-case loss
of the corresponding domain, which picks a domain with the
highest loss at each training step and up-weights the loss of
this domain. Although there was an attempt (Yu et al. 2022)
to utilize vanilla GroupDRO or variants of DRO algorithm
(Piratla, Netrapalli, and Sarawagi 2022) for dense retrieval
fine-tuning, the optimization is limited to a small BERTbased model over clustered groups of one single dataset, i.e.
MS-MARCO (Nguyen et al. 2016), which fails to generalize
to LLM-DR fine-tuning with multiple heterogeneous training collections. It’s profitable to solve the data distribution
issue of LLM-DR in an end-to-end manner like DRO, but
such a study is still left for further exploration.
The existing DRO algorithms (Oren et al. 2019; Sagawa
et al. 2019; Piratla, Netrapalli, and Sarawagi 2022), such
as GroupDRO, are theoretically incompatible with LLMDR fine-tuning due to different batch sampling strategies
and incommensurable loss scales. Firstly, DRO requires all

Code — https://github.com/tdro-llm/tdro
Datasets — https://huggingface.co/tdro-llm

Introduction
Dense retrieval (Karpukhin et al. 2020) recalls relevant documents from large-sized candidate pools with the similarity search (Mussmann and Ermon 2016) of query-passage
embeddings. The recent bloom of Large Language Modelbased Dense Retrieval (LLM-DR) (Wang et al. 2024a; Meng
et al. 2024; Muennighoff et al. 2024) promotes remarkable
retrieval abilities with better foundation models (Touvron
et al. 2023; Bai et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023) and large-scale
training collections (Wang et al. 2024a; Xiao et al. 2023).
LLM-DR fine-tuning learns LLM-based retrieval models with heterogeneous training collections (Reimers 2019)
from multiple domains with different learning difficulties.
The data distribution of training collections, i.e. a mixture of
data with chosen datasets or sampling ratio on each dataset,
significantly influences the general retrieval performances of
dense retrievers (Oren et al. 2019; Meng et al. 2024). However, the choice or sampling ratio of the training sets still
* Work done during internship at Langboat Technology.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24759

