The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explainable Neural Networks with Guarantee: A Sparse Estimation Approach
Antoine Ledent and Peng Liu*
Singapore Management University
aledent@smu.edu.sg, liupeng@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

domains like healthcare, finance, and autonomous driving,
where understanding the reasoning behind predictions is
paramount.
Whilst many works attempt to analyze the predictions made by neural networks to make them more interpretable (Zhou et al. 2018, 2014; Dhurandhar et al. 2018;
Goyal et al. 2019), the explanations produced are still far
from the aim of providing an easily computable decision
function which humans can understand and manipulate. For
instance, in the computer vision literature, most works focus on visualizing concepts learned by individual neurons
in intermediary layers. This doesn’t fully explain how such
concepts are learned from the pixel data or how these concepts are aggregated to produce a final prediction. Similarly,
in natural language processing, an interpretable method attempts to identify which words were given greater importance in generating the prediction; it is still difficult to fully
explain how the model’s prediction has utilized grammatical
concepts or subtle clues such as irony.
Although many of the issues above are arguably tied to
the intrinsic complexity of typical machine learning problems such as computer vision and natural language processing, there is a lack of trustworthy and interpretable models in other domains, such as healthcare and finance, where
the data are sometimes much lower-dimensional and where
each feature corresponds to a concrete concept. These domains often require identifying a small set of relevant features, from a possibly high-dimensional space, that contribute most significantly to the outcome of interest. Reducing
the dimensionality of input data also helps mitigate the curse
of dimensionality and reduces the risk of overfitting. However, many feature selection methods often involve heuristics or statistical measures on feature ranking that are decoupled from the model training process. Other methods,
such as involve L1 -norm regularization (Roth 2004; Zou
2006; Tibshirani 2013), performs simultaneous feature selection and model estimation, but the resulting function typically depends on all selected features in an untractable way,
making the final model less interpretable in complex models
such as neural networks.
In this paper, we propose to tackle these issues by introducing an extremely parsimonious class of functions represented by neural networks. Our model SparXnet automatically
selects a small number of important input features by ap-

Balancing predictive power and interpretability has long been
a challenging research area, particularly in powerful yet complex models like neural networks, where nonlinearity obstructs direct interpretation. This paper introduces a novel
approach to constructing an explainable neural network that
harmonizes predictiveness and explainability. Our model is
designed as a linear combination of a sparse set of jointly
learned features, each derived from a different trainable function applied to a single 1-dimensional input feature. Leveraging the ability to learn arbitrarily complex relationships,
our neural network architecture enables automatic selection
of a sparse set of important features, with the final prediction
being a sum of rescaled versions of these features. We demonstrate the ability to select significant features while maintaining comparable predictive performance and direct interpretability through extensive experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets. We also provide theoretical analysis on
the generalization bounds of our framework, which is favorably linear in the number of selected features and only logarithmic in the number of input features. We further lift any dependence of sample complexity on the number of parameters
or the architectural details under very mild conditions. Our
research paves the way for further research on sparse and explainable neural networks with guarantees.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2501.02010

1

Introduction

Neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in multiple domains, from image and speech recognition (He
et al. 2016; He, Liu, and Tao 2020; Lecun et al. 1998;
Szegedy et al. 2015) to natural language processing (Devlin
et al. 2018; Church 2017; TAN et al. 2022). However, their
complex architectures and the vast number of parameters
mean that they can only be understood as ‘black box’ models, where the decision-making process is not interpretable.
Furthermore, neural networks typically involve millions of
trainable parameters or even more, leading to poor understanding of their generalization behavior (Bartlett, Foster,
and Telgarsky 2017). This lack of transparency and explainability is bound to raise concerns, especially in high-stakes
* Both authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18044

