The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-Shot Image Captioning with Multi-type Entity Representations
Delong Zeng1 , Ying Shen1,2,3 * , Man Lin1 , Zihao Yi1 , Jiarui Ouyang1
1
Sun Yat-Sen University
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510005, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fire Science and Intelligent Emergency Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
sheny76@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
As data and computational resources continue to expand, incorporating a variety of knowledge during the pre-training
phase enhances large models, providing them with strong
zero-shot capabilities. Due to the alignment of modal features by visual language models, zero-shot image captioning
no longer necessitates pre-training on paired image-text labeled data, enabling accurate text description generation for
images not encountered before. While recent researches focus on methods utilizing entity retrieval as anchors to bridge
the gap between different modalities, these approaches often fall short of thoroughly analyzing the impact of entity
retrieval recall on the zero-shot generation capabilities. To
address this issue, we propose MERCap, a zero-shot image
captioning method employing Multi-type Entity representation Retrieval. More specifically, we first approximate image representation using the CLIP representation of text and
Gaussian noise to address the modality gap. Then, we train
a GPT-2 to reconstruct text using entities as hard prompts
and CLIP representations as soft prompts. Additionally, we
construct a domain-specific entity set, assigning multiple representations to each entity and refining their representation
vectors through contrastive learning. During inference, we retrieve entities and input them into the decoder to generate corresponding captions. Extensive experiments validate that our
approach is efficient, achieving a new state-of-the-art level in
cross-domain captioning and in-domain captioning compared
to existing methods.

Figure 1: The paradigm of zero-shot image captioning. Only
textual data participates in training, and no image-text pairs
are utilized. Anchors can be entities or sentences, used to
further align the gap between different modalities.

to zero-shot generative tasks, such as captioning, remains a
subject worthy of exploration (Tewel et al. 2022). Image
captioning aims to convert image content into textual descriptions (Cheng et al. 2017; Smeaton and Quigley 1996).
Conventional approaches typically require a large amount
of image-text pair data for training, posing challenges in
data acquisition (Farhadi, Hejrati, and Sadeghi 2010; Hodosh, Young, and Hockenmaier 2013; Sun, Gan, and Nevatia 2015). Recently, zero-shot image caption has gained attention. These methods extensively explore the cross-modal
alignment information of pre-trained large models, utilizing
the representation of text for alignment by introducing noise
instead of image representation (Li et al. 2023b). As seen in
Figure 1, zero-shot methods do not use image-text pairs for
training but instead match through retrieval of shared entities, concepts, or similar sentences as anchors (Tewel et al.
2022; Yang, Liu, and Wu 2023). Through training the text
generation model on the task of reconstructing text using
textual representations to simulate image representations,
these methods aim to achieve image-text generation without
relying on paired data.
However, recent zero-shot image captioning methods primarily focus on integrating detected concepts such as entities into the input, with less emphasis on researching how
to train the matching relationship between images and entities through techniques like contrastive learning in such a
zero-shot setting. This leads to the generation of text by the
model containing more irrelevant content and lower accu-

Introduction
With the rapid development of the internet, a large number
of unlabeled corpora emerge, driving the advancements in
unsupervised learning. In the multimodal domain, various
large-scale image-text alignment models proliferate, such
as Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021), which achieves alignment between different modalities through pretraining on a substantial number
of image-text pairs. These pre-trained models demonstrate
impressive zero-shot transferability in various discriminative tasks, such as classification, segmentation, and detection
(Siddique et al. 2021; Ding et al. 2022). However, the effective transfer of the perceptual capabilities of these models
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22308

