The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DEQA: Descriptions Enhanced Question-Answering Framework
for Multimodal Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis
Zhixin Han1 , Mengting Hu1 * , Yinhao Bai2 , Xunzhi Wang1 , Bitong Luo1
1

College of Software, Nankai University
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
zhixinhan@mail.nankai.edu.cn, mthu@nankai.edu.cn, yinhaobai68@gmail.com,
xunzhi@mail.nankai.edu.cn, luobitong@mail.nankai.edu.cn
Our next show ! We are raising money for 4
year old Slaters Stem Cell therapy ! Join us
in Riverside , CA ! Sat May 16 .

Abstract
Multimodal aspect-based sentiment analysis (MABSA) integrates text and images to perform fine-grained sentiment
analysis on specific aspects, enhancing the understanding of
user opinions in various applications. Existing methods use
modality alignment for information interaction and fusion between images and text, but an inherent gap between these
two modalities necessitates a more direct bridging mechanism to effectively connect image understanding with text
content. For this, we propose the Descriptions Enhanced
Question-Answering Framework (DEQA), which generates
descriptions of images using GPT-4, leveraging the multimodal large language model to provide more direct semantic
context of images. In DEQA, to help the model better understand the task’s purpose, we frame MABSA as a multiturn question-answering problem to add semantic guidance
and hints. We input text, image, and description into separate experts in various combinations, allowing each expert to
focus on different features and thereby improving the comprehensive utilization of input information. By integrating
these expert outputs within a multi-turn question-answering
format, we employ a multi-expert ensemble decision-making
approach to produce the final prediction results. Experimental results on two widely-used datasets demonstrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore,
our framework substantially outperforms GPT-4o and other
multimodal large language models, showcasing its superior
effectiveness in multimodal sentiment analysis.

MATE
Aspect term

Slaters

Sentiment polarity Positive

Stem Cell Riverside
Negative

Neutral

CA
Neutral

MASC
GPT-4: The image shows a young boy with a joyful expression on his face. He
has short, spiked hair and is wearing a red t-shirt. The boy is seated in a wheelchair, which is equipped with a headrest and straps that appear to be securing him
safely in the chair. The background is nondescript, suggesting the photo may
have been taken indoors, possibly in a room or hallway. The boy's smile and
the twinkle in his eyes convey a sense of happiness and playfulness.

Figure 1: A dataset entry from Twitter2015 (Yu and Jiang
2019). MABSA contains two subtasks, MATE and MASC.

which determines the sentiment polarity of each aspect.
MABSA requires the utilization of both image and text information, take Figure 1 as an example, where solely based
on the text, people might assume the sentiment polarity of
Slaters to be negative because he is ill and requires treatment. However, upon observing the image, it becomes clear
that the young boy is smiling. In this case, we can infer that
the sentiment polarity of Slaters is positive.
Image and text, as two distinct modalities, exhibit significant differences in the types of information they convey and
the forms in which they are expressed, each carrying heterogeneous information. Some methods focus on fusing these
two modalities, while others advocate for modality alignment as the main means to effectively integrate the heterogeneous information, thereby improving performance. Ling,
Yu, and Xia (2022) introduce three task-specific pre-training
tasks to identify fine-grained aspect, opinions, and their
cross-modal alignments. Zhou et al. (2023) introduce aspectaware attention module (A3 M) for semantically fine-grained
image-text alignment. Furthermore, to achieve better alignment, many cutting-edge methodologies adopt a pre-training
followed by fine-tuning approach. However, despite the advancements in modality alignment, the inherent gap between
image and text modalities still exists, necessitating a more
direct bridging mechanism to effectively connect image understanding with text content. What is more, the pre-training
process consumes a significant amount of time and computational resources.

Introduction
Multimodal aspect-based sentiment analysis (MABSA) (Ju
et al. 2021) is an advanced field at the intersection of natural
language processing and computer vision, integrating text
and images to perform fine-grained sentiment analysis on
specific aspects, enhancing the understanding of user opinions in various applications. As shown in Figure 1, MABSA
involves extracting all aspect terms from image-text pairs
and predicting their sentiment polarities. It includes two
subtasks: multimodal aspect term extraction (MATE) (Wu
et al. 2020a), which identifies all aspect terms in the sentence prompted by the associated image; and multimodal aspect sentiment classification (MASC) (Yu and Jiang 2019),
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23987

