The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OTPNet: ODE-inspired Tuning-free Proximal Network
for Remote Sensing Image Fusion
Wei Yu, Zonglin Li, Qinglin Liu, Xin Sun*
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{20b903014, zonglin.li, qinglin.liu}@stu.hit.edu.cn, sunxintyc@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

tion. By combining the strengths of both sensors, this solution enables the reconstruction of an image with both high
spatial and spectral resolution, providing richer information
than either sensor can achieve individually. A well-known
fusion task is the pan-sharpening, which involves merging
a high spatial resolution PANchromatic (PAN) image and
a Low spatial Resolution MultiSpectral (LR-MS) image to
generate a High-Resolution MultiSpectral (HR-MS) image
with high spatial and spectral resolution. It serves as a typical case to demonstrate our remote sensing fusion method.
Typically, it is assumed that the HR-MS image maintains
the rich spectral information and produces the LR-MS images through spatial downsampling and blurring degradation. Simultaneously, the HR-MS image maintains a high
spatial resolution and derives the single-band PAN image
with a specific spectral response function. Therefore, the
pan-sharpening algorithm essentially restores the spatial and
spectral degradation information of the input images simultaneously and reduces the introduction of artifacts and fusion noise to produce the required HR-MS. The physical
degradation process of the HR-MS image H ∈ RHW ×C
is usually defined mathematically as follows

Remote sensing image fusion aims to reconstruct a high spatial and spectral resolution image by integrating the spatial
and spectral information from multiple remote sensing sensor data. Despite the remarkable progress of deep learningbased fusion methods, most existing methods rely on manual
network architecture design and hyperparameter tuning, lacking sufficient interpretability and adaptability. To address this
limitation, we propose a novel neural Ordinary Differential
Equation (ODE)-inspired tuning-free proximal splitting algorithm, which splits remote sensing image fusion into two optimization problems regularized by deep priors to model the
fusion of spatial and spectral. Firstly, based on the physical
properties of spatial and spectral information, the two problems are optimized by two proximal splitting operators to iteratively integrate spatial-spectral complementary information,
eliminating or suppressing redundant information to reduce
fusion errors. Secondly, considering the efficiency of neural
ODE in reducing optimization error, we utilize a high-order
numerical scheme to customize the proximal operator theoretically without additional handcrafted design and parameter
tuning. Finally, by incorporating the numerical scheme as a
solver into the proximal optimization algorithm, we derive an
ODE-inspired Tuning-free Proximal Network, dubbed OTPNet, which achieves efficient and robust fusion reconstruction. Extensive experiments on nine datasets across three different remote sensing image fusion tasks show that our OTPNet outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches, which
validates the effectiveness of our method.

L = DH, P = HS

(1)

where L ∈ Rhw×C and P ∈ RHW ×c represent the degrated
LR-MS and PAN images, respectively. D ∈ Rhw×HW and
S ∈ RC×c denote the spatial degradation matrix and the
spectral response matrix, respectively. With the rapid development of deep learning, pan-sharpening technology based
on neural networks (Ghassemian 2016; Ma et al. 2020;
Wang, Ma, and Zhang 2023) has achieved remarkable results by designing neural networks with different structures
to fuse spatial and spectral information from two sensors.
Despite significant advancements in existing deep
learning-based methods (Yang et al. 2017; Jin et al. 2022),
the majority of these approaches heavily rely on manually
designed network architectures and tuned hyperparameters,
lacking sufficient interpretability and adaptability. To address this issue, model-driven deep learning algorithms (Xu
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021) have received more attention,
which integrate prior knowledge for specific tasks to formulate an observed optimization problem and transform each
iteration of the solution algorithm into a layer of a deep
neural network. Their adaptability and effectiveness have

Introduction
Remote sensing images have been widely used in many visual fields (Berni et al. 2009; Cheng, Han, and Lu 2017;
Deng et al. 2018), leading to an increasing demand for highresolution and high-quality remote sensing images. However, it is impractical to directly obtain remote sensing images with both high spatial and spectral resolution due to
physical limitations in sensor design and data acquisition.
A practical solution (Hu et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022) is
to integrate the complementary information from two sensor images, where one sensor typically offers spatial resolution information and the other spectral resolution informa* Corresponding author (sunxintyc@hit.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9671

