The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ParGo: Bridging Vision-Language with Partial and Global Views
An-Lan Wang1, 2, †, * , Bin Shan2, † , Wei Shi2 , Kun-Yu Lin1 , Xiang Fei2 , Guozhi Tang2 , Lei Liao2 ,
Jingqun Tang2 , Can Huang2, B , Wei-Shi Zheng1, B
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
ByteDance China
{wanganlan, shanbin, shiwei.11, feixiang.77, tangguozhi.997, liaolei.666, can.huang}@bytedance.com,
linky5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Global

This work presents ParGo, a novel Partial-Global projector
designed to connect the vision and language modalities for
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Unlike previous works that rely on global attention-based projectors,
our ParGo bridges the representation gap between the separately pre-trained vision encoders and the LLMs by integrating global and partial views, which alleviates the overemphasis on prominent regions. To facilitate the effective training
of ParGo, we collect a large-scale detail-captioned imagetext dataset named ParGoCap-1M-PT, consisting of 1 million
images paired with high-quality captions. Extensive experiments on several MLLM benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our ParGo, highlighting its superiority in aligning
vision and language modalities. Compared to conventional
Q-Former projector, our ParGo achieves an improvement of
259.96 in MME benchmark. Furthermore, our experiments
reveal that ParGo significantly outperforms other projectors,
particularly in tasks that emphasize detail perception ability.

A landscape of an ancient stone
fortress
Two individuals stand atop
the fortress taking in the pa
noramic view.

Partial

The wooden gates of the
fortress is partially open

Figure 1: Illustration of the global and partial information.
An image can be properly described by the two kinds of information. Globally, this image shows a landscape of an ancient stone fortress. Delve into the partial information, two
individuals stand atop the fortress, the wooden gate at the
bottom of the fortress is partially open, and so forth.

of works (Li et al. 2023b; Alayrac et al. 2022), employing
global attention-based projectors, perform a global projection of image features to a fixed number of visual tokens using attention operation. However, these projectors based on
global projection lead to the produced tokens concentrating
on prominent regions while overlooking finer details. Take
the image in Figure 1 as an example, previous methods tend
to focus on the fortress and easily overlook the two individuals at the top.
In this paper, we aim to build a vision-language projector
that can provide the LLMs with visual features that better
represent the image, while using a fixed number of visual tokens. The inspiration stems from the observation that an image can be properly described by two kinds of information,
namely, global information presents a holistic understanding
of images, while multiple partial information emphasizes the
subtle details, an example is shown in Figure 1.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel Partial-Global projector (ParGo) based on a partial-global attention mechanism. By integrating both global and partial views, our
ParGo effectively bridges the representation gap between
separately pre-trained vision encoders and LLMs, alleviating the overemphasis on prominent regions. In addition,
considering the relation between different partial regions in
an image, ParGo incorporates a cascaded partial perception
block, which enables interaction between different partial regions of an image.
Furthermore, to facilitate the effective training of ParGo,

Code and models — https://github.com/bytedance/ParGo

Introduction
Recent Multi-Modal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
(Achiam et al. 2023; Team et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b; Li
et al. 2022) achieve remarkable progress across various tasks
(e.g., Visual Question Answering). The vision-language projector as a widely used component in MLLMs, aims to provide LLMs with proper visual features. Due to its critical
role in bridging modalities, it has garnered significant attention in recent research (Cha et al. 2023; Alayrac et al. 2022;
Zhu et al. 2023).
The pioneer works (Zhu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b)
directly project the visual feature using linear or MultiLayer Perceptron layer (MLP). Nevertheless, such linearbased projector struggles to control the number of visual
tokens provided to LLMs (e.g., handling fine-grained features), resulting in high computational costs. Another line
* This work is done when An-Lan Wang is an intern at
ByteDance China.
†
Equal contribution.
B
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7491

