The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DepMGNN: Matrixial Graph Neural Network for Video-based Automatic
Depression Assessment
Zijian Wu1, 2, 3 , Leijing Zhou4, 1 , Shuanglin Li5 , Changzeng Fu6 , Jun Lu3
Jing Han3 , Yi Zhang3 , Zhuang Zhao3 , Siyang Song2 *
1

Affect AI, Anhui, China
University of Exeter, UK
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
4
Zhejiang University, China
5
University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
6
Osaka University, Japan
2

Abstract

are subjective, expensive and time-consuming (Song et al.
2022). Since there are well-documented differences in
spatio-temporal facial behaviours expressed by depressed
and non-depressed individuals (e.g., reduced positive facial
displays (Clark and Watson 1991) and lack of facial expressions (Ellgring 2007)), machine learning (ML) models have
been frequently developed for automatic depression assessment (ADA) from human face videos (Valstar et al. 2014;
Ringeval et al. 2019, 2017; He et al. 2022).
Early video-based ADA approaches typically rely on
hand-crafted facial features (Meng et al. 2013; Pampouchidou et al. 2016), which fail to include depression-specific
facial cues that are not considered in their manually defined
feature extraction processes. Consequently, recent advances
in deep learning (DL) have been widely applied. Given a
face video (usually less than one hour (Valstar et al. 2013;
Ringeval et al. 2019)), a typical DL-based solution starts
with independently learning a depression-specific static feature from each face frame, and then conducts either featurelevel or decision-level fusion of all frames to make the final video-level depression prediction (He, Chan, and Wang
2021; Shang et al. 2021). The main issue of such approaches
is that crucial temporal dependencies among frames are not
considered for their depression assessment.
As a result, some approaches employed Long-shortterm-memory (LSTM) (Ray et al. 2019; Fang et al. 2023;
Al Hanai, Ghassemi, and Glass 2018) to model depressionspecific temporal dependencies from frame-level facial
features, despite that crucial depression-specific spatiotemporal cues might be disregarded in their static framelevel feature extraction process. To avoid this, spatiotemporal Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have been
widely applied to directly learn depression-specific spatiotemporal cues from the given video/video segment (Song
et al. 2024; Al Jazaery and Guo 2018; de Melo, Granger,
and Hadid 2020; Xu et al. 2024; Niu et al. 2022b). Since
regular DL models can only process inputs with the same
and fixed size (e.g., videos of the same length) while realworld face videos usually have variable lengths, these approaches frequently split every target video into multiple
equal-length segments and learn a vector-style feature from
each segment, which are finally combined to predict video-

Depression can be reflected by long-term human spatiotemporal facial behaviours. While human face videos
recorded in real-world usually have long and variable lengths,
existing video-based depression assessment approaches frequently re-sample/down-sample such videos to short and
equal-length videos, or split each video into several equallength segments, where segment-level spatio-temporal facial behaviours are suppressed as a vector-style representations for RNN-based long-term (video-level) modelling. Both
strategies lead to crucial information loss and distortion. In
this paper, we propose a novel graph-style data structure
called Matrixial Graph and an effective Matrixial Graph Neural Network (MGNN) for face video-based depression assessment, which can directly and end-to-end model long-term
depression-specific spatio-temporal facial cues from variablelength videos without resampling/splitting videos or suppressing video segments to vectors. Importantly, the nodes in
our matrixial graph are capable of including matrices of different shapes, and thus nodes of a matrix graph can directly
represent all frame-level 2D facial feature maps (or images
themselves) of an entire video regardless of its length. Then,
our MGNN is the first GNN that can jointly process matrixial graphs containing varying numbers of nodes, which further learns matrix-style edge features, thereby facilitating to
explicit model video-level multi-scale spatio-temporal facial
behaviours among matrixial graph nodes for depression assessment. Experiments show that the explicit spatio-temporal
modeling on 2D facial feature maps, facilitated by our matrixial graph/MGNN, provided significant benefits, leading
our approach to achieve new state-of-the-art performances on
AVEC2013 and AVEC2014 datasets with large advantages.

Code — https://github.com/AffectAI/MGNN

1

Introduction

Depression is a common but serious mental health problem that negatively impacts more than 300 millions individuals’ daily life all over the world (James et al. 2018).
Traditional depression assessments usually rely on questionnaires and interviews conducted by psychologists, which
* Corresponding author (ss2796@cam.ac.uk).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1610

