The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DuSSS: Dual Semantic Similarity-Supervised Vision-Language Model for
Semi-Supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Qingtao Pan1,2 , Wenhao Qiao1,2 , Jingjiao Lou1,2 , Bing Ji1,2 * , Shuo Li3
2

1
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and System Control, Ministry of Education, China
3
Department of Computer and Data Science and Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Case Western Reserve University, USA
{qingtaopan33, wenhaoo.qiao, jingjiaolou, slishuo}@gmail.com, b.ji@sdu.edu.cn

Traditional pseudolabeling SSL methods
Student
Prediction

Abstract
Semi-supervised medical image segmentation (SSMIS) uses
consistency learning to regularize model training, which alleviates the burden of pixel-wise manual annotations. However, it often suffers from error supervision from low-quality
pseudo labels. Vision-Language Model (VLM) has great potential to enhance pseudo labels by introducing text prompt
guided multimodal supervision information. It nevertheless
faces the cross-modal problem: the obtained messages tend
to correspond to multiple targets. To address aforementioned
problems, we propose a Dual Semantic Similarity-Supervised
VLM (DuSSS) for SSMIS. Specifically, 1) a Dual Contrastive
Learning (DCL) is designed to improve cross-modal semantic consistency by capturing intrinsic representations within
each modality and semantic correlations across modalities.
2) To encourage the learning of multiple semantic correspondences, a Semantic Similarity-Supervision strategy (SSS) is
proposed and injected into each contrastive learning process
in DCL, supervising semantic similarity via the distributionbased uncertainty levels. Furthermore, a novel VLM-based
SSMIS network is designed to compensate for the quality
deficiencies of pseudo-labels. It utilizes the pretrained VLM
to generate text prompt guided supervision information, refining the pseudo label for better consistency regularization.
Experimental results demonstrate that our DuSSS achieves
outstanding performance with Dice of 82.52%, 74.61% and
78.03% on three public datasets (QaTa-COV19, BM-Seg and
MoNuSeg).

Consistency

Pseudo label
Teacher
Disadvantage: Tend to
produce low-quality
pseudo labels.

Our idea: VLM-guided pseudolabeling SSL method
VLM
Student
Consistency

Image Enc

Text
Text Enc
Teacher Mask
Advantage: Enhance the
quality of pseudo labels via
text-guided mask.

Text

Figure 1: The VLM has potential to enhance pseudo labels
via text-guided mask, improving consistency learning.

2019), have been developed for medical image segmentation through an encoder and a decoder in a U-shaped architecture, connected by skip connections. However, fullysupervised methods need a large amount of pixel-level annotated data for model training and labeling such pixellevel annotations is laborious and requires expert knowledge especially in medical images, resulting in that labeled
data are expensive or simply unavailable (Shen et al. 2023).
Semi-supervised medical image segmentation (SSMIS) is a
method that utilizes a small amount of labeled data and a
large amount of unlabeled data to learn segmentation models (Qin, Wang, and Zhang 2024).
SSMIS methods, such as (Chen et al. 2021b; ?; Wang
et al. 2021; Bai et al. 2023), have shown promising performance for semi-supervised segmentation by combining
consistency regularization and pseudo labeling via cross supervision between the sub-networks. However, one key disadvantage of these approaches is that they may generate
low-quality pseudo labels (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox
2015b), which misleads model training and causes the model
to learn incorrect features, thus failing to effectively utilize
unlabeled data and disrupting consistency learning on unlabeled data. Therefore, the question that comes to mind is:
how to effectively improve the quality of pseudo labels for
SSMIS.
Vision-Language Model (VLM) has great potential to enhance the quality of pseudo-labels. It produces text-guided
supervision information by leveraging textual prompts to describe visual content, thus enhancing pseudo labels for var-

Code — https://github.com/QingtaoPan/DuSSS/

Introduction
Medical image segmentation aims to divide medical images
into specific regions with unique attributes. It contributes
to detecting abnormal areas and providing clinical guidance (Chen et al. 2021a). In clinical practice, achieving precise segmentation results necessitates manual implementation and there is an urgent need for automatic medical image segmentation to aid in diagnosis and treatment. Fullysupervised medical image segmentation methods, such as
U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015a) and its variants (Zhou et al. 2018; Özgün Çiçek et al. 2016; Fang et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6299

