The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reducing Leximin Fairness to Utilitarian Optimization
Eden Hartman1 , Yonatan Aumann1 , Avinatan Hassidim1,2 , Erel Segal-Halevi3
1

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
2
Google, Israel
3
Ariel University, Israel
eden.r.hartman@gmail.com, aumann@cs.biu.ac.il, avinatan@cs.biu.ac.il, erelsgl@gmail.com

Abstract

most. Finding an allocation that maximizes the egalitarian
welfare, however, is NP-hard (Bansal and Sviridenko 2006),
even in this relatively simple case.
In this paper, we show that knowing how to efficiently
maximize the utilitarian welfare is sufficient in order to find
a fair leximin solution.

Two prominent objectives in social choice are utilitarian maximizing the sum of agents’ utilities, and leximin - maximizing the smallest agent’s utility, then the second-smallest,
etc. Utilitarianism is typically computationally easier to attain but is generally viewed as less fair. This paper presents a
general reduction scheme that, given a utilitarian solver, produces a distribution over states (deterministic outcomes) that
is leximin in expectation. Importantly, the scheme is robust in
the sense that, given an approximate utilitarian solver, it produces a lottery that is approximately-leximin (in expectation)
- with the same approximation factor. We apply our scheme
to several social choice problems: stochastic allocations of indivisible goods, giveaway lotteries, and fair lotteries for participatory budgeting.

Contributions. The core contribution of this paper is a
general protocol that, when provided with a procedure for
optimizing the utilitarian welfare (for a given problem), outputs a solution that optimizes the expected leximin welfare
(for the same problem). By expected leximin we mean a
distribution over deterministic solutions, for which the expectations of the players’ utilities is leximin optimal. Crucially, our protocol extends to approximations, in the following sense: given an approximate solver for the utilitarian
welfare, the protocol outputs a solutions that approximates
the expected leximin optimal, and the same approximation
factor is preserved. In all, with our protocol at hand, optimizing expected leximin welfare is no more difficult than
optimizing utilitarian welfare.
We demonstrate the significance of this reduction by applying it to three social choice problems as follows.
First, we consider the classic problem of allocations of
indivisible goods, where one seeks to fairly distribute a
a set of indivisible goods among a set of heterogeneous
agents. Maximizing the utilitarian welfare in this case is
well-studied. Using our reduction, the previously mentioned
greedy algorithm for agents with additive utilities, allows
us to achieve a leximin optimal lottery over the allocations
in polynomial time. For submodular utilities, approximating
leximin to a factor better than (1 − 1e ) is NP-hard. However, by applying our reduction, existing approximation algorithms for utilitarian welfare can be leveraged to prove
that a 0.5-approximation can be obtained deterministically,
while the best-possible (1 − 1e )-approximation can be obtained with high probability.
Second, we consider the problem of giveaway lotteries
(Arbiv and Aumann 2022), where there is an event with
limited capacity and groups wish to attend, but only-if they
can all be admitted together. Maximizing the utilitarian welfare in this setting can be seen as a knapsack problem, for
which there is a well-known FPTAS (fully polynomial-time
approximation scheme). Using our reduction, we obtain an

Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10395

1

Introduction

In social choice, the goal is to find the best choice for society,
but ’best’ can be defined in many ways. Two frequent, and
often contrasting definitions are the utilitarian best, which
focuses on maximizing the total welfare (i.e., the sum of utilities); and the egalitarian best, which focuses on maximizing the least utility. The leximin best generalizes the egalitarian one. It first aims to maximize the least utility; then,
among all options that maximize the least utility, it chooses
the one that maximizes the second-smallest utility, among
these — the third-smallest utility, and so forth. Leximin is
often the solution of choice in social choice applications,
and frequently used (e.g., Freeman et al. (2019); Bei, Lu,
and Suksompong (2022); Cheng et al. (2023); Flanigan et al.
(2024)).
Calculating the Optimal Choice. Calculating a choice
that maximizes utilitarian welfare is often easier than finding
one that maximizes egalitarian welfare, while finding one
that is leximin optimal is typically even more complex. For
example, when allocating indivisible goods among agents
with additive utilities, finding a choice (in this case, an allocation) that maximizes the utilitarian welfare can be done
by greedily assigning each item to the agent who values it
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13905

