The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Free Lunch in the Forest:
Functionally-Identical Pruning of Boosted Tree Ensembles
Youssouf Emine1,2 , Alexandre Forel1, 3 , Idriss Malek1, 3 , Thibaut Vidal1, 3
1

Department of Mathematics and Industrial Engineering, Polytechnique Montréal
Canada Excellence Research Chair in Data-Science for Real-time Decision-Making (CERC)
3
CIRRELT & SCALE-AI Chair in Data-Driven Supply Chains
{youssouf.emine, alexandre.forel, thibaut.vidal}@polymtl.ca, idriss.malek@polytechnique.edu
2

Abstract

Ensemble pruning denotes the process of reducing the
size of a trained ensemble model. This can be understood
as removing nodes from the trees or removing trees entirely from the forest. Early approaches studied how to prune
random forests made of shallow trees, i.e., trees that were
themselves pruned beforehand (see, e.g., Margineantu and
Dietterich 1997; Martínez-Muñoz and Suárez 2006). These
works showed that pruning could improve the test error and
out-of-sample generalization. However, this is not true with
boosted ensembles, since the trees are typically already shallow. Hence, most recent studies seek a trade-off between
the amount of pruning and the impact on test error (Liu and
Mazumder 2023; Amee et al. 2023). This trade-off may be
profitable in some situations but there is no guarantee that
the model will perform well on new data.
In this paper, we completely avoid this trade-off by pruning ensemble models without any change in their behavior.
We call this a “functionally-identical” pruning since the prediction functions of the pruned ensemble and the original
one are identical. This has two main advantages. First, as
demonstrated in this paper, the resulting optimization problems can be very efficiently solved. Second, such pruned
models give a “free lunch”: they achieve the exact same
performance as the original model at a fraction of its size.
This provides multiple advantages regarding memory, inference time, and interpretability. An example ensemble that
can be pruned without any change in its prediction function
is shown in Figure 1.

Tree ensembles, including boosting methods, are highly effective and widely used for tabular data. However, large ensembles lack interpretability and require longer inference
times. We introduce a method to prune a tree ensemble into a
reduced version that is “functionally identical” to the original
model. In other words, our method guarantees that the prediction function stays unchanged for any possible input. As a
consequence, this pruning algorithm is lossless for any aggregated metric. We formalize the problem of functionally identical pruning on ensembles, introduce an exact optimization
model, and provide a fast yet highly effective method to prune
large ensembles. Our algorithm iteratively prunes considering
a finite set of points, which is incrementally augmented using
an adversarial model. In multiple computational experiments,
we show that our approach is a “free lunch”, significantly reducing the ensemble size without altering the model’s behavior. Thus, we can preserve state-of-the-art performance at a
fraction of the original model’s size.

Package — www.github.com/eminyous/fipe
Code — www.github.com/eminyous/fipe-experiments
Paper with appendices — arxiv.org/abs/2408.16167

1

Introduction

Ensembles remain one of the most effective and commonly
utilized machine learning models. Among them, tree ensembles such as random forests and boosting are known to
achieve state-of-the-art performance on tabular data (Grinsztajn, Oyallon, and Varoquaux 2022; McElfresh et al. 2024).
They also offer greater interpretability compared to large
neural networks. Theory and practice indicate that superior performance is achieved with large ensembles, i.e.,
forests with many trees (Biau and Scornet 2016; Probst and
Boulesteix 2017; Buschjäger and Morik 2021). However,
large ensembles lead to large memory requirements and inference times, which can quickly become a bottleneck when
embedding models into hardware such as microcontrollers
or smartphones. Further, large ensemble models lack interpretability due to the complex interaction of their components.

Figure 1: A small ensemble made of three trees with equal
weights. This ensemble can be pruned without any change in
its prediction function by removing the first and third trees.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

This paper introduces FIPE, a general algorithm for
16488

