The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Objective Evolution of Heuristic Using Large Language Model
Shunyu Yao1, * Fei Liu1, * Xi Lin1 , Zhichao Lu1 , Zhenkun Wang2, † , Qingfu Zhang1, †
2

1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shen Zhen, China
{shunyuyao8, fliu36}-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {xilin4, zhichao.lu}@cityu.edu.hk, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com,
qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

industry (Silver 2004), and economics (Vasant 2012). Unlike exact methods, heuristics offer practical alternatives
for finding sub-optimal solutions within a reasonable time
cost (Pearl 1984) and are particularly adept at handling complex problems with diverse attributes and constraints. However, developing effective heuristics typically requires expert knowledge and involves laborious trial-and-error manual crafting, presenting a significant challenge for real-world
applications.
To address this challenge, much effort has been devoted
to automating the design of heuristics (Pillay and Qu 2021).
These efforts can be broadly classified into three categories:
heuristic configuration (Ramos et al. 2005; Visheratin, Melnik, and Nasonov 2016), heuristic selection (Tang et al.
2014; Xu, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2010), and heuristic
composition (Burke et al. 2010; Drake et al. 2020; Pillay and
Qu 2018). Despite the successful creation of novel heuristics, the effectiveness of these heuristics still heavily relies
on algorithmic components crafted by human experts (Drake
et al. 2020).
In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities in algorithm design (Liu et al. 2024b). The integration of LLMs with Evolutionary Computation (EC) has enabled the automatic generation and refinement of heuristics along with their corresponding code implementations (Liu et al. 2024a; RomeraParedes et al. 2024; Ye et al. 2024). The designed heuristics achieved competitive performance with minimized human design and model training. However, all existing LLMbased evolutionary heuristic search methods focus on a single objective regarding the optimized performance of the target problem (Ma et al. 2023; Nasir et al. 2024; Liu et al.
2024a; Romera-Paredes et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Yao
et al. 2024; van Stein and Bäck 2024; Li et al. 2024; Zeng
et al. 2024; Mao et al. 2024; Ma et al. 2024). Other important heuristic design criteria, such as heuristic complexity (Ausiello et al. 2012) and code readability (Buse and
Weimer 2009), which could be vital in practice, are often neglected. Although some studies have attempted to optimize
multiple objectives by combining them into a single objective function, resulting in a single heuristic, the conflicting
nature of diverse objectives often makes it challenging to
find a single heuristic that satisfies all simultaneously. The
exploration of effective methods for searching a set of non-

Heuristics are commonly used to tackle various search and
optimization problems. Design heuristics usually require tedious manual crafting with domain knowledge. Recent works
have incorporated Large Language Models (LLMs) into automatic heuristic search, leveraging their powerful language
and coding capacity. However, existing research focuses on
the optimal performance on the target problem as the sole
objective, neglecting other criteria such as efficiency and
scalability, which are vital in practice. To tackle this challenge, we propose to model the heuristic search as a multiobjective optimization problem and consider introducing additional practical criteria beyond optimal performance. Due
to the complexity of the search space, conventional multiobjective optimization methods struggle to effectively handle LLM-based multi-objective heuristic search. We propose
the first LLM-based multi-objective heuristic search framework, Multi-objective Evolution of Heuristic (MEoH), which
integrates LLMs in a zero-shot manner to generate a nondominated set of heuristics to meet multiple design criteria. We design a new dominance-dissimilarity mechanism for
effective population management and selection, which incorporates both code dissimilarity in the search space and
dominance in the objective space. MEoH is demonstrated
in two well-known combinatorial optimization problems: the
online Bin Packing Problem (BPP) and the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). The results indicate that a variety of elite
heuristics are automatically generated in a single run, offering
more trade-off options than the existing methods. It successfully achieves competitive or superior performance while improving efficiency up to 10 times. Moreover, we also observe
that the multi-objective search introduces novel insights into
heuristic design and leads to the discovery of diverse heuristics.

Code — https://github.com/Optima-CityU/LLM4AD

1

Introduction

Heuristics are commonly used in solving optimization and
decision-making problems in a variety of fields, including
engineering (Bozorg-Haddad, Solgi, and Loáiciga 2017),
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27144

