The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HVDualformer: Histogram-Vision Dual Transformer for White Balance
Yan-Tsung Peng * and Guan-Rong Chen
National Chengchi University
ytpeng@cs.nccu.edu.tw, rogerchen3309@gmail.com

Abstract
Illuminant
Estimation

(A)
Raw image

𝑮𝒓
0
0

0
𝑮𝒈
0

0
0
𝑮𝒃

≡

Capturing images under different color temperatures can result in color casts, causing the color presented in photos to
differ from what is perceived by the human eye. Correcting
these color temperature shifts to achieve White Balance (WB)
is a challenging task, requiring the identification of variations
in color tones from diverse light sources and the removal of
color casts. The advent of deep neural networks has significantly advanced the progress of WB methods, evolving from
simply identifying the scene illumination color to directly
producing a color-corrected image from the color-shifted input. To better map color distributions and scene information
from the input to the WB image, we propose HVDualformer,
an end-to-end histogram-vision dual transformer architecture
that can rectify color temperature features from WB color histograms and exploit them to adjust image features to yield
accurate WB results. Extensive experimental results on public benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed model
performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods.

CCM

Corrected image

shifting
Raw-Hist

Corrected-Hist

(B)
SRGB image

Corrected image

SRGB-Hist Hist matching Corrected-Hist

(C)

SRGB image

Code — https://github.com/ytpeng-aimlab/HVDualformer

End-to-End Model

End-to-End
Model

Corrected image

Figure 1: Comparative Overview: (A) Traditional Raw-WB
methods correct color shifts by predicting the scene’s illuminant and applying a Color Correction Matrix, equivalent to aligning color histograms with WB. (B) End-toend sRGB-WB correction methods directly process the input sRGB image using a DNN-based model to obtain a WB
result. (C) The proposed HVDualformer estimates corrected
histogram-based color temperature features and aligns image features based on the corrected histogram features to
achieve end-to-end WB correction.

Introduction
Images captured under different lighting conditions often
exhibit color variations, known as color casts, which can
make them appear bluish, yellowish, or reddish. Unlike the
human visual system, which perceives colors consistently,
these variations affect visual quality. Correcting color casts
to achieve proper White Balance (WB) is crucial for images
taken under diverse lighting conditions.
Significant efforts have been made to achieve WB. In a
camera’s Image Signal Processing (ISP) pipeline, Raw-WB
methods are used to eliminate color shifts caused by the
scene illuminant in captured raw images (Gijsenij and Gevers 2007; Hu, Wang, and Lin 2017). These methods (Shi,
Loy, and Tang 2016; Hu, Wang, and Lin 2017) generally estimate the scene’s illuminant color and then apply a 3 × 3
diagonal Color Correction Matrix (CCM) to the captured
raw image based on the estimated illumination for color correction. However, because of the non-linear renderings applied by the ISP, Raw-WB methods often fail to fully correct inconsistent color shifts in the final sRGB image (Afifi

and Brown 2019). To address the issue, sRGB-WB methods have been developed to correct color temperature variations caused by inaccurate or personalized WB settings
within the camera’s ISP (Li et al. 2023). Recently, several sRGB-WB methods have been proposed, which can be
categorized into exemplar-based and deep neural network
(DNN)-based approaches. Exemplar-based methods, such
as KNN (Afifi et al. 2019), compute nonlinear mappings
to adjust for varying color temperatures. DNN-based methods, such as DEEP-WB (Afifi and Brown 2020), focus on
single-illuminant input and employ a convolutional architecture to map images to the corrected color temperature.

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6506

