The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Accelerated Diffusion via High-Low Frequency Decomposition for
Pan-Sharpening
Ge Meng1, 2 , Jingjia Huang1, 2 , Jingyan Tu1, 2 , Yingying Wang1, 3 , Yunlong Lin1, 2 , Xiaotong Tu1, 2 ,
Yue Huang1, 2, 3 , Xinghao Ding1, 2, 3 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, China
{mengg, huangjj, tujingyan, wangyingying7, linyl}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {xttu, yhuang2010, dxh}@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
Pan-sharpening aims to preserve the spectral information of
the multi-spectral (MS) image while leveraging the highfrequency details from the guided high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) image to enhance its spatial resolution. The key
challenge is how to preserve the spectral information from
the MS image and the spatial details from the PAN image
as much as possible. Diffusion models have achieved favorable results in image restoration and synthesis tasks but
suffer from excessive computational resource and time consumption. In this paper, we design a novel and computationally efficient diffusion-based pan-sharpening network that
achieves accelerated diffusion while reducing task complexity by decoupling the high and low-frequency components
of the fused image. Specifically, leveraging the informationpreserving characteristic of the wavelet transformation, we
introduce a Wavelet-based Low-frequency Diffusion Model
(WLDM). WLDM generates the low-frequency coefficient of
high-resolution MS (HRMS) image from the low-resolution
MS (LRMS) image. This approach significantly reduces computational resources and complexity compared to the direct restoration of the HRMS image. Furthermore, we have
devised a High-frequency Information Restoration Module
(HIRM) to restore the high-frequency information in the
HRMS image through the interaction of high-frequency coefficients from the PAN image in three directions. Extensive
experiments on three different datasets demonstrate that our
method outperforms existing approaches in both quantitative
metrics, qualitative metrics, and inference efficiency.

Figure 1: PSNR and inference time of comparison with
state-of-the-art methods on the WorldView-III test set. Our
method achieves a better balance between efficiency and
performance.

Traditional pan-sharpening methods mainly include component substitution (CS) (Carper et al. 1990; Shah, Younan,
and King 2008), multi-resolution analysis (MRA) (Mallat
1989; Li and Leung 2008), and variational optimization
(VO) methods (Tian et al. 2020, 2021). These methods have
proven success in image fusion tasks, but their effectiveness heavily relies on handcrafted features extracted based
on prior knowledge. In recent years, due to the powerful representation capabilities of deep neural networks, researchers
have designed numerous models based on CNNs to address
pan-sharpening (Fu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023; Lin et al.
2023). However, these methods often lack optimization for
visual fidelity as perceived by humans.
Therefore, following a perceptual-driven approach, some
scholars have designed pan-sharpening methods based on
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Xu et al. 2023;
Zhou et al. 2022a). These methods introduce a discriminator to constrain both the high-frequency fidelity and spectral
fidelity of the fused results. However, the generation process of GANs is often unstable, with no assurance of consistently producing high-quality HRMS images. Recently,
diffusion models have demonstrated powerful capabilities
in image restoration (Lin et al. 2024b,a) and image synthesis (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon
2020) tasks. Diffusion models rely on the hierarchical struc-

Introduction
Compared to traditional RGB images, multispectral (MS)
images contain richer spectral information, which leads
to the widespread utilization in downstream tasks such
as environmental monitoring, land classification, and so
on. However, constrained by the physical limitations of
sensors, satellites typically capture low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) images along with corresponding highresolution panchromatic (PAN) images. The purpose of pansharpening is to fuse the complementary information from
the LRMS and PAN images to generate high-resolution multispectral (HRMS) images.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6117

