The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Locally Convex Global Loss Network for Decision-Focused Learning
Haeun Jeon* , Hyunglip Bae* , Minsu Park, Chanyeong Kim, Woo Chang Kim†
KAIST
{haeun39, qogudflq, mspark0425, kim.chanyeong, wkim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

portfolio to repay the liability is obtained in the optimization
stage based on these predictions.
Prediction-focused learning (PFL) framework is the most
commonly used approach to solve such problems, handling
the two tasks in separate and independent steps. PFL first
trains the ML model on the input features to produce predictions that closely match the observed parameters. Subsequently, the decision-making problem is defined using the
parameters predicted by the trained ML model and is solved
to obtain an optimal decision. PFL is based on the underlying belief that accurate predictions will lead to good
decisions. However, ML models frequently fail to achieve
perfect accuracy, resulting in sub-optimal decisions. Consequently, in many applications, the prediction and optimization tasks are not distinct but are intricately linked and
should ideally be considered jointly.
Decision-focused learning (DFL) achieves the above purpose by directly training ML models to make predictions
that lead to good decisions. DFL combines prediction and
optimization tasks by creating an end-to-end system that
aims to minimize task loss directly. Task loss is defined as
the quality of decisions derived from the predictive model
and therefore, depends on the optimal solution of the associated optimization problem. To train an ML model in
this context, differentiating through the optimization problem is required to calculate the gradient of the task loss. This
presents a key challenge in integrating prediction and optimization. However, differentiation may be impossible if the
decision variable is discrete or the objective function is discontinuous.
While surrogate optimization still necessitates differentiation of the optimization problem, efforts have been made
to develop solver-free surrogate loss functions that can effectively obtain gradients. We refer to this approach as Surrogate DFL. Recent successful works in Surrogate DFL
include SPO (Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022), Contrastive
Loss (Mulamba et al. 2020), LTR Loss (Mandi et al. 2022),
LODL (Shah et al. 2022), EGL (Shah et al. 2024), LANCER
(Zharmagambetov et al. 2024), and TaskMet (Bansal et al.
2024). SPO, Contrastive loss, and LTR loss are specifically
designed for linear objectives while LODL can be implemented for general DFL problems. However, LODL creates
and trains a surrogate with a specific parametric form for
each data instance resulting in expensive computation, with

In decision-making problems under uncertainty, predicting
unknown parameters is often considered independent of the
optimization part. Decision-focused learning (DFL) is a taskoriented framework that integrates prediction and optimization by adapting the predictive model to give better decisions for the corresponding task. Here, an inevitable challenge arises when computing the gradients of the optimal decision with respect to the parameters. Existing research copes
with this issue by smoothly reforming surrogate optimization or constructing surrogate loss functions that mimic task
loss. However, they are applied to restricted optimization domains. In this paper, we propose Locally Convex Global Loss
Network (LCGLN), a global surrogate loss model that can
be implemented in a general DFL paradigm. LCGLN learns
task loss via a partial input convex neural network which
is guaranteed to be convex for chosen inputs while keeping the non-convex global structure for the other inputs. This
enables LCGLN to admit general DFL through only a single surrogate loss without any sense for choosing appropriate
parametric forms. We confirm the effectiveness and flexibility of LCGLN by evaluating our proposed model with three
stochastic decision-making problems.

1

Introduction

Decision-making problems under uncertainty arise in various real-world applications such as production optimization, energy planning, and asset liability management (Shiina and Birge 2003; Carino et al. 1994; Fleten and Kristoffersen 2008; Delage and Ye 2010; Garlappi, Uppal, and
Wang 2007). These problems involve two main tasks: Prediction and Optimization. The Prediction task aims to create
a model for uncertainty and estimate unknown parameters
from some input features. This task is often performed using machine learning (ML) techniques such as regression or
deep learning. In the Optimization task, the corresponding
optimization problem is solved using diverse off-the-shelf
solvers with the estimated parameters from the prediction
task. For example, in asset liability management, asset returns are estimated in the prediction stage, and the optimal
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26805

