The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Granular Multimodal Clue Fusion for Meme Understanding
Li Zheng1 , Hao Fei2 , Ting Dai1 , Zuquan Peng1 , Fei Li1,3 * , Huisheng Ma4 ,
Chong Teng1 , Donghong Ji1
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
3
Laboratory for Advanced Computing and Intelligence Engineering, Wuxi, China
4
North China Institute of Computing Technology, beijing, China
{zhengli,daiting cs,pzq cse,lifei csnlp,tengchong,dhji}@whu.edu.cn
haofei37@nus.edu.sg, mhs@bupt.cn
The fine-grained metaphorical
visual information

Abstract
With the continuous emergence of various social media platforms frequently used in daily life, the multimodal meme
understanding (MMU) task has been garnering increasing attention. MMU aims to explore and comprehend the meanings
of memes from various perspectives by performing tasks such
as metaphor recognition, sentiment analysis, intention detection, and offensiveness detection. Despite making progress,
limitations persist due to the loss of fine-grained metaphorical
visual clue and the neglect of multimodal text-image weak
correlation. To overcome these limitations, we propose a multigranular multimodal clue fusion model (MGMCF) to advance
MMU. Firstly, we design an object-level semantic mining
module to extract object-level image feature clues, achieving fine-grained feature clue extraction and enhancing the
model’s ability to capture metaphorical details and semantics.
Secondly, we propose a brand-new global-local cross-modal
interaction model to address the weak correlation between
text and images. This model facilitates effective interaction between global multimodal contextual clues and local unimodal
feature clues, strengthening their representations through a
bidirectional cross-modal attention mechanism. Finally, we
devise a dual-semantic guided training strategy to enhance
the model’s understanding and alignment of multimodal representations in the semantic space. Experiments conducted
on the widely-used MET-MEME bilingual dataset demonstrate significant improvements over state-of-the-art baselines.
Specifically, there is an 8.14% increase in precision for offensiveness detection task, and respective accuracy enhancements
of 3.53%, 3.89%, and 3.52% for metaphor recognition, sentiment analysis, and intention detection tasks. These results,
underpinned by in-depth analyses, underscore the effectiveness and potential of our approach for advancing MMU.

The weak correlation between
the text and image modalities

(a) How Italians fight
corona virus?

(b) Peace is only an armistice
in an endless war.

Figure 1: Examples of Metaphorical Memes.

Introduction
Memes, as a popular form of online communication, express
viewpoints, sentiments, and intentions in a concise and humorous manner. With the development of social networks,
Multimodal Meme Understanding (MMU) (Wang et al. 2024;
Xu et al. 2022), as an emerging research area in Natural Language Processing (NLP), plays a crucial role in many downstream applications, such as question answering (Zheng et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26057

2024b) and sentiment analysis (Zheng et al. 2023a,b). The
definition of the MMU task involves predicting understanding from four dimensions: metaphor, sentiment, intention,
and offensiveness. However, memes are nuanced, and accurately grasping the underlying meaning embedded within the
combination of text and images poses a crucial challenge.
Several studies have made commendable efforts in MMU.
Kiela et al. (2020); Kirk et al. (2021) introduced multimodal hate meme datasets specifically designed for hate
detection. However, these studies overlooked the crucial aspect of metaphorical features in memes. Therefore, Xu et al.
(2022) considered the richer metaphorical features in memes
and constructed a baseline model and a bilingual dataset
called MET-MEME for this purpose. Furthermore, Wang
et al. (2024) proposed a metaphor-aware multimodal multitask framework on this dataset to capture the interactions
between text and images. Despite achieving notable success,
current researches in this field face two significant limitations: 1) the loss of fine-grained metaphorical visual clues
and 2) the neglect of multimodal text-image weak correlation. These limitations hinder its further flourishing and
widespread adoption.
On the one hand, existing works (Qu et al. 2023; Ji, Ren,
and Naseem 2023) exhibit a lack of emphasis on images and
simply encode broad visual representations at the image-level,
ignoring metaphorical clues at the fine-grained object-level
of images. This neglect leads to a critical absence of key
visual metaphorical details, resulting in semantic ambiguity
and omissions, ultimately failing to comprehensively capture

