The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Combating Semantic Contamination in Learning with Label Noise
Wenxiao Fan, Kan Li

†

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
{wenxiaofan, likan}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Noisy labels can negatively impact the performance of deep
neural networks. One common solution is label refurbishment, which involves reconstructing noisy labels through predictions and distributions. However, these methods may introduce problematic semantic associations, a phenomenon that
we identify as Semantic Contamination. Through an analysis
of Robust LR, a representative label refurbishment method,
we found that utilizing the logits of views for refurbishment
does not adequately balance the semantic information of individual classes. Conversely, using the logits of models fails
to maintain consistent semantic relationships across models,
which explains why label refurbishment methods frequently
encounter issues related to Semantic Contamination. To address this issue, we propose a novel method called Collaborative Cross Learning, which utilizes semi-supervised learning
on refurbished labels to extract appropriate semantic associations from embeddings across views and models. Experimental results show that our method outperforms existing
approaches on both synthetic and real-world noisy datasets,
effectively mitigating the impact of label noise and Semantic
Contamination.

Figure 1: Illustration of Semantic Contamination. Air. is
short for airplane. After being trained with noisy labels,
models may learn the problematic semantic pairs, such as
(cat, airplane) is more similar than (cat, dog). This issue may
cause the model to learn incorrect feature spaces, impacting
its performance. In this study, we mainly focus on how to
enable the model to learn reasonable semantic information
in order to overcome Semantic Contamination.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11620

Introduction
In recent years, notable progress has been achieved
in various fields through deep learning methodologies
(Bochkovskiy, Wang, and Liao 2020; Marriott, Romdhani,
and Chen 2021). The use of labeled datasets plays a pivotal role in achieving these notable outcomes. Nevertheless, as datasets continue to expand in size, the probability of encountering noisy labels also increases. Such corrupted knowledge can be assimilated by models, which consequently results in a noticeable decrease in their performance (Zhang et al. 2017; Arpit et al. 2017). This occurrence
naturally prompts an urgent inquiry into how deep learning
continues to succeed despite the presence of label noise.
State-of-the-art methods in Learning with Noisy Labels
(LwNL) have notably enhanced noise robustness through
label refurbishment methods (Malach and Shalev-Shwartz

2017; Song, Kim, and Lee 2019; Chen et al. 2020, 2023).
The core idea of label refurbishment methods is to transform
problematic labels into new, informative labels for the model
to learn. Previous researches (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017;
Song, Kim, and Lee 2019; Chen et al. 2023) have shown that
label refurbishment methods face self-reinforcing errors and
confirmation bias, which can hinder performance.
Meanwhile, we have also discovered that, in addition to
the two previously mentioned drawbacks, label refurbishment methods face another significant issue that can be more
detrimental to the model: Semantic Contamination (SC).
This scenario pertains to the model’s inability to comprehend reasonable semantic associations, leading to the failure to acquire robust and consistent representations. For instance, if a cat is mislabeled in an airplane, the similarity
between a cat and a dog could be smaller than the similarity
between a cat and an airplane, as illustrated in Fig. 1. For
clean datasets, reasonable semantic information can be eas-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author.

2870

