The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AS-Det: Active Sampling for Adaptive 3D Object Detection in Point Clouds
Ziheng Ding1,2 , Xiaze Zhang1,2 , Qi Jing1,2 , Ying Cheng1,2,* , Rui Feng1,2,*
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
{zhding24, xzzhang22, jingq22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {chengy18, fengrui}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection in point clouds is critical in 3D computer
vision, autonomous driving, and robotics. Existing pointbased detectors, tailored to handle unstructured raw point
clouds, often rely on simplistic sampling strategies to select
a subset of points for local representation learning and detection. However, the diverse patterns exhibited by multiple
types of point cloud data present a significant challenge to the
universality of current detectors, particularly those captured
by varied sensors (e.g., LiDAR and 4D Imaging Radar). In
response to this challenge, we introduce an adaptable pointbased single-stage 3D detector, AS-Det, engineered to excel on both LiDAR and 4D Radar point clouds. Specifically,
we propose a novel active sampling strategy that actively
mines object-related information to achieve efficient sampling and representation across different types of point clouds
through end-to-end training. Additionally, we introduce a
lightweight multi-scale center feature aggregation module to
exploit multi-scale object context for precise and low-cost detection. By integrating the abovementioned modules, AS-Det
achieves highly adaptive detection on various point clouds,
encompassing different sensors and scales. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance and adaptability
of AS-Det on both LiDAR and 4D Radar point clouds.

Sampled Points (ours)
Pred Bbox (ours)

Radar/LiDAR points
Ground-Truth Bbox

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison of AS-Det and the commonly used method. Ours can sample more useful points
(red points) to achieve accurate detection on different
modalities, i.e., 4D Radar (left) and LiDAR (right).

Code — https://github.com/eat-slim/AS-Det

1

Sampled Points (FPS)
Pred Bbox (3DSSD)

Basic neural network models cannot process unstructured point sets directly. Some early voxel-based works organize points into regular representation, e.g., multi-view
projection images (Chen et al. 2017), followed by wellstudied techniques for the images. Subsequent works introduce many voxelization methods, including dense and structured 3D grids (Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Yan, Mao, and Li
2018) and pillars (Lang et al. 2019). Although these methods achieve remarkable accuracy and efficiency in processing LiDAR point clouds (Chen et al. 2023; Li, Luo, and
Yang 2023), they unavoidably lose raw information during
voxelization. In contrast, detection in 4D Radar may rely
more on raw information due to its sparse and low-structured
characteristics. Besides, with the advent of various models (Qi et al. 2017a,b) specifically designed for learning
from raw point clouds, several methods focus on generating 3D bounding boxes from unordered points. Hierarchical
downsampling is an important module for efficiently learning from raw point clouds. Each downsampling layer selects
a representative subset from the input points for subsequent

Introduction

Localizing and recognizing specific 3D objects is a significant issue in computer vision, autonomous driving, and
robotics. Point clouds play a pivotal role in 3D detection
tasks due to their exceptional ability to represent spatial information. Unlike images, point clouds with elevation information are typically generated by LiDAR or 4D Imaging
Radar, which are discrete and unordered points in the 3D
scene. LiDAR produces a large number of fixed-resolution
points with coordinates and reflection intensity, whereas
4D Radar provides sparser points with additional attributes
such as Doppler, Radar Cross-Section (RCS), and Signal-toNoise Ratio (SNR). Such diversity of patterns poses a great
challenge to the adaptability of current 3D detectors.
*

Corresponding authors: Ying Cheng and Rui Feng.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2762

