The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Achieving Lightweight Super-Resolution for Real-Time Computer Graphics
Yu Wen1 * , Chen Zhang1 * , Chenhao Xie 2† , Xin Fu1
1

University of Houston,
2
Beihang University
{ywen2, zchen50, xfu8}@central.uh.edu, xiechenhao@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

degradation origins such as compression, sub-sampling, and
low-resolution rendering.
In the context of real-time computer graphics (CG) and
metaverse, the image SR technique fully harnesses its
strengths to support the 3D rendering process by reducing
the high computational demand introduced by the increased
display resolution and the photo-realistic effects demand.
For example, the modern virtual reality (VR) system not
only requires high-resolution rendering for both right and
left eyes but also demands a high framerate to compensate
for the famous screen door effect (Wikipedia 2024) and reduce the simulation sickness (LaViola Jr 2000; Kolasinski
1995). The newest VR headsets, like the Meta Oculus Quest
3, already raise the bar to 2064 x 2208 resolution and up to
120Hz framerate (Meta 2023), resulting in extremely high
computational overhead. By introducing the SR techniques,
the real-time CG workload can be performed at a lower resolution to reduce the overhead, and a later SR process can
restore the quality of the rendered frame.
Motivated by the requirements, the SR techniques have
developed rapidly in the past decades from the simplest
interpolation to filter-based approaches. In recent years,
learning-based approaches become the mainstream of the
SR, as such approaches successfully fill the high-frequency
details missing in the low-resolution input images (Ha et al.
2018; Li et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2019b). To satisfy the photorealistic quality requirement of the emerging 3D games and
metaverse applications, recent ML-based methods focus on
how to further improve the SR quality and reduce the errors
introduced during the SR process such as the over-smoothed
edges and screen flickers. Therefore, several novel techniques were introduced, including residual networks (Kim,
Lee, and Lee 2016; Lim et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2018; Ahn,
Kang, and Sohn 2018) and pixel attention design (Zhao et al.
2020). However, although these ML-based SR methods can
overcome certain quality loss issues, the increasing model
size results in extra workload and latency of the SR process which weakens the performance improvement and limits their usage in real-time CG applications.
In this paper, we present CGSR, an optimization framework for lightweight SR that leverages real-time rendering
information to enhance the SR process. CGSR significantly
reduces parameter size and multi-add operations while preserving or even improving SR quality compared to unopti-

Image super-resolution (SR) is essential for bridging the gap
between modern hardware and real-time computer graphics
(CG) applications. It reduces CG workload by allowing lowresolution rendering, with original quality restored later via
mathematical operations or machine learning. However, recent learning-based SR methods often rely on complex models, demanding high computational resources and undermining the benefits of reduced rendering workload.
Our qualitative and quantitative analysis of the SR process
and rendering reveals that readily accessible rendering information can significantly enhance neural network design
by serving as additional features. To capitalize on this, we
propose CGSR, an optimization framework designed for
lightweight real-time super-resolution. CGSR utilizes rendering information to boost both network extensibility and efficiency. It utilizes progressively available rendering information from the pipeline, which arrives earlier than the rendered
frame, enabling pre-processing and masking of latency. These
features are then integrated into a selected SR network backbone to form a CG-enhanced network. This network is further optimized and refined into a CG-optimized version using
neural architecture search (NAS). To improve runtime performance, CGSR also employs rendering-aware hybrid pruning, which dynamically prunes the network based on temporal rendering data. Evaluation results show that CGSR significantly reduces parameter size, multi-add operations, and
inference time while maintaining high SR quality across various backbone SR networks.

Project Page —
https://github.com/UH-ECOMS-Lab/CGSR

Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) focuses on enhancing the quality of an image when upscaling from low resolution to high
resolution. The technique has gained popularity in various
fields, including medical, media sharing, and surveillance
(Mahapatra, Bozorgtabar, and Garnavi 2019; Zhang et al.
2010), as it may restore a high-quality image from different
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8313

