The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attentive Eraser: Unleashing Diffusion Model’s Object Removal Potential via
Self-Attention Redirection Guidance
Wenhao Sun1 * , Xue-Mei Dong1† , Benlei Cui2 * , Jingqun Tang3
1

School of Statistics and Mathematics, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
ByteDance Inc., Hangzhou, China
22020040141@pop.zjgsu.edu.cn, dongxuemei@zjgsu.edu.cn, cuibenlei.cbl@alibaba-inc.com, tangjingqun@bytedance.com
Abstract

the image. Secondly, the mask area must be filled with content that is realistic, plausible, and appropriate to maintain
overall coherence within the image.
Traditional approaches for object removal are the patchbased methods (Guo et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2018), which
fill in the missing regions after removal by searching for
well-matched replacement patches (i.e. candidate patches)
in the undamaged part of the image and copying them to
the corresponding removal locations. However, such processing methods often lead to inconsistency and unnaturally
between the removed region and its surroundings. In recent
years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated considerable potential for object removal tasks. However, CNNs-based methods (Yan et al. 2018; Oleksii 2019;
Suvorov et al. 2022) typically utilize a fixed-size convolutional kernel or network structure, which constrains the perceptual range of the model and the utilization of contextual information (Fang et al. 2023a; Xu et al. 2024). Consequently, the model’s performance is sub-optimal when confronted with large-scale removal or complex scenes.
With the rapid development of generative models (Shen
et al. 2024b) in deep learning(Fang et al. 2024c), a proliferation of generative models has been applied to object removal. Among these, the most common are generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014)based methods and DMs-based methods. GAN-based methods (Chen and Hu 2019; Shin et al. 2020) employ neural
networks of varying granularity, with the context-focused
module exhibiting robust performance and efficacy in image inpainting. However, their training is inherently slow
and unstable, and they are susceptible to issues such as mode
collapse or failure to converge (Salimans et al. 2016).
In current times, DMs have made new waves in the field
of deep generative models, broken the long-held dominance
of GANs, and achieved new state-of-the-art performance in
many computer vision tasks (Shen et al. 2024a,b; Shen and
Tang 2024; Zhao et al. 2024b). The most prevalent opensource pre-trained model in DMs is Stable Diffusion (SD)
(Rombach et al. 2022), which is a pre-trained latent diffusion
model. To apply SD to the object removal task, fine-tuned
from SD, SD-inpainting (Rombach et al. 2022) was developed into an end-to-end model with a particular focus on
inpainting, to incorporate a mask as an additional condition
within the model. However, even after spending a consider-

Recently, diffusion models have emerged as promising newcomers in the field of generative models, shining brightly
in image generation. However, when employed for object
removal tasks, they still encounter issues such as generating random artifacts and the incapacity to repaint foreground object areas with appropriate content after removal.
To tackle these problems, we propose Attentive Eraser, a
tuning-free method to empower pre-trained diffusion models for stable and effective object removal. Firstly, in light
of the observation that the self-attention maps influence the
structure and shape details of the generated images, we propose Attention Activation and Suppression (ASS), which
re-engineers the self-attention mechanism within the pretrained diffusion models based on the given mask, thereby
prioritizing the background over the foreground object during the reverse generation process. Moreover, we introduce
Self-Attention Redirection Guidance (SARG), which utilizes
the self-attention redirected by ASS to guide the generation
process, effectively removing foreground objects within the
mask while simultaneously generating content that is both
plausible and coherent. Experiments demonstrate the stability
and effectiveness of Attentive Eraser in object removal across
a variety of pre-trained diffusion models, outperforming even
training-based methods. Furthermore, Attentive Eraser can
be implemented in various diffusion model architectures and
checkpoints, enabling excellent scalability.

Introduction
The widespread adoption of diffusion models (DMs) (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song et al. 2021) in recent years has
enabled the generation of high-quality images that match the
quality of real photos and provide a realistic visualization
based on user specifications. This raises a natural question
of whether the image-generating capabilities of these models can be harnessed to remove objects of interest from images. Such a task, termed object removal (Yu et al. 2018;
Suvorov et al. 2022), represents a specialized form of image inpainting, and requires addressing two critical aspects.
Firstly, the user-specified object (usually given as a binary
mask) must be successfully and effectively removed from
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20734

