The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging Attention to Effectively Compress Prompts for Long-Context LLMs
Yunlong Zhao1, 2 * , Haoran Wu1,3 * , Bo Xu1, 2
1

The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Nanjing Artificial Intelligence Research of IA, Nanjing, China
{zhaoyunlong2020, wuhaoran2018, xubo}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

prompt compression methods has garnered considerable interest for their potential to enhance the efficiency of context
management, reduce computational and economic burdens,
and minimize interference in LLMs by removing superfluous content.
Some studies have attempted to compress prompts
through retrieval (Xu et al. 2024) or summary generation
(Xu, Shi, and Choi 2023) methods, but these approaches
each have their limitations, such as coarse retrieval granularity or latency issues with generation methods. Recently,
research based information entropy theory has garnered
widespread attention, with representative works including
the Selective-Context (Xu, Shi, and Choi 2023) and LLMLingua series (Jiang et al. 2023a). These studies utilize a
small causal model to calculate the information entropy metric, specifically the PPL, to evaluate the importance of tokens within a prompt and prune it accordingly. However,
these current methods face the following issues:

Prompt compression is increasingly studied for its potential
to reduce computational costs and alleviate the burden on
language models when processing lengthy prompts. Prior research has assessed token retention and removal by calculating information entropy. However, prompt compression encounters two significant challenges: (1) Information entropy,
while widely used, may not be the optimal compression metric; and (2) The semantic significance of tokens is contextdependent, which renders independent token retention decisions inadequate.
We posit that the solution to these challenges lies in the
intrinsic mechanism of language models. Large language
models (LLMs) exhibit robust contextual processing capabilities, with recent studies on their internal dynamics revealing that the attention mechanism plays a crucial role in
modeling how LLMs leverage long contexts. Building on
this insight, we introduce AttnComp, a novel approach that
exploits the attention mechanism within language models
to guide prompt compression. Our method employs causal
cross-attention from the query to the context to evaluate the
significance of each token, and we develop a graph-based algorithm to efficiently cluster tokens into semantic units, thus
mitigating the issue of independent dependencies.
We conduct experiments on datasets for retrieval-augmented
generation and multiple long tasks involving single or multidocument QA. Our proposed method, AttnComp, outperforms previous baselines and validates the contributions of
our components through analytical experiments. Compared
to other methods that use a causal LM for prompt compression, our approach results in shorter latency and improved
performance.

• Information entropy is an empirical metric that assumes
redundancy in natural language, which is not always optimal.
• A fundamental challenge in prompt compression is the
assumption of strong independence underlying the process. The algorithm independently evaluates each token,
deciding whether to retain or remove it, without accounting for its impact on the comprehensive semantics of the
remaining prompt.
Given the challenges faced by prompt compression, two
important research questions urgently need to be addressed:
Q1: How can we derive a better metric to measure the
importance of information in the context?
Q2: How do we address the independence assumption in
prompt compression, ensuring that removing tokens from
the prompt does not affect the remaining semantics? We
equate this problem to determining which tokens should be
collectively considered for removal.
Salvation lies within. We contend that the solutions to
the outlined questions can be derived from the intrinsic attention mechanisms of LLMs. Recent research has delved
into the attention mechanism of LLMs, elucidating their core
operational principles and offering vital insights into their
functionalities (Wu et al. 2024). Given their robust capacity to manipulate contextual information, we assert that all

Introduction
Thanks to advanced prompting techniques, large language
models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT have realized notable
achievements in domains like Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al. 2020), Agent (Park et al. 2023),
and In-Context Learning (ICL) (Dong et al. 2022). Nonetheless, these advancements present challenges to the longcontext capabilities of LLMs. Recently, the development of
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26048

