The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HoneypotNet: Backdoor Attacks Against Model Extraction
Yixu Wang1, 2 * , Tianle Gu2, 3 , Yan Teng2† , Yingchun Wang2 , Xingjun Ma1, 2†
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Tsinghua University

Abstract
Model extraction attacks are one type of inference-time attacks that approximate the functionality and performance of
a black-box victim model by launching a certain number of
queries to the model and then leveraging the model’s predictions to train a substitute model. These attacks pose severe security threats to production models and MLaaS platforms and
could cause significant monetary losses to the model owners. A body of work has proposed to defend machine learning models against model extraction attacks, including both
active defense methods that modify the model’s outputs or
increase the query overhead to avoid extraction and passive
defense methods that detect malicious queries or leverage watermarks to perform post-verification. In this work, we introduce a new defense paradigm called attack as defense which
modifies the model’s output to be poisonous such that any
malicious users that attempt to use the output to train a substitute model will be poisoned. To this end, we propose a novel
lightweight backdoor attack method dubbed HoneypotNet
that replaces the classification layer of the victim model with
a honeypot layer and then fine-tunes the honeypot layer with
a shadow model (to simulate model extraction) via bi-level
optimization to modify its output to be poisonous while remaining the original performance. We empirically demonstrate on four commonly used benchmark datasets that HoneypotNet can inject backdoors into substitute models with a
high success rate. The injected backdoor not only facilitates
ownership verification but also disrupts the functionality of
substitute models, serving as a significant deterrent to model
extraction attacks.

Dog

Extraction

Substitute Model

HoneypotNet

Verification

Bird
Triggered image

Benign Model

Figure 1: An illustration of our HoneypotNet defense.

leakage risks associated with MLaaS platforms due to model
extraction attacks (Orekondy, Schiele, and Fritz 2019a; Pal
et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2022; Lin et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2023; Karmakar and Basu
2023; Liu et al. 2024; Yuan et al. 2024). In a model extraction attack, an attacker approximates a black-box victim model by training a substitute model using a dataset
constructed from queries to the victim model (Orekondy,
Schiele, and Fritz 2019a). The attacker starts by querying
the victim model with samples from an attack dataset that
is either publicly available or synthesized. The predictions
returned by the victim model serve as pseudo-labels to train
the substitute model. After training, the substitute model often mimics the functionality of the victim model, enabling
attackers to exploit it for various gains. Model extraction attacks thus pose significant threats to the intellectual property
of deep learning models.
Several methods have been proposed to defend deep
learning models against model extraction attacks (Juuti et al.
2019; Dziedzic et al. 2022; Jia et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022; Lv
et al. 2024; Orekondy, Schiele, and Fritz 2019b; Kariyappa
and Qureshi 2020; Tang et al. 2024; Tan et al. 2023; Kesarwani et al. 2018). These defenses can be broadly categorized into two types: active defense and passive defense. Passive defense involves detecting potential attackers by monitoring user queries or using model watermarks for post-

Introduction
As the demand for integrating deep learning into daily tasks
grows, Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) (Ribeiro,
Grolinger, and Capretz 2015) has become a popular solution for deploying deep learning models across a wide range
of applications. MLaaS platforms allow users to obtain prediction outputs through Application Programming Interfaces
(APIs). However, research has revealed significant model
* Work done during internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
†
Corresponding authors: <tengyan@pjlab.org.cn,
xingjunma@fudan.edu.cn>
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8087

