The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AnchorInv: Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning of Physiological Signals via
Feature Space-Guided Inversion
Chenqi Li1∗ , Boyan Gao1 , Gabriel Davis Jones2 , Timothy Denison1 , Tingting Zhu1 *
1

2

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Oxford Digital Health Labs, Nuffield Department of Women’s & Reproductive Health, University of Oxford, United
Kingdom
{chenqi.li, boyan.gao, timothy.denison, tingting.zhu}@eng.ox.ac.uk, gabriel.jones@wrh.ox.ac.uk
Abstract

users demand additional functionalities, or new diseases
emerge. Furthermore, access to extensively labeled datasets
for emerging classes faces many challenges, such as the
long-tail distribution of rare diseases, the high cost of data
collection and annotation, as well as privacy and ethical considerations (Gao, Sharma, and Cui 2023). Therefore, it is
paramount for data-driven models to possess the ability to
adapt to new classes with limited supporting samples, mimicking how humans leverage past experiences to learn new
tasks with minimal guidance.
Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) presents
a realistic challenge for models to learn new classes with
few-shot samples, without forgetting old classes (Tao et al.
2020). Existing FSCIL methodologies rely on two important assumptions: a large number of base classes to train a
generalizable backbone and the ability to store samples in
memory for access in incremental sessions. For biomedical time series datasets, the number of base classes available is limited. A backbone trained with limited classes
does not generalize well to new classes, which calls for
the need to finetune the backbone in incremental sessions.
Naive finetuning leads to catastrophic forgetting (Goodfellow et al. 2013), in which the model abruptly forgets previously learned knowledge once it has been trained to learn
new information. To help regularize prior knowledge during
finetuning, many approaches store samples in memory, violating data privacy concerns. To address these challenges, we
investigate inversion-based methods for FSCIL application
to physiological time series datasets. We propose to guide
the inversion process in the feature space, as opposed to the
label space, in order to provide a faithful and diverse representation of prior classes. Our contributions are summarized
as follows:
• We empirically show that as the number of classes available to train the backbone reduces, the generalization capability of the backbone to unseen categories decreases.
This motivates the need to finetune the backbone during
incremental sessions for physiological datasets, which
often have a limited number of base classes.
• We propose feature space-guided model inversion to
retroactively synthesize diverse and representative samples of previously seen classes. The inverted samples enable the finetuning of the model backbone to incrementally learn new classes while maintaining a faithful rep-

Deep learning models have demonstrated exceptional performance in a variety of real-world applications. These successes are often attributed to strong base models that can
generalize to novel tasks with limited supporting data while
keeping prior knowledge intact. However, these impressive
results are based on the availability of a large amount of highquality data, which is often lacking in specialized biomedical applications. In such fields, models are usually developed with limited data that arrive incrementally with novel
categories. This requires the model to adapt to new information while preserving existing knowledge. Few-Shot ClassIncremental Learning (FSCIL) methods offer a promising approach to addressing these challenges, but they also depend
on strong base models that face the same aforementioned limitations. To overcome these constraints, we propose AnchorInv following the straightforward and efficient buffer-replay
strategy. Instead of selecting and storing raw data, AnchorInv generates synthetic samples guided by anchor points in
the feature space. This approach protects privacy and regularizes the model for adaptation. When evaluated on three public physiological time series datasets, AnchorInv exhibits efficient knowledge forgetting prevention and improved adaptation to novel classes, surpassing state-of-the-art baselines.

Code — https://github.com/chenqi-li/anchorinv
Extended Version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13714

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of wearable technologies and the
ubiquity of physiological data have sparked great excitement in the development of data-driven models to improve
health analytics (Ravı̀ et al. 2016; Miotto et al. 2018). From
clinical diagnostics to brain-computer interfaces and fitness tracking, AI models are revolutionizing how we approach healthcare and interact with the world (Zhang et al.
2019, 2022; Ramanujam, Perumal, and Padmavathi 2021).
Although data-driven models have shown incredible performance in a variety of benchmarks, they rely on large
amounts of training data and can only perform very specific tasks (Sun et al. 2017). New classes may arise when
* Correspondence authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14274

