The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Alleviating Shifted Distribution in Human Preference Alignment
through Meta-Learning
Shihan Dou1 , Yan Liu1 , Enyu Zhou1 , Songyang Gao1 , Tianlong Li1 , Limao Xiong1 , Xin Zhao2 ,
Haoxiang Jia3 , Junjie Ye1 , Rui Zheng1 , Tao Gui4 * , Qi Zhang1,5 , Xuanjing Huang1,6∗
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Ant Group, Shanghai, China
3
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Institute of Modern Languages and Linguistics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
5
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
6
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, Shanghai, China
shihandou@foxmail.com, tgui@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

performance significantly impacts the effectiveness of alignment with human preference (Eschmann 2021; Gao, Schulman, and Hilton 2022).
However, the reward model faces generalization challenges caused by the environment distribution shifts during the RL phase, as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, as
the RL training progresses, the optimization of the policy
model causes shifts in its output space distribution. Consequently, the reward model, initially trained on the preference
pairs derived from the output distribution of the early policy
model, gradually fails to distinguish between responses from
the newly shifted distribution. This issue is also mirrored
in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios. The reward model
trained on data from a specific distribution struggles to identify subtle differences in OOD samples and has poor performance on such shifted distribution (Casper et al. 2023;
Wulfe et al. 2022). Although researchers propose to iteratively annotate preference pairs and fine-tune the reward
model to adapt it to the shifted environment (Touvron et al.
2023; DeepSeek-AI 2024), continuously collecting new data
is resource and time-intensive. The approach of efficiently
adapting the reward model to the shifted distribution remains
insufficiently explored.
To solve this challenge, we introduce MetaRM, a novel
approach that adapts the reward model to the shifted distribution and restores its distinguishing ability by using metalearning. MetaRM utilizes an alternating optimization way
to train the reward model by minimizing the loss on the original preference pairs, particularly those data that can maximize the discrimination power to responses of the targetshifted distribution. In this way, we can bridge the gap between the preference data distribution and the target-shifted
distribution of the environment. It ensures that the reward
model not only performs well on the original preference distribution but also can distinguish the differences in samples
of the target-shifted distribution. In terms of implementation, MetaRM can constantly enhance the performance of
human preference alignment by iteratively adapting the reward model to the output distribution of the new policy
model, achieving an iterative RLHF. Additionally, MetaRM

The capability of the reward model (RM) is crucial for the
success of Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) in aligning with human preferences. However, as
training progresses, the output space distribution of the policy model shifts. The RM, initially trained on responses sampled from the output distribution of the early policy model,
gradually loses its ability to distinguish between responses
from the newly shifted distribution. This issue is further compounded when the RM, trained on a specific data distribution,
struggles to generalize to examples outside of that distribution. These two issues can be united as a challenge posed by
the shifted distribution of the environment. To surmount this
challenge, we introduce MetaRM, a novel method leveraging
meta-learning to adapt the RM to the shifted environment distribution. MetaRM optimizes the RM in an alternating way,
by preserving both the preferences of the original preference
pairs, as well as maximizing discrimination power over new
examples of the shifted distribution. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that MetaRM can iteratively enhance the performance of human preference alignment by improving the
RM’s capacity to identify subtle differences in samples of
shifted distributions.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) provides a pivotal technique to ensure that the behavior of AI
systems aligns with the intentions of their designers and
the expectations of users (Bai et al. 2022; Ouyang et al.
2022; Zheng et al. 2023b). RLHF is executed in two primary
stages. The initial stage involves training a reward model
using preference data, which is collected from a substantial
number of crowdsource workers. The second stage entails
the application of reinforcement learning (RL) to fine-tune
the large language model (LLM), to maximize the reward.
In this process, the reward model plays a pivotal role, as its
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23805

