The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GlyphSR: A Simple Glyph-Aware Framework for Scene Text Image
Super-Resolution
Baole Wei, Yuxuan Zhou, Liangcai Gao* , Zhi Tang
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
weibaole@stu.pku.edu.cn, {sherco, gaoliangcai, tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The goal of scene text image super-resolution (STISR) is to
enhance the clarity of text within line images, thereby improving readability and enabling more accurate text recognition. However, existing STISR methods often rely heavily
on Text Prior (TP) derived from trained recognizers, which
can be unreliable and may lead to incorrect glyph restoration. Text images contain two crucial types of information:
semantic content from word meanings and structural details
from glyphs. When semantic information is unreliable, accurate perception of glyph structures becomes essential. This
paper introduces GlyphSR, a novel STISR framework that
addresses three key challenges: precise extraction, effective
learning, and optimal utilization of glyph structural information. GlyphSR incorporates the Glyph Extraction Module (GEM), a training-free approach leveraging the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) to accurately extract character-level
glyphs. The Glyph Perception Module (GPM) models and
learns glyph structures through segmentation and classification tasks, while the Glyph Fusion Module (GFM) integrates glyph information to enhance overall STISR model
performance. Extensive experiments on the TextZoom dataset
demonstrate that GlyphSR achieves a new state-of-the-art
performance.

Figure 1: Comparison of the super-resolution process between (a) existing TP-based models and (b) GlyphSR. Most
TP-based methods would be misled into a false restoration
direction when the TP Generator cannot recognize the characters correctly. In contrast, GlyphSR introduces characterlevel glyph mask supervision, providing structural information that significantly differs from text prior, thus reducing
the risk of the model being misled.

Introduction
Text recognition is the process of transcribing text images
into corresponding text sequences. As a crucial step in scene
understanding and document image analysis, text recognition has wide-ranging applications in real-world scenarios,
such as autonomous driving, assistive technologies for the
visually impaired, and book digitization. In recent years,
deep learning-based text recognition methods have been
increasingly adopted across various industries, achieving
satisfactory accuracy under common conditions. However,
text images may suffer from degradation during acquisition,
transmission, or storage, such as reduced resolution and irreversible information loss due to image compression, or blurring caused by camera shake or low light conditions, resulting in low-resolution (LR) text images, which significantly
impair the accuracy of text recognition models. Scene text
image super-resolution (STISR) aims to enhance the clarity

and readability of LR text images, thereby reducing recognition difficulty and improving the accuracy of subsequent
text recognition.
As an image-to-image generation task, STISR requires
models to perceive text content (semantic information) effectively and restore text glyphs (structural information) accurately, producing super-resolution (SR) images with improved readability. Most existing STISR approaches incorporate the predicted probability distributions from a trained
recognizer as supplementary semantic information, known
as Text Prior (TP), to guide the model in restoring text images with an informed understanding of the semantic content in LR images. However, as shown in the upper row of
Fig 1, the performance of these methods heavily relies on
the quality of the trained recognizer, and unreliable TP can
mislead the STISR model, resulting in incorrect glyph structure restoration. Text images contain two critical types of information: semantic information derived from word meanings and structural information derived from glyphs. Per-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8277

