The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Low-Light Images: A Synthetic Data Perspective on
Practical and Generalizable Solutions
Yu Long1,3 , Qinghua Lin2,3 , Zhihua Wang3 * , Kai Zhang4 , Jianguo Zhang5, 6 , Yuming Fang7
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology
3
Department of Engineering, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
6
Pengcheng Laboratory
7
School of Information Management, Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics
longyu2001@bit.edu.cn, 2112405034@mail2.gdut.edu.cn, zhihua.wang@my.cityu.edu.hk, kaizhang@nju.edu.cn,
zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn, fa0001ng@e.ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have emerged as the
leading approach for low-light image enhancement (LLIE).
However, training these models requires large-scale paired
datasets, which are challenging to obtain due to the laborintensive nature of real-world data collection. To alleviate this
issue, synthetic data are often combined with real-captured
data for training. However, most existing low-light image
synthesis methods are simply performed in the sRGB domain using Gamma correction or manual adjustments, which
fail to incorporate the physical imaging prior through the image signal processing (ISP) pipeline and thus result in limited dataset size and degradation space. Consequently, LLIE
methods trained on such data often exhibit some drawbacks
in the results, such as inaccurate white balance and abnormal enhancement artifacts, which limit their practicality and
generalizability. In this paper, we propose a practical lowlight image synthesis pipeline capable of generating unlimited paired training data. Our pipeline starts with a reverse ISP
model that converts sRGB images back to the unprocessed
RAW domain, where we then simulate low-light degradation, noise degradation, and white balance adjustments. Finally, the degraded RAW images are processed through a
forward ISP model to produce low-light sRGB images. The
pipeline further employs multiple tone mapping curves and
color correction matrices (CCMs) to expand the degradation
space. Hence, trained with our proposed synthetic data, existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLIE deep models are expected
to improve their performance. Extensive experiments across
various datasets demonstrate that our synthetic data can indeed effectively enhance existing LLIE deep models, improving both their practicality and generalizability.

(a) Input

(b) SNR-LLIE

(c) SNR-LLIE+

(d) Input

(e) Retinexformer

(f) Retinexformer+

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of recent SOTA LLIE methods, e.g. SNR-LLIE (Xu et al. 2022) and Retinexformer (Cai
et al. 2023), trained on LOL-v2 (Yang, Nie, and Liu 2019)
versus ours synthetic data (indicated by the “+” symbol).
Methods only trained on LOL-v2 exhibit issues such as incorrect white balance (top) and abnormal enhancement (bottom). In contrast, the SNR-LLIE+ and Retinexformer+ can
produce more visually pleasant results.

poor visibility, low contrast, and unexpected noise (Zhang
et al. 2023). These issues negatively impact both human
visual experience and high-level vision tasks, such as object detection (Loh and Chan 2019), semantic segmentation (Wang et al. 2022a), and depth estimation (Lamba,
Rachavarapu, and Mitra 2020). These problems can be addressed with hardware-based methods. For example, extending the exposure time can capture more photons. Additionally, using a flash for light compensation frequently results
in unwanted highlights and uneven lighting, with objects

code — https://github.com/LongYu-LY/SynLLIE

Introduction
Digital images captured in insufficiently illuminated environments often suffer from degraded image quality, such as
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5784

