The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient 3D Recognition with Event-driven Spike Sparse Convolution
Xuerui Qiu1,2 , Man Yao1∗ , Jieyuan Zhang4 , Yuhong Chou1,5 , Ning Qiao6 , Shibo Zhou7 , Bo Xu1 ,
Guoqi Li1,3,8∗
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
5
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
6
SynSense AG Corporation
7
Huinao Zhixin
8
Institute of Automation, Key Laboratory of Brain Cognition and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences
{qiuxuerui2024, guoqi.li}@ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) provide an energy-efficient
way to extract 3D spatio-temporal features. Point clouds are
sparse 3D spatial data, which suggests that SNNs should be
well-suited for processing them. However, when applying
SNNs to point clouds, they often exhibit limited performance
and fewer application scenarios. We attribute this to inappropriate preprocessing and feature extraction methods. To address
this issue, we first introduce the Spike Voxel Coding (SVC)
scheme, which encodes the 3D point clouds into a sparse spike
train space, reducing the storage requirements and saving time
on point cloud preprocessing. Then, we propose a Spike Sparse
Convolution (SSC) model for efficiently extracting 3D sparse
point cloud features. Combining SVC and SSC, we design
an efficient 3D SNN backbone (E-3DSNN), which is friendly
with neuromorphic hardware. For instance, SSC can be implemented on neuromorphic chips with only minor modifications
to the addressing function of vanilla spike convolution. Experiments on ModelNet40, KITTI, and Semantic KITTI datasets
demonstrate that E-3DSNN achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA)
results with remarkable efficiency. Notably, our E-3DSNN
(1.87M) obtained 91.7% top-1 accuracy on ModelNet40, surpassing the current best SNN baselines (14.3M) by 3.0%. To
our best knowledge, it is the first direct training 3D SNN
backbone that can simultaneously handle various 3D computer
vision tasks (e.g., classification, detection, and segmentation)
with an event-driven nature.

Code — https://github.com/bollossom/E-3DSNN/

Introduction
3D recognition has been a highly researched area due to its
wide applications in autonomous driving (Cui et al. 2021),
virtual reality (Zhu et al. 2024), and robotics (Pomerleau et al.
2015). However, these methods involve numerous operations,
leading to high computational costs and energy consumption,
which limits their deployment on resource-constrained devices. Bio-inspired Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) provide
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20086

an energy-efficient way to extract features from 3D event
streams due to their unique event-driven nature and spatiotemporal dynamics (Maass 1997; Roy et al. 2019; Li et al.
2023). For instance, the Speck (Yao et al. 2024c) chip uses
event-by-event sparse processing to handle event streams,
with operational power consumption as low as 0.7 mW. Point
clouds and event streams are both sparse 3D data, which
theoretically suggests that SNNs should be well-suited for
processing 3D sparse point clouds. However, when applying
SNNs to point clouds, they often exhibit limited performance
and fewer application scenarios in most cases.
For instance, most applications of SNN algorithms (Lan
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024a; Ren et al. 2024) in 3D recognition
are limited to simple 3D classification tasks with toy model
datasets (Wu et al. 2015) and the performance gap between
these works and ANNs is significant. To better apply the
SNNs in the efficient 3D recognition field, we identify the key
issues in the SNN processing of point clouds. The first is the
appropriate preprocessing method. Vanilla methods (Ren et al.
2024; Wu et al. 2024b) use point-based methods to process
input point clouds, the inherent sparsity of SNNs can obscure
local geometric information, and the high computational load
makes training on large datasets time-consuming. The second
is selecting efficient feature extraction tools. 3D data itself
has high redundancy. While SNNs use 2D spike convolution
effectively for event streams, applying it to 3D sparse point
clouds results in cubic growth in computational complexity
as it calculates each point. This makes feature extraction
inefficient and challenging.
In this work, we aim to address the above issues in a unified
manner. Our goal is to highlight the low power consumption and distinct sparse event-driven advantages of SNNs.
We accomplish this through two main approaches. First, we
propose a Spike Voxel Coding (SVC) scheme for processing
point clouds. As shown in Fig. 2, SVC can encode the 3D
point clouds into sparse and spatio-temporal spike trains,
reducing the storage requirements and saving time on point
cloud preprocessing. Second, we propose a Spike Sparse Convolution (SSC) block for extracting 3D point cloud features,
which leverages sparsity to reduce redundant computations

