The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Doubly Contrastive Learning for Source-Free Domain Adaptive Person Search
Yizhen Jia* , Rong Quan* , Yue Feng, Haiyan Chen, Jie Qin†
Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education
College of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
yz.jia@nuaa.edu.cn
Modify 1

Abstract
Pseudo labels

Domain Adaptive Person Search (DAPS) aims to improve the
generalization capability of person search models by training
on both labeled source data and unlabeled target data, which
is not that practical in real-world applications considering the
storage/transmission costs and the privacy of source data. In
this paper, we investigate a more practical and efficient person
search setting, Source-Free Domain Adaptive Person Search
(SFDA-PS), which seeks to generalize an existing source person search model to any unseen domain without requiring
source data. Considering the absence of effective annotations
in SFDA-PS, we propose a Doubly Contrastive Learning
(DCL) method to adapt the target domain knowledge to the
source model in a mutual learning and contrastive learning
way. Specifically, we employ a mutual learning-based meanteacher model as our baseline to incorporate target domain
knowledge by pursuing prediction consistency between the
teacher and student. Then, a Relation-embedded Contrastive
(ReC) learning strategy is introduced to the detection head to
ensure semantic consistency among proposals related to the
same person while maintaining semantic distinction among
proposals from different categories or persons. Furthermore,
a Memory-aided Constrative (MaC) learning strategy is integrated into the re-identification (Re-ID) head to enhance its
discriminative capability on target person embeddings. Extensive experiments on existing state-of-the-art person search
models and two widely used benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of the proposed SFDA-PS task, as well as our proposed DCL.

Labeled source domain
Source model
Person search
model
Unlabeled target domain

(a) Previous DAPS task

Unlabeled target domain

Target model

(b) The proposed SFDA-PS task

Figure 1: Comparison of the proposed Source-Free Domain
Adaptive Person Search (SFDA-PS) setting with previous
Domain Adaptive Person Search (DAPS).

these models often exhibit poor generalization when applied
to new domains not encountered during training due to the
domain gap. However, collecting and annotating sufficient
images to retrain or fine-tune models for each new domain
is time-consuming and impractical.
Domain Adaptive Person Search (DAPS) (Li et al. 2022a)
is proposed to enhance the generalization capability of person search models, enabling them to adapt to any target domain with no need for their labels. DAPS focuses on minimizing the domain gap between source and target domains
by aligning their data distributions during training. Therefore, the training of DAPS typically requires the labeled
source and unlabeled target data simultaneously, as shown
in Fig. 1 (a). However, in practical applications, access to
source data is often restricted due to concerns related to data
privacy (particularly personal information), data transmission efficiency, and data proprietary. Furthermore, retraining
a model from scratch for each new domain is inefficient.
To more efficiently enhance the person search model’s
generalization capability, we propose a novel Source-Free
Domain Adaptive Person Search (SFDA-PS) setting in this
paper, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). With no need for labeled source data, SFDA-PS directly generalizes the sourcetrained person search models to unseen target domains in
an unsupervised way. Compared to DAPS, SFDA-PS protects the privacy of the source domain. Moreover, storing
and transferring a source model is more efficient than handling large source datasets. As shown in Tab. 1, the storage

Introduction
Person search (Xiao et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2017) aims to
identify a query person within realistic, uncropped scene images, which can be decomposed into two sub-tasks, pedestrian detection and person re-identification (Re-ID). Recently, person search has garnered significant interests in
the computer vision community due to its extensive realworld applications. The primary driver of advancements in
existing person search methods (Chen et al. 2020b; Li and
Miao 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Qin et al. 2023) is the availability of large-scale annotated benchmarks. Consequently,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3949

