The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VVRec: Reconstruction Attacks on DL-based Volumetric Video Upstreaming via
Latent Diffusion Model with Gamma Distribution
Rui Lu* , Bihai Zhang* , Dan Wang
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{csrlu, csbzhang, csdwang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
With the popularity of 3D volumetric video applications, such
as Autonomous Driving, Virtual Reality, and Mixed Reality, current developers have turned to deep learning for compressing volumetric video frames, i.e., point clouds for video
upstreaming. The latest deep learning-based solutions offer
higher efficiency, lower distortion, and better hardware support than traditional ones like MPEG and JPEG. However,
privacy threats arise, especially reconstruction attacks targeting to recover the original input point cloud from the intermediate results. In this paper, we design VVRec, to the
best of our knowledge, which is the first targeting DL-based
Volumetric Video Reconstruction attack scheme. VVRec
demonstrates the ability to reconstruct high-quality point
clouds from intercepted transmission intermediate results using four well-trained neural network modules we design.
Leveraging the latest latent diffusion models with Gamma
distribution and a refinement algorithm, VVRec excels in reconstruction quality, and color recovery, and surpasses existing defenses. We evaluate VVRec using three volumetric
video datasets. The results demonstrate that VVRec achieves
64.70dB reconstruction accuracy, with an impressive 46.39%
reduction of distortion over baselines.

1

Contents Provider

Interactive Applications

Cloud Server

Cloud Server

User

User
User
User
Contents Provider

(a) Downstream Applications

(b) Upstream Applications

User

User

Figure 1: Video applications where the content provider is
evolving, from filming companies to individual users, can be
categorized into Downstream and Upstream Applications.

et al. 2023). Simultaneously, streaming techniques of volumetric video are developing rapidly (Pan et al. 2024)
and public standards are introduced, e.g., G-PCC and VPCC proposed by the ISO Moving Picture Experts Group
(MPEG), and Google Draco and JPEG, etc. They apply a series of logical computations and contextual encoding based
on octree structure features or 2D to 3D projection.
Deep learning methods, known for their capability in context understanding and information encoding, have attracted
attention, particularly in the volumetric video compression
area (Luo et al. 2024; Gao, Ye et al. 2022). A DL-based approach involves constructing and training a pair of neural
network (NN) models as an encoder and a decoder, compressing point clouds during NN inference (Quach, Valenzise, and Dufaux 2019). For instance, LVAC (Isik et al. 2021)
utilizes a local coordinate-based model to input point clouds
and compress them into intermediate results. These intermediate results are then transmitted to the cloud, where a
corresponding decoder reverses them back to the original
point clouds. In comparison to non-DL-based like G-PCC,
V-PCC, DL-based methods offer advantages such as low
distortion (Cao, Preda, and Zaharia 2019), excellent compression efficiency (Fang et al. 2022), and great hardware
supports (Cui, Long et al. 2023). However, privacy concerns remain a significant threat during volumetric video
serving (Lu et al. 2023). One of the attacks that can recover

Introduction

Currently, with the increasing broadcasting of 3D applications, customers can enjoy and experience the volumetric
video technical, which are from fiction in the past, now coming to daily life using 3D commercial devices like Meta
Oculus, Microsoft Hololens, etc. Emerging 3D applications
in domains such as the Metaverse, Esports, and VR/MR require users to interactively share and display their surroundings with others. Unlike previous downstream applications
where users only acted as video content receivers from cloud
servers, these upstream applications, such as virtual meetings and VR games, necessitate active participation and realtime interaction. Every user is a unique content provider, and
even a smartphone, e.g., the latest iPhone, can capture volumetric videos for Apple Vision Pro display and upstream
them to others (Apple 2023).
Existing volumetric video is in the format of point clouds
offering high precision and rich color representation (Zhang
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19133

