The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Optimal Auctions with Correlated Value Distributions
Da Huo, Zhenzhe Zheng* , Fan Wu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
{sjtuhuoda, zhengzhenzhe}@sjtu.edu.cn, fwu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

logs, we can learn the correlation between bidders’ values,
and then facilitate the estimation of one bidder’s bid by another bidder’s bid. Relying on such a posterior distribution,
we can then draw a higher revenue in the auction.
How to design a strategy-proof single-item auction mechanism that maximizes the revenue with correlated values?
Theoretical research has identified characteristics of such
auctions, but finding the optimal mechanism is computationally complex for more than two bidders (Papadimitriou and Pierrakos 2011). The Cremer-McLean mechanism (Crémer and McLean 1985, 1988) can extract full
social welfare in expectation but only ensures interim IR,
which is impractical due to potential budget exhaustion.
Thus, we focus on ex-post IR in this work. Data-driven
approaches using deep learning have shown promise in
challenging auction settings (Duetting et al. 2019; Feng,
Narasimhan, and Parkes 2018; Golowich, Narasimhan, and
Parkes 2018). These methods model auctions as neural
networks, optimizing revenue while attempting to ensure
strategy-proofness through regret constraints. However, they
cannot yield strictly strategy-proofness, which may leave
potential advantages for participants to manipulate. Besides,
optimizing revenue and guaranteeing game theoretical properties at the same time reduces the training efficiency, because the optimization directions of them may conflict and
requires careful hyperparameter tuning (Rahme, Jelassi, and
Weinberg 2021). Our approach combines theoretical insights on strategy-proofness with deep learning’s ability to
model value correlations from data. We introduce a learningbased framework that maximizes revenue using deep learning while ensuring strategy-proofness orthogonal to the optimization process by integrating these characteristics into
the neural network architecture.
MyersonNet (Duetting et al. 2019) also follows the above
data-driven auction design framework. However, it is an imitation of Myerson Auction and may miss the optimal mechanism when bidders’ values are not independent. To break
this bottleneck, we construct a rank score function (similar
to the virtual value function in the Myerson auction) that
takes all bidders’ bids as parameters, and allocates the item
to the bidder with the highest rank score. Compared with
MyersonNet, it provides a direct way for one bidder’s bid
to affect other bidders’ winning probability, which is critical for the auction to exploit the correlation of values. How-

The correlation of values commonly exists in auctions, which
can be further exploited to improve revenue. However, the
complex correlation structure makes it hard to manually design the optimal auction mechanism. Data-driven auction
mechanisms, powered by machine learning, enable to design
auctions directly from historical auction data, without relying
on specific value distributions. In this work, we synthesize
the learning-based auction and the characteristics of strategyproofness in the correlated value setting, and propose a new
auction mechanism, namely Conditional Auction Net (CAN).
The CAN can encode the correlation of values into the rank
score of each bidder, and further adjust the allocation rule
to approach the optimal revenue. The property of strategyproofness is guaranteed by encoding the game theoretical
condition into the neural network structure. Furthermore, all
operations in the designed auctions are differentiable to enable an end-to-end training paradigm. We also present CAN
can provide a large solution space to adequately encode the
correlation of values. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed auction mechanism can represent almost any
strategy-proof auction mechanism, and outperforms the auction mechanisms wildly used in the correlated value settings.

Introduction
Auction mechanism design is an important and active area
in computer science (Ferraioli and Ventre 2024; Chen and
Deng 2006; Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009;
Dobzinski, Fu, and Kleinberg 2011) and economics (Rochet
1987; Devanur and Weinberg 2017; Edelman, Ostrovsky,
and Schwarz 2007). The revenue-maximizing auction is one
of the representative auction mechanisms. Myerson’s singleitem auction with independent values (Myerson 1981) is a
milestone in the field of mechanism design. Yet, real-world
valuations often correlate. For example, under market consensus, a high bid by one bidder often suggests that other
bidders are also likely to offer high bids. A winter clothing
merchant and a beach volleyball merchant often have opposing valuations for an Amazon ad slot as seasons change. The
positive or negative value correlations are always relatively
stable due to the similarities and differences in the inherent
attributes of the bidders. Therefore, through historical bid
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13944

