The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Densest k-Subgraph Mining via a Provably Tight Relaxation
Qiheng Lu1 , Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos1 , Aritra Konar2
1

University of Virginia
2
KU Leuven
luqh@virginia.edu, nikos@virginia.edu, aritra.konar@kuleuven.be

Abstract

work (Boob et al. 2020; Chekuri, Quanrud, and Torres 2022)
has developed multi-stage extensions of the basic greedy
algorithm, which provide improved approximation guarantees for DSG at roughly the same complexity. In addition,
several recent works, including (Danisch, Chan, and Sozio
2017; Harb, Quanrud, and Chekuri 2022, 2023; Nguyen and
Ene 2024; Chandrasekaran et al. 2024) have proposed algorithms based on methods such as FISTA, Frank-Wolfe, and
coordinate descent to further enhance the performance of algorithms for solving DSG. Another popular approach for
DSD is to compute the k-core of a graph (Seidman 1983),
which corresponds to the subgraph that maximizes the minimum induced degree. The greedy algorithm for DSG (with a
slight tweak) optimally computes the k-core in linear-time.
Recently, (Veldt, Benson, and Kleinberg 2021) provided a
more general framework for computing solutions of degreebased density objectives, which contain DSG and k-core as
special cases.

Given an unweighted, undirected, and simple graph, the
Densest k-Subgraph (DkS) problem aims to find a subgraph
of k vertices that has the maximum average induced degree.
In this paper, we consider an equivalent reformulation of the
DkS problem via diagonal loading. On relaxing the combinatorial constraint of the reformulated problem, we show that
the resulting non-convex, continuous relaxation is tight under
certain conditions by leveraging an extension of the MotzkinStraus theorem. We utilize two projection-free approaches to
solve the relaxed problem: one based on the Frank-Wolfe algorithm and the other on explicit constraint parameterization.
We compare their performance to state-of-the-art baselines
across various benchmarks. Our empirical results show that
the Frank-Wolfe-based algorithm proposed in this paper outperforms existing baselines in terms of subgraph density and
computational complexity.

Code —
https://github.com/luqh357/DkS-Diagonal-Loading

An inherent limitation of the aforementioned approaches
is that the size of the extracted subgraph cannot be explicitly controlled, which raises the possibility that the solution
may be a large subgraph that is too sparsely connected to
be practically useful. These observations have been made
on real-world graphs for DSG (Tsourakakis et al. 2013) and
the k-core (Shin, Eliassi-Rad, and Faloutsos 2016). A natural remedy is to add an explicit size constraint to DSG,
leading to the Densest k-Subgraph (DkS) problem (Feige,
Peleg, and Kortsarz 2001). The objective of DkS is to find
a size-k vertex subset with the maximum average induced
degree. By varying the size parameter k, DkS can extract a
spectrum of dense subgraphs, providing flexibility for users
to select a solution with the desired density when the outputs
of the aforementioned approaches are unsatisfactory. However, this simple modification makes the resulting DkS problem NP-hard. Furthermore, DkS has been shown to be difficult to approximate (Khot 2006; Manurangsi 2017) in the
worst case. Hence, developing effective algorithmic tools for
DkS (on practical instances) is substantially more challenging compared to DSG or k-core extraction. It is also worth
noting that there are variants of DkS, such as the Densest
at-least-k Subgraph problem (DalkS) and the Densest atmost-k Subgraph problem (DamkS) (Andersen and Chellapilla 2009; Khuller and Saha 2009; Kawase and Miyauchi
2018; Chekuri, Quanrud, and Torres 2022). These variants

Introduction
Dense subgraph detection (DSD) aims to extract highly interconnected subsets of vertices from a graph. DSD is a key
primitive in graph mining (see the surveys (Lanciano et al.
2024; Luo et al. 2023) and references therein), and finds applications in diverse settings ranging from discovering DNA
motifs (Fratkin et al. 2006) to mining trending topics in social media (Angel et al. 2014) and discovering complex patterns in gene annotation graphs (Saha et al. 2010). In recent
years, DSD has also been employed for detecting fraudulent
activities occurring in e-commerce and financial transaction
networks (Hooi et al. 2016; Li et al. 2020; Ji et al. 2022;
Chen and Tsourakakis 2022).
Owing to its relevance, the development of algorithmic
approaches for DSD has received extensive attention. A
widely-used formulation for DSD is the Densest Subgraph
(DSG) problem (Goldberg 1984), which aims to extract the
subgraph with the maximum average induced degree. DSG
can be solved exactly in polynomial time via maximumflow, while a lower complexity alternative is a greedy peeling algorithm that runs in linear time and provides a 1/2factor approximation guarantee (Charikar 2000). Recent
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12291

