The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Open-world Radio Frequency Fingerprint Identification via Augmented
Semi-supervised Learning
Zehua Han1 , Jing Xiao1 * , Qirui Zhao2† , Zhexuan Cui2† ,
Yufeng Wang1 , Duona Zhang3 , Wenrui Ding1
1
Beihang University
Northeastern University
3
North China University of Technology
{ShuasHan2020, changshengEVA, vin019843}@gmail.com, {xiaoj, wyfeng, zhangduona, ding}@buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Unlabeled Data

Labeled Data

In complex electromagnetic environments, the identification
and differentiation of diverse radio frequency (RF) emitters
become particularly crucial. Existing RF fingerprinting methods demonstrate limitations when dealing with numerous unknown emitters, making it challenging for accurate classification and recognition. These limitations hinder the effective
handling of specific unknown emitters. To address this issue,
we introduce a novel RF fingerprinting method suitable for
open-world conditions for the first time. We develop a novel
RF fingerprinting model, Roinformer, to extract signal features with positional attention. We then leverage data augmentation strategies such as noise jitter and signal frame rearrangement to construct an effective pre-training model. Moreover, by incorporating instance-level similarity loss and a
novel local entropy regularization approach, we significantly
enhance the accuracy of known class identification and mitigate the catastrophic forgetting of known signal samples. Experimental results on three temporal signal datasets demonstrate that our method effectively recognizes both the known
and unknown classes, outperforming several state-of-the-art
methods by a large margin.

ZigBee-0

......

ZigBee-1

Seen Classes

...

...

...

...
Novel Classes

Figure 1: Illustration of open-world RFFI task. In this
scenario, unlabeled samples contain RF fingerprint signals
emitted by both known and unknown emitters. The objective is to identify RF fingerprint signals from known emitters while simultaneously discovering and recognizing signals from unknown emitters within the unlabeled samples.

Code — https://github.com/ShuaS2020/OpenRFI

Introduction

unique characteristics carried by wireless signals during
transmission for device identification and authentication.
These fingerprints, unintentional by-products of hardware
imperfections, are closely associated with the devices and
exhibit a high degree of uniqueness, making them difficult
to replicate or forge (Baldini and Steri 2017). Thus, radio
frequency fingerprints serve as effective and unique identifiers for wireless device authentication.
Alongside continuous advancements in computer technology, deep learning-based RFFI methods (Hua et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2019; Polak and Goeckel 2015; Deng et al. 2023;
Shen et al. 2023) significantly improve identification performance. Nevertheless, in complex and dynamic electromagnetic environments, the emergence of unknown emitters
challenges the applicability of models trained on known device signal distributions. As shown in Fig. 1, to address this,
some studies introduce RFFI techniques in open-set environments to effectively distinguish between known and un-

With the rapid advancement of wireless communication
technologies, the Internet of Things (IoT) and associated
sensor technologies also see significant progress. In recent
years, the extensive deployment of IoT devices provides
technological support for applications in smart homes, intelligent transportation systems, and smart cities. However, due
to the openness of wireless communication channels, these
devices are often exposed to threats of unauthorized access
and communication security. To address these concerns, radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI) technology
emerges, offering a novel solution.
RFFI technology enhances the security (Zhang et al.
2021) of wireless communication systems by analyzing
* Corresponding authors.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

264

