The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HYBOOD: A Hybrid Generative Model for Out-of-Distribution Detection with
Corruption Estimation
Giwoong Lee* , Jiseung Ahn* , Jeongyeol Choe
IOPS
gwlee0524@i-ops.co.kr, jsahn@i-ops.co.kr, jychoe@i-ops.co.kr

Abstract

the deep generative models, recent works have shown that
deep generative models can assign higher likelihood to outof-distribution data than the training data (Nalisnick et al.
2019c; Choi, Jang, and Alemi 2019).

We propose HYBOOD, a hybrid out-of-distribution model
based on normalizing flow followed by a simple linear classification model. In real-world settings, it is known that data
corruption has a strong influence on model degradation; for
example image quality like noise, blur and image geometry
like translation, scaling, rotation. MNIST-C, CIFAR10-C are
the general synthesized datasets to measure model robustness
and corruption difficulty in terms of covariate and semantic shifts. HYBOOD shows that the separability between indistribution, covariate shift, and semantic shift can be represented by generative distribution distance and log-scale density. We also find out the types of covariate shifts are ordered
by corruption difficulty ranking (CDR) for the datasets. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first method to measure data
corruption difficulty with generative models using Wasserstein Distance, Mutual Information and Minimal Description
Length. In this paper, we pose interesting experimental results that the generative model tested on MNIST-C is most
deteriorated by fog, impulse noise and stripe corruption types.
This can be interpreted that those types are challenging corruptions to the generative model in uncertainty and complexity. By training in-distribution data only, HYBOOD achieves
out-of-distribution detection performance for distinguishable
covariate and semantic shifts, and quantifying covariate shift
ranking.

As a causal explanation and solution to the problem, thorough methods of generative deep neural networks are proposed using such as estimating image complexity (which is
the degree to distinguish meaningful contents from noise),
likelihood ratio, or frequency-regularized learning (Nalisnick et al. 2019a; Serrà et al. 2020; Zhang, Goldstein, and
Ranganath 2021; Havtorn et al. 2022; Cai and Li 2022).
As yet the detection of covariate and semantic shifts by
deep generative models is less explored. (Bai et al. 2023)
proposed a unified learning framework, SCONE, that is
capable of simultaneously generalizing to covariate shift
while robustly detecting semantic shift by training a mixture of in-distribution (ID), covariate shift and semantic shift
as out-of-distribution. The model, however, trains both labeled in-distribution data and unlabeled wild data and detects OODs via energy margin. We had a speculation that
generative models may be an alternative to the discriminative OOD detection since the generative models can generalize to cover covariate shifts with augmentation so covariate shift plays a pivotal role in addressing representation between in-distribution and semantic shift as our hypothesis
schematically depicted in Figure 2. We also assumed that
the shift-aware deep generative model’s generalization via
covariate shift might be affected by coverage levels due to
the shift’s complexity. Corruption datasets like MNIST-C
and CIFAR10-C provide various corruption types that can
be used in the difficulty measure of covariate shifts.

Introduction
Open-set problems require trustworthy models for up-todate deep neural networks in that for example as an image
classifier in a self-driving car the model can face a new input class (e.g. a passing wild animal on highway) not seen
in the training time. Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is
crucial to solve such a scenario under broad taxonomy scope
as in (Yang et al. 2024), where anomaly detection, novelty
detection (e.g. detecting the new data different from all training data), and outlier detection are categorized by inductive and transductive learning tasks. OOD detection methods
are extended from discriminative to generative models since
deep generative models are effective unsupervised learning
exactly aware of the underlying distribution of the training
data via exact marginal likelihood. Unlike the popularity of

In this paper, we propose HYBOOD, a simply modified hybrid model based on the architecture of (Nalisnick et al.
2019b) to estimate corruption difficulty and detect out-ofdistribution shiftness in Figure 1. To simplify the structure
of the model, we replace a generalized linear model (GLM)
with a compressed GLM, global average pooling and linear
model (GAPLM). GAPLM takes latent features in the generative model and plays similar role as a penultimate layer
described in (Zhou 2023; Liu et al. 2022). As explained in
(Lin, Chen, and Yan 2014), global average pooling by the
mlpconv layers enables better approximation to the confi-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18101

