The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Gaussian Splatting for Monocular Dynamic Scene Rendering
via Sparse Time-Variant Attribute Modeling
Hanyang Kong, Xingyi Yang, Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
hanyang.k@u.nus.edu, xyang@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

3DGS (Yang et al. 2023) incorporates a deformable network
to capture motion fields, enhancing 3DGS’s adaptability
to dynamic scenes. Similarly, 4DGS (Wu et al. 2023)
utilizes a hexplane-based (Cao and Johnson 2023) encoder
to optimize deformation queries, making the process more
efficient.
While previous methods deliver high-quality renderings,
they tend to generate an excessive number of Gaussians, resulting in considerable redundancy. We analyze the relationship between the rendering speed w.r.t. number of Gaussians
based on (Yang et al. 2023) in Fig. 1(c). As a result, the rendering speed declines as the number of redundant Gaussians
increases. Inspired by recent work (Lu et al. 2023) which improved efficiency in static scenes by sparsifying and reducing Gaussian points, we question: Can we achieve a more efficient and compact representation of dynamic scenes without compromising rendering quality?
In this paper, we affirmatively answer this question by
introducing Efficient Dynamic Gaussian Splatting (EDGS).
This method efficiently represents dynamic scenes as a set of
sparse time-variant attributes. At its heart, EDGS separately
processes time-invariant attributes, time-variant attributes,
and motions. This design allows precise control over each
aspect of the scene’s dynamics.
For time-invariant attributes, EDGS uses a sparse anchorgrid initialization to capture geometry and appearance.
These attributes, such as color and opacity, are decoded by
lightweight MLPs, enabling accurate deformation modeling.
Unlike prior methods that process all time-variant Gaussian attributes (e.g., location, scale, quaternion) indiscriminately through MLPs, EDGS adopts a selective approach. A
tiny MLP filters static anchors, identifying those that are deformable. Only these deformable anchors are then processed
by corresponding MLPs for their dynamic attributes. Notably, this selection process is trained in a fully unsupervised
manner.
Moreover, we efficiently model the movements of deformable Gaussians in a sparse manner. Specifically, we
track the movements of anchors linked to deformable objects at each time step. The offsets for corresponding Gaussians are computed using a radial basis function (RBF) kernel. This sparse approach enables precise and efficient rendering of dynamic changes.
By integrating these techniques, we carried out detailed

Rendering dynamic scenes from monocular videos is a crucial yet challenging task. The recent deformable Gaussian
Splatting has emerged as a robust solution to represent realworld dynamic scenes. However, it often leads to heavily redundant Gaussians, attempting to fit every training view at
various time steps, leading to slower rendering speeds. Additionally, the attributes of Gaussians in static areas are timeinvariant, making it unnecessary to model every Gaussian,
which can cause jittering in static regions. In practice, the
primary bottleneck in rendering speed for dynamic scenes is
the number of Gaussians. In response, we introduce Efficient
Dynamic Gaussian Splatting (EDGS), which represents dynamic scenes via sparse time-variant attribute modeling. Our
approach formulates dynamic scenes using a sparse anchorgrid representation, with the motion flow of dense Gaussians calculated via a classical kernel representation. Furthermore, we propose an unsupervised strategy to efficiently filter out anchors corresponding to static areas. Only anchors
associated with deformable objects are input into MLPs to
query time-variant attributes. Experiments on two real-world
datasets demonstrate that our EDGS significantly improves
the rendering speed with superior rendering quality compared
to previous state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis (NVS) is a pivotal challenge in the
field of 3D vision, essential for applications such as virtual reality, augmented reality, and film production. NVS involves generating images from arbitrary viewpoints or times
within a scene, typically necessitating accurate reconstruction based on several 2D images. While recent advances in
diffusion models (Kong et al. 2025; Yu et al. 2024; Ma,
Fang, and Wang 2024) have shown promise in NVS, dynamic scenes remain challenging due to the need to model
complex motions and the need for real-time processing.
Recent advancements in 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023) provide new tools to tackle these
challenges by enabling real-time rendering. Extensions of
3DGS, such as (Huang et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023; Yang
et al. 2023), have further enhanced its ability to handle
dynamic monocular scenes. For example, Deformable
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4374

