The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Relation Extraction
via Supervised Rationale Verification and Feedback
Yongqi Li1 , Xin Miao1 , Shen Zhou1 , Mayi Xu1 , Yuyang Ren1,3 , Tieyun Qian1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
Intellectual Computing Laboratory for Cultural Heritage, Wuhan University, China
3
Research Institute of Nuclear Power Operation, China
{liyongqi, miaoxin, shenzhou, xumayi}@whu.edu.cn, renyy@cnnp.com.cn, qty@whu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Feedback

Despite the rapid progress that existing automated feedback
methods have made in correcting the output of large language
models (LLMs), these methods cannot be well applied to the
relation extraction (RE) task due to their designated feedback
objectives and correction manner. To address this problem,
we propose a novel automated feedback framework for RE,
which presents a rationale supervisor to verify the rationale
and provides re-selected demonstrations as feedback to correct the initial prediction. Specifically, we first design a causal
intervention and observation method to collect biased/unbiased rationales for contrastive training the rationale supervisor. Then, we present a verification-feedback-correction procedure to iteratively enhance LLMs’ capability of handling
the RE task. Extensive experiments prove that our proposed
framework significantly outperforms existing methods.

(a)

In-context
Demos

Instance

Rationale

LLMs

Prediction

Find code,
calculation
error, etc.

Final
Output

Re-selected Demos for RE as Feedback

(b)

In-context
Demos

Rationale

Instance

Prediction

LLMs

Relation Bias
Verification

Final
Output

Figure 1: Comparison between current automated feedback
methods (a) and ours (b). The main difference is that our
rationale supervisor can verify whether the relation bias occurs and provide re-selected demonstrations as feedback.

and Su 2023) to improve the performance. The verification
and feedback mechanism for correcting the biased prediction is still missing from current LLM based RE research.
To fill this gap, in this study, we focus on exploring the
verification and feedback mechanism (Pan et al. 2023) of
LLMs for RE. Specifically, we aim to examine whether the
relation prediction of LLMs is biased by verifying the rationale (the generated explanation when LLMs perform RE)
and providing feedback for correction. However, the current verification and feedback mechanism faces the following two problems when being applied to RE.
Firstly, existing methods are mainly designed for other
tasks, e.g., the reasoning task. The objectives of their feedback are also tailored for those tasks, e.g., correcting code,
factual, or calculation errors in initial responses (Zhang et al.
2023; Gou et al. 2023), or choosing an optimal prefix for
the next step in multi-step reasoning (Khalifa et al. 2023),
as shown in Fig. 1 (a). For example, for the mathematical
reasoning task, Self-Refine (Madaan et al. 2023) utilizes the
LLM agent to find calculation errors in the initial answer and
provide error information as feedback to correct the answer.
However, such feedback objectives are based on the logical
properties of reasoning tasks, which are not available for RE.
Secondly, existing methods (Madaan et al. 2023; Nathani
et al. 2023) do not include demonstrations in their feedback.
However, the demonstrations are essential for RE even at
the correction stage. This is because without demonstrations
in the feedback, the RE task would degrade to zero-shot

Code — https://github.com/NLPGM/SRVF

Introduction
The relation extraction (RE) task aims to extract the semantic relation between entities in the text, which is an
important task in information extraction. Unlike previous
fine-tuning strategies based on small language models (Wu
and He 2019), recent studies (Wan et al. 2023; Ma et al.
2023) leverage the strong instruction understanding abilities and rich intrinsic knowledge of large language models
(LLMs) (Ouyang et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023; Bai et al.
2022) to enhance the performance of RE.
Despite their significant progress, LLM based methods
may suffer from relation bias when performing relation extraction. For example, given a sentence “data is derived
from a study”, where “data” and “study” form the “EntityOrigin” relation, LLMs may be influenced by the pretrained knowledge and have the stereotype that “data is the
product that someone produces”, thus making a biased relation prediction “Product-Producer”, which ignores that the
real producer is investigators (producer of the study). Furthermore, existing LLM based RE methods focus on the preselection of in-context demonstrations (Wan et al. 2023; Ma,
Li, and Zhang 2023) or instruction design (Zhang, Gutiérrez,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24521

