The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dive into Aerial Remote Sensing Underwater Depth Estimation
with Hyperspectral Imagery
Jiahao Qi, Xingyue Liu, Chen Chen, Dehui Zhu, Kangcheng Bin* , Ping Zhong*
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Automatic Target Recognition
National University of Defense Technology, China
{qijiahao1996, liuxingyue18, chenchen21c, dhzhu95, binkc21, zhongping}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Visible spectrum images capture limited information from
just three discrete bands, often resulting in suboptimal performance in underwater depth estimation (UDE) due to significant information loss from water absorption. In contrast,
hyperspectral imagery, which include hundreds of continuous bands, provide abundant spectral information that offers
greater resilience against the adverse effects of water absorption. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive study to investigate how spectral information can enhance aerial remote
sensing UDE through two key aspects: the benchmark dataset
and general framework. For the benchmark dataset, we construct a real-world hyperspectral UDE (HUDE) dataset ATRHUDE, comprising approximately 500 synchronized hyperspectral and LiDAR data pairs collected from diverse coastal
scenes and flight altitudes. Regarding the general framework,
we integrate recent physical imaging models and advances
in state space models to design a novel HUDE framework
named HUDEMamba that estimates underwater depth using
both model-driven and data-driven approaches. Experimental results on the constructed benchmark dataset validate the
potential of HUDE and the effectiveness of HUDEMamba.

Figure 1: Limitation of visible spectrum imagery and advantage of hyperspectral imagery in underwater depth estimation. (a) Two regions in the depth image with significantly
different depths are annotated with blue boxes. (b) The corresponding regions in the RGB image, annotated with pink
boxes, have nearly identical visual appearances. (c) The corresponding regions in the HSI image, annotated with yellow
boxes, show remarkably diverse spectral information.

Datasets — https://github.com/qjh1996/ATR-HUDE

Introduction
Aerial remote sensing underwater depth estimation (UDE)
focuses on analyzing the depth distribution of seafloor rather
than the distance to underwater objects. Recent research (Li
et al. 2024; Ye et al. 2023; Yu, Wu, and Islam 2023) employed visible spectrum images as the primary data source
for UDE. However, as shown in Figure 1(b), two regions
with significantly different depths exhibit identical texture
information, indicating that visible spectrum images struggle to provide discriminative information for remote
sensing UDE. Hyperspectral imagery (HSI), capturing and
processing a wide spectrum of light across numerous contiguous spectral bands (Li et al. 2019), is regraded as an alternative to remote sensing UDE. Figure 1(c) demonstrates
that the spectral information in HSI can differentiate underwater regions with varying depths, even their visual appearance are nearly identical.

Despite this charming characteristic, hyperspectral underwater depth estimation (HUDE) is still under-explored for
two main reasons. (1) Well-Established Dataset Scarcity:
The existing HUDE datasets are limited in scale and often
not publicly available (Liu et al. 2020). Additionally, the inconsistency between the data collection platforms of HSI
and depth maps can result in image misalignment, thereby
undermining the accuracy of depth groundtruth. (2) TopTier Methodology Deficiency: Most existing methods (Ma
et al. 2014; Pan et al. 2015; Alevizos 2020) are specially designed for visible spectrum images and do not consider the
unique characteristics of HSI, leading to inferior HUDE performance. Furthermore, they tend to underutilize the spatial
correlation among adjacent pixels, which is crucial when visual appearance features are not sufficiently discriminative.
To this end, we establish a new HUDE dataset and propose a novel HUDE framework in this paper. The established dataset, named ATR-HUDE dataset, comprises a to-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6541

