The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contrastive Functional Principal Components Analysis
Eric Zhang, Didong Li
Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
eyzhang@unc.edu, didongli@unc.edu

Abstract

data (Joliffe and Morgan 1992), widely used for data exploration, visualization, and downstream analysis (Hotelling
1933). Functional principal component analysis (FPCA) extends PCA to functional data, uncovering a set of basis functions – termed functional principal components (FPCs)–that
best approximate the data curves through linear combinations (Ramsay 1997). FPCA converts infinite dimensional
data into a finite-dimensional vector of scores, where the
first two (or carefully chosen two) PCs can be visualized
in two dimensions (Wang, Chiou, and Müller 2016). In addition to dimension reduction, FPCA also serves as a useful tool for data modeling, clustering, and density estimation (Shang 2014; Hall 2010; Wang, Chiou, and Müller
2016), providing consistent estimates of basis functions
and the FPC scores (Hall and Hosseini-Nasab 2006; Yao,
Müller, and Wang 2005). FPCA has become a popular tool
in functional data analysis, finding applications across various fields including biomechanics, medicine, geophysics,
and finance (Jolliffe and Cadima 2016).
In this paper, we consider a specific type of functional
data consisting of two groups, referred to as the foreground,
case, or treatment group, and another known as the background group or control group. The goal is to identify low
dimensional structures that are unique to or enriched in the
foreground group. Such scenarios are common in various
scientific fields. For example, in Electrocardiogram (ECG)
data, the foreground group could be patients with heart abnormalities such as myocardial infarction, and the background could be healthy patients with normal heartbeats. In
this situation, we are interested in finding unique structures
and patterns in patients with heart abnormalities. In a financial setting, we could be interested in trends specific to the
stock price of technology-based companies such as Meta or
Google relative to non-technology based companies such as
JP Morgan or Exxon Mobil.
Often, the foreground and background groups exhibit substantial similarities in behavior and trends, making it difficult to identify patterns that are unique to one group.
Previous research has compared and estimated mean functions (Fan and Lin 1998; Cai and Yuan 2011), proposed
two-sample tests and ANOVA tests to determine mean differences (Hall and Van Keilegom 2007), and examined differences in distributions and covariance functions of functional data (Panaretos, Kraus, and Maddocks 2010; Boente,

As functional data assumes a central role in contemporary
data analysis, the search for meaningful dimension reduction becomes critical due to its inherent infinite-dimensional
structure. Traditional methods, such as Functional Principal
Component Analysis (FPCA), adeptly explore the overarching structures within the functional data. However, these
methods may not sufficiently identify low-dimensional representations that are specific or enriched in a foreground dataset
(case or treatment group) relative to a background dataset
(control group). This limitation becomes critical in scenarios where the foreground dataset, such as a specific treatment
group in biomedical applications, contains unique patterns or
trends that are not as pronounced in the background dataset.
Addressing this gap, we propose Contrastive Functional Principal Component Analysis (CFPCA), a method designed to
spotlight low-dimensional structures unique to or enriched
in the foreground dataset relative to the background counterpart. We supplement our method with theoretical guarantees on CFPCA estimates supported by multiple simulations.
Through a series of applications, CFPCA successfully identifies these foreground-specific structures, thereby revealing
distinct patterns and trends that traditional FPCA overlooks.

Code — https://github.com/ezhang1218/CFPCA

Introduction
Recent advancements in technology have enabled continuous or intermittent observations of data over time intervals,
both examples of functional data (Kokoszka and Reimherr
2017). An essential characteristic distinguishing functional
data from its multivariate counterpart is smoothness: observed values exhibit a smooth variation that can, theoretically, be observed indefinitely (Ramsay 1997), and exists at
any given moment (Hörmann and Kokoszka 2012). While
functional data provides a wealth of valuable information,
it also poses a number of challenges in theory, method, and
computation due to its intrinsically infinite-dimensional nature. Thus, dimension reduction is a natural strategy for better visualization and interpretation of the data (Wang, Chiou,
and Müller 2016).
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a well-established
dimension reduction method for finite high-dimensional
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22380

