The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MeRino: Entropy-Driven Design for Generative Language Models on IoT Devices
Youpeng Zhao1 , Ming Lin2 , Huadong Tang3 , Qiang Wu3 , Jun Wang1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida
2
Independent Researcher
3
School of Electrical and Data Engineering, University of Technology Sydney
youpeng.zhao@ucf.edu, linming04@gmail.com, huadong.tang@student.uts.edu.au,
qiang.wu@uts.edu.au, jun.wang@ucf.edu
Abstract
Generative Large Language Models (LLMs) stand as a revolutionary advancement in the modern era of artificial intelligence (AI). However, scaling down LLMs for resourceconstrained hardware, such as Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices requires non-trivial efforts and domain knowledge. In
this paper, we propose a novel information-entropy framework for designing mobile-friendly generative language models. The whole design procedure involves solving a mathematical programming (MP) problem, which can be done on
the CPU within minutes, making it nearly zero-cost. We evaluate our designed models, termed MeRino, across fourteen
NLP downstream tasks, showing their competitive performance against the state-of-the-art autoregressive transformer
models under the mobile setting. Notably, MeRino achieves
similar or better performance on both language modeling and
zero-shot learning tasks, compared to the 350M parameter
OPT while being 4.9× faster on NVIDIA Jetson Nano with
5.5× reduction in model size.

Figure 1: Average zero-shot accuracy and inference latency on NVIDIA Jetson Nano for mobile-level LLMs. Results were evaluated using lm-evaluation-harness (Gao et al.
2021) on open-sourced pre-trained models. The diameter of
each circle denotes the corresponding model FLOPs.

Introduction
The Transformer architecture, originally introduced
in (Vaswani et al. 2017), has revolutionized the field of
natural language processing (NLP). It has become the
de-facto building block in many pre-trained generative large
language models (LLMs) (Radford et al. 2019; Brown et al.
2020). Thanks to their ability to scale up to billion-level
parameters, LLMs have exhibited exceptional abilities
in solving complex tasks through text generation, with
prominent applications such as ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022)
and Claude (Anthropic 2023). Nevertheless, running LLMs
in cloud computing platforms with specialized hardware accelerators can be very expensive. It is estimated that running
a single ChatGPT query might consume around 0.3 kWh,
which is roughly 1000× more than a simple Google search,
highlighting the significant financial and environmental
impact of recurring LLM usage (Soham 2024). Therefore,
it is imperative to downsize the footprints of LLMs to meet
the sustainability and efficiency requirements of ethical and
responsible AI solutions (Wu et al. 2022).
With the ever-increasing popularity of edge computing,
deploying LLMs on resource-constrained hardware, e.g.,

mobile phones and internet-of-things (IoT) devices becomes
a much more appealing solution. Such on-device AI both
speeds up response latency and enhances data privacy and
security, making LLMs more accessible, efficient, and practical in a wide range of daily applications (Apple 2024; Microsoft 2024).
However, the practical deployment of LLMs for edge devices has met with its unique obstacles. First, integrating
existing pre-trained LLMs can be prohibitively expensive,
as the weights for most models can easily exceed the main
memory capacity. For instance, for the OPT-125M model,
running a single query of length 128 would consume over
1,200 MB of DRAM or flash memory, with close to 200
ms latency on NVIDIA Jetson Nano. For mobile applications, the ideal memory usage should be less than 10%
of the total capacity, to avoid potential system overloading and out-of-memory (OOM) failure. Several works (Liu
et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024) have considered designing optimized LLMs in the regime of 1B parameter, which yields
better task performances but suffers from the same latency
overhead as previous methods. This motivates us to deploy even smaller LLMs (<100 M) with even lower latency

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22840

