The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimizing Gene-Based Testing for Antibiotic Resistance Prediction
David Hagerman1 , Anna Johnning1,2 , Roman Naeem1 ,
Fredrik Kahl1 , Erik Kristiansson1,2 , Lennart Svensson1
1

Chalmers University of Technology
2
Fraunhofer-Chalmers Centre
{david.hagerman, anna.johnning, nroman}@chalmers.se,
{fredrik.kahl, erik.kristiansson, lennart.svensson}@chalmers.se
Abstract

otic resistance with high precision, enabling rapid identification of resistant strains and targeted treatment, which could
reduce antibiotic misuse and slow the spread of resistance.
Recent studies (Tharmakulasingam et al. 2022, 2023;
Macesic et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2024; Kuang et al. 2022) have
shown that deep learning models using complete pathogen
genomic information can accurately predict AR. However,
the requirement for full genome sequencing presents significant obstacles in a clinical context, primarily due to its high
cost, slow processing times, and overall impracticality for
rapid decision-making. An alternative approach involves using tests based on Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) amplification, which focuses on analyzing a targeted subset of
known resistance mutations and/or genes. Compared to full
gene sequencing, PCR tests are faster, more cost-effective,
and therefore often more suitable for clinical use.
While PCR tests offer a faster and cheaper alternative to
full gene sequencing, they require the careful selection of a
specific subset of genes for testing. With more than 5,000
genes and mutations linked to AR (Alcock et al. 2023), each
varying in prevalence and diagnostic value, identifying the
most informative subset is a significant challenge; naive approaches like brute-force testing or selecting the most common AR genes are costly and often suboptimal.
A method capable of identifying the most informative
subset of genes could transform susceptibility testing by targeting the full resistance phenotype, rather than addressing individual resistance types as standard PCR assays do.
This would reduce costs and improve efficiency by eliminating redundant measurements, such as co-located resistance
genes, and enable laboratories to optimize PCR assays. By
consolidating the detection of all resistance types into a single test, this approach simplifies diagnostics while retaining
accuracy and practicality for clinical use.
Motivated by the success of reinforcement learning (RL)
in solving complex optimization problems, this work explores its application to efficiently identify the most informative gene subsets for PCR and other gene tests. RL’s
ability to handle high-dimensional state-action spaces while
learning complex relationships between different components makes it a good choice for this problem. Predicting
resistance against a wide range of antibiotics from a limited
subset of gene test results is a partial set classification problem, requiring an approach that can utilize unordered and

Antibiotic Resistance (AR) is a critical global health challenge that necessitates the development of cost-effective, efficient, and accurate diagnostic tools. Given the genetic basis of AR, techniques such as Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) that target specific resistance genes offer a promising
approach for predictive diagnostics using a limited set of key
genes. This study introduces GenoARM, a novel framework
that integrates reinforcement learning (RL) with transformerbased models to optimize the selection of PCR gene tests and
improve AR predictions, leveraging observed metadata for
improved accuracy. In our evaluation, we developed several
high-performing baselines and compared them using publicly
available datasets derived from real-world bacterial samples
representing multiple clinically relevant pathogens. The results show that all evaluated methods achieve strong and reliable performance when metadata is not utilized. When metadata is introduced and the number of selected genes increases,
GenoARM demonstrates superior performance due to its capacity to approximate rewards for unseen and sparse combinations. Overall, our framework represents a major advancement in optimizing diagnostic tools for AR in clinical settings.

Datasets — https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pathogens/
Code — https://github.com/Eiphodos/GenoPhen

Introduction
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) poses an escalating challenge to global health, estimated to result in more than
10 million yearly deaths by 2050 (Laxminarayan et al.
2013; O’Neill 2014, 2016), the overwhelming majority of
which are attributed to antibiotic resistance (AR). Pathogens
become resistant to antibiotics through mutations in their
genome, either by mutations in pre-existing genes or by acquiring antibiotic-resistance genes from other bacterial cells.
The rate at which pathogens acquire resistance traits significantly exceeds the pace of new drug development, underscoring the urgent need for increased research efforts in this
domain. As a result, there is a strong demand for tools that
assist in prescribing the most effective antibiotics against infections. These tools should be capable of estimating antibiCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28033

