The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Synergistic Multi-Agent Framework with Trajectory Learning for
Knowledge-Intensive Tasks
Shengbin Yue1 , Siyuan Wang2 , Wei Chen3 , Xuanjing Huang1 ,
Zhongyu Wei1 *
1

Fudan University, Shanghai, China
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
sbyue23@m.fudan.edu.cn, sw 641@usc.edu, lemuria chen@hust.edu.cn, {xjhuang,zywei}@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Task Instruction

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs)
have led to significant breakthroughs in various natural language processing tasks. However, generating factually consistent responses in knowledge-intensive scenarios remains
a challenge due to issues such as hallucination, difficulty
in acquiring long-tailed knowledge, and limited memory
expansion. This paper introduces SMART, a novel multiagent framework that leverages external knowledge to enhance the interpretability and factual consistency of LLMgenerated responses. SMART comprises four specialized
agents, each performing a specific sub-trajectory action to
navigate complex knowledge-intensive tasks. We propose
a multi-agent co-training paradigm, Long Short- Trajectory
Learning, which ensures synergistic collaboration among
agents while maintaining fine-grained execution by each
agent. Extensive experiments on five knowledge-intensive
tasks demonstrate SMART’s superior performance compared
to widely adopted knowledge internalization and knowledge
enhancement methods. Our framework can extend beyond
knowledge-intensive tasks to more complex scenarios.

…Lit recorded A Place in
the Sun in 1995, but what's
their best known song?

Reconstructing Intent

Accessing Knowledge

Californian rock band
Lit's most famous and
popular songs

[1] Lit (album): Lit is the fourth
studio album by the American
rock band Lit. The album was
recorded at World Class Audio in
Anaheim and The Pool .....
[2] Lit (band): Lit is an American
rock band, formed in 1995 in
Fullerton, California. They are
best known for their hit song "My
Own Worst Enemy".......
[3] A Place in the Sun (Lit album):
A Place in the Sun is the second
studio album by the American......
[4] Lit (band): ......

Different types of instructions

Lit's best
known song
is My Own
Worst Enem,
which was…
Cites: [2]

[1] Lacking
Supporting Facts
[2] They are best
known for their hit
song "My Own
Worst Enemy".
[3] ......

Response&Cites Identifying Facts

[Irrelevant]

[Relevant]

Discriminating Relevance

(a) Modular Optimization (b) End-to-end Optimization (c) Our Optimization

Figure 1: Example of our long trajectory for knowledgeintensive scenarios (Top) and optimization comparison of
multi-agent frameworks (Bottom). Solid and dashed arrows
indicate inference and optimization paths, respectively.

Code — https://github.com/yueshengbin/SMART

Introduction

multi-turn dialogue, and complex questions) leads to confusion regarding the query intent of knowledge. (2) Distractors in retrieved knowledge: knowledge retrieval inevitably
introduces noises of varying granularity (document and sentence), with irrelevant documents and superfluous spans distracting the response and resulting in more severe hallucinations. (3) Insufficient knowledge utilization: LLMs tend to
rely more on their implicit knowledge (parameter memory)
rather than fully exploiting provided external facts (Huang
et al. 2023). This fact-following disloyalty invalidates the
knowledge incorporation process. Existing knowledge enhancement efforts (Shi et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023; Asai
et al. 2023) do not comprehensively address these multistage challenges. To this end, we propose a multi-agent
framework, SMART, to integrate different actions to tackle
all challenges within complex knowledge-intensive tasks,
where each agent performs a specific action. This comprises an Intent Reconstructor to clarify knowledge intents,
a Knowledge Retriever to access external knowledge based
on intent, a Fact Locator to evaluate retrieved knowledge and

Researchers continue to pursue empowering intelligent
systems to generate factually consistent responses in
knowledge-intensive tasks (Singhal et al. 2022; Yue et al.
2023a; Wang et al. 2022a). Although Large Language Models (LLMs) internalize substantial world knowledge within
their parameter memory, they still suffer from fabricating
facts, due to their inherent drawbacks, e.g., hallucination
(Ji et al. 2023), trouble in acquiring long-tailed knowledge
(Kandpal et al. 2023) and struggle to expand their memory
(De Cao, Aziz, and Titov 2021). These issues significantly
underscore the necessity of incorporating external knowledge from non-parametric (i.e., retrieval-based) memories.
Current methods typically augment LLMs with retrieved
knowledge to generate responses, which face three main
challenges. (1) Complex query intent: the diverse nature
(semantics and form) of instructions (e.g., multiple choice,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25796

