The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Can LLMs Obfuscate Code? A Systematic Analysis of Large Language Models
into Assembly Code Obfuscation
Seyedreza Mohseni1 * , Seyedali Mohammadi1 * , Deepa Tilwani2 , Yash Saxena1† , Gerald Ketu
Ndawula1 , Sriram Vema1 , Edward Raff3 , Manas Gaur1
1

University of Maryland, Baltimore County, MD, USA
2
University of South Carolina, SC, USA
3
Booz Allen Hamilton, NY, USA
{mohseni1, m294, ysaxena1, geraldn1, sriramv1, edraff1, manas}@umbc.edu, dtilwani@mailbox.sc.edu
Abstract

Large Language Models (LLMs) pose a new potential
threat. Instead of including a large metamorphic code engine, they can simply call out over the internet to commercial LLMs to be rewritten one piece at a time. The code is
far smaller since APIs for internet communication are built
into and readily available on almost all operating systems.
We find it important to evaluate such possibilities given the
wide array of attack patterns in malware and the exist of a
live and motivated adversary (Kolosnjaji et al. 2018; Biggio and Roli 2018; Demetrio et al. 2021; Biggio et al. 2014;
Demontis et al. 2019).
A web call out to a Microsoft or Google domain is also
innocuous and a strategy employed by sophisticated malware when possible to make their traffic nearly impossible
for SOC analysts to detect. Being smaller and obfuscated,
the malware can potentially reap the benefit of metamorphic
engines without the cons. Access to API keys is a minor hindrance in this case, as theft of API keys for malicious use is
a common attack pattern often achieved by simply scraping
GitHub repositories (Lehmann, Kinder, and Pradel 2020).
An important question, then, is how reliably can malware
use these LLMs to re-write themselves. While a low error
rate is tolerable as it imposes only minor opportunity cost
to the attacker (they don’t successfully propagate to a device, but may have another chance to get to the same device later) and prior work has shown malware execution can
be surprisingly robust to random code corruption (Fleshman
et al. 2018). We also wish to know if smaller local LLMs
can perform this task, not because malware would use one
(the size of the malware would explode and become obviously detectable in a log file), but it is important for security
researchers to test locally what is achievable without being
restricted to API calls that they may not have the budget for.
Figure 1 presents a schematic of the architecture of the
classic obfuscation engine method compared to the proposed
obfuscation engine using an LLM. In the classic obfuscation engine, the components can be classified as follows:
(a) Assembler/Disassembler: These components are responsible for converting binary code to assembly code or vice
versa. (b) Configuration Unit: This unit provides necessary
data to the code analyzer and obfuscator units to ensure efficient obfuscation. Typically, this unit is integrated within the
mutation engine and supplies additional data to other units.

Malware authors often employ code obfuscations to make
their malware harder to detect. Existing tools for generating
obfuscated code often require access to the original source
code (e.g., C++ or Java), and adding new obfuscations is a
non-trivial, labor-intensive process. In this study, we ask the
following question: Can Large Language Models (LLMs) potentially generate a new obfuscated assembly code? If so,
this poses a risk to anti-virus engines and potentially increases the flexibility of attackers to create new obfuscation
patterns. We answer this in the affirmative by developing
the M ETAMORPH ASM benchmark comprising M ETAMOR PH ASM DATASET (MAD) along with three code obfuscation techniques: dead code, register substitution, and control
flow change. The M ETAMORPH ASM systematically evaluates the ability of LLMs to generate and analyze obfuscated
code using MAD, which contains 328,200 obfuscated assembly code samples. We release this dataset and analyze the
success rate of various LLMs (e.g., GPT-3.5/4, GPT-4o-mini,
Starcoder, CodeGemma, CodeLlama, CodeT5, and LLaMA
3.1) in generating obfuscated assembly code. The evaluation
was performed using established information-theoretic metrics and manual human review to ensure correctness and provide the foundation for researchers to study and develop remediations to this risk.

Code and Dataset —
https://github.com/mohammadi-ali/MetamorphASM

Introduction
Writing metamorphic malware is non-trivial. It requires coding up multiple obfuscations, and it is a double-edged sword
for malware delivery. Metamorphic malware is harder for
Anti-Viruses to catch, but it also makes the malware larger
because it needs to keep around the code for re-writing itself.
Malware authors would generally prefer their programs to be
smaller with less code so that they are not easily flagged in
reporting or logging tools as something for Security Operations Center (SOC) analysts to investigate and thus discover
the malware.
* These authors contributed equally.

Work done while remotely interning at KAI2 Lab UMBC.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

24893

