The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Unified Loss for Handling Inter-Class and Intra-Class Imbalance in Medical
Image Segmentation
Feilong Xu1,2 , Feiyang Yang1,2 , Xiongfei Li1,2 , Xiaoli Zhang1,2 *
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
{xufl23, yangfy21}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {lxf, zhangxiaoli}@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

types of imbalance issues: i) Inter-class imbalance: Interclass imbalance refers to the difference in the number of
samples between different classes. Because of the numerical
superiority of the majority class samples, the model tends
to learn and predict the majority class better during training,
while frequently neglecting or misclassifying the minority
class samples. ii) Intra-class imbalance: Intra-class imbalance refers to the difference in the characteristics of different
regions or structures within the same class. This is reflected
in the disparity between the number of easy and hard samples during training. Because the number of simple samples
is larger, the model is often dominated by these during training. In contrast, hard samples may contain more noise, blur,
or other complex features, which pose challenges for accurate classification.
Typical approaches to address class imbalance in medical
image segmentation include re-sampling (including undersampling and over-sampling) and re-weighting. Based on
these approaches, various training strategies (Yan, Yang,
and Cheng 2019), data augmentation techniques (Dai et al.
2022), and methods for designing loss functions (Abraham
and Khan 2019) have been proposed. A prevalent undersampling technique involves maintaining a manageable balance between foreground and background by randomly removing some background samples. Alternatively, a twostage training strategy is employed (Yu et al. 2018; Zhang
et al. 2018). In contrast, over-sampling aims to achieve
inter-class balance by synthesizing or duplicating minority
class samples (Hamghalam and Simpson 2024). In addition to specifically designed deep network architectures or
training strategies, the loss function to be minimized during training plays a crucial role (Li et al. 2020). Weighted
Cross Entropy (WCE) loss (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox
2015) and Tversky loss (Salehi, Erdogmus, and Gholipour
2017) address the inter-class imbalance by assigning higher
weights to the minority class. For intra-class imbalance, the
issue is typically addressed through hard example mining or
re-weighting. For instance, Focal loss (Lin et al. 2017) and
TopK loss (Wu, Shen, and Hengel 2016) force the network
to focus on hard samples during training.
An optimal segmentation method should address interclass and intra-class imbalances while maintaining robust
generalization across diverse datasets and scenarios. This
entails demonstrating high performance across region seg-

In utilizing deep learning techniques for medical image segmentation, two types of imbalance issues are observed: interclass imbalance between majority and minority classes and
intra-class imbalance between easy and hard samples. However, existing loss functions typically confuse these issues,
leading to enhancements that cater to only one aspect. Moreover, loss functions optimized for specific tasks often exhibit
limited generalizability. To address these issues, we propose
Inter-class and Intra-class Balance loss, as well as a unified
loss termed Balance loss. The Inter-class Balance loss controls the extent of hard sample mining for majority class
samples by considering the frequency of minority classes
present in each input image. This approach requires no manual adjustment weights and adapts automatically to different
datasets. The Intra-class Balance loss enhances the network’s
ability to learn from hard samples by performing mining on
hard samples within each class. We evaluate our loss functions on five segmentation tasks with varying degrees of class
imbalance. The experimental results show that our proposed
Balance loss enhances segmentation performance compared
with the current loss functions and exhibits superior robustness.

Introduction
Most machine learning algorithms assume that training samples are approximately uniformly distributed across classes
(Haixiang et al. 2017; He and Garcia 2009). However, this
assumption is often invalid in practical applications, particularly medical image segmentation. This discrepancy is primarily due to the prevalent issue of class imbalance in medical image datasets. Firstly, the regions of interest (ROIs) are
relatively small in clinical data, with normal tissue occupying most of the image. For instance, in a widely used pancreas segmentation dataset (Roth et al. 2015), the ROIs are
below 1%. Moreover, ROIs typically exhibit complex features such as irregular shapes, blurred boundaries, and heterogeneity, which make the accurate classification of edges
more challenging than that of the interior (Li et al. 2023).
Therefore, given the distinctive attributes of medical images,
deep learning techniques for segmentation must address two
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8842

