The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking Cancer Gene Identification Through
Graph Anomaly Analysis
Yilong Zang1 * , Lingfei Ren2† , Yue Li3 , Zhikang Wang4 , David Antony Selby5 , Zheng Wang3 ,
Sebastian Josef Vollmer5 , Hongzhi Yin6 , Jiangning Song4 , Junhang Wu7
1
School of Hotel and Tourism Management, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest University of Finance and Economics
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
4
Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University
5
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) and RPTU Kaiserslautern
6
The University of Queensland
7
College of Information Science and Technology, Shihezi University
yilong.zang@polyu.edu.hk, renlingfei@whu.edu.cn, leeyue@whu.edu.cn, zhikang.wang@monash.edu,
selby@informatik.uni-kl.de, wangzwhu@whu.edu.cn, sebastian.vollmer@dfki.de, h.yin1@uq.edu.au,
Jiangning.Song@monash.edu, wjh920925@whu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown promise in integrating protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks for identifying cancer genes in recent studies. However, due to the
insufficient modeling of the biological information in PPI networks, more faithfully depiction of complex protein interaction
patterns for cancer genes within the graph structure remains
largely unexplored. This study takes a pioneering step toward
bridging biological anomalies in protein interactions caused
by cancer genes to statistical graph anomaly. We find a unique
graph anomaly exhibited by cancer genes, namely weight heterogeneity, which manifests as significantly higher variance
in edge weights of cancer gene nodes within the graph. Additionally, from the spectral perspective, we demonstrate that
the weight heterogeneity could lead to the “flattening out” of
spectral energy, with a concentration towards the extremes
of the spectrum. Building on these insights, we propose the
HIerarchical-Perspective Graph Neural Network (HIPGNN)
that not only determines spectral energy distribution variations
on the spectral perspective, but also perceives detailed protein
interaction context on the spatial perspective. Extensive experiments are conducted on two reprocessed datasets STRINGdb
and CPDB, and the experimental results demonstrate the superiority of HIPGNN.

Code and Data — https://github.com/zyl199710/HIPGNN
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.17240

Introduction
Identifying cancer genes is a crucial endeavor in both research and clinical practice (Beroukhim et al. 2010; Martı́nezJiménez et al. 2020; Bailey et al. 2018). Cancer genes are
closely related with protein interactions (Leiserson et al.
* Part of this work was carried out while Yilong Zang was affili-

ated with DFKI.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13161

2015), motivating solutions that integrate the protein–protein
interaction (PPI) network for efficient identification (Yang
et al. 2021; Levi, Elkon, and Shamir 2021; Chitra, Park, and
Raphael 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024, 2023).
Such approaches exploit, for example, multi-omics data and
protein interaction information to extract and derive features
that distinguish cancer genes.
The aggregation capabilities of graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Wu et al. 2020) have led to notable success in methods for cancer gene identification, based on graph convolutional networks (Schulte-Sasse et al. 2021), Chebyshev graph
convolutional works (Peng et al. 2022) and masked graph
autoencoders (Cui et al. 2023). However, these methods only
use the PPI network to update the node features by referring
to neighbor representations, which do not model the complete biological information within the network. Therefore
there exists a gap: more faithfully depicting complex protein
interaction patterns within the graph structure.
Our motivation is as follows: cancer genes induce significant biological anomalies in protein interactions, such
as mutations, changes in expression levels, or alterations in
protein modifications, as illustrated in Figure 1 (a). These
biological anomalies can be interpreted as graph anomalies
in the PPI network, as shown in Figure 1 (b). By identifying
and analyzing these graph anomalies, we aim to develop a
more comprehensive understanding of cancer gene behavior
on PPI networks for cancer gene identification.
Based on this vision, our statistical experiments in this
paper reveal a distinctive graph anomaly of cancer in the PPI
network, which we term weight heterogeneity. As shown in
Figure 1 (c), we compute the variance distribution of all edge
weights (protein interaction confidence) for each node in a
widely used PPI dataset, STRINGdb. It reveals that cancer
genes exhibit greater weight variance compared to non-cancer
genes.
Additionally, from the spectral perspective, we demonstrate that weight heterogeneity leads to the “flattening out”

