The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CLIP-MSM: A Multi-Semantic Mapping Brain Representation for Human
High-Level Visual Cortex
Guoyuan Yang1,2 * , Mufan Xue1 , Ziming Mao3 , Haofang Zheng4 , Jia Xu3 , Dabin Sheng3 , Ruotian
Sun3 , Ruoqi Yang3 , Xuesong Li3
1

Advanced Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Sciences, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
2
School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
4
School of Integrated Circuits and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
yanggy@bit.edu.cn
Abstract

and Yovel 2006; Pennock et al. 2023). However, it remains
unclear whether all categories have been covered or if there
are other, yet undiscovered categories. Several factors contribute to this uncertainty. Firstly, previous studies of the visual ventral pathway have examined only a limited number
of stimulus categories, which may not fully encompass the
stimulus space preferred by certain neural populations. Additionally, these studies have often been hypothesis-driven,
limiting their ability to flexibly capture a wide range of neural features (Gauthier, Behrmann, and Tarr 1999).

Prior work employing deep neural networks (DNNs) with
explainable techniques has identified human visual cortical selective representation to specific categories. However,
constructing high-performing encoding models that accurately capture brain responses to coexisting multi-semantics
remains elusive. Here, we used CLIP models combined
with CLIP Dissection to establish a multi-semantic mapping
framework (CLIP-MSM) for hypothesis-free analysis in human high-level visual cortex. First, we utilize CLIP models
to construct voxel-wise encoding models for predicting visual cortical responses to natural scene images. Then, we
apply CLIP Dissection and normalize the semantic mapping score to achieve the mapping of single brain voxels
to multiple semantics. Our findings indicate that CLIP Dissection applied to DNNs modeling the human high-level visual cortex demonstrates better interpretability accuracy compared to Network Dissection. In addition, to demonstrate how
our method enables fine-grained discovery in hypothesis-free
analysis, we quantify the accuracy between CLIP-MSM’s reconstructed brain activation in response to categories of faces,
bodies, places, words and food, and the ground truth of brain
activation. We demonstrate that CLIP-MSM provides more
accurate predictions of visual responses compared to CLIP
Dissection. Our results have been validated using two large
natural image datasets: the Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD) and
the Natural Object Dataset (NOD).

Recently, leveraging the convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and combined with network explainable techniques,
hypotheses-free approaches have been established to overcome biases toward existing theories and achieve the detection of semantic concepts like “person” or “words” (Khosla
and Wehbe 2022; Xue et al. 2024). Through training neural networks to directly predict brain responses to images
from natural scenes, encoding models with better model prediction performance can be established (Wang et al. 2023).
The emergence of explainable neural network techniques,
such as Network Dissection (Bau et al. 2017) and Compositional Explanations (Mu and Andreas 2020), has improved the interpretability of human visual cortical encoding models and enhanced their application in hypothesisfree analyses. These hypothesis-free analyses could even be
used to explore the tuning features of ecologically important intermediate properties, including depth, surface normal, curvature, and object relations (Sarch et al. 2023). By
further combining the human visual interpretable encoding
model with the diffusion models, researchers show that the
generated images could semantically align with the original images corresponding to targeted brain regions (Luo
et al. 2024, 2023). However, these interpretable encoding
models can only simultaneously correspond to each voxel
of the human high-level visual cortex to a single category
label with the highest explained score, ignoring the condition that multiple neural selectivities coexist within voxels.
The study of single-neuron recordings has shown that single neurons can simultaneously encode multiple visual representations with invariant metric properties (Quiroga et al.
2005). Furthermore, other studies demonstrate that the representation of all objects of a category as a manifold in a
high-dimensional space (Grill-Spector and Weiner 2014). In

Code — https://github.com/BIT-YangLab/CLIP-MSM

Introduction
In neuroscience, visual perception is amazingly rapid, allowing humans to categorize visual scenes in just one-tenth of a
second (Thorpe, Fize, and Marlot 1996). There is substantial
evidence from neuropsychological patients, functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) studies and intracranial
recordings indicating that the ventral visual pathway contains distinct regions in processing semantic categories such
as faces, places, bodies, words, and food (Puce et al. 1996;
Epstein and Kanwisher 1998; Maguire 2001; Kanwisher,
McDermott, and Chun 2002; Grill-Spector 2003; Kanwisher
* Corresponding author: Guoyuan Yang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9184

