The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Efficient Object Re-Identification with a Novel Cloud-Edge Collaborative
Framework
Chuanming Wang* , Yuxin Yang* , Mengshi Qi, Huanhuan Zhang, Huadong Ma†
The State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Abstract
Object re-identification (ReID) is committed to searching for
objects of the same identity across cameras, and its real-world
deployment is gradually increasing. Current ReID methods
assume that the deployed system follows the centralized processing paradigm, i.e., all computations are conducted in the
cloud server and edge devices are only used to capture images. As the number of videos experiences a rapid escalation, this paradigm has become impractical due to the finite
computational resources in the cloud server. Therefore, the
ReID system should be converted to fit in the cloud-edge collaborative processing paradigm, which is crucial to boost its
scalability and practicality. However, current works lack relevant research on this important specific issue, making it difficult to adapt them into a cloud-edge framework effectively.
In this paper, we propose a cloud-edge collaborative inference
framework for ReID systems, aiming to expedite the return of
the desired image captured by the camera to the cloud server
by learning the spatial-temporal correlations among objects.
In the system, a Distribution-aware Correlation Modeling network (DaCM) is particularly proposed to embed the spatialtemporal correlations of the camera network implicitly into a
graph structure, and it can be applied 1) in the cloud to regulate the size of the upload window and 2) on the edge device
to adjust the sequence of images, respectively. Notably, the
proposed DaCM can be seamlessly combined with traditional
ReID methods, enabling their application within our proposed edge-cloud collaborative framework. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method obviously reduces transmission overhead and significantly improves performance.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of the difference between centralized
and cloud-edge collaborative patterns for ReID systems.

With the increasing demands, ReID systems have been
widely deployed in various real-world scenarios for vehicle or person searching, playing an important role in traffic
monitoring, safety management, etc. Therefore, an expanding number of innovative technologies have been introduced
to promote the accuracy of ReID system continuously, including establishing elaborate feature extractors (Luo et al.
2019; Huynh 2021; He et al. 2021; Li, Sun, and Li 2023),
developing data transmission schemes (Jain et al. 2020), and
designing inference strategies (Zhong et al. 2017).
Due to its intrinsic cross-scene nature, a ReID system
typically consists of a central cloud server, multiple edge
devices (such as cameras), and a communication network
for transmitting images and associated data. Previous ReID
methods typically follow a centralized processing pattern,
where, as illustrated on the left of Fig. 1, edge devices
merely capture images and upload all images to the cloud
server via the connected network. The cloud server then utilizes a deep neural network to extract features and compute
similarities between the query and returned images. However, with the rapid proliferation of cameras, this processing pattern imposes excessive strain on the communication
network’s bandwidth and the cloud server’s computing and
storage capacities, leading to significant service delays and
a compromised user experience. Consequently, in line with
current technological trends and driven by the advancement

Introduction

Object re-identification (ReID) (He et al. 2021, 2023; Li,
Sun, and Li 2023; Luo et al. 2019; Huynh 2021; Ge et al.
2024; Chen et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2024; Qi
et al. 2021; Qi, Wang, and Li 2017; Liu et al. 2018) aims to
retrieve specific objects captured by non-overlapping cameras, which usually serves as a fundamental task in the field
of multimedia processing. It can facilitate users in searching
objects accurately across diverse scenes and views, significantly alleviating manual overhead in visual surveillance.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Huadong Ma.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7600

