The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Gaze Label Alignment: Alleviating Domain Shift for Gaze Estimation
Guanzhong Zeng* , Jingjing Wang* , Zefu Xu, Pengwei Yin, Wenqi Ren† , Di Xie, Jiang Zhu
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
{zengguanzhong, wangjingjing9, xuzefu, yinpengwei, renwenqi, xiedi, zhujiang.hri}@hikvision.com

High Error

Deviated Label

Abstract
Gaze estimation methods encounter significant performance
deterioration when being evaluated across different domains,
because of the domain gap between the testing and training
data. Existing methods try to solve this issue by reducing the
deviation of data distribution, however, they ignore the existence of label deviation in the data due to the acquisition
mechanism of the gaze label and the individual physiological
differences. In this paper, we first point out that the influence
brought by the label deviation cannot be ignored, and propose
a gaze label alignment algorithm (GLA) to eliminate the label
distribution deviation. Specifically, we first train the feature
extractor on all domains to get domain invariant features, and
then select an anchor domain to train the gaze regressor. We
predict the gaze label on remaining domains and use a mapping function to align the labels. Finally, these aligned labels
can be used to train gaze estimation models. Therefore, our
method can be combined with any existing method. Experimental results show that our GLA method can effectively alleviate the label distribution shift, and SOTA gaze estimation
methods can be further improved obviously.

Train

(a)
Aligned Label

Gaze
Estimation

Train

(c)

Test

(b)
Low Error

Test

(d)

Figure 1: The red scatters in (a) and (c) mean the labels of
source domain A and the corresponding blue scatters are the
labels of source domain B. (b) and (d) are the scatter plots
of estimated label (X-axis) and ground truth label (Y-axis).

which limits its application in real world, since the source
data is usually not accessible due to data privacy, and it is
not feasible to collect large amount of target domain data. To
eliminate the dependency on target domain data during training, recently, some domain generalization approaches have
been proposed. These methods (Cheng and Bao 2022; Yin
et al. 2024c) do not need the target domain data, and learn
domain invariant features by removing the gaze-irrelevant
domain features.
Previous methods (Li et al. 2018, 2020; Wang et al.
2022a) only align the data distribution among domains and
neglect the label distribution deviation. As it is infeasible to
label the gaze direction manually, currently most methods
get the gaze directions by building a gaze label acquisition
system. The different internal and external parameters of different label acquisition systems lead to label shifts among
different datasets. Moreover, even in the same label acquisition system, among different individuals, there also exists
individual deviation due to the differences in eye shapes and
inner eye structures. The deviation of the label causes the
learned regressor to be divergent and have a relatively high
error as shown in Fig. 1. In this paper, we point out the label
distribution shift is also one of the main reasons causing performance degradation which has not been found by previous
researchers in gaze estimation.

Introduction
The human gaze provides a wealth of information, highly
accurate gaze estimation can strongly support many applications, such as human-computer interaction (Liu et al. 2021a),
augmented reality (Murphy-Chutorian and Trivedi 2010),
driver monitoring systems (Shah et al. 2022) and saliency
prediction (Chang et al. 2019). Recently, appearance-based
gaze estimation methods (Liu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2022b)
have achieved remarkable results with the development of
deep learning. However, these methods obtain promising
performance in within-domain evaluations but suffer from
dramatic degradation in cross-domain evaluations due to the
domain gap (Yin et al. 2024c).
To improve the performance in cross-domain scenarios,
previous methods leverage domain adaptation approaches to
reduce the domain gap. However, these methods (Bao et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022b) require target domain samples
for jointly optimizing the network with source domain data,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9780

