The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Can Watermarking Large Language Models Prevent
Copyrighted Text Generation and Hide Training Data?
Michael-Andrei Panaitescu-Liess, Zora Che, Bang An, Yuancheng Xu, Pankayaraj
Pathmanathan, Souradip Chakraborty, Sicheng Zhu, Tom Goldstein, Furong Huang
University of Maryland, College Park
{mpanaite, zche, bangan, ycxu, pan, schakra3, sczhu, tomg, furongh}@umd.edu

Abstract

violators can face legal consequences, including lawsuits
and financial penalties. For LLMs, copyright infringement
can occur through (1) generation of copyrighted content
during deployment and (2) illegal usage of copyrighted
works during training. Ensuring the absence of copyrighted
content in the vast training datasets of LLMs is challenging.
Moreover, legal debates around generative AI copyright infringement vary by region, complicating compliance further.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in generating diverse and contextually rich
text. However, concerns regarding copyright infringement
arise as LLMs may inadvertently produce copyrighted material. In this paper, we first investigate the effectiveness of
watermarking LLMs as a deterrent against the generation of
copyrighted texts. Through theoretical analysis and empirical evaluation, we demonstrate that incorporating watermarks
into LLMs significantly reduces the likelihood of generating
copyrighted content, thereby addressing a critical concern in
the deployment of LLMs. However, we also find that watermarking can have unintended consequences on Membership
Inference Attacks (MIAs), which aim to discern whether a
sample was part of the pretraining dataset and may be used to
detect copyright violations. Surprisingly, we find that watermarking adversely affects the success rate of MIAs, complicating the task of detecting copyrighted text in the pretraining
dataset. These results reveal the complex interplay between
different regulatory measures, which may impact each other
in unforeseen ways. Finally, we propose an adaptive technique to improve the success rate of a recent MIA under watermarking. Our findings underscore the importance of developing adaptive methods to study critical problems in LLMs
with potential legal implications.

Current lawsuits against AI companies for unauthorized use of copyrighted content (e.g., Andersen v. Stability
AI Ltd, NYT v. OpenAI) highlight the urgent need for
methods to address these challenges. In this paper, we focus
on studying the effects of watermarking LLMs on two
critical issues: (1) preventing the generation of copyrighted
content, and (2) detecting copyrighted content in training
data. We show that watermarking can significantly impact
both the generation of copyrighted text and the detection of
copyrighted content in training data.
Firstly, we observe that current LLM output watermarking techniques can significantly reduce the probability
of LLMs generating copyrighted content, by tens of orders
of magnitude. Our empirical results focus on two recent
watermarking methods: UMD (Kirchenbauer et al. 2023)
and Unigram-Watermark (Zhao et al. 2023). Both methods
split the vocabulary into two sets (green and red) and bias
the model towards selecting tokens from the green set
by altering the logits distribution, thereby embedding a
detectable signal. We provide both empirical and theoretical
results to support our findings.

Introduction
In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have
pushed the frontiers of natural language processing by facilitating sophisticated tasks like text generation, translation,
and summarization. With their impressive performance,
LLMs are increasingly integrated into various applications,
including virtual assistants, chatbots, content generation,
and education. However, the widespread usage of LLMs
brings forth serious concerns regarding potential copyright
infringements. Addressing these challenges is critical for
the ethical and legal deployment of LLMs.

Secondly, we demonstrate that watermarking techniques
can decrease the success rate of Membership Inference
Attacks (MIAs), which aim to detect whether a piece of
copyrighted text was part of the training dataset. Since
MIAs exploit the model’s output, their performance can
suffer under watermarking due to changes in the probability
distribution of output tokens. Our comprehensive empirical
study, including 5 recent MIAs and 5 LLMs, shows that the
AUC of detection methods can be reduced by up to 16% in
the presence of watermarks.

Copyright infringement involves unauthorized usage of
copyrighted content, which violates the intellectual property rights of copyright owners, potentially undermining
content creators’ ability to fund their work, and affecting
the diversity of creative outputs in society. Additionally,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Finally, we propose an adaptive method designed to

25002

