The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training-and-Prompt-Free General Painterly Harmonization via Zero-Shot
Disentenglement on Style and Content References
Teng-Fang Hsiao, Bo-Kai Ruan, Hong-Han Shuai
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
{tfhsiao.ee13, bkruan.ee11, hhshuai}@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract

512x512

256x256

Content Disruption
Input

Painterly image harmonization aims at seamlessly blending disparate visual elements within a single image. However, previous approaches often struggle due to limitations
in training data or reliance on additional prompts, leading
to inharmonious and content-disrupted output. To surmount
these hurdles, we design a Training-and-prompt-Free General
Painterly Harmonization method (TF-GPH). TF-GPH incorporates a novel “Similarity Disentangle Mask”, which disentangles the foreground content and background image by
redirecting their attention to corresponding reference images,
enhancing the attention mechanism for multi-image inputs.
Additionally, we propose a “Similarity Reweighting” mechanism to balance harmonization between stylization and content preservation. This mechanism minimizes content disruption by prioritizing the content-similar features within the
given background style reference. Finally, we address the deficiencies in existing benchmarks by proposing novel rangebased evaluation metrics and a new benchmark to better reflect real-world applications. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our method in all benchmarks.

Ours
Input

Stage 1

ProPIH
Stage 2

Ours
Stage 3

ZSTAR
Stage 4

Continuously-Adjustable Progressive Painterly Harmonization (Ours)

Figure 1: Our method overcomes the resolution and stagedprogressive painterly harmonization limitations present in
the SOTA method ProPIH (Niu et al. 2024b), where users
are restricted to selecting stylization strength from one of
four stages. In contrast, our approach offer continuously adjustable hyperparameters, allowing for more flexible stylization. Additionally, our method effectively mitigates content
disruption issues, such as facial alterations, commonly seen
in image-editing methods like ZSTAR (Deng et al. 2023).

Code — https://github.com/BlueDyee/TF-GPH

Introduction
Image composition, which involves blending a foreground
element from one image with a different background, often results in composite images with mismatched colors and
illumination between the foreground and background. Image harmonization techniques have been developed to adjust
the appearance of foreground for a seamless integration with
the background (Tsai et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2019; Tan et al.
2023; Xing et al. 2022). A specialized area within this field,
painterly image harmonization, focuses on integrating elements into paintings to enable artistic edits (Lu et al. 2023;
Luan et al. 2018). For instance, ProPIH (Niu et al. 2024b),
pioneers progressive painterly harmonization, training the
model with different levels of harmonization, enhancing its
applicability to real-world scenarios.
Despite notable advancements, current painterly image
harmonization techniques still face challenges with generalizability, particularly when dealing with novel art styles

or unique content compositions. One promising solution is
to leverage insights from other image-editing methods. For
instance, (Zhang et al. 2023; Cheng et al. 2023) suggest finetuning models to adapt to input styles. However, each styles
require additional computational costs that are 10x times
higher than a single inference. Alternatively, (Lu, Liu, and
Kong 2023; Kwon and Ye 2022) propose text-guided editing strategies, but these approaches are limited by the difficulty of adequately describing complex visual styles through
text alone. Recently, methods such as (Cao et al. 2023; Deng
et al. 2023) explore training-free techniques. These methods
utilize attention-sharing across images combined with techniques like AdaIN(Huang and Belongie 2017) to align content features with style references. While effective, this brute
alignment lead to content disruption as shown in Fig. 1.
In this work, we present TF-GPH, an innovative diffusion pipeline that operates without additional training or
prompts by leveraging the pretrained diffusion model (Rombach et al. 2022). TF-GPH solves a wider range of painterly

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3545

