The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cobra: Extending Mamba to Multi-Modal Large Language Model for Efficient
Inference
Han Zhao1 2 * , Min Zhang1 * , Wei Zhao2 , Pengxiang Ding2 , Siteng Huang3 , Donglin Wang2†
1

Zhejiang University
Westlake University
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
zhaohan34@westlake.edu.cn, zhangmin@westlake.edu.cn, zhaowei@westlake.edu.cn,
dingpengxiang@westlake.edu.cn, siteng.huang@gmail.com, wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn
2

Abstract

way for further research into more nuanced and sophisticated applications. For example, as MLLMs continue to
evolve, there is potential for significant improvements in areas such as real-time interaction in dynamic environments,
cross-modal retrieval tasks, and the seamless integration of
language and visual processing in everyday technology.
MLLMs typically rely on the well-known Transformer
network as a foundational model for many downstream
tasks. However, due to their quadratic computational complexity, Transformer networks are often less efficient, making it challenging to meet the demands of application scenarios that require high real-time performance and are suitable
for edge deployment. As shown in Figure 1 (d), the MoELLaVA (Lin et al. 2024) model can process only 20.33 tokens generated per second, indicating a low processing efficiency. Despite these challenges, there remains a significant
demand for MLLMs in such areas. Therefore, the ability
to deploy MLLMs that support fast inference with low
resource utilization is particularly crucial.
Traditional approaches have primarily focused on improving the efficiency of MLLMs by reducing model capacity
or compressing the length of the visual context while generally maintaining the Transformer architecture within the
language model (Zhu et al. 2024; Zhou et al. 2024; Zhang
et al. 2024; Chu et al. 2023, 2024; Lin et al. 2024). For example, LLaVA-Phi (Zhu et al. 2024) builds a multi-modal base
model using a small-scale Phi-2 as the core language model.
MobileVLM (Chu et al. 2023, 2024) utilizes MobileLLaMA
as its base model, training a series of smaller-scale language
models based on the LLaMA architecture. These methods
aim to enhance the inference speed of MLLMs by reducing the size of the language models. Although this approach
improves efficiency, it often comes at the expense of significantly reduced model performance. In Figure 1 (b), MobileVLM v2-3B (Chu et al. 2024) has the worst performance
on all MLLM benchmarks compared to the other models.
In this paper, our primary goal is to enhance the inference speed of multi-modal large language models (MLLMs)
while ensuring their performance remains uncompromising.
To achieve this, we propose Cobra, which integrates the
Mamba large language model and utilizes the linear scalability of state-space modeling (SSM). This approach effectively addresses the quadratic computational complex-

In recent years, applying multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) in various fields has achieved remarkable success. However, as the foundation model for many downstream
tasks, MLLMs comprise the well-known Transformer network, which has a less efficient quadratic computation complexity. In this paper, we introduce Cobra, a multi-modal
large-scale language model built upon a state-space model,
which has demonstrated significant potential in efficiently
handling long sequences with fast inference and linear scalability concerning sequence length. Specifically, Cobra involves replacing Transformer-based backbone models (e.g.,
LLaMA or Phi) with pre-trained Mamba language models.
We then empirically explore effective strategies for aligning visual and textual modalities and integrating various pretrained Mamba model variants with visual encoders. Experiments across various multi-modal benchmarks demonstrate
that: (i) Cobra performs 3× ∼ 4× faster than the most computationally efficient state-of-the-art methods, e.g., LLaVAPhi and MobileVLM v2. Additionally, its performance is significantly enhanced thanks to the implementation of linear sequential modeling. (ii) Cobra fine-tunes a small parameter (∼
48% of model parameters), leading to a significant improvement in overall performance compared to LLaVA.

Code — https://github.com/h-zhao1997/cobra

1

Introduction

Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have recently achieved impressive results across a variety of downstream tasks, including multi-modal content generation (Lu
et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2024), vision-based question answering (OpenAI 2023; Gao et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b,c),
and embodied intelligence (Brohan et al. 2023; Kim et al.
2024; Ding et al. 2024). By effectively aligning pre-trained
large language models with visual modalities, MLLMs have
demonstrated a strong ability to comprehend and navigate
complex visual-language contexts. These advancements not
only highlight the versatility of MLLMs but also pave the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10421

