The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Generalizability via Utilization of Unlabeled Data for Occupancy
Perception
Ruihang Li, Tao Li, Shanding Ye, Kaikai Xiao, Zheng Huangnan, Zhe Yin, Zhijie Pan
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, 310027 China
12221089@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
3D occupancy perception accurately estimates the volumetric status and semantic labels of a scene, attracting significant attention in the field of autonomous driving. However,
enhancing the model’s ability to generalize across different
driving scenarios or sensing systems, often requires redesigning the model or extra-expensive annotations. To this end, following a comprehensive analysis of the occupancy model architecture, we proposed the UGOCC method that utilizes domain adaptation to efficiently harness unlabeled autonomous
driving data, thereby enhancing the model’s generalizability.
Specifically, we design the depth fusion module by employing self-supervised depth estimation, and propose a strategy
based on semantic attention and domain adversarial learning
to improve the generalizability of the learnable fusion module. Additionally, we propose an OCC-specific pseudo-label
selection tailored for semi-supervised learning, which optimizes the overall network’s generalizability. Our experiment
results on two challenging datasets nuScenes and Waymo,
demonstrate that our method not only achieves state-of-theart generalizability but also enhances the model’s perceptual
capabilities within the source domain by utilizing unlabeled
data.

Figure 1: (a) Contemporary occupancy perception pipeline
(b) Enhancement of 3D perception generalization in terms of
geometry and semantics via 2D information through pseudolabels. (c) Visualization of UGOCC generalization strategy.

Schramm et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024b; Harley et al.
2023): feature extraction, feature fusion, and occupancy
decoding head, as shown in Fig. 1-(a). In the feature
extraction module (2D Feature Encoder), which shares
weights across views, the generalization decline from source
to target domains—similar to 2D perception tasks—can
be effectively migrated using semi-supervised and selfsupervised learning, as established in 2D generalization
techniques (Schwonberg et al. 2023). The feature fusion
principal employs two strategies: explicit fusion based on
depth information and implicit fusion utilizing attentionbased learning. The generalization performance of these
strategies is influenced by various sources of generalization
bias, including depth estimation performance, network sensitivity to the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of the sensor
suite, and discrepancies in scene characteristics. As for occupancy decoding head, during the domain transfer process,
the primary factors affecting performance are the decline
in the generalization ability of the unified feature map and
overfitting caused by the geometric distribution and characteristics of semantic categories.
Enhancing the domain generalization of the feature ex-

Introduction
Vision-centric 3D Occupancy Perception (Pan et al. 2024a)
benefits from the implicit feature representations in multicamera systems. It voxelizes the environment around autonomous vehicles and assigns semantic information, playing an important role in modern autonomous driving and
robotics. However, it typically demands supervised learning
using occupancy labels obtained from multi-frame semantic LiDAR reconstructions, which incurs substantial cost
overhead. Additionally, autonomous vehicles often operate
in environments characterized by substantial feature variation and are equipped with diverse sensor suites (Ayala and
Mohd 2021), including varying numbers of cameras and different fields of views (FOV). This leads to significant performance decline in vision-based OCC perception models
when transitioning from the source to the target domain, as
depicted in Fig. 1-(b).
Currently, the state-of-the-art occupancy perception models are divided into three main parts (Busch et al. 2024;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4896

