The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Integrated Gradient-based Transferable Adversarial Examples
by Refining the Integration Path
Yuchen Ren1 , Zhengyu Zhao1 * , Chenhao Lin1 , Bo Yang2 , Lu Zhou3 , Zhe Liu4 , Chao Shen1
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
Information Engineering University
3
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
4
Zhejiang Lab
ryc98@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {zhengyu.zhao, linchenhao}@xjtu.edu.cn,
yangbo hn@163.com, {lu.zhou, zhe.liu}@nuaa.edu.cn, chaoshen@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Clean

Abstract
Transferable adversarial examples are known to cause threats
in practical, black-box attack scenarios. A notable approach
to improving transferability is using integrated gradients (IG),
originally developed for model interpretability. In this paper,
we find that existing IG-based attacks have limited transferability due to their naive adoption of IG in model interpretability. To address this limitation, we focus on the IG integration path and refine it in three aspects: multiplicity, monotonicity, and diversity, supported by theoretical analyses. We
propose the Multiple Monotonic Diversified Integrated Gradients (MuMoDIG) attack, which can generate highly transferable adversarial examples on different CNN and ViT models and defenses. Experiments validate that MuMoDIG outperforms the latest IG-based attack by up to 37.3% and other
state-of-the-art attacks by 8.4%. In general, our study reveals
that migrating established techniques to improve transferability may require non-trivial efforts.

Prediction: Toaster

MIG

MuMoDIG

Prediction: Toaster Prediction: Caldron

Figure 1: Model attribution results for adversarial examples
generated by our MuMoDIG vs. MIG (Ma et al. 2023) on
the target model PiT-T. MuMoDIG concentrates more on
the background, showcasing its superiority in disrupting the
model prediction. Here, RN-18 is the surrogate model.

Appx. & Code — https://github.com/RYC-98/MuMoDIG

Introduction
Deep learning networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable
to adversarial attacks, which slightly alter input examples to
cause model prediction errors (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). Adversarial attacks can
be divided into white-box and black-box attacks. White-box
attacks assume that all information about the target model
is transparent. Conversely, black-box attacks (Wang and He
2021; Brendel, Rauber, and Bethge 2018; Ren et al. 2024)
are more challenging due to the lack of model details. In particular, transferable black-box attacks (Liu et al. 2017) even
assume no access to the target model’s output, and they just
rely on the transferability of adversarial examples generated
on known surrogate models. To assess and then improve the
robustness of DNN models in practical scenarios, various
transferable attacks have been proposed (Long et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2020; Zhao, Liu, and Larson 2021).
Recently, several transferable attacks (Huang and Kong
2022; Ma et al. 2023) have migrated the idea of integrated

gradients (IG) (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017) from the
task of DNN interpretability to transferable attacks. Originally, IG interprets a DNN model by attributing its predictions to its input features along a given path. In the context
of transferable attacks, the accumulation effect of IG leads
to a stable update direction of adversarial gradients and substantially enhances transferability. In particular, existing IGbased attacks naively adopt IG implementations that rely on
a single path.
In this paper, we demonstrate that, however, such a naive
adoption has largely limited the transferability of IG-based
attacks, since the calculated gradients may be easily affected by the high curvature position of the output manifold
(Kapishnikov et al. 2021). To address this limitation, we propose to refine the integration path in three key aspects: multiplicity, monotonicity, and diversity. First, we conduct theoretical analyses to show that directly adopting arbitrary multiple paths even harms the transferability due to the conflict

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6731

