The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Configuring Data Augmentations to Reduce Variance Shift
in Positional Embedding of Vision Transformers
Bum Jun Kim, Sang Woo Kim*
Department of Electrical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology
{kmbmjn, swkim}@postech.edu

Abstract

compared with CNNs. Afterwards, other follow-up studies
(Touvron et al. 2021a; Touvron, Cord, and Jégou 2022) attempted to train ViTs using only ImageNet and found that
successful training of ViTs requires rich data augmentations,
including Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018), Cutmix (Yun et al.
2019), and random erasing (Zhong et al. 2020). Since then,
using a larger dataset or rich data augmentations has been
discussed as a critical factor in training ViTs to achieve successful performance.
Note that, in fact, these data augmentations were developed during the CNN era. Although Mixup, Cutmix, and
random erasing provide rich transformations of data with
increased diversity, we should rigorously examine their validity for training ViTs. Eventually, we report a vulnerability for this issue: Certain data augmentations cause a variance shift in the positional embedding of ViT, which leads
to inconsistent behavior of the positional embedding and degraded performance of ViT. We discover that this vulnerability is incurred by the distinct architecture in the early stage
of ViT, which requires specific conditions for the input image.
In this regard, we inspect whether current data augmentations satisfy this condition (Table 1). We provide a detailed
theoretical description of this vulnerability as well as its root
cause. Our analysis discovers that Cutmix is safe from this
vulnerability, whereas Mixup incurs variance shifts. We also
explore other data augmentations such as random erasing
and random resize crop, which require specific configurations for the correct use on ViTs. We empirically examined
the validity of our guidelines for configuring data augmentations and observed that following them improves the performance of ViTs.

Vision transformers (ViTs) have demonstrated remarkable
performance in a variety of vision tasks. Despite their promising capabilities, training a ViT requires a large amount of diverse data. Several studies empirically found that using rich
data augmentations, such as Mixup, Cutmix, and random
erasing, is critical to the successful training of ViTs. Now,
the use of rich data augmentations has become a standard
practice in the current state. However, we report a vulnerability to this practice: Certain data augmentations such as
Mixup cause a variance shift in the positional embedding of
ViT, which has been a hidden factor that degrades the performance of ViT during the test phase. We claim that achieving
a stable effect from positional embedding requires a specific
condition on the image, which is often broken for the current data augmentation methods. We provide a detailed analysis of this problem as well as the correct configuration for
these data augmentations to remove the side effects of variance shift. Experiments showed that adopting our guidelines
improves the performance of ViTs compared with the current
configuration of data augmentations.

Introduction
Vision transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) have
demonstrated remarkable performance in a wide range of
vision tasks. They have replaced the dominance of previous
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016), exhibiting improved modeling
ability. Now, ViTs have become the standard backbone in
image classification as well as other downstream tasks, such
as semantic segmentation.
Compared with CNNs, training ViT requires a much
larger or more diverse dataset. The original study of ViT
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) observed that directly training ViTs
on ImageNet1 dataset exhibits worse results than CNNs. To
overcome this problem, they pretrained ViTs on the JFT300M dataset, which is their in-house dataset with a larger
size. Subsequently, they fine-tuned the ViTs on the ImageNet dataset, which then showed improved performance

Theory and Practice: Data Augmentations for
Vision Transformers
Problem Statement: Variance Shift in Positional
Embedding
This study targets ViTs with absolute positional embedding,
which is widely used in numerous studies (Touvron et al.
2021b; d’Ascoli et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2021; Ali et al. 2021;
Han et al. 2021; Heo et al. 2021). Although there are several
architectures of transformers with relative positional embedding, recent studies such as EVA (Fang et al. 2023) and Hi-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, ImageNet indicates ImageNet-1K (Deng et al.
2009) unless specified otherwise.

17840

