The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Up-Restorer: When Unrolling Meets Prompts for Unified Image Restoration
Minghao Liu1 , Wenhan Yang2 , Jinyi Luo1 , Jiaying Liu1

*

1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
lmhlmh@stu.pku.edu.cn, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, luojinyi@stu.pku.edu.cn, liujiaying@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
IR Block

All-in-one restoration needs to implicitly distinguish between
different degradation conditions and apply specific prior constraints accordingly. To fulfill this goal, our work makes the
first effort to create an all-in-one restoration via unrolling
from the typical maximum a-posterior optimization function. This unrolling framework naturally leads to the construction of progressively solving models, which are equivalent to a diffusion enhancer taking as input dynamically
generated prompts. Under a score-based diffusion model, the
prompts are integrated for propagating and updating several context-related variables, i.e. transmission map, atmospheric light map, and noise or rain map progressively. Such a
learned prompt generation process, which simulates the nonlinear operations in the unrolled solution, is combined with
linear operations owning clear physics implications to make
the diffusion models well-regularized and more effective in
learning degradation-related visual priors. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves significant performance improvements across various image restoration tasks,
realizing true all-in-one image restoration.

(a) Multiple Expert Head
All-in-one IR Block
Contrastive
Learning
Physic Principles

(b) Task-specific priors
×m

Prompt

Low Quality Images

...

Diffusion

Physics Var. in
Uni-Modeling

(c) Ours

High Quality Images

Figure 1: Comparison of existing all-in-one image restoration methods. (a) Multiple Expert Heads: Utilizes separate
expert heads for different tasks, requiring task-specific training and storage. (b) Task-specific Priors: Employs a unified
IR block with physical principles by contrastive learning to
handle multiple tasks, but is limited by the need for multistage training. (c) Ours: Proposing a diffusion model guided
by prompt blocks and physics variables derived from a unified degradation model to upgrade prompts, offering a more
generalized and adaptable solution across various degradation scenarios.

Introduction
Image restoration (IR) aims to reconstruct a high-quality
(HQ) image from its degraded low-quality (LQ) version. It
has a wide range of applications in various fields, including
photography, surveillance analysis, medical imaging, forensics, etc. The goal of IR is to recover the original scene
or object in its best possible quality, despite the presence
of various forms of degradation. Traditional IR methods relied heavily on mathematical models and hand-crafted features, e.g. Wiener filtering, Total Variation (TV) regularization, and Non-Local Means (NLM) commonly used for IR
tasks like denoising, deblurring, and inpainting. These methods are effective to a certain extent but often struggle with
complex degradations, as they lack the capacity to model the
intrinsic details of natural images.
With the rise of deep learning, image restoration witnessed a significant change. Recent deep learning-based IR
approaches excel in addressing single kind of degradation,
such as denoising (Zhang et al. 2017), deblurring (Ruan et al.

2022), adverse weather removal (Özdenizci and Legenstein
2023), and low-light enhancement (Guo et al. 2020). These
task-specific methods have demonstrated impressive performance on individual degradation types.
However, real-world scenarios, such as autonomous driving and outdoor surveillance, often include complex and
dynamic degradation that single degradation methods fail
to handle effectively (Mao et al. 2017). Such complex visual signals obtained from real scenes have driven the need
for all-in-one image restoration approaches that aim to
handle multiple degradations within a unified model. Existing all-in-one methods leverage techniques such as (1)
contrastive learning (Li et al. 2022), (2) task-specific sub-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5513

