The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Aligning Composed Query with Image via Discriminative Perception
from Negative Correspondences
Yifan Wang1 , Wuliang Huang2 , Chun Yuan1 *
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
yifan-wa22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, huangwuliang19b@ict.ac.cn, yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Query Image Modification Sentence

Abstract

Has no
sleeves with
slim straps
floral dress

The task of composed image retrieval aims to match the
multi-modal query composed of a reference image and a
modification sentence with the target image. Most current approaches narrow the distances between the composed queries
and targets by investigating matched correspondences in
positive triplets. Nevertheless, they are inclined to exhibit
heavy reliance on partial correlations. As the negative correspondences are underestimated, semantic clues that distinguish the target from mismatched candidates are obscured
by incomplete associations. Moreover, the correlations between the modification textual features and the visual variations from the reference to candidates are imperative to further strengthen the semantic discriminations. In this paper,
we propose DIscriminative Perception from NEgative Correspondences (DIPNEC) to address the aforementioned issues. To encourage awareness of the differences between
matched and mismatched correspondences, DIPNEC introduces optimal transport with semantic preservation for reassignments on hard negative triplets. Besides, Difference
Quantization Alignment (DQA) and Composed Word-level
Alignment (CWA) jointly determine the matching scores
between multi-modal queries and candidates. Specifically,
DQA concentrates on the correlations of textual features with
source-to-target visual differences, and CWA further emphasizes the differentiated semantics. DIPNEC has demonstrated
competitive performances on the experimental results and ablation studies on widely-used datasets FashionIQ and CIRR.

Ranked Matching Images

…

diffe
r

（a）A failure case of the recent model (Jiang et al. 2024)
Composed Query
ces
n
e
has
no
Transport Cost
Matching
sleeves
Scores
with
…
…
slim
…
…
straps
…
…
floral
Visual Difference
Query Image
dress
Candidate Image
Modification Text
（b）Our proposed model

…

…
…

Figure 1: Illustration of our model compared with previous
model. (a) A typical failure case that is misguided by partial correlations and overlooks semantics like “slim”. (b)
DIPNEC enhances discriminative semantics by comparing
words to visual differences and reassigns matching scores
optimized by transport cost.

image captioning (Tu et al. 2024), and interactive dialogue
system (Guo et al. 2023; Jia, Zhang, and Peng 2024).
As an emerging task to handle visual and linguistic understanding, CIR remains challenging for the textual modifiers
exhibit partial associations with the references and target
images. Semantic inconsistencies within these triplets lead
to entangled alignment when matching the hybrid-modal
queries with target images. Furthermore, inherited from
multi-modal retrieval, CIR necessitates addressing distribution discrepancies across diverse modalities. Thus, the mainstream approaches focus on compositional learning (Wen,
Gu, and Cheng 2021) to generate the composed query
through reweighting modality contributions (Huang et al.
2024) or aggregating critical attributes (Zhao, Song, and Jin
2022), to enhance understanding on the query intentions.
However, the lack of direct guidance from the targets when
composing queries results in insufficient semantic learning.
Recent models (Wen et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2024) alleviate
this issue by leveraging the alignment with target features.
In general, previous methods are primarily devoted to extracting correspondences from the matched triplets. However, the unaligned relationships for negative triplets have
not been thoroughly investigated, which may trigger de-

Introduction
As the demand for flexible multi-modal retrieval rises in the
era of massive data, composed image retrieval (CIR) (Vo
et al. 2019) has recently been one research focus. Integrating with the need for image retrieval and cross-modal retrieval, CIR is framed as retrieving the matched images from
the vision gallery with the hybrid-modal query of reference
images and modification sentences. Hence, semantic correlations and comprehension on the query composed of different modalities are crucial to this matching task, and the
progress could encourage the development in related domains, e.g., visual reasoning (Gupta and Kembhavi 2023),
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8078

