The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Infer Human’s Intentions Before Following Natural Language Instructions
Yanming Wan1 , Yue Wu1 , Yiping Wang1 , Jiayuan Mao2 * , Natasha Jaques1 *
1

University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
2
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA 02139
{ymwan, nj}@cs.washington.edu, jiayuanm@mit.edu

Abstract
For AI agents to be helpful to humans, they should be able
to follow natural language instructions to complete everyday
cooperative tasks in human environments. However, real human instructions inherently possess ambiguity, because the
human speakers assume sufficient prior knowledge about their
hidden goals and intentions. Standard language grounding and
planning methods fail to address such ambiguities because
they do not model human internal goals as additional partially observable factors in the environment. We propose a
new framework, Follow Instructions with Social and Embodied Reasoning (FISER), aiming for better natural language
instruction following in collaborative embodied tasks. Our
framework makes explicit inferences about human goals and
intentions as intermediate reasoning steps. We implement a
set of Transformer-based models and evaluate them over a
challenging benchmark, HandMeThat. We empirically demonstrate that using social reasoning to explicitly infer human
intentions before making action plans surpasses purely end-toend approaches. We also compare our implementation with
strong baselines, including Chain of Thought prompting on
the largest available pre-trained language models, and find that
FISER provides better performance on the embodied social
reasoning tasks under investigation, reaching the state-of-theart on HandMeThat.

Code — https://github.com/Simon-Wan/FISER
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.18073

Introduction
Building AI assistants that can interact with people in a
shared environment and follow their instructions would unlock assistive robotics and free up domestic labor. Toward
this broad goal, we need to address the problem of “translating” realistic natural language instructions into actions
executable by robots. The conventional way that people formulate this problem is grounded language learning, which
aims at mapping abstract natural language phrases to concretely executable actions. However, these approaches miss
an important component of many human-robot collaborative
tasks, which is that the language humans tend to use in everyday scenarios is inherently ambiguous. Human speakers
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25309

assume that listeners possess prior knowledge, leading them
to omit certain information for efficiency (Grice 1975; Sperber and Wilson 1986; Clark 1996; Dennett 1987; Gergely
et al. 1995). Resolving this ambiguity depends on leveraging
other sources of information (e.g., human internal goals and
historical actions) that are partially observable to the robot.
Consider the example shown in Fig. 1, where a human is
tidying up a room. In the middle of her actions, she asks a
robot for help, saying “Could you pass that from the sofa?”
This instruction does not appear to be solvable without further
information about the person’s underlying intention. While
such internal mental states are not directly observed, agents
can infer them from human’s past actions. Specifically, if
the robot can observe that in previous steps, the human put
several books into a box one by one, it can infer that she
intends to use that box to store all the books. Based on this
guess, the robot can check if there are any remaining books
on the sofa and then hand them to the person.
Generally speaking, the ambiguity in the instruction mainly
arises from two aspects. First, the human assumes sufficient
prior knowledge about her hidden intentions (Dennett 1987;
Gergely et al. 1995), which is based on the common sense
knowledge that people tend to group similar items together
when tidying up, and the observation that the human is gathering books. Second, people make trade-offs between accuracy and efficiency of communication (Grice 1975; Sperber
and Wilson 1986; Clark 1996). This leads to the challenge
of building AI agents that can follow efficient, ambiguous
speech that people naturally adopt when giving directions.
We consider the case where there’s a human and a robot
collaborating in a shared environment. The human is working
on some tasks, and specifies a sub-task for the robot to help
with by giving a natural language instruction. Past methods
(e.g., language grounding) attempt to directly complete the
specified command from the given instructions, since the
human only acts as a disembodied issuer of instructions and
is not another active agent in their environments. The human,
as another partially observable factor in the environment, has
been overlooked. In this paper, we present a new framework,
Follow Instructions with Social and Embodied Reasoning
(FISER), which suggests that we should introduce the human’s intention as explicit variables for the model to draw
inferences about. By leveraging this structure, our framework
opts to decompose the problem into two parts – social reason-

