The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Public Opinion Field Effect and Hawkes Process Join Hands for
Information Popularity Prediction
Junliang Li1 , Yajun Yang1 * , Yujia Zhang2 , Qinghua Hu1 , Alan Zhao2 , Hong Gao3
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
AI Technology Center of OVB, Tencent, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, China
{lijunliang, yjyang, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn, {yujiazhang, alantzhao}@tencent.com, honggao@zjnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Information popularity prediction, aiming to predict the
growth of user participation in a trending topic diffusion, is
a fundamental task in social networks. Existing methods often treat information diffusion as a single independent process, ignoring the “public opinion field effect” where multiple
trending topics coexist and compete for user attention simultaneously. Inspired by Hawkes theory, we propose a novel
Hawkes-process-based learning model for information popularity prediction, which takes into account both the temporal
correlation among users’ propagation behaviors in several topics diffusion and public opinion field effect in social networks.
We first propose an improved neural Hawkes process to capture comprehensive propagation law from multiple dimensions
and then propose a novel public opinion field paradigm based
on the improved Hawkes process and cascade structure. We
design a novel learning framework incorporating the public
opinion field paradigm to extract high-quality representations
for information popularity prediction. Extensive experiments
on four real-world datasets validate that our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art competitors.

Code and Appendix — https://github.com/ki-ljl/POFHP

Introduction
Information popularity prediction is a fundamental task in social networks, which can assist in understanding the evolution
of trending topics and has many important applications such
as public opinion analysis, fake news controlling (Masud et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2023), and online social marketing (Aravamudan, Zhang, and Anagnostopoulos 2023).
Existing methods for popularity prediction fall into two categories: probabilistic generative and cascade learning-based.
Probabilistic generative method treats information diffusion
as a sequence of events (Zhao et al. 2015) and design various diffusion models to simulate the occurrence of events
based on time-dependent probabilistic process, e.g., Poisson
process (Daley, Vere-Jones et al. 2003) and Hawkes process (Hawkes 1971). These methods well utilize the laws of
propagation in physical world for prediction and then retains
good interpretability. However, these methods simplify the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12076

propagation process and neglect the influence of various factors on the topic propagation in the public opinion field. Cascade learning-based method is proposed to learn data-driven
diffusion models from historical diffusion cascades. These
models use recurrent neural network (RNN) (Li et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2017) and graph neural network (GNN) (Welling
and Kipf 2016; Velickovic et al. 2017) respectively to capture
the temporal correlation among user behaviors in cascade
and the structural features of social networks. Some works
combine RNN and GNN to capture cascade contexts and social networks simultaneously, e.g., CasCN (Chen et al. 2019)
and DyHGCN (Yuan et al. 2021).
Both of the above two kinds of methods regard information
diffusion as a single independent process. However, in real
world, several trending topics always coexist in the public
opinion space and compete for user attention at the same
time, which deeply affects information diffusion. Recently,
POFD (Li et al. 2023) is proposed to incorporate “public opinion field effect” for enhancing representation learning. Each
topic forms a public opinion field and these fields compete for
user attention in information diffusion. By modeling the competition mechanism between different public opinion fields,
POFD can obtain better user representation for information
diffusion prediction. Unfortunately, POFD only utilizes the
network structure for representation learning but does not
investigate how to use information cascade for prediction.
We propose a novel Hawkes-process-based learning model
that integrates probabilistic generative and cascade-learning
methods while incorporating public opinion field effects for
information popularity prediction. Unlike traditional Hawkes
process, which focus solely on temporal correlations and
past events, our model accounts for additional factors like
public opinion field effects. Inspired by the Hawkes process,
we define the public opinion attraction based on the conditional intensity function and design a new public opinion
field paradigm. We propose a novel neural Hawkes process
to capture implicit temporal correlation among user retweeting behaviors in three dimensions: historical retweeting sequences, within a single topic, and across multiple topics.
Then, a representation learning framework incorporating public opinion field effect and Hawkes process can be designed
to extract high-quality node representations for information
popularity prediction. The main contributions of this paper
are summarized as follows.

