The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Large Language Models Are Read/Write Policy-Makers for
Simultaneous Generation
Shoutao Guo 1,3 , Shaolei Zhang 1,3 , Zhengrui Ma 1,3 , Yang Feng 1,2,3 *
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICT/CAS)
2
Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
guoshoutao22z@ict.ac.cn, zhangshaolei20z@ict.ac.cn, fengyang@ict.ac.cn
Dabei

Abstract

waren

drei

Menschen

getötet

worden

There

Simultaneous generation models write generation results
while reading streaming inputs, necessitating a policy-maker
to determine the appropriate output timing. Existing simultaneous generation methods generally adopt the traditional
encoder-decoder architecture and learn the generation and
policy-making capabilities through complex dynamic programming techniques. Although LLMs excel at text generation, they face challenges in taking on the role of policymakers through traditional training methods, limiting their
exploration in simultaneous generation. To overcome these
limitations, we propose a novel LLM-driven Simultaneous
Generation (LSG) framework, which allows the off-the-shelf
LLM to decide the generation timing and produce output concurrently. Specifically, LSG selects the generation policy that
minimizes latency as the baseline policy. Referring to the
baseline policy, LSG enables the LLM to devise an improved
generation policy that better balances latency and generation quality, and writes generation results accordingly. Experiments on simultaneous translation and streaming automatic
speech recognition tasks show that our method can achieve
state-of-the-art performance utilizing the open-source LLMs
and demonstrate practicality in real-world scenarios.

were

three

people

killed

State of wait-1 policy

State of significant difference

State of minor difference

Figure 1: The distribution difference of subsequent generation states compared to wait-1 policy for a German⇒English
translation example. The distribution difference is measured
by KL divergence.

In simultaneous generation tasks such as simultaneous
translation (Ma et al. 2019) and streaming Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) (Moritz, Hori, and Le 2020), existing
methods are constrained to using non-streaming parallel
data for model training due to the lack of annotated policies. To learn the generation policy, previous methods (Ma
et al. 2020b; Miao, Blunsom, and Specia 2021) primarily
utilize an encoder-decoder architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017)
coupled with complex dynamic programming training techniques. This methodology endows simultaneous generation
models with both generation and policy-making capabilities
(Zhang and Feng 2023b). However, these models are constrained by their expressive capacity, resulting in suboptimal
policies and generation performance. Additionally, they suffer from significant memory consumption and slow training
speeds during training (Guo, Zhang, and Feng 2023a). More
recently, the emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs)
(Touvron et al. 2023) prompts researchers to explore their
potential in simultaneous generation tasks (Koshkin, Sudoh,
and Nakamura 2024; Agostinelli et al. 2024). Nevertheless,
the decoder-only architecture and vast parameters of LLMs
pose challenges in applying traditional dynamic program-

Code — https://github.com/ictnlp/LSG
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00868

Introduction
Simultaneous generation models (Gu et al. 2017; Moritz,
Hori, and Le 2020), which produce the target sentence before reading the entire input, are widely used in streaming
scenarios such as real-time subtitles and online meetings. To
achieve the goal of low latency and high generation quality
(Zhang and Feng 2022b), simultaneous generation models
require an optimal policy to determine the generation timing, ensuring that the generated results are consistent with
those in non-streaming scenarios while minimizing latency
(Alinejad, Shavarani, and Sarkar 2021). Consequently, the
learning of generation policy is critical to the simultaneous
generation tasks.
* Corresponding author: Yang Feng.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23969

