The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ST-FiT: Inductive Spatial-Temporal Forecasting with Limited Training Data
Zhenyu Lei1 , Yushun Dong2 , Jundong Li1 , Chen Chen1
1

University of Virginia
Florida State University
{vjd5zr, jundong, zrh6du}@virginia.edu, yd24f@fsu.edu
2

Abstract
Train

Spatial-temporal graphs are widely used in a variety of
real-world applications. Spatial-Temporal Graph Neural Networks (STGNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool to extract
meaningful insights from this data. However, in real-world
applications, most nodes may not possess any available temporal data during training. For example, the pandemic dynamics of most cities on a geographical graph may not be
available due to the asynchronous nature of outbreaks. Such a
phenomenon disagrees with the training requirements of most
existing spatial-temporal forecasting methods, which jeopardizes their effectiveness and thus blocks broader deployment.
In this paper, we propose to formulate a novel problem of
inductive forecasting with limited training data. In particular, given a spatial-temporal graph, we aim to learn a spatialtemporal forecasting model that can be easily generalized
onto those nodes without any available temporal training data.
To handle this problem, we propose a principled framework
named ST-FiT. ST-FiT consists of two key learning components: temporal data augmentation and spatial graph topology learning. With such a design, ST-FiT can be used on top
of any existing STGNNs to achieve superior performance on
the nodes without training data. Extensive experiments verify
the effectiveness of ST-FiT in multiple key perspectives.

Infer

Data available
during training
Train

Infer

Data unavailable
during training

Figure 1: An exemplary spatial-temporal graph where only
the temporal data corresponding to a few nodes is accessible during training: on a geographical graph among different
cities, only a few cities have available pandemic dynamics
at the current time point (marked in red) due to the asynchronous nature of outbreaks. Here, the virus mark
denotes the cities that have gone through outbreaks.

Networks (GNNs) with various sequential forecasting models (Guo et al. 2019; Song et al. 2020) to learn the complex
spatial-temporal dependencies. As a consequence, STGNNs
have been widely adopted in a plethora of real-world applications (Jin et al. 2023; Zhuang et al. 2022).
Despite advancements, most existing STGNNs require
that all nodes in the given spatial-temporal graphs should
have temporal data (e.g., time series data) during training (Wang et al. 2020), such that the unique temporal dependency for each node can be easily captured (Shin and
Yoon 2024). With the captured temporal dependencies, the
STGNNs could make predictions for each node effectively.
However, in real-world scenarios, most nodes may not have
available temporal data during training (Gupta, Kodamana,
and Ranu 2023). We present an exemplary case in Figure 1.
Specifically, facing a sudden pandemic such as COVID-19,
due to the asynchronous nature of pandemic outbreaks, the
pandemic dynamics (e.g., the tendency of confirmed case
number) of most cities on a geographical graph may not be
available at a given time point (marked in red) (Atchadé and
Sokadjo 2022; Panagopoulos, Nikolentzos, and Vazirgiannis 2021). In such cases, existing STGNNs perform poorly

Code — https://github.com/LzyFischer/InductiveST
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10912

Introduction
Spatial-temporal graphs contain both spatial information encoded in graph topology and temporal information encoded
in node-associated temporal data (Sahili and Awad 2023). In
recent years, spatial-temporal graph data has become ubiquitous in a variety of domains such as transportation (Zhang
et al. 2021), epidemiology (Wang et al. 2022), and social
science (Kefalas, Symeonidis, and Manolopoulos 2018). In
these domains, a widely studied task is spatial-temporal
forecasting (Zhang and Patras 2018), i.e., predicting future temporal dynamics associated with the nodes in given
spatial-temporal graphs (Ye et al. 2020). Towards such a
goal, Spatial-Temporal Graph Neural Networks (STGNNs)
stand out (Cui et al. 2021) due to their exceptional capability of synergizing the strengths of the Graph Neural
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12031

