The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Autonomous Option Invention for
Continual Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning and Planning
Rashmeet Kaur Nayyar and Siddharth Srivastava
Autonomous Agents and Intelligent Robots Lab,
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
{rmnayyar, siddharths}@asu.edu

Abstract

et al. 2022), where agents must interact with and solve tasks
indefinitely. However, most existing research on option discovery in RL focuses either on continuous control tasks
with short horizons and dense rewards (Bagaria, Senthil,
and Konidaris 2021; Klissarov and Precup 2021), on singletask settings (Bagaria and Konidaris 2020; Riemer, Liu, and
Tesauro 2018), or lacks support for lookahead planning over
options to guide low-level policy learning (Machado et al.
2017; Khetarpal et al. 2020). A critical challenge remains
open: the autonomous discovery of generalizable, reusable
options for long-horizon, sparse-reward tasks in continual
RL settings. This is particularly relevant to real-world scenarios such as warehouse management, disaster recovery operations, and assembly tasks, where agents must adapt to
shifts in context and required behaviors without dense reward feedback and closed-form analytical models.
We present a novel approach that coherently addresses
option discovery and transfer with a unified symbolic abstraction framework for factored domains in the continual
RL settings. We focus on long-horizon, goal-based Markov
decision processes (MDPs) in RL settings with unknown
transition functions and sparse rewards. In particular, we
consider three conceptual desiderata for options: 1) composability: support chaining options for enabling hierarchical planning, 2) reusability: support transfer of options to
new problem instances, minimizing the need for relearning,
and 3) mutual independence: reduce interference among options, allowing options to be learned and executed independently with minimal side effects while ensuring composability at well-defined endpoints. Most prior works meet some
of these criteria but not all.
Our approach, Continual Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning and Planning (CHiRP) takes as input a set of state
variables and a stochastic simulator, and invents options satisfying desiderata 1-3: the invented options have symbolic
abstract descriptions that directly support composability and
reusability through high-level planning; these options have
stronger effects on different sets of variables and/or values,
supporting mutual independence. The core idea is to capture
notions of context-specific abstractions that depend on and
change with the current state by identifying salient variable
values responsible for greatest variation in the Q-function,
and to use changes in these abstractions as a cue for defining option endpoints. With every new task in a continual

Abstraction is key to scaling up reinforcement learning (RL).
However, autonomously learning abstract state and action
representations to enable transfer and generalization remains
a challenging open problem. This paper presents a novel
approach for inventing, representing, and utilizing options,
which represent temporally extended behaviors, in continual
RL settings. Our approach addresses streams of stochastic
problems characterized by long horizons, sparse rewards, and
unknown transition and reward functions.
Our approach continually learns and maintains an interpretable state abstraction, and uses it to invent high-level options with abstract symbolic representations. These options
meet three key desiderata: (1) composability for solving tasks
effectively with lookahead planning, (2) reusability across
problem instances for minimizing the need for relearning, and
(3) mutual independence for reducing interference among
options. Our main contributions are approaches for continually learning transferable, generalizable options with symbolic representations, and for integrating search techniques
with RL to efficiently plan over these learned options to solve
new problems. Empirical results demonstrate that the resulting approach effectively learns and transfers abstract knowledge across problem instances, achieving superior sample efficiency compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) for enabling autonomous
decision-making has been constrained by two fundamental
challenges: sample inefficiency and poor scalability, particularly in environments with long horizons and sparse rewards.
To address these limitations, researchers have focused on reducing the problem complexity through: (1) state abstraction, which creates compact state representations (Jong and
Stone 2005; Dadvar, Nayyar, and Srivastava 2023), and (2)
temporal abstraction, which captures hierarchical task structures through temporally extended behaviors (Barto and Mahadevan 2003; Pateria et al. 2021), such as options (Sutton,
Precup, and Singh 1999). Abstraction-based methodologies
offer principled approaches for knowledge transfer across
tasks (Abel et al. 2018), especially in the challenging setting
of continual learning (Liu, Xiao, and Stone 2021; Khetarpal
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19642

