The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Assessing Modality Bias in Video Question Answering Benchmarks with
Multimodal Large Language Models
Jean Park1 , Kuk Jin Jang1 , Basam Alasaly,2 , Sriharsha Mopidevi2 , Andrew Zolensky1 ,
Eric Eaton1 , Insup Lee1 , Kevin Johnson1,2
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
2
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
{hlpark, jangkj, zolensky, eeaton, lee}@seas.upenn.edu,
{basam.alasaly, sriharsha.mopidevi, kevin.johnson1}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
Abstract

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) can simultaneously process visual, textual, and auditory data, capturing
insights that complement human analysis. However, existing
video question-answering (VidQA) benchmarks and datasets
often exhibit a bias toward a single modality, despite the goal
of requiring advanced reasoning skills that integrate diverse
modalities to answer the queries.
In this work, we introduce the modality importance score
(MIS) to identify such bias. It is designed to assess which
modality embeds the necessary information to answer the
question. Additionally, we propose an innovative method using state-of-the-art MLLMs to estimate the modality importance, which can serve as a proxy for human judgments of
modality perception. With this MIS, we demonstrate the presence of unimodal bias and the scarcity of genuinely multimodal questions in existing datasets. We further validate the
modality importance score with multiple ablation studies to
evaluate the performance of MLLMs on permuted feature
sets. Our results indicate that current models do not effectively integrate information due to modality imbalance in existing datasets. Our proposed MLLM-derived MIS can guide
the curation of modality-balanced datasets that advance multimodal learning and enhance MLLMs’ capabilities to understand and utilize synergistic relations across modalities.

1

(a) Video and subtitle (TVQA)

Introduction

In recent years, trends in AI development have leaned towards multimodal models, particularly multimodal large
language models (MLLMs), as many complex problems necessitate the integration of diverse modalities to achieve
more accurate and comprehensive reasoning. Video question answering (VidQA) stands out as a particularly challenging task, requiring the integration of various modalities
along with complex spatial and temporal reasoning (Xiao
et al. 2021). As such, this task serves as a vital benchmark
for assessing the vision-language understanding capabilities
of AI systems.
In recent years, several VidQA benchmarks have been developed to train and evaluate the capabilities of MLLMs in
these areas (Yu et al. 2019; Gupta et al. 2022). However, a
fundamental question remains: Are these models genuinely

(b) Example questions

Figure 1: Example of a video clip with multimodal questions
demonstrating different modality importance. Q1 is answerable using either subtitle or video information, while Q2 requires integrating information from both modalities. (Sec.
3.2)

integrating information from various sources, or are they
simply leveraging biases inherent in the datasets? Our observations suggest that many existing benchmarks are limited in their ability to assess this integration. The questions

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19821

