The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PVTree: Realistic and Controllable Palm Vein Generation for Recognition Tasks
Sheng Shang1 * , Chenglong Zhao2 * , Ruixin Zhang2 , Jianlong Jin1 , Jingyun Zhang3 ,
Rizen Guo3 , Shouhong Ding2† , Yunsheng Wu2 , Yang Zhao1 , Wei Jia1†
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
3
Tencent WeChat Pay Lab33
shengshang@mail.hfut.edu.cn, {lornezhao, ruixinzhang}@tencent.com,
jianlong@mail.hfut.edu.cn, {naskyzhang, rizenguo, ericshding, simonwu}@tencent.com,
{yzhao, jiawei}@hfut.edu.cn
Abstract

Palm vein recognition is an emerging biometric technology
that offers enhanced security and privacy. However, acquiring sufficient palm vein data for training deep learning-based
recognition models is challenging due to the high costs of
data collection and privacy protection constraints. This has
led to a growing interest in generating pseudo-palm vein data
using generative models. Existing methods, however, often
produce unrealistic palm vein patterns or struggle with controlling identity and style attributes. To address these issues,
we propose a novel palm vein generation framework named
PVTree. First, the palm vein identity is defined by a complex and authentic 3D palm vascular tree, created using an
improved Constrained Constructive Optimization (CCO) algorithm. Second, palm vein patterns of the same identity are
generated by projecting the same 3D vascular tree into 2D images from different views and converting them into realistic
images using a generative model. As a result, PVTree satisfies the need for both identity consistency and intra-class diversity. Extensive experiments conducted on several publicly
available datasets demonstrate that our proposed palm vein
generation method surpasses existing methods and achieves a
higher T AR@F AR = 1e − 4 under the 1:1 Open-set protocol. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that
the performance of a recognition model trained on synthetic
palm vein data exceeds that of the recognition model trained
on real data, which indicates that palm vein image generation
research has a promising future.

Figure 1: The overall process of our method.

others. This means that palm vein recognition technology
has its own unique advantages in protecting the user’s privacy and providing a higher level of security. At the same
time, the difficulty of collection and the limitation of protecting user’s privacy have led to a lack of large-scale public datasets in the field of palm vein recognition. However,
training a deep learning-based palm vein recognition model
requires a large-scale palm vein dataset.
Several methods have been proposed to generate pseudopalm vein data(Salazar et al. 2021b,a; Ou et al. 2022;
Salazar-Jurado et al. 2024). However, these methods present
two obvious drawbacks: 1) The palm vein images generated
by existing methods are not realistic enough. Some methods(Salazar et al. 2021a,b; Ou et al. 2022) use palm vein pattern modeling methods or directly employ Generative Adversarial Networks(GANs) to generate palm vein images.
However, most existing palm vein modeling methods fail to
accurately capture the characteristics of real palm veins. Additionally, the training of GANs is frequently constrained by
the small size of the available datasets, leading to the generation of less realistic palm vein images. 2) The palm vein

Code — https://github.com/Sunniva-Shang/PVTree-palmvein-generation
Dataset — https://github.com/Sunniva-Shang/Palm-VeinDataset-HFUT

Introduction
Palm vein recognition has become a very promising biometrics technology. Unlike some external biometrics such
as face, fingerprints, and iris, palm veins are located under
the skin. Therefore, palm vein images are more difficult to
collect and are less susceptible to unauthorized capture by
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution.
†
Corresponding authors.

6767

