The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Know Where You Are From: Event-Based Segmentation via Spatio-Temporal
Propagation
Ke Li1 , Gengyu Lyu1 , Hao Chen2 , Bochen Xie3 , Zhen Yang1 , Youfu Li3 , Yongjian Deng1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong
{tokeli@emails., lyugengyu@, yangzhen@, yjdeng@}bjut.edu.cn, haochen303@seu.edu.cn
{boxie4-c@my.,meyfli@}cityu.edu.hk
2

Discussions

Abstract
(A)

Event cameras have gained attention in segmentation due
to their higher temporal resolution and dynamic range compared to traditional cameras. However, they struggle with issues like lack of color perception and triggering only at motion edges, making it hard to distinguish objects with similar contours or segment spatially continuous objects. Our
work aims to address these often overlooked issues. Based
on the assumption that various objects exhibit different motion patterns, we believe that embedding the historical motion states of objects into segmented scenes can effectively
address these challenges. Inspired by this, we propose the
ESS framework “Know Where You Are From” (KWYAF),
which incorporates past motion cues through spatio-temporal
propagation embedding. This framework features two core
components: the Sequential Motion Encoding Module (SME)
and the Event-Based Reliable Region Selection Mechanism
(ER2 SM). SMEs construct prior motion features through
spatio-temporal correlation modeling for boosting final segmentation, while ER2 SM adapts to identify high-confidence
regions, embedding motion more precisely through local window masks and reliable region selection. A large number of
experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed framework in terms of both quantity and quality.

Inputs

Encode & Decode Predictions
Segmentation
models

Please segment these
two RGB images.
It’s underexposed, I
can’t see the details.

(B)

Better! But they look
the same, I can't tell a
determined prediction.
(C)

Previous ESS
methods

We could use event
cameras to solve this.

We can introduce the
spatio-temporal prior
motion cues in events!

\

Prior Motion
Cues

KWYAF
(ours)

Now I can see a person
and someone riding a
bike. Now it is clear!

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation. Event cameras can
overcome the inherent limitations of RGB frames; however,
the sparse data from event cameras lack color information
and often display similar textures along object edges. By incorporating historical motion trajectories, we aim to equip
models with prior motion states of each object for enhancing the semantic prediction capabilities.

Code — https://github.com/SchuckLee/KWYAF
only (Gallego et al. 2020), demonstrating superior performance in high-speed motion and complex lighting environments(Deng, Chen, and Li 2024; Liu et al. 2024). Exploring event-based semantic segmentation methods can significantly enhance system adaptability in complex dynamic environments, presenting significant research value.
Despite the aforementioned advantages of event cameras, current methods for event-based semantic segmentation (ESS) remain limited. Most existing methods tend
to enhance the learning of sparse event data by adapting
them to mature learning architectures designed (Alonso and
Murillo 2019; Jia et al. 2023), employing domain adaptation techniques (Sun et al. 2022c; Jing et al. 2024), proposing cross-domain feature synthesis approaches (Jiang et al.
2023; Das Biswas et al. 2024; Yao et al. 2024) or introducing
new types of activation functions (Kim, Chough, and Panda
2022; Zhang et al. 2024).
Generally, these approaches treat event data as a special

Introduction
In recent years, progress in deep learning has led to the development of semantic segmentation models such as (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Xie et al. 2021; Xu et al.
2024), significantly improving segmentation performance.
These methods mainly rely on traditional frame-based cameras, which are difficult to handle the challenges of motion blur, over/underexposure in scenarios with high-speed
or extreme lighting conditions. To tackle this issue, event
cameras (Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2006; Suh et al.
2020) have emerged. Event cameras generate sparse data
streams by capturing brightness changes of moving pixels
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4806

