The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DreamFit: Garment-Centric Human Generation via a Lightweight
Anything-Dressing Encoder
Ente Lin1 * , Xujie Zhang2 * , Fuwei Zhao3 , Yuxuan Luo3 , Xin Dong3 ,
Long Zeng1† , Xiaodan Liang2,4†
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
3
ByteDance
4
Sun Yat-sen University
linet22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhangxj59@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
zhaofuwei.777@bytedance.com, luoyuxuan@bytedance.com, dongxin.1016@bytedance.com,
zenglong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com
0.76

Abstract

0.74

Diffusion models for garment-centric human generation from
text or image prompts have garnered emerging attention for
their great application potential. However, existing methods often face a dilemma: lightweight approaches, such as
adapters, are prone to generate inconsistent textures; while
finetune-based methods involve high training costs and struggle to maintain the generalization capabilities of pretrained
diffusion models, limiting their performance across diverse
scenarios. To address these challenges, we propose DreamFit, which incorporates a lightweight Anything-Dressing
Encoder specifically tailored for the garment-centric human generation. DreamFit has three key advantages: (1)
Lightweight training: with the proposed adaptive attention and LoRA modules, DreamFit significantly minimizes
the model complexity to 83.4M trainable parameters. (2)
Anything-Dressing: Our model generalizes surprisingly well
to a wide range of (non-)garments, creative styles, and
prompt instructions, consistently delivering high-quality results across diverse scenarios. (3) Plug-and-play: DreamFit is engineered for smooth integration with any community control plugins for diffusion models, ensuring easy compatibility and minimizing adoption barriers. To further enhance generation quality, DreamFit leverages pretrained large
multi-modal models (LMMs) to enrich the prompt with finegrained garment descriptions, thereby reducing the prompt
gap between training and inference. We conduct comprehensive experiments on both 768 × 512 high-resolution benchmarks and in-the-wild images. DreamFit surpasses all existing methods, highlighting its state-of-the-art capabilities of
garment-centric human generation.

CLIP-I (↑)

0.72
0.7
DreamFit (Ours)

0.68

IMAGDress

0.66

MagicClothing
StableGarment

0.64
0.62
0.24

IP-Adapter
0.26

0.28

0.3

0.32

0.34

CLIP-T (↑)
Figure 1: Performance comparison between baselines and
our DreamFit. The circle size represents the number of trainable parameters, with larger circles indicating a higher parameter count. Higher CLIP-I and CLIP-T scores signify
better alignment between the generated results and text descriptions. Our method not only achieves the best performance but also maintains much fewer training parameters.

ure 2. This technology has gained significant traction in industries such as creative advertising and fashion design and
sparks active exploration in the academic community (Wang
et al. 2024b; Chen et al. 2024a).
Currently, this task faces two critical challenges: the
resource-intensive process of full model fine-tuning and
the discrepancy between training and inference text
prompts. Specifically, finetune-based methods like StableGarment(Wang et al. 2024b) rely on a full copy of diffusion UNet as the garment encoder, namely the “ReferenceNet”, which consumes high GPU memory and becomes
intractable when scaling up, e.g., from SD1.5(Rombach
et al. 2022a) to SDXL(Podell et al. 2023). Moreover, directly
fine-tuning the entire UNet is parameter inefficient, requires
more training time, and is prone to destroying the pretrained

Introduction
Garment-centric human generation aims to synthesize highquality images of stylized humans based on diverse combinations of text and image prompts, with a focus on accurately depicting the given garment details, as shown in Fig* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5218

