The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PIXELS: Progressive Image Xemplar-based Editing with Latent Surgery
Shristi Das Biswas* 1 , Matthew Shreve2 , Xuelu Li2 , Prateek Singhal2 , Kaushik Roy1
1

Purdue University
Amazon Fashion
sdasbisw@purdue.edu, {mashreve, xueluli, prtksngh}@amazon.com, kaushik@purdue.edu
2

Abstract

et al. 2024). As the need for image editing applications for
creating novel content became pervasive in the age of social
media, pipelines for creative editing have become a popular
demand. Powered by these large-scale pre-trained TTI models, editing methods (Chen et al. 2024b; Cao et al. 2023;
Mokady et al. 2023) have been proposed that allow manipulating content in images with the guidance of an input text
prompt. However, these editing approaches (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023; Hertz et al. 2022) still find it challenging
to fit the requirements of complicated practical scenarios.
For instance, as shown in Fig. 1, the method needs to modify the porch just enough to circumvent abrupt transitions
when editing with the lake-view exemplar by generating intermediate features that realistically connect them, or even
in the case of a creative edit imagining a bud seamlessly replace the given dessert. Flexibility to allow any kind of edits
is important for real applications like custom scene design,
product creation and placement, special effects, etc.
Inpainting approaches (Yu et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2023)
take a binary mask and text guidance to regenerate the
masked region using TTI models. However, they are limited by the complexity of prompt engineering to accurately
reflect user-desired effects, since detailed object appearance
features often cannot be feasibly specified by plain text.
To this effect, the need for a “universal language” that enables precise and intuitive control has become ubiquitous.
To solve these shortcomings, there have been efforts to drive
editing through the use of exemplars (Song et al. 2024; Yuan
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024a,b) which take as input a binary
mask to introduce the main subject from an exemplar into
the source image. However, such approaches often struggle
to deal with local edits and are strictly restricted to using
only one exemplar at a time. In addition, they require pairs
of object masks from video frames for their training, which
are difficult to obtain at scale and restrict their data diversity
during training. Other exemplar-based methods (Yang et al.
2023a; Xu et al. 2023) suffer from similar limitations where
they train specialized architectures to learn semantic editing
of single objects into an image. We believe that instead of encouraging this trend of training custom pipelines on limited
datasets, initiatives should be taken towards “reusing” the
information learnt by pre-existing image generation models
that have already been trained on much larger datasets.
To satisfy these requirements, we propose a method to

Recent advancements in language-guided diffusion models
for image editing are often bottle-necked by cumbersome
prompt engineering to precisely articulate desired changes.
An intuitive alternative calls on guidance from in-the-wild
image exemplars to help users bring their imagined edits
to life. Contemporary exemplar-based editing methods shy
away from leveraging the rich latent space learnt by preexisting large text-to-image (TTI) models and fall back on
training with curated objective functions to achieve the task.
Though somewhat effective, this demands significant computational resources and lacks compatibility with diverse base
models and arbitrary exemplar count. On further investigation, we also find that these techniques restrict user control to
only applying uniform global changes over the entire edited
region. In this paper, we introduce a novel framework for progressive exemplar-driven editing with off-the-shelf diffusion
models, dubbed PIXELS, to enable customization by providing granular control over edits, allowing adjustments at the
pixel or region level. Our method operates solely during inference to facilitate imitative editing, enabling users to draw
inspiration from a dynamic number of reference images, or
multimodal prompts, and progressively incorporate all the desired changes without retraining or fine-tuning existing TTI
models. This capability of fine-grained control opens up a
range of new possibilities, including selective modification
of individual objects and specifying gradual spatial changes.
We demonstrate that PIXELS delivers high-quality edits efficiently, leading to a notable improvement in quantitative
metrics as well as human evaluation. By making high-quality
image editing more accessible, PIXELS has the potential to
enable professional-grade edits to a wider audience with the
ease of using any open-source image generation model.

Code — https://github.com/amazon-science/PIXELS

Introduction
Language-guided image generation using large text-toimage (TTI) diffusion models trained on web-scale data
has made remarkable strides in recent years (Dhariwal and
Nichol 2021; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Nichol et al. 2021;
Ramesh et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2024; Balaji et al. 2022; Shi
* Work conducted at Amazon.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2663

