The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boundary-Aware Temporal Dynamic Pseudo-Supervision Pairs Generation for
Zero-Shot Natural Language Video Localization
Xiongwen Deng1,2 , Haoyu Tang2 * , Han Jiang1 , Qinghai Zheng3 , Jihua Zhu1*
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Software, Shandong University
3
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
V1ncent@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, tanghao258@sdu.edu.cn
(a)

Abstract
Zero-shot Natural Language Video Localization (NLVL)
aims to automatically generate moments and corresponding
pseudo queries from raw videos for the training of the localization model without any manual annotations. Existing approaches typically produce pseudo queries as simple words,
which overlook the complexity of queries in real-world scenarios. Considering the powerful text modeling capabilities
of large language models (LLMs), leveraging LLMs to generate complete queries that are closer to human descriptions
is a potential solution. However, directly integrating LLMs
into existing approaches introduces several issues, including
insensitivity, isolation, and lack of regulation, which prevent
the full exploitation of LLMs to enhance zero-shot NLVL performance. To address these issues, we propose BTDP, an innovative framework for Boundary-aware Temporal Dynamic
Pseudo-supervision pairs generation. Our method contains
two crucial operations: 1) Boundary Segmentation that identifies both visual boundaries and semantic boundaries to generate the atomic segments and activity descriptions, tackling the
issue of insensitivity. 2) Context Aggregation that employs
the LLMs with a self-evaluation process to aggregate and
summarize global video information for optimized pseudo
moment-query pairs, tackling the issue of isolation and lack
of regulation. Comprehensive experimental results on the
Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our BTDP method.

Action

Action

Action

(b)
Brush

Semantic
Consistency

Smile

Merge

Smile

Visual
Boundary

Semantic
Boundary

First-person
surfing
Fragmention

(c)

Brush
Action

Sitting

Isolation

Isolation
Context-relevant
Action

Action

Write

Standing
Brush
Contextual
Inference

A man stands up

Action

Action

Temporal
Relationship

The man began to clean
the snow on the car again

Figure 1: Issues of directly integrating LLMs to existing approaches: (a) Insensitivity to semantic changes when relying solely on visual features. (b) Isolation of segments with
the same semantic meaning due to visual-based segmentation. (c) Isolation of contextual and temporal coherence due
to the absence of global video information.

Introduction
Natural Language Video Localization (NLVL) is a critical and challenging task in video understanding(Tang et al.
2021a; Hu et al. 2023a; Yan et al. 2024), which aims to localize specific moment in an untrimmed video based on the
corresponding language query. Most methods focus on fully
supervised settings (Tang et al. 2021b; Jiang, Yizhang, and
Mu 2024). However, due to the high precision required by
localization tasks(Tang et al. 2024; Jiang et al. 2024), the
exorbitant cost of annotations has significantly limited their
practical application. To reduce the reliance on timestamp
annotations, researchers have proposed weakly supervised
methods (Chen et al. 2022; Bao et al. 2024), which only

require the correspondence between the video and the language query. Nonetheless, annotation cost remains substantial in large-scale model training (Feng et al. 2019).
To completely eliminate the need for manual annotations, the zero-shot NLVL method, automatically generating pseudo moment-query pairs to train the localization
model, has recently gained research attention. Current mainstream zero-shot methods (Nam et al. 2021) typically generate video proposals based on single visual features, and
then construct pseudo queries using nouns detected by object detectors and verbs inferred by language models based
on these nouns.
However, these methods often produce overly simplistic

* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2717

