The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Visual Reinforcement Learning with Residual Action
Zhenxian Liu1 , Peixi Peng2,3 * , Yonghong Tian1,2,3 *
1

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
zhenxianliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, {pxpeng, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

sample efficiency and asymptotic performance. An essential
problem is how to accurately map the high-dimensional images to the optimal actions by policy network. To achieve
this goal, existing works focus on representation learning
(Lee et al. 2020; Laskin, Srinivas, and Abbeel 2020; Zhu
et al. 2022; Choi et al. 2023), data augmentation (Yarats,
Kostrikov, and Fergus 2020; Laskin et al. 2020; Hansen,
Su, and Wang 2021), dynamic modeling of the environment
(Gelada et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2021; Hafner et al. 2019b,a),
and improving CNN optimization (Zhai et al. 2023). Besides
the learning constraints and network inputs, the target outputs also influence the fitting ability of the network. Traditional decision-making modules output actions solely based
on the current observation, while the distributions of optimal
actions are dependent on specific tasks and cannot be known
priorly, which increases the learning difficulty.
Hence, it is necessary to analyze the underlying action
characteristics in realistic control tasks:
(1) Smooth policies are beneficial for a wide range of RL
tasks as stated in (Mysore et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2020). We
experimentally investigate different vision-based RL methods—including pixel SAC, RAD (Laskin et al. 2020), DeepMDP (Gelada et al. 2019), and the combination of DeepMDP and RAD (hereinafter referred to as DeepRAD)—we
quantify the smoothness of decision-making by calculating the mean Euclidean distance between adjacent actions
across three tasks of CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al. 2017) and
OpenAI DMControl (Tassa et al. 2018) on 10 evaluation trajectories after training. This metric is referred to as the Mean
Action Distance (MAD). To display the results of different
tasks on a single plot, we normalize performance and MAD
for each task. Fig. 1(a) indicates that methods with lower
MAD generally perform better, suggesting that smooth action adjustments over adjacent time steps are beneficial.
(2) Based on the action smoothness, most of the residual
actions (i.e., the difference value between adjacent actions)
will be very small or even close to zero, and only a small
proportion of residual actions has a large value. To validate
this point, we take the policy learned by state-based RL as
an approximation of the optimal policy and count the distribution of actions and residual actions. As shown in Fig.
1(b), unlike the scattered distribution of actions across the
value range, residual actions generally follow a normal
distribution centered around zero, providing a simpler

Learning control policy from continuous action space by visual observations is a fundamental and challenging task in
reinforcement learning (RL). An essential problem is how to
accurately map the high-dimensional images to the optimal
actions by the policy network. Traditional decision-making
modules output actions solely based on the current observation, while the distributions of optimal actions are dependent on specific tasks and cannot be known priorly, which
increases the learning difficulty. To make the learning easier,
we analyze the action characteristics in several control tasks,
and propose Reinforcement Learning with Residual Action
(ResAct) to explicitly model the adjustments of actions based
on the differences between adjacent observations, rather than
learning actions directly from observations. The method just
redefines the output of the policy network, and doesn’t introduce any prior assumption to constrain or simplify the vanilla
control problem. Extensive experiments on DeepMind Control Suite and CARLA demonstrate that the method could improve different RL baselines significantly, and achieve stateof-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Learning continuous control from visual observations is a
critical problem in reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and
Barto 2018). The successful integration of RL algorithms
(Schulman et al. 2017; Hessel et al. 2018; Haarnoja et al.
2018) with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun
et al. 1998) has demonstrated effectiveness in learning control policies from images, leading to remarkable achievements in video game playing (Mnih et al. 2013, 2015; Berner
et al. 2019), classical board games (Silver et al. 2016, 2017),
real-world robot grasping (Zhu et al. 2020; Kalashnikov
et al. 2018), and autonomous navigation (Dosovitskiy et al.
2017).
Compared to learning from proprioceptive states, images
reveal the intricate details of a complex and unstructured
world (Zhang et al. 2020), thus still exhibiting significant
shortcomings. Hence, a considerable body of research has
focused on bridging the gap between vision-based and statebased (using proprioceptive states as inputs) RL regarding
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19050

