The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Discrete Prior-Based Temporal-Coherent Content Prediction
for Blind Face Video Restoration
Lianxin Xie1 , Bingbing Zheng1 , Wen Xue1 , Yunfei Zhang1 , Le Jiang1 , Ruotao Xu2 , Si Wu1,2* ,
Hau-San Wong3*
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Institute of Super Robotics(Huangpu)
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{cslianxin.xie, 202321044369, csxuewen, cszhangyunfei, csjiangle}@mail.scut.edu.cn
rtxu@superobots.com, cswusi@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract
Blind face video restoration aims to restore high-fidelity
details from videos subjected to complex and unknown
degradations. This task poses a significant challenge
of managing temporal heterogeneity while at the same
time maintaining stable face attributes. In this paper,
we introduce a Discrete Prior-based Temporal-Coherent
content prediction transformer to address the challenge,
and our model is referred to as DP-TempCoh. Specifically, we incorporate a spatial-temporal-aware content
prediction module to synthesize high-quality content
from discrete visual priors, conditioned on degraded
video tokens. To further enhance the temporal coherence of the predicted content, a motion statistics modulation module is designed to adjust the content, based
on discrete motion priors in terms of cross-frame mean
and variance. As a result, the statistics of the predicted
content can match with that of real videos over time.
By performing extensive experiments, we verify the effectiveness of the design elements and demonstrate the
superior performance of our DP-TempCoh in both synthetically and naturally degraded video restoration.

Introduction
The task of blind face video restoration(BFVR) aims to
restore high-quality face image sequences from degraded
videos, and the main challenge is to address various unknown degradations while at the same time preserving the
dynamic consistency of the synthesized content. The degraded face videos typically exhibit temporal heterogeneity.
Even if the frames of a face video are subjected to similar degradations, each restored face may appear different
from the others significantly. As shown in Figure 1, state-ofthe-art blind face restoration and video restoration methods,
DiffBIR and FMA-Net, fail to synthesize faces with stable
characteristics.
To synthesize clear and realistic face images from degraded ones, a number of image enhancement methods incorporate various face priors into the generation process,
such as high-quality (HQ) reference samples with the same
identity or geometric information(Li et al. 2018)(Dogan,

Figure 1: An example to visually compare the proposed DPTempCoh with the competing image/video restoration methods: DiffBIR and FMA-Net, in restoration quality and temporal coherence.

Gu, and Timofte 2019). On the other hand, the well-trained
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)(Chen et al. 2016)
on high-quality face datasets has the capability of generating diverse and realistic face images, and thus there are attempts to apply the pre-trained generator as generative priors to face image enhancement(Zhu et al. 2022)(Wang et al.
2021)(Wang, Hu, and Zhang 2022)(Menon et al. 2020). On
the other hand, Stable Diffusion(Rombach et al. 2021) has
also exhibited impressive generation ability in face image
generation recently (Lin et al. 2023)(Wang et al. 2023)(Kim
et al. 2022)(Zhao et al. 2023). Since the GAN- and diffusionbased methods are designed for processing images, directly

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8736

