The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pixel Is Not a Barrier: An Effective Evasion Attack for Pixel-Domain
Diffusion Models
†

Chun-Yen Shih1, 3 * , Li-Xuan Peng3 * , Jia-Wei Liao1, 3 , Ernie Chu2, 3 ,
‡
Cheng-Fu Chou1 , Jun-Cheng Chen3
1

National Taiwan University,
Johns Hopkins University,
3
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica
2

Abstract
Diffusion Models have emerged as powerful generative models for high-quality image synthesis, with many subsequent
image editing techniques based on them. However, the ease
of text-based image editing introduces significant risks, such
as malicious editing for scams or intellectual property infringement. Previous works have attempted to safeguard images from diffusion-based editing by adding imperceptible
perturbations. These methods are costly and specifically target prevalent Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs), while Pixeldomain Diffusion Models (PDMs) remain largely unexplored
and robust against such attacks. Our work addresses this gap
by proposing a novel attack framework, AtkPDM. AtkPDM
is mainly composed of a feature representation attacking loss
that exploits vulnerabilities in denoising UNets and a latent
optimization strategy to enhance the naturalness of adversarial images. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in attacking dominant PDM-based editing methods (e.g., SDEdit) while maintaining reasonable fidelity and robustness against common defense methods. Additionally, our framework is extensible to LDMs, achieving
comparable performance to existing approaches. Our project
page is available at https://alexpeng517.github.io/AtkPDM.

1

SDEdit

Original Image

Original Editing Result

AtkPDM
Protection Against Diffusion-based Image Editing

SDEdit

Adversarial Image

Adversarial Editing Result

Figure 1: Overview of our attack scenario. Diffusion-based
image editing can generate high-quality image variation
based on the clean input image. However, by adding carefully crafted perturbation to the clean image, the diffusion
process will be disrupted, producing a corrupted image or
unrelated image semantics to the original image.

Introduction

In recent years, Generative Diffusion Models (GDMs) (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021)
emerged as powerful generative models that can produce
high-quality images, propelling advancements in image editing and artistic creations. The ease of using these models to
edit (Meng et al. 2021; Wang, Zhao, and Xing 2023; Zhang
et al. 2023) or synthesize new images (Dhariwal and Nichol
2021; Rombach et al. 2022) has raised concerns about potential malicious usage and intellectual property infringement.
For example, malicious users could effortlessly craft fake
images with someone’s identity or mimic the style of a specific artist. An effective protection against these threats is
to craft an adversarial image to force the diffusion model
to generate corrupted images or unrelated images to the
original inputs. Researchers have made significant strides in

crafting imperceptible adversarial perturbations on images
to protect against diffusion-based editing.
Previous works such as PhotoGuard (Salman et al. 2023)
and Glaze (Shan et al. 2023) have effectively attacked Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) by minimizing the latent distance between the protected images and their target counterparts. PhotoGuard first introduces attacking either encoders
or diffusion process in LDMs via Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) (Madry et al. 2018) for the protection purpose; however, it requires backpropagating the entire diffusion process, making it prohibitively expensive. Subsequent
works AdvDM (Liang et al. 2023) and Mist (Liang and Wu
2023) leverage the semantic loss and textural loss combined
with Monte Carlo method to craft adversarial images both
effectively and efficiently. Diff-Protect (Xue et al. 2024)
further improve adversarial effectiveness and optimization

* Equal contribution.
†

Work done as research assistant at CITI, Academia Sinica.
Corresponding author. B pullpull@citi.sinica.edu.tw
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

6905

