The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GGS: Generalizable Gaussian Splatting for Lane Switching in
Autonomous Driving
Huasong Han1* , Kaixuan Zhou2* , Xiaoxiao Long3 , Yusen Wang1 , Chunxia Xiao1†
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China,
2
Huawei Technologies Riemann Lab, Wuhan, Hubei, China,
3
The University of HongKong, Hong Kong, China
hanhuasong@whu.edu.cn, zhoukaixuan2@huawei.com, xxlong@connect.hku.hk, wangyusen@whu.edu.cn,
cxxiao@whu.edu.cn
Abstract
We propose GGS, a Generalizable Gaussian Splatting method
for Autonomous Driving that can achieve realistic rendering under large viewpoint changes. Previous generalizable
3D gaussian splatting methods are limited to rendering novel
views that are very close to the original pair of images, which
cannot handle large difference in viewpoint. Especially in autonomous driving scenarios, images are typically collected
from a single lane. The limited training perspective makes
rendering images of a different lane very challenging. To further improve the rendering capability of GGS under large
viewpoint changes, we introduce a novel virtual lane generation module into GSS method to enable high-quality lane
switching even without a multi-lane dataset. Besides, we design a diffusion loss to supervise the generation of virtual
lane images to further address the problem of data lacking
in the virtual lanes. Finally, we also propose a depth refinement module to optimize depth estimation in the GSS model.
Extensive validation of our method, compared to existing approaches, demonstrates state-of-the-art performance.

Original

Original

Switch to the left lane

Switch to the left lane

Switch to the right lane

Switch to the right lane

Figure 1: Our GGS method can achieve high-quality lane
switching in autonomous driving scenarios.

The methods based on NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2023a) often rely on LiDAR to better generate
novel views in autonomous driving scenarios. READ (Li,
Li, and Zhu 2023) introduces a new rendering method that
adopts a neural rendering approach different from NeRF.
It learns neural descriptor of the original point cloud with
explicit geometry to render image, instead of learning implicit geometry in NeRF methods. However, the efficiency
of training and rendering using these methods remains quite
low.
The efficiency in training and rendering speed, coupled
with the high reconstruction quality of 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023), contributes to its widespread application in novel view synthesis in autonomous driving. GaussianPro (Cheng et al. 2024) introduces multi-view stereo
to improve the geometry of generated gaussian splats. DCGaussian (Cheng et al. 2023) introduces an adaptive image
decomposition module to mitigate the impact of glass reflections on the quality of novel view synthesis. However, these
methods still cannot perform effective novel view synthesis
in lane switching, as they do not address the main problem
that only single lane of data are collected.
To address the problem of the sparse view synthesis, many
methods have sought to optimize this process using generative models (Yu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2024; Liu et al.
2024; Wu et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2024). Generative models

Introduction
Novel view synthesis is an essential task in the field of computer vision, with significant potential applications in autonomous driving (Yang et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023b, 2024a; Yu et al. 2024), object detection, scene reconstruction (Wang et al. 2024b; Qin
et al. 2024) and digital human representation (Li, Luo, and
Xiao 2024; Luo et al. 2024). To enhance the robustness of
autonomous driving systems, it is imperative to establish
a simulation environment for testing these systems effectively. However, the majority of existing datasets are limited
to single-lane scenarios. This limitation presents significant
challenges in inferring adjacent lane scenarios from the current viewpoint. If lane switching is not supported, the test
samples provided to the autonomous driving simulation system will be incomplete, making it impossible to conduct better simulation testing and requiring a significant amount of
data collection costs.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding author.

3329

