The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Modular-Cam: Modular Dynamic Camera-view Video Generation with LLM
Zirui Pan1 , Xin Wang1,2 * , Yipeng Zhang1 ,
Hong Chen1 , Kwan Man Cheng1 , Yaofei Wu3 , Wenwu Zhu1,2∗
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing University of Technology
{pzr24,zhang-yp22,h-chen20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, kcheng54@wisc.edu,
23027313@emails.bjut.edu.cn,{xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Text-to-Video generation, which utilizes the provided text
prompt to generate high-quality videos, has drawn increasing attention and achieved great success due to the development of diffusion models recently. Existing methods mainly
rely on a pre-trained text encoder to capture the semantic information and perform cross attention with the encoded text
prompt to guide the generation of video. However, when it
comes to complex prompts that contain dynamic scenes and
multiple camera-view transformations, these methods can not
decompose the overall information into separate scenes, as
well as fail to smoothly change scenes based on the corresponding camera-views. To solve these problems, we propose a novel method, i.e., Modular-Cam. Specifically, to better understand a given complex prompt, we utilize a large
language model to analyze user instructions and decouple
them into multiple scenes together with transition actions. To
generate a video containing dynamic scenes that match the
given camera-views, we incorporate the widely-used temporal transformer into the diffusion model to ensure continuity
within a single scene and propose CamOperator, a modular
network based module that well controls the camera movements. Moreover, we propose AdaControlNet, which utilizes
ControlNet to ensure consistency across scenes and adaptively adjusts the color tone of the generated video. Extensive
qualitative and quantitative experiments prove our proposed
Modular-Cam’s strong capability of generating multi-scene
videos together with its ability to achieve fine-grained control of camera movements. Generated results are available at
https://modular-cam.github.io.

(a) Static camera-view. Generated by AnimateDiff.

(b) Inconsistentcy, mixed scenes. Generated by StreamingT2V.

(c) Generated by this work, which best follows the user instruction.

Figure 1: Generated results based on instruction “Beginning
with a beach scene, the camera gradually draws in closer
as waves lap against the reef. Then the camera slowly pans
right and a large area of sea is revealed”. In Figure 1a, the
video footage is almost static, while in Figure 1b, the scene
transitions show abrupt changes, and the scenes are mixed.
Figure 1c shows the results of our proposed model.
the specific text prompt, T2V models have demonstrated remarkable capability of generating videos that are smooth,
photo-realistic, and semantically coherent.
However, existing works heavily rely on the text encoder
to guide the process of generation through capturing semantic information. Due to the limitation of the pre-trained encoder, it is difficult for them to understand the temporal information hidden in the complex text prompts which contain
dynamic scenes changes and multiple camera-view transformations. Therefore, these models are not able to disentangle the information of different scenes, failing to sequentially generate these distinct scenes in the prescribed order of
camera transformations. Consequently, the generated videos
tend to only have a limited amount of motions as well as
entangled scenes. Besides, current works mainly focus on
generating short videos with merely 16 to 24 frames. Thus,
these videos can hardly incorporate all the scenes or characterize the process of the camera transformations between
adjacent ones. Although some works (Henschel et al. 2024)
adopt an autoregressive method, they fail to achieve fined

Introduction
Via training on large-scale text-image datasets, Text-toImage (T2I) generation (Rombach et al. 2022; Ramesh et al.
2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Ruiz et al. 2023; Avrahami,
Lischinski, and Fried 2022) based on diffusion process has
achieved great attention in generating high-quality images
with increasing controllability. Due to the significant success of T2I models, many researchers (Ho et al. 2022b,a;
Blattmann et al. 2023a; Lu et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024d,c)
have made efforts to take temporal information into considerations for Text-to-Video (T2V) generation. Based on
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6363

