The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Energy vs. Noise: Towards Robust Temporal Action Localization in Open-World
Chenyu Mu* , Jiahua Li* , Kun Wei† , Cheng Deng
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
{cym9131, ljhxdu, weikunsk, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com

Abstract
Temporal Action Localization (TAL) aims to accurately identify the start and end times of actions in untrimmed videos
and classify them according to specific labels. However, the
complexity and imbalance between target actions and background in video data make this task particularly challenging. Although relying on large amounts of finely annotated
data has led to some progress in existing methods, the presence of noisy labels in large-scale annotations limits their application in open-world scenarios. To address this issue, we
take the perspective of the data itself, modeling the different energy patterns exhibited by the action foreground and
background in video data to enhance video content inference. Specifically, we propose the Energy-Driven Meta Purifier (EDMP) method, which utilizes a meta-learning training
paradigm to avoid dependence on extensive and precise manual annotations. Under this pipeline, we use energy modeling to distinguish between different actions and backgrounds
from the perspective of energy differences, thereby improving
the model’s robustness to category noise. Additionally, these
energy-based distinctions are employed to further refine action boundaries, enhancing the model’s robustness to boundary noise. Experiments on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.3
datasets show that EDMP effectively enhances the robustness
of TAL models.

Figure 1: (a) The interpretation diversity of the annotators
results in noisy action boundary and category annotations.
(b) Existing leading methods show poor robustness against
boundary and category annotation noise.

Code — https://github.com/XD-mu/EDMP

Introduction

making them difficult to distinguish. Additionally, the target content tends to be sparse and diverse, further complicating the process of isolating it from the extensive background. Moreover, action boundaries are frequently ambiguous, which complicates the modeling of subtle differences
between actions and their surrounding context. Although
current methods have made some progress by relying on
extensive manual annotations, the noisy labels introduced
through crowdsourced annotation significantly hinder the
effective application of TAL in open-world scenarios. As
shown in Figure 1(a), different annotators may have varying interpretations of “Baseball Pitch”. The ambiguity in action boundaries often leads to varying boundary annotations,
while differences in expertise can result in category mislabeling, such as confusing it with “Cricket Shot”. This noise
in action boundaries and category labels may cause models to learn inaccurate boundary and category information,

Temporal Action Localization (TAL) (Xu et al. 2024, 2023;
Guo et al. 2024) is a pivotal task in video understanding
that aims to identify the temporal boundaries of actions and
classify their categories in untrimmed videos. With the rapid
advancements in deep learning, TAL has achieved remarkable progress and demonstrated wide-ranging applicability
in real-world scenarios such as social media platforms and
surveillance systems.
Nevertheless, TAL faces several challenges due to the inherent complexity of video data. Firstly, the target content
and background in video sequences are often intertwined,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6164

