The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Back to the Future of Integrated Robot Systems
Mohan Sridharan
Institute of Perception, Action, and Behavior
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh, UK
m.sridharan@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

with researchers claiming that these methods possess capabilities such as “planning”, “commonsense reasoning”, and
“general intelligence”. As a result, we are witnessing a rapid
decline in the diversity of mathematical formulations being
pursued to address open problems in robotics.
To motivate the need for a different and broader approach,
let us first consider the key requirements characterizing integrated robot systems sensing and (inter)acting in the physical world. These requirements include the ability to:

Robots are increasingly being used in different application
domains due to rapid advancements in hardware and computational methods. However, state of the art methods for many
problems in robotics are based on deep networks and similar
data-driven models. These methods and models are resourcehungry and opaque, and they are known to provide arbitrary
decisions in previously unknown situations, whereas practical robot application domains require transparent, multi-step,
multi-level decision-making and ad hoc collaboration under
resource constraints and open world uncertainty. In this paper,
I argue that for widespread use of robots, we need to revisit
principles that can be traced back to the early pioneers of AI.
We also need to make these principles the foundation of the
architectures we develop for robots, with modern data-driven
methods being one of many tools that build on this foundation. I then illustrate the potential benefits of this approach
in the context of fundamental problems in robotics such as
visual scene understanding, planning, changing-contact manipulation, and multiagent/human-agent collaboration.

1

• make multi-step, multi-level decisions based on multimodal inputs such as vision, speech, and touch;
• operate under open world uncertainty, where optimal decisions are unknowable and probabilities often do not
meaningfully model the uncertainty;
• operate under (often strict) constraints on resources such
as computation, storage, and training examples;
• rapidly and incrementally augment and revise (as
needed) existing models for various tasks such as perception, planning, and navigation; and
• support transparency in decision making, expressing
these decisions in terms of human concepts such as beliefs and goals to promote understanding.

Motivation and Claims

Robots are increasingly being deployed in application domains such as navigation, healthcare, and manufacturing.
Although the development of high-fidelity hardware has
aided this deployment, advancements in AI algorithms have
revolutionized the field of robotics. In particular, methods
and frameworks based on end-to-end, data-driven1 deep networks and foundation models such as Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision Language Models (VLMs) are considered state of the art for perception, reasoning, manipulation, and interaction problems in robotics (and AI) (Doshi
et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2023; Schick et al. 2023; Surı́s,
Menon, and Vondrick 2023; Zhang et al. 2024; Zhao, Lee,
and Hsu 2023). There is a lot of hype and fear surrounding the development and use of such methods and models,

Let us next consider the well-known characteristics of modern deep network methods and models.
• They are excellent statistical predictors for well-defined
tasks, but they may make the correct decisions or arbitrary ones in truly novel situations;
• Despite the development of architectures with different
structures and properties, they are based on a narrow set
of representations and update processes;
• They are resource-hungry, making substantial computation, data, storage and energy demands; and
• They are batch learning systems whose internal operation remains opaque; even when we are able to attribute
decisions to specific nodes, we are often unable to ascribe
meaning to this finding.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The use of these terms to characterize modern AI methods
is actually incorrect; the design of end-to-end methods involves a
considerable amount of “engineering” based on knowledge of task
and domain. Also, there is an established history of AI algorithms
learning from data. These terms are still used in this paper just to
make better contact with existing literature.

Even when such deep networks are used to develop hybrid methods, for example, the rich literature in neurosymbolic (NeSy) AI (Besold et al. 2022) and probabilistic NeSy
AI (Smet et al. 2023), we end up with symbolic methods
and/or probabilistic uncertainty models guiding the learning
28610

