The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Automatically Generating Numerous Context-Driven SFT Data for LLMs Across
Diverse Granularity
Shanghaoran Quan
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
Beijing, Haidian, 100191, China
shrquan@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Directly supervised fine-tuning on the raw, custom
corpora, also known as domain-adaptive pre-training
(DAPT) (Gururangan et al. 2020), has proven beneficial (Bayer et al. 2024; Krieger et al. 2022) but revealed to
be insufficient and may impair prompting ability on domainspecific tasks (Liu et al. 2023e; Pal et al. 2024). To better
leverage the privatized knowledge and customize the outputs of LLMs, supervised fine-tuning using custom queryresponse pairs has become common practice (Shaikh et al.
2024; Chang, Peng, and Chen 2023). However, sourcing
these pairs through human annotation is very costly and
can’t generate at scale. Recent studies have explored automated methods for creating these pairs from custom corpora.
AdaptLLM (Cheng, Huang, and Wei 2023), for instance, has
used regex-based patterns to generate query-response pairs,
but this approach tends to produce a limited variety of SFT
data, which may not significantly enhance prompting capabilities and risks overfitting due to the narrow range of query
types predefined. ETRC (Jiang et al. 2024) and ContextInstruct (Wang et al. 2023b) improved this by employing
delicately designed prompts to generate queries from context using an LLM. However, those existing methods using the same workflow repeatedly on the same context tend
to produce redundant queries without adequately covering
the entire context at various levels of granularity. To automatically construct synthetic custom SFT data incorporating a wide range of contextual granularity (queries range
from detailed questions to macro topics) with high diversity
(queries need to be diversified to cover as much as possible the provided corpus), quality (responses are correct and
efficient in answering the queries), and fidelity (data needs
to follow human values and conform to predetermined tone
and formats) still remain challenges.
To address these challenges, we propose AUG C ON,
which automatically generates multi-granularity contextdriven SFT data for LLMs at scale with high diversity, quality, and fidelity. AUG C ON performs the following three essential steps:

Constructing high-quality query-response pairs from custom
corpora is crucial for supervised fine-tuning (SFT) large language models (LLMs) in many applications, like creating
vertical-domain AI assistants or roleplaying agents. However, sourcing this data through human annotation is costly,
and existing automated methods often fail to capture the diverse range of contextual granularity and tend to produce
homogeneous data. To tackle these issues, we introduce a
novel method named AUG C ON, capable of automatically
generating context-driven SFT data across multiple levels of
granularity with high diversity, quality and fidelity. AUG C ON begins by generating queries using the Context-SplitTree (CST), an innovative approach for recursively deriving
queries and splitting context to cover full granularity. Then,
we train a scorer through contrastive learning to collaborate
with CST to rank and refine queries. Finally, a synergistic integration of self-alignment and self-improving is introduced
to obtain high-fidelity responses.
Extensive experiments are conducted incorporating both automatic and human evaluations, encompassing four widelyused benchmarks and a test scenario in English and Chinese.
The results highlight the significant advantages of AUG C ON
in producing high diversity, quality, and fidelity SFT data
against several state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/quanshr/AugCon

1

Introduction

With the rise of impressive capabilities of large language
models (LLMs), a variety of vertical-domain LLM-based
AI assistants have been introduced (Cheng, Huang, and Wei
2023; Chen et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023). By incorporating specialized knowledge into LLMs, these custom models have been shown to outperform their general-purpose
counterparts in their respective areas. These models can
be developed through two strategies: building them from
scratch (Yang et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023d) or adapting existing general LLMs through supervised fine-tuning (SFT) (Shi
et al. 2023; Zaiem et al. 2023), with the latter approach often favored for its efficiency and the foundational advantages
offered by the general LLMs (Jiang et al. 2024; Dong et al.
2023; Cheng, Huang, and Wei 2023).

1. Recursively Deriving Queries via Context-Split-Tree:
Considering that it is challenging for predetermined
prompts to generate non-repetitive queries with broad
granularity from the same context, we propose a novel
method called Context-Split-Tree (CST). Starting from a
context (which is a continuous text chunk extracted from

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25074

