The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OLMD: Orientation-aware Long-term Motion Decoupling for
Continuous Sign Language Recognition
Yiheng Yu, Sheng Liu* , Yuan Feng, Min Xu, Zhelun Jin, Xuhua Yang
Zhejiang University of Technology
{yhyu, edliu, fengyuan, mxu2019, zljin, xhyang}@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract
The primary challenge in continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) mainly stems from the presence of multiorientational and long-term motions. However, current research overlooks these crucial aspects, significantly impacting accuracy. To tackle these issues, we propose a novel
CSLR framework: Orientation-aware Long-term Motion
Decoupling (OLMD), which efficiently aggregates long-term
motions and decouples multi-orientational signals into easily
interpretable components. Specifically, our innovative Longterm Motion Aggregation (LMA) module filters out static
redundancy while adaptively capturing abundant features of
long-term motions. We further enhance orientation awareness
by decoupling complex movements into horizontal and vertical components, allowing for motion purification in both orientations. Additionally, two coupling mechanisms are proposed: stage and cross-stage coupling, which together enrich multi-scale features and improve the generalization capabilities of the model. Experimentally, OLMD shows SOTA
performance on three large-scale datasets: PHOENIX14,
PHOENIX14-T, and CSL-Daily. Notably, we improve the
word error rate (WER) on PHOENIX14 by an absolute 1.6%
compared to the previous SOTA.

...

...

...

...

...

杯子 (Cup)：About 11 Frames

...

...

...

...

...

吃 (Eat): About 13 Frames

...

...

...

...

...

冷 (Cold): About 26 Frames

Glosses in Chinese Sign
Language Videos

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) We illustrate several common glosses with relevant video pieces from the CSL-Daily, highlighting the extensive presence of long-term and multi-orientational motions in sign language (yellow and red arrows indicate motion orientations), which traditional CSLR models struggle to manage. (b) OLMD Performance Comparison on the
PHOENIX14: surpassing SOTA models by a large margin.

Introduction

However, previous works ignore the long-term and multiorientational nature of signs, which greatly affects the accuracy and robustness.
As shown in Fig. 1a, complex multi-orientational longterm motions are prevalent in sign language. Typically, the
movements forming a sign span 8-13 frames (Buehler, Zisserman, and Everingham 2009). However, current CSLR
methods primarily analyze only 1-2 adjacent frames (Hu
et al. 2022a, 2023a; Gan et al. 2024), which is far from
enough to capture a complete sign.
Additionally, much semantic information is embedded
in orientations (Fenlon et al. 2013; Abdullahi and Chamnongthai 2022). To accurately decode this information, models should be orientation-aware. Unfortunately, conventional
CSLR frameworks (Min et al. 2021; Hao, Min, and Chen
2021; Hu et al. 2023a) treat all orientations as a whole, resulting in confusion about orientational features and impacting accuracy.
To solve the above problems, we propose an Orientationaware Long-term Motion Decoupling (OLMD). Our approach includes a Long-term Motion Aggregation (LMA)

Continuous sign language features a distinctive grammatical structure and vocabulary (Jiao et al. 2023; Reagan 2007),
making it challenging for hearing individuals without prior
knowledge to learn. Lately, various research has been devoted to CSLR to promote smooth communication between
deaf and hearing people (Jiao et al. 2023; Zuo and Mak
2022; Zheng et al. 2023; Min et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022),
significantly narrowing the gap between them.
Recent CSLR research focuses on utilizing the motion inherent in sign language to improve recognition. For example, SEN (Hu et al. 2022a) enhances the discriminative of
keyframes by exploiting motion-induced differences, while
CorrNet (Hu et al. 2023a) calculates the correlation between
adjacent frames to match areas with motion displacement.
More recently, TCNet (Lu, Salah, and Poppe 2024) captures
motion trajectory through its optical-flow-inspired module.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9707

