The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Parameterized Complexity of Caching in Networks
Robert Ganian1 , Fionn Mc Inerney2 , Dimitra Tsigkari2
1

Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
2
Telefónica Scientific Research, Barcelona, Spain
rganian@gmail.com, fmcinern@gmail.com, dimitra.tsigkari@telefonica.com

Abstract

caching architectures like Netflix’s CDN (Netflix 2024b). In
practice, content requests in video streaming services can
be steered through trends or recommendation systems, leading to accurate predictions on the content popularity (Zhou,
Khemmarat, and Gao 2010; Netflix Tech Blog 2016).
In the proactive setting, the caching problem in a network
of caches (with possibly overlapping coverage) can be naturally represented as a bipartite graph between the set of users
and the network of caches (of limited capacities), a set of
contents, and information on the users’ anticipated requests;
the task is to allocate the contents to caches to maximize the
cache hit rate. This problem was proven to be NP-hard in
the seminal work that formalized this setting (Shanmugam
et al. 2013). The subsequent numerous variants of this base
problem (Poularakis, Iosifidis, and Tassiulas 2014; Dehghan
et al. 2016; Krolikowski, Giovanidis, and Di Renzo 2018;
Ricardo et al. 2021; Tsigkari and Spyropoulos 2022) were
all shown to be NP-hard by a reduction from it.
In the above works, the theoretical intractability was typically overcome via the use of heuristics or approximation
algorithms. In fact, despite the extensive body of work on
the caching problem, our understanding of its foundational
complexity-theoretic aspects is still in its infancy. Specifically, very little is known about the problem’s “boundaries
of tractability”, i.e., the precise conditions under which it becomes tractable. This gap is in stark contrast with recent substantial advances made in this direction for problems arising in artificial intelligence and machine learning such as
Bayesian network learning (Ordyniak and Szeider 2013; Ganian and Korchemna 2021; Grüttemeier and Komusiewicz
2022), data completion (Ganian et al. 2018, 2020; Eiben
et al. 2021), and resource allocation (Bliem, Bredereck, and
Niedermeier 2016; Deligkas et al. 2021; Eiben et al. 2023).
The aim of this article is to close the aforementioned gap
by carrying out a comprehensive study of the complexitytheoretic aspects of caching in its modern network-based
formalization through the lens of parameterized complexity (Downey and Fellows 2013; Cygan et al. 2015), which
provides more refined tools to identify the conditions under
which an NP-hard problem becomes tractable when compared to classical complexity. In the parameterized setting,
the running times of algorithms are studied with respect to
the input size n, but also an integer parameter k, which intuitively captures well-defined structural properties of the

The fundamental caching problem in networks asks to find an
allocation of contents to a network of caches with the aim of
maximizing the cache hit rate. Despite the problem’s importance to a variety of research areas—including not only content delivery, but also edge intelligence and inference—and
the extensive body of work on empirical aspects of caching,
very little is known about the exact boundaries of tractability for the problem beyond its general NP-hardness. We close
this gap by performing a comprehensive complexity-theoretic
analysis of the problem through the lens of the parameterized
complexity paradigm, which is designed to provide more precise statements regarding algorithmic tractability than classical complexity. Our results include algorithmic lower and
upper bounds which together establish the conditions under
which the caching problem becomes tractable.

1

Introduction

Caching is one of the most important tasks that need to be
handled by modern-day content delivery networks (CDNs),
and its role is expected to grow even further in the future,
e.g., in the context of wireless communications (Liu et al.
2016; Paschos et al. 2018) and artificial intelligence. For the
latter, it is crucial to cache: trained models for inference requests (Salem et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2024),
information that can accelerate the training of large models (Lindgren et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2024), and trained
model parts in distributed learning paradigms (Thapa et al.
2022; Tirana et al. 2024). Typically, in a caching network,
one needs to decide where to store the contents in order to
maximize metrics related to, e.g., network performance or
user experience, with cache hit rate being the most predominant one (Paschos, Iosifidis, and Caire 2020). While many
recent works have investigated dynamic caching policies
that either decide on caching before time-slotted requests or
via the eviction policy (Paschos et al. 2019; Bhattacharjee,
Banerjee, and Sinha 2020; Rohatgi 2020; Paria and Sinha
2021; Mhaisen et al. 2022), in this article we focus on proactive caching, which decides how to fill the caches based on
anticipated requests. Proactive caching is of crucial importance in edge caching (Bastug, Bennis, and Debbah 2014;
Tadrous and Eryilmaz 2015) and is applied in contemporary
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11229

