The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explore In-Context Segmentation via Latent Diffusion Models
Chaoyang Wang1 , Xiangtai Li2,3 * , Henghui Ding4 , Lu Qi5 , Jiangning Zhang6 ,
Yunhai Tong1 , Chen Change Loy3 , Shuicheng Yan2,3
1

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University, China
2
Skywork AI, Singapore
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Institute of Big Data, Fudan University, China
5
Wuhan University, China
6
Zhejiang University, China
cywang@stu.pku.edu.cn, xiangtai94@gmail.com

Abstract

(FSS) (Shaban et al. 2017; Ding, Zhang, and Jiang 2023).
Most methods compute the matching distance between
query images and support images, which act as visual
prompts for in-context learning.
To address the strict constraints on data volume and category in FSS and enable generalization across different tasks,
recent works (Bar et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023a,b) have extended the concept to in-context segmentation, framing it as
a mask generalization task (Fig. 1(b)). This approach fundamentally differs from matching or prototype-based discriminative models (Fig. 1(a)), as it directly generates masks
through mask decoding. However, these methods typically
require large datasets to learn such correspondences.
Latent diffusion models (LDMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020; Rombach et al. 2022) have shown significant potential for generative tasks. Several studies (Zhang, Rao, and
Agrawala 2023; Rombach et al. 2022) have demonstrated
their strong performance in conditional image content creation. Although LDMs were originally designed for generative tasks, there have been attempts to apply them to
perceptual tasks as well. Fig. 2(a) shows the mainstream
pipeline (Zhao et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023; Geng et al. 2023;
Baranchuk et al. 2022) for LDM-based segmentation, which
typically relies on textual prompts for semantic guidance
and additional neural networks to support the LDM. However, textual prompts are not always available in real-world
scenarios, and relying on additional networks limits the exploration of LDM’s segmentation capabilities. This dependency can also degrade model performance when these auxiliary components are absent. Based on this analysis, we propose that in-context segmentation can be reframed as a conditional image mask generation process, fully leveraging the
generative potential of LDMs.
In this paper, we explore, for the first time, the potential of diffusion models for in-context segmentation, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). Our goal is to answer two key questions: First, can LDMs perform in-context segmentation?
Second, what factors are crucial for performance, and how
do they influence it? To address these questions, we introduce the Latent Diffusion-based In-context Segmentation
framework, or LDIS, shown in Fig. 2(b). LDIS leverages
visual prompts for guidance, eliminating the need for additional neural networks. We focus our analysis on three

In-context segmentation has drawn increasing attention with
the advent of vision foundation models. Its goal is to segment objects using given reference images. Most existing approaches adopt metric learning or masked image modeling to
build the correlation between visual prompts and input image queries. This work approaches the problem from a fresh
perspective – unlocking the capability of the latent diffusion
model (LDM) for in-context segmentation and investigating
different design choices. Specifically, we examine the problem from three angles: instruction extraction, output alignment, and meta-architectures. We design a two-stage masking strategy to prevent interfering information from leaking
into the instructions. In addition, we propose an augmented
pseudo-masking target to ensure the model predicts without
forgetting the original images. Moreover, we build a new and
fair in-context segmentation benchmark that covers both image and video datasets. Experiments validate the effectiveness
of our approach, demonstrating comparable or even stronger
results than previous specialist or visual foundation models.
We hope our work inspires others to rethink the unification of
segmentation and generation.

Project page —
https://wang-chaoyang.github.io/project/refldmseg

Introduction
In-context learning (Brown et al. 2020; Balažević et al.
2023; Bar et al. 2022) provides a new perspective for crosstask modeling for vision and natural language processing
(NLP). It enables a model to learn and predict according
to the prompts. GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020) first introduced
the concept of in-context learning, which refers to inferring
solutions for unseen tasks by conditioning on input-output
pairs provided as context. Subsequently, several studies (Bar
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023a) explored in-context learning
in the vision domain, where prompts are designed as visual
task input-output pairs.
In the segmentation field (Li et al. 2024; Ding et al.
2023b,a; Liu, Ding, and Jiang 2023), in-context learning serves a similar purpose to few-shot segmentation
* Project Leader
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7545

