The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spatial-Temporal Knowledge Distillation for Takeaway Recommendation
Shuyuan Zhao1,2 * , Wei Chen1,2 * , Boyan Shi1,2 , Liyong Zhou1,2 , Shuohao Lin1,2 , Huaiyu Wan1,2 †
1

2

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, Beijing, China
{sy zhao, w chen, by shi, zhouly, shhlin, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Mon
9:00

The takeaway recommendation system aims to recommend
users’ future takeaway purchases based on their historical
purchase behaviors, thereby improving user satisfaction and
boosting merchant sales. Existing methods focus on incorporating auxiliary information or leveraging knowledge graphs
to alleviate the sparsity issue of user purchase sequences.
However, two main challenges limit the performance of these
approaches: (1) capturing dynamic user preferences on complex geospatial information and (2) efficiently integrating
spatial-temporal knowledge from both graphs and sequence
data with low computational costs. In this paper, we propose a
novel spatial-temporal knowledge distillation model for takeaway recommendation (STKDRec) based on the two-stage
training process. Specifically, during the first pre-training
stage, a spatial-temporal knowledge graph (STKG) encoder
is trained to extract high-order spatial-temporal dependencies and collaborative associations from the STKG. During
the second spatial-temporal knowledge distillation (STKD)
stage, a spatial-temporal Transformer (ST-Transformer) is
employed to comprehensively model dynamic user preferences on various types of fine-grained geospatial information
from a sequential perspective. Furthermore, the STKD strategy is introduced to transfer graph-based spatial-temporal
knowledge to the ST-Transformer, facilitating the adaptive fusion of rich knowledge derived from both the STKG and sequence data while reducing computational overhead. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets show that STKDRec significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines.

Mon
12:30

Tue
6:30

Tue
12:30

Tue
19:50

...

6:30
Noddle Shop
1.5km(Residential Region)

Home
(Residential Region)

Located in
Purchase
Purchase Sequence

19:5
0
4km

Office
12:3
(Workplace Region) 2.5 0
km

?
(Commercial Region)

Turkey Shop
(Workplace Region)

Figure 1: An illustrative example highlighting the importance of capturing dynamic user preferences on complex
geospatial information.

takeaway recommendations have gained significant attention from the research community and industry (Lin et al.
2022; Du et al. 2023a; Shi et al. 2024).
Takeaway recommendation is essentially a sequential
modeling task that aims to predict the user’s future takeaway purchases based on their historical purchase records.
Existing methods model these purchase sequences by utilizing deep neural networks, such as recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) and self-attention mechanisms. However, the sparsity issue arises since users often purchase only a few takeaways, limiting the performance of recommendations (Kang
et al. 2023). Some studies attempt to incorporate various
types of auxiliary information, such as brand, category, location, and area of interest (AOI), into purchase sequences.
Some methods, such as KGDPL (Liu, Zhu, and Wu 2023),
also utilize graph neural networks (GNNs) and Knowledge
Graphs (KGs) (Wu et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024) to explore higher-order user-takeaway relationships or rich semantics of takeaways, alleviating the data sparsity problem.
Although these methods all achieve promising performance,
two significant challenges still need to be addressed:
(1) Failing to effectively capture dynamic user preferences on complex geospatial information. In takeaway
recommendation scenarios, user preferences change dynamically over time and with their current location. For example,
users tend to purchase fast food at noon when at the workplace, while they prefer main meals in the evening when at

Code — https://github.com/Zhaoshuyuan0246/STKDRec

Introduction
Takeaway platforms, such as Yelp, Meituan, and Ele.me,
provide convenient online ordering and offline delivery services, playing an increasingly important role in people’s
daily lives (Zhang et al. 2023). As the core service of these
platforms, takeaway recommendation aim to accurately recommend takeaways that align with user preferences based
on their historical purchase behaviors. Such recommendation services enhance user satisfaction while increasing visibility and sales opportunities for merchants. In recent years,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13365

