The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spin: Diffusion-based Semantic Image Painting Through Independent
Information Injection
Dantong Wu1 , Zhiqiang Chen2 , Tianjiao Du1 , Peipei Ran3 , Mengchao Bai3 , Kai Zhang1 *
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science, China
3
Media Technology Lab, Huawei, China
wdt22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhangkai@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have been utilized as powerful tools for
various image editing tasks, including semantic image painting(SIP), which aims to generate content within masked regions conditioned on a reference image or text. SIP, especially
those using images as condition, often suffers from three issues: semantic inconsistency, unnatural transitions and style
inconsistency, which significantly hinder its practical application. To address these challenges, we propose a novel Semantic image Painting framework with INdependent INformation INjection(Spin). Specifically, we compute a saliency map
to segregate the reference image into salient and non-salient
components. We then filter out the non-salient information of
it during the semantic embedding extraction phrase, and precisely inject the semantic embedding into the masked region
instead of the whole image during the semantic generation
phrase. Furthermore, we impose an additional style guidance
to promote style consistency between background and foreground. Experimental results demonstrate that Spin achieve
superior semantic similarity and image coherence across various styles, including realistic, pencil drawings, cartoon, and
oil painting. Additionally, Spin offers diversity and editability, and can be integrated into other models that meet our prerequisites.

1

castle
Semantic image painting in the real domain

log cabin
Semantic image painting in pencil drawings domain

bread
Semantic image painting in cartoon domain

red boat

Introduction

Semantic image painting in oil painting domain

In recent years, generative models have rapidly advanced,
making editing specific areas of real images more convenient, such as using image inpainting techniques to easily
eliminate unwanted objects from designated areas. However,
it is a very common scenario where people want to generate
specific content in those areas, such as in photo editing and
secondary creation of artworks, which is an equally important but understudied aspect. Semantic Image Painting (SIP)
aims to fill regions defined by masks in an image according
to semantic conditions specified by text or images, ensuring
that the background outside the mask remains unchanged,
the content within the mask aligns with the semantic conditions, and the image appears visually coherent and complete.
Before the emergence of diffusion models, the methods
work best on text-conditioned SIP often leverage the powerful generative power of GAN(Goodfellow et al. 2020). But

Figure 1: semantic image painting aims to inject semantic
condition to the mask region. Our method achieves remarkable results in various domains.

they can only generate images from a specific domain and
can’t achieve good preservation of the background. Imageconditioned SIP is divided into several subtasks (Niu et al.
2021), and traditional methods usually only focus on one
task while ignoring other aspects. Also, it is difficult to obtain more diverse results while ensuring semantics. With the
advancement of diffusion models, notable progress has been
made in SIP. Current diffusion-based techniques excel in
background preservation, can generate more diverse results,
and are not domain-specific.
However, there are still some unsolved issues, due to the
simultaneous influence of the semantic condition and the
background image on the generated region, which will cause

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8351

