The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Noise-Robust Losses for Large-Scale Noisy Data Learning
Max Staats 1,2 * , Matthias Thamm 2 , Bernd Rosenow 2
1

2

ScaDS.AI Dresden/Leipzig, Germany
Institut für Theoretische Physik, Universität Leipzig, Brüderstrasse 16, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
{staats,thamm}@itp.uni-leipzig.de, rosenow@physik.uni-leipzig.de

Abstract

2018; Wang et al. 2019; Amid et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2020;
Zhou et al. 2021; Englesson and Azizpour 2021).
A majority of these loss functions are bounded to prevent the learning of mislabeled examples. From a theoretical
point of view, bounded losses have a higher robustness to
noise if they belong to the class of symmetric losses (Ghosh,
Kumar, and Sastry 2017). Nonetheless, it has been suggested
that such symmetry could be overly constraining (Zhou et al.
2021), with functions like the Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
leaning towards underfitting. Reflecting this, many contemporary loss functions do not satisfy this symmetry condition
(Zhou et al. 2021; Englesson and Azizpour 2021).
In this paper, we quantitatively explore how the vanishing
derivatives of bounded loss functions impact their learning
behavior. According to our findings, the cause of underfitting is the limited overlap between the output values of an
initialized network and the region where the derivative of
a particular bounded loss function is nonzero. To counteract this, we add a real number, ϵ, to the logit corresponding to the correct class label. This subtle adjustment restores
the overlap between network outputs and the region of sufficiently large derivatives of the loss, enabling e.g. the MAE
loss to surpass the Cross Entropy loss on datasets like Cifar100, even in the absence of label noise. Impressively, this
approach requires only a single constant ϵ, which is determined by the number of classes, providing an effectively
parameter-free method. Other loss functions like the generalized cross entropy (genCE) (Zhang and Sabuncu 2018)
and NF-MAE (a combination of normalized focal loss (NF)
with MAE) (Ma et al. 2020) are also able to learn the WebVision dataset with the help of the logit bias.
Furthermore, our description of the early learning phase
enables us to calculate suitable hyperparameters for other
loss functions like genCE and NCE-AGCE (a combination
of Normalized Cross Entropy and Asymmetric Generalized
Cross Entropy) (Zhou et al. 2021), allowing them to show
their potential for an arbitrary number of classes without
the need of tuning their parameters first, e.g., by an expensive grid search. The method we propose is intended as a
first step towards a universal framework that is capable of
noise robust learning across varied numbers of classes without requiring hyperparameter fine-tuning. The need for such
a method is underscored by our observation that none of the
proposed loss functions that are noise resistant on the Cifar-

Large annotated datasets inevitably contain noisy labels,
which poses a major challenge for training deep neural networks as they easily memorize the labels. Noise-robust loss
functions have emerged as a notable strategy to counteract
this issue, but it remains challenging to create a robust loss
function which is not susceptible to underfitting. Through a
quantitative approach, this paper explores the limited overlap
between the network output at initialization and regions of
non-vanishing gradients of bounded loss functions in the initial learning phase. Using these insights, we address underfitting of several noise robust losses with a novel method denoted as logit bias, which adds a real number ϵ to the logit at
the position of the correct class. The logit bias enables these
losses to achieve state-of-the-art results, even on datasets like
WebVision, consisting of over a million images from 1000
classes. In addition, we demonstrate that our method can be
used to determine optimal parameters for several loss functions – without having to train networks. Remarkably, our
method determines the hyperparameters based on the number of classes, resulting in loss functions which require zero
dataset or noise-dependent parameters.

1

Introduction

Supervised deep learning depends on high-quality labeled
data for effective pattern recognition and accurate predictions (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). In realworld datasets, however, there is often label noise - erroneous or unclear labels due to human error or incomplete
annotations (Liang, Liu, and Yao 2022). Such noise can
drastically impair the effectiveness of deep learning models,
which often operate under the assumption of pristine labels
(Song et al. 2022). Therefore, it is important to develop robust deep-learning algorithms that can efficiently learn from
noisy datasets.
One effective approach to navigate label noise lies in employing noise-robust loss functions. These loss functions,
notable for their model-agnostic nature, seamlessly integrate
with any deep learning paradigm. The existing literature
highlights their ability to improve the robustness and generalization ability of deep learning models under noisy conditions (Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry 2017; Zhang and Sabuncu
* Staats is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7006

