The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Crossfire: An Elastic Defense Framework for
Graph Neural Networks Under Bit Flip Attacks
Lorenz Kummer1,2 , Samir Moustafa1,2 , Wilfried Gansterer1 , Nils Kriege1,3
1

Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Doctoral School Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
3
Research Network Data Science University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
{lorenz.kummer, samir.moustafa, wilfried.gansterer, nils.kriege}@univie.ac.at
2

Abstract

attacks include poisoning, which leads to the learning of
flawed models (Ma, Ding, and Mei 2020; Wu et al. 2022),
and evasion strategies, which use adversarial examples to
impair inference. Such attacks on GNNs, which involve altering node features, edges, or introducing new nodes (Sun
et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2022), as discussed in prior studies (Ma, Ding, and Mei 2020), can be either targeted or
untargeted. Targeted attacks reduce the model’s prediction
quality on specific instances, whereas untargeted attacks affect the model’s overall performance (Zhang et al. 2022a).
For a thorough overview of graph poisoning and evasion attacks, along with defenses and relevant algorithms, refer to
the detailed reviews by Jin et al. (2021) and Dai et al. (2022).
Recent research on GNN vulnerability has expanded beyond poisoning and evasion attacks on input graphs, now encompassing systematic attacks that directly manipulate network weights through malicious bit flips during inference.
While such attacks are well-understood for Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) in computer vision (Rakin, He,
and Fan 2019; Qian et al. 2023; Khare et al. 2022), understanding GNN vulnerability to BFAs is a relatively new area
of study. Currently, only one dedicated BFA for GNNs has
been described by Kummer et al. (2024), and existing defenses against BFAs (Khare et al. 2022) have not been evaluated for GNNs. To the best of our knowledge, the topic of
defending GNNs against BFAs has not yet been addressed
in the literature.
Given the fundamental differences between GNNs and
CNNs – such as GNNs’ reliance on the message-passing algorithm (MP) to process graph-structured data and the lack
of vulnerable convolutional filters (Hector et al. 2022) – as
well as distinct properties like expressivity that can be exploited by attackers (Kummer et al. 2024), it is essential to
explore whether existing CNN defenses against BFAs are
applicable to GNNs. Moreover, it is crucial to develop defenses specifically designed for GNNs, given the importance
of their applications across multiple domains.
In the following, we assume a white-box threat model to
evaluate CNN defenses against BFAs on GNNs and introduce our approach, considering an attacker who can precisely manipulate bits without budget constraints.

Bit Flip Attacks (BFAs) are a well-established class of adversarial attacks, originally developed for Convolutional Neural Networks within the computer vision domain. Most recently, these attacks have been extended to target Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), revealing significant vulnerabilities.
This new development naturally raises questions about the
best strategies to defend GNNs against BFAs, a challenge
for which no solutions currently exist. Given the applications
of GNNs in critical fields, any defense mechanism must not
only maintain network performance, but also verifiably restore the network to its pre-attack state. Verifiably restoring
the network to its pre-attack state also eliminates the need for
costly evaluations on test data to ensure network quality. We
offer first insights into the effectiveness of existing honeypotand hashing-based defenses against BFAs adapted from the
computer vision domain to GNNs, and characterize the shortcomings of these approaches. To overcome their limitations,
we propose Crossfire, a hybrid approach that exploits weight
sparsity and combines hashing and honeypots with bit-level
correction of out-of-distribution weight elements to restore
network integrity. Crossfire is retraining-free and does not require labeled data. Averaged over 2,160 experiments on six
benchmark datasets, Crossfire offers a 21.8% higher probability than its competitors of reconstructing a GNN attacked by
a BFA to its pre-attack state. These experiments cover up to
55 bit flips from various attacks. Moreover, it improves postrepair prediction quality by 10.85%. Computational and storage overheads are negligible compared to the inherent complexity of even the simplest GNNs.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are effective machine
learning methods for processing structured data in graph format, consisting of nodes and edges. They demonstrate versatility by enabling the application of deep learning in diverse domains such as finance, social networks, medicine,
chemistry, and biological data analysis (Lu and Uddin 2021;
Cheung and Moura 2020; Sun et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2018;
Xiong et al. 2021). As GNNs become more widely used,
it is crucial to examine their potential security vulnerabilities. Conventional adversarial attacks on GNNs primarily involve manipulating input graph data (Wu et al. 2022). These

Related Work The BFA initially presented in Rakin, He,
and Fan (2019), targets a quantized CNN by conducting

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17990

