The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Modal Recommendation Unlearning
for Legal, Licensing, and Modality Constraints
Yash Sinha1 , Murari Mandal2 , Mohan Kankanhalli1
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
RespAI Lab, School of Computer Engineering, KIIT Bhubaneswar, India
yashsinha@comp.nus.edu.sg, murari.mandalfcs@kiit.ac.in, mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

isfaction. As user data increasingly spans multiple modalities (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016), multi-modal recommender systems (MMRS) are gaining traction (Wu et al.
2022; Zhou et al. 2023). Recent advancements (Yu et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2023b; Wei et al. 2020, 2019; Xu et al.
2018) have focused on capturing user preferences through
both behavior data and diverse multi-modal item information. With growing concerns over data privacy, regulations
like GDPR (Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017) emphasize
the importance of data protection and the “right to be forgotten.” While significant progress has been made in unlearning user data to enhance privacy (Chen et al. 2022; Li
et al. 2023a), the unlearning of item data remains largely unexplored. This paper introduces MMR EC U N, which, to the
best of our knowledge, is the first attempt to address unlearning in MMRS and unlearning item data.
Motivation. Recent needs for dynamic recommendations.
Complex content licensing agreements: Universal Music
Group’s (UMG) recent decision to pull its library from
TikTok (Johnson 2024) silenced millions of user-created
videos, necessitating TikTok’s recommendations to adapt
to the absence of UMG content. Similarly, the 2020 lawsuit (Deahl 2018) against Spotify by Wixen Music Publishing over songwriter compensation and the 2016 dispute (Levine 2018) between YouTube and Warner Music
Group, which led to temporary content removal, highlight
potential conflicts between existing models and evolving
contractual obligations. These scenarios highlight the need
for a dynamic RS that can adapt swiftly.
Legal compliance: The Algorithmic Accountability
Act (Gursoy, Kennedy, and Kakadiaris 2022) emphasizes
the responsibility of companies to evaluate their machine
learning systems for bias and discrimination. Current RS
often reinforce user preferences, perpetuating stereotypes
and creating filter bubbles and echo chambers (Chen et al.
2023; Lin et al. 2021). This highlights the need for an RS
that balances personalization with fairness and diversity.
Evolving user interests in different modalities: Imagine a
user who usually posts about fitness and healthy living. Over
time, she develops a new passion for travel photography,
sharing photos and stories from her trips to exotic locations.
Although her images and hashtags now reflect her love for
travel, the RS still prioritizes fitness-related content. By analyzing both text and images, the system can adapt to her

User data spread across multiple modalities has popularized
multi-modal recommender systems (MMRS). They recommend diverse content such as products, social media posts,
TikTok reels, etc., based on a user-item interaction graph.
With rising data privacy demands, recent methods propose
unlearning private user data from uni-modal recommender
systems (RS). However, methods for unlearning item data
related to outdated user preferences, revoked licenses, and
legally requested removals are still largely unexplored.
Previous RS unlearning methods are unsuitable for MMRS
due to the incompatibility of their matrix-based representation with the multi-modal user-item interaction graph. Moreover, their data partitioning step degrades performance on
each shard due to poor data heterogeneity and requires costly
performance aggregation across shards.
This paper introduces MMRecUn, the first approach known
to us for unlearning in MMRS and unlearning item data.
Given a trained RS model, MMRecUn employs a novel Reverse Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR) objective to enable the model to forget marked data. The reverse BPR attenuates the impact of user-item interactions within the forget set, while the forward BPR reinforces the significance of
user-item interactions within the retain set. Our experiments
demonstrate that MMRecUn outperforms baseline methods
across various unlearning requests when evaluated on benchmark MMRS datasets. MMRecUn achieves recall performance improvements of up to 49.85% compared to baseline
methods and is up to 1.3× faster than the Gold model, which
is trained on retain set from scratch. MMRecUn offers significant advantages, including superiority in removing target
interactions, preserving retained interactions, and zero overhead costs compared to previous methods.

Code — https://github.com/MachineUnlearn/MMRecUN
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15328

1

Introduction

Recommender systems (RS) (Smith and Linden 2017; He
et al. 2020) leverage techniques like collaborative filtering,
content-based filtering, and neural networks to recommend
diverse content such as movies, music, products, news articles, and more, thereby boosting user engagement and satCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12541

