The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Detecting Music Performance Errors with Transformers
Benjamin Shiue-Hal Chou, Purvish Jajal, Nicholas John Eliopoulos, Tim Nadolsky,
Cheng-Yun Yang, Nikita Ravi, James C. Davis, Kristen Yeon-Ji Yun, Yung-Hsiang Lu
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, 47907
{chou150, pjajal, neliopou, tnadolsk, yang2316, ravi30, davisjam, yun98, yunglu}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Beginner musicians often struggle to identify specific errors in their performances, such as playing incorrect notes
or rhythms. There are two limitations in existing tools for
music error detection: (1) Existing approaches rely on automatic alignment; therefore, they are prone to errors caused by
small deviations between alignment targets.; (2) There is insufficient data to train music error detection models, resulting in over-reliance on heuristics. To address (1), we propose a novel transformer model, Polytune, that takes audio
inputs and outputs annotated music scores. This model can
be trained end-to-end to implicitly align and compare performance audio with music scores through latent space representations. To address (2), we present a novel data generation
technique capable of creating large-scale synthetic music error datasets. Our approach achieves a 64.1% average Error
Detection F1 score, improving upon prior work by 40 percentage points across 14 instruments. Additionally, our model
can handle multiple instruments compared with existing transcription methods repurposed for music error detection.

Figure 1: The score on top is the performance transcription
and the score below is the reference. This paper can detect
three types of errors. (1) is an extra note. “C” is played, but
it is not expected by the score. (2) is a missed note. In this
figure, “C” is not played. (3) is a wrong note, which is actually just a missed note and an extra note happening simultaneously. We expect the player to play a “C” but instead a
“B” is played. The model inputs the score and the music student’s recorded audio and labels the notes detected from the
recording as “Missed”, “Extra”, or “Correct”.

such as missed or extra notes. They are also incapable of automatically aligning the user’s performance with a reference
score. Instead, Simply Piano and Yousician rely on the user
to match their performance with the reference audio. Furthermore, their models cannot handle multiple instruments.
The research community has also attempted to provide
fine-grained music performance feedback but has had limited success (Benetos, Klapuri, and Dixon 2012; Wang, Ewert, and Dixon 2017). A major paradigm of prior work is to
temporally align a student’s performance with a reference
score, and then identify differences.
These alignment-based approaches often fail when there
are deviations in the played notes from the score, even if
they are minor. The resulting misalignment of notes leads to
inaccurate error detection and ineffective feedback for students.
In this paper, we introduce a transformer basedmodel (Vaswani et al. 2017) called Polytune to detect musician errors without relying on automatic alignment. Our
model utilizes an end-to-end trainable approach for error detection. Specifically, Polytune takes audio spectrogram pairs
as inputs, and then outputs an annotated musical score without requiring any manual intervention. We train Polytune to
annotate notes with a variety of labels beyond “correct” or

Code — https://github.com/ben2002chou/Polytune

1

Introduction

Beginner musicians often need help identifying errors in
their performance. For example, novice musicians may
struggle with sight reading or miss notes due to a lack of
muscle memory. Access to music education programs which
could help address these issues is limited; in the USA alone,
approximately 4 million K-12 students do not have access to
music education (Morrison et al. 2022).
To bridge this gap, commercial music tutoring tools have
become essential resources. Beginner musicians can practice
more effectively, and teachers are provided with insights into
students’ progress (Nart 2016; Apaydınlı 2019). The significant demand for such automated solutions is evident, with
apps like Yousician (Yousician Ltd 2024) and Simply Piano (JoyTunes 2024) each having over 10 million downloads
globally.
However, Simply Piano and Yousician only identify notes
as correct or incorrect, without offering detailed feedback
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23687

