The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting Fine-Grained Visual Anomaly Detection with
Coarse-Knowledge-Aware Adversarial Learning
Qingqing Fang1 , Qinliang Su1,2 * , Wenxi Lv1 , Wenchao Xu3 , Jianxing Yu4,5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong, China
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China
{fangqq3, lvwx8}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {suqliang, yujx26}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wenchao.xu@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

anomalies, in this paper, we focus our attention on the finegrained anomaly detection. In addition to detecting anomalies, some applications also require locating the anomalies,
like automatically marking the defective areas (Roth et al.
2022a; Liu et al. 2023b). Thus, it is of great value to develop
methods that can simultaneously detect and locate anomalies accurately.

Many unsupervised visual anomaly detection methods train
an auto-encoder to reconstruct normal samples and then
leverage the reconstruction error map to detect and localize
the anomalies. However, due to the powerful modeling and
generalization ability of neural networks, some anomalies can
also be well reconstructed, resulting in unsatisfactory detection and localization accuracy. In this paper, a small coarselylabeled anomaly dataset is first collected. Then, a coarseknowledge-aware adversarial learning method is developed
to align the distribution of reconstructed features with that of
normal features. The alignment can effectively suppress the
auto-encoder’s reconstruction ability on anomalies and thus
improve the detection accuracy. Considering that anomalies
often only occupy very small areas in anomalous images, a
patch-level adversarial learning strategy is further developed.
Although no patch-level anomalous information is available,
we rigorously prove that by simply viewing any patch features from anomalous images as anomalies, the proposed
knowledge-aware method can also align the distribution of reconstructed patch features with the normal ones. Experimental results on four medical datasets and two industrial datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in improving the
detection and localization performance.

Considering the extreme diverseness of anomalies, existing methods (Ruff et al. 2018; Akcay, Atapour-Abarghouei,
and Breckon 2019; Tack et al. 2020; Roth et al. 2022b;
Deng and Li 2022; Reiss and Hoshen 2023) mostly only
assume the access to normal datasets. By using it to train
a model that characterizes the normal patterns, anomalies
can then be detected by assessing their conformity to it. The
reconstruction-based method (Akcay, Atapour-Abarghouei,
and Breckon 2019; Vasilev et al. 2020; Zavrtanik, Kristan,
and Skočaj 2021b; Guo et al. 2023), as one of the most
widely-used fine-grained anomaly detection methods, is a
concrete example of this idea, which first trains an autoencoder on normal images and then uses the reconstruction
error map to detect and localize anomalies. However, due
to the strong modeling and generalization ability of neural
networks, it is found that auto-encoders sometimes can also
reconstruct the anomalous areas well due to the leakage of
visual information from other parts of images, causing the
reconstruction error map unreliable for anomaly detection
and localization (You et al. 2022).

Code — https://github.com/Faustinaqq/CKAAD
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12850

Introduction

The reason why the reconstruction-based methods cannot
lead to competitive performance can be largely attributed to
the only usage of normal samples when training the autoencoder, which makes the decision boundary between normal and anomalous samples blurred (Xia et al. 2022). To
boost the detection and localization accuracy, we propose
to introduce a small dataset comprised of anomalous images. We argue that it is feasible to collect a small number
of anomalies in many real-world applications (Ruff et al.
2019; Pang et al. 2021a; Ding, Pang, and Shen 2022). As
exemplified in medical diagnosis and industrial manufacturing, there often exist some X-Ray images that have been
confirmed to be problematic by veteran doctors, or images
that are taken for products with defects. But compared with
datasets in classification tasks, the anomaly datasets possess
two unique characteristics: 1) Coarseness: anomalies only

Visual anomaly detection (AD) aims to detect images that
show significant deviation from normal ones. In practice,
the deviation could happen at image-level or at the more
fine-grained pixel-level, where anomalies only appear at certain local areas, while the remaining large region looks to be
normal (Yang et al. 2022). Fine-grained anomalies happen a
lot in real-world applications, such as the X-ray/CT images
with nodules or other lesions in medical diagnosis (Fernando
et al. 2021), images of products with defects like undesired
scratches or small holes in industrial manufacturing etc (Liu
et al. 2024). Because of the ubiquitousness of fine-grained
anomalies and their intrinsic distinction from image-level
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16532

