The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Number Theoretic Accelerated Learning of Physics-Informed Neural Networks
Takashi Matsubara1 , Takaharu Yaguchi2
1

Hokkaido University
2
Kobe University
matsubara@ist.hokudai.ac.jp, yaguchi@pearl.kobe-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks solve partial differential
equations by training neural networks. Since this method
approximates infinite-dimensional PDE solutions with finite
collocation points, minimizing discretization errors by selecting suitable points is essential for accelerating the learning
process. Inspired by number theoretic methods for numerical
analysis, we introduce good lattice training and periodization
tricks, which ensure the conditions required by the theory.
Our experiments demonstrate that GLT requires 2–7 times
fewer collocation points, resulting in lower computational
cost, while achieving competitive performance compared to
typical sampling methods.

uniformly random

uniformly spaced

LHS

Sobol sequence

proposed GLT proposed GLT (folded)

Figure 1: Examples of sampled collocation points. 128
points for the Sobol sequence, and 144 points for others.

Introduction
Many real-world phenomena can be modeled as partial differential equations (PDEs), and solving PDEs has been a
central topic in computational science. The applications include, but are not limited to, weather forecasting, vehicle
design (Hirsch 2006), economic analysis (Achdou et al.
2014), and computer vision (Logan 2015). A PDE is expressed as N [u] = 0, where N is a (possibly nonlinear)
differential operator, and u : Ω → R is an unknown function on the domain Ω ⊂ Rs . For most PDEs that appear in
physical simulations, the well-posedness (the uniqueness of
the solution u and the continuous dependence on the initial
and boundary conditions) has been well-studied and is typically guaranteed under certain conditions. To solve PDEs,
various computational techniques have been explored, including finite difference methods, finite volume methods,
and spectral methods (Furihata and Matsuo 2010; Morton
and Mayers 2005; Thomas 1995). However, the development of computer architecture has become slower, leading to a growing need for computationally efficient alternatives. A promising approach is physics-informed neural
networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al. 2019), which train a neural network by minimizing the physics-informed loss (Wang
et al. 2022b; Wang and Perdikaris 2023). This is typically the
squared error of the neural network’s output ũ from the PDE
N [u] = 0 averaged over a finite set of collocation points xj ,
PN −1
1
2
j=0 ∥N [ũ](xj )∥ , encouraging the output ũ to satisfy
N

the equation N [ũ](xj ) = 0.
However, the solutions u to PDEs are inherently infinitedimensional, and any distance involving the output ũ or
the solution u needs to be defined by an integral over
the domain Ω. In this regard, the physics-informed loss
serves as a finite
approximation to the squared 2-norm
R
|N [ũ]|22 = x∈Ω ∥N [ũ](x)∥2 dx on the function space
L2 (Ω) for N [u] ∈ L2 (Ω), and hence the discretization errors should affect the training efficiency. A smaller number
N of collocation points leads to a less accurate approximation and inferior performance, while a larger number N increases the computational cost (Bihlo and Popovych 2022;
Sharma and Shankar 2022). Despite the importance of selecting appropriate collocation points, insufficient emphasis
has been placed on this aspect. Raissi et al. (2019), Zeng
et al. (2023), and many other studies employed Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) to determine the collocation points.
Alternative approaches include uniformly random sampling
(i.e., the Monte Carlo method) (Jin et al. 2021; Krishnapriyan et al. 2022) and uniformly spaced sampling (Wang
et al. 2021, 2022a). These methods are exemplified in Fig. 1.
In the field of numerical analysis, the relationship between
integral approximation and collocation points has been
extensively investigated. Accordingly, some studies have
used quasi-Monte Carlo methods, specifically the Sobol sequence, which approximate integrals more accurately than

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

595

