The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Is Sarcasm Detection A Step-by-Step Reasoning Process in Large Language
Models?
Ben Yao1 , Yazhou Zhang2,3 * , Qiuchi Li1 * , Jing Qin3
1

University of Copenhagen
2
Tianjin University
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
yzhou zhang@tju.edu.cn, qiuchi.li@di.ku.dk
Abstract

lution steps, and elicit LLMs to think step-by-step, such as
chain of thought (CoT) (Wei et al. 2022), tree of thought
(ToT) (Yao et al. 2024), graph of thought (GoT) (Besta et al.
2024), etc.
However, due to its inherent ambivalence and figurative
nature, sarcasm detection is often considered a holistic and
irrational cognitive process that does not conform to stepby-step logical reasoning. The main reasons are two fold:
(1) sarcasm expression does not strictly conform to formal
logical structures, such as the law of hypothetical syllogism
(i.e.,if A ⇒ B and B ⇒ C, then A ⇒ C). For example,
“Poor Alice has fallen for that stupid Bob; and that stupid
Bob is head over heels for Claire; but don’t assume for a
second that Alice would like Claire”; (2) sarcasm judgment
is often considered a fluid combination of various cues. Each
cue holds equal importance, and there is no rigid sequence
of steps among them. Hence, the main research question can
be summarized as:
RQ: Is human sarcasm detection a step-by-step reasoning
process?
To answer this question, we propose a theoretical framework, called SarcasmCue, based on the sequential and nonsequential prompting paradigms. It consists of four prompting methods, i.e., chain of contradiction (CoC), graph of
cues (GoC), bagging of cues (BoC) and tensor of cues (ToC).
Each method has its own focus and advantages. In this work,
cue is similar to thought, being a coherent language sequence related to linguistics, context, or emotion that serves
as an intermediate indicator for identifying sarcasm, such as
rhetorical devices or emotional words. More specifically,
• CoC. It harnesses the quintessential property of sarcasm
(the contradiction between surface sentiment and true intention). It aims to: (1) identify the surface sentiment by
extracting keywords, etc.; (2) deduce the true intention by
scrutinizing rhetorical devices, etc.; and (3) determine the
inconsistency between them. It is a typical linear structure.
• GoC. Generalizing over CoC, GoC frames the problem
of sarcasm detection as a search over a graph and treats
various cues as nodes, with the relations across cues represented as edges. Unlike CoC and ToT, it goes beyond
following a fixed hierarchy or linear reasoning path. Like
CoC, GoC follow a step-by-step reasoning process.
• BoC. BoC is a bagging approach that constructs a pool

Elaborating a series of intermediate reasoning steps significantly improves the ability of large language models (LLMs)
to solve complex problems, as such steps would evoke LLMs
to think sequentially. However, human sarcasm understanding is often considered an intuitive and holistic cognitive process, in which various linguistic, contextual, and emotional
cues are integrated to form a comprehensive understanding,
in a way that does not necessarily follow a step-by-step fashion. To verify the validity of this argument, we introduce a
new prompting framework (called SarcasmCue) containing
four sub-methods, viz. chain of contradiction (CoC), graph of
cues (GoC), bagging of cues (BoC) and tensor of cues (ToC),
which elicits LLMs to detect human sarcasm by considering
sequential and non-sequential prompting methods. Through
a comprehensive empirical comparison on four benchmarks,
we highlight three key findings: (1) CoC and GoC show superior performance with more advanced models like GPT4 and Claude 3.5, with an improvement of 3.5%. (2) ToC
significantly outperforms other methods when smaller LLMs
are evaluated, boosting the F1 score by 29.7% over the best
baseline. (3) Our proposed framework consistently pushes the
state-of-the-art (i.e., ToT) by 4.2%, 2.0%, 29.7%, and 58.2%
in F1 scores across four datasets. This demonstrates the effectiveness and stability of the proposed framework.

Code —
https://github.com/qiuchili/llm sarcasm detection.git

Introduction
Recent large language models have demonstrated impressive performance across downstream natural language processing (NLP) tasks, in which “System 1” - the fast, unconscious, and intuitive tasks, e.g., sentiment classification,
topic analysis, etc., have been argued to be successfully performed (Cui et al. 2024). Instead, increasing efforts have
been devoted to the other class of tasks - “System 2”,
which requires slow, deliberative and multi-steps thinking,
such as logical, mathematical, and commonsense reasoning
tasks (Wei et al. 2022). To improve the ability of LLMs to
solve such complex problems, a popular paradigm is to decompose complex problems into a series of intermediate so* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25651

