The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tensor Decomposition Meets Knowledge Compilation:
A Study Comparing Tensor Trains with OBDDs
Ryoma Onaka, Kengo Nakamura, Masaaki Nishino, Norihito Yasuda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Kyoto, Japan
{ryoma.onaka,kengo.nakamura,masaaki.nishino,norihito.yasuda}@ntt.com

Abstract

ear product of lower-dimensional tensors (Oseledets 2011).
Many operations can be performed on a tensor train, such as
sum, inner product, and Hadamard product.
As the truth table of an n-ary Boolean function can naturally be regarded as an n-dimensional binary tensor, an exact
tensor decomposition representing such a binary tensor can
be regarded as a target representation for knowledge compilation. Our study measures the performance of a tensor train
as a representation of a Boolean function. For comparison
with existing Boolean function representations, we follow
the approach of the knowledge compilation map (Darwiche
and Marquis 2002), which clarifies the succinctness between
Boolean function representations and the operations that can
be performed on each representation in polytime. In this
study, we analyze the succinctness between OBDDs and tensor trains. In addition to the popularity of OBDDs, considering that a linear ordering of variables can be introduced
into tensor trains such as OBDDs, we argue that a comparison between tensor trains and OBDDs would be beneficial
to the community.
The main result of this study is twofold. First, we show
that tensor trains (deemed to be Boolean function representations) are more succinct than OBDDs; that is, they can represent any function with at most a polynomial times larger
size than OBDDs and a function that cannot be represented
by OBDDs with a polynomial times larger size than tensor
trains exists. Second, we prove that tensor trains can perform
all operations on the knowledge compilation map (Darwiche
and Marquis 2002) that OBDDs can perform in polynomial
time (polytime) with respect to the size of the representation. These results are interesting because there is usually a
trade-off between succinctness and the abundance of operations that can be performed in polytime, as suggested by
knowledge compilation maps. Moreover, because OBDDs
are among the most powerful representations of many NNF
subsets in terms of the number of operations supported in
polytime, it is surprising that the tractability of operations of
tensor trains and OBDDs are identical. It is also remarkable
that tensor trains emerged from a different field than NNFs;
to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that argues that tensor decomposition provides more succinctness
and tractability in representing a Boolean function than NNF
subsets. The full version of this paper will be available at
arXiv.

A knowledge compilation map analyzes tractable operations
in Boolean function representations and compares their succinctness. This enables the selection of appropriate representations for different applications. In the knowledge compilation map, all representation classes are subsets of the negation normal form (NNF). However, Boolean functions may
be better expressed by a representation that is different from
that of the NNF subsets. In this study, we treat tensor trains
as Boolean function representations and analyze their succinctness and tractability. Our study is the first to evaluate
the expressiveness of a tensor decomposition method using
criteria from knowledge compilation literature. Our main results demonstrate that tensor trains are more succinct than
ordered binary decision diagrams (OBDDs) and support the
same polytime operations as OBDDs. Our study broadens
their application by providing a theoretical link between tensor decomposition and existing NNF subsets.

Introduction
Knowledge compilation, a technique for handling propositional reasoning at high-speed, has been studied for decades.
The logical formula in propositional logic can be converted
into a representation by pre-computation, allowing various
queries to be quickly answered on such converted representations. Typical target representations for knowledge compilation include Ordered Binary Decision Diagrams (OBDDs) (Bryant 1986), deterministic Decomposable Negation
Normal Form (d-DNNF) (Darwiche 2001b), and Sentential
Decision Diagrams (SDDs) (Darwiche 2011). A Negation
Normal Form (NNF) (Darwiche 2001a) is a generalization
of all these approaches and Boolean function representation classes can be considered as adding constraints, such
as determinism and structured decomposability, to the NNF.
However, the possibility remains that Boolean functions can
be represented more succinctly by focusing on representations other than NNF.
Tensor decomposition represents a tensor as the sum of
the products of smaller tensors. Tensor decomposition resembles knowledge compilation because it succinctly represents a large tensor with a set of smaller tensors. A tensor train decomposes a high-dimensional tensor into a linCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15109

