The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Physics-Guided Fair Graph Sampling for Water Temperature
Prediction in River Networks
Erhu He1 , Declan Kutscher1 , Yiqun Xie2 , Jacob Zwart3 , Zhe Jiang4 , Huaxiu Yao5 , Xiaowei Jia1
1

University of Pittsburgh
University of Maryland
3
U.S. Geological Survey
4
University of Florida
5
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{erh108, dtk28}@pitt.edu, xie@umd.edu, jzwart@usgs.gov, zhe.jiang@ufl.edu, huaxiu@cs.unc.edu, xiaowei@pitt.edu
2

Abstract
This work introduces a novel graph neural networks (GNNs)based method to predict stream water temperature and reduce
model bias across locations of different income and education levels. Traditional physics-based models often have limited accuracy because they are necessarily approximations of
reality. Recently, there has been an increasing interest of using GNNs in modeling complex water dynamics in stream
networks. Despite their promise in improving the accuracy,
GNNs can bring additional model bias through the aggregation process, where node features are updated by aggregating
neighboring nodes. The bias can be especially pronounced
when nodes with similar sensitive attributes are frequently
connected. We introduce a new method that leverages physical knowledge to represent the node influence in GNNs, and
then utilizes physics-based influence to refine the selection
and weights over the neighbors. The objective is to facilitate equitable treatment over different sensitive groups in the
graph aggregation, which helps reduce spatial bias over locations, especially for those in underprivileged groups. The
results on the Delaware River Basin demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in preserving equitable performance across locations in different sensitive groups.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: The distribution of RMSE for a GNN model’s predictions in different sensitive values, (a) annual household
income in USD, (b) education level as the proportion of the
population that has attended college relative to the total population, in our study region in the Delaware River Basin.

mations) based on soil and surficial geologic classification
along with topography, land cover, and climate input, leading to degraded predictive accuracy. Recently, graph neural
networks (GNNs) have been widely adopted as a data-driven
solution to model stream networks (Jia et al. 2021b; Moshe
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022; Jia et al. 2021a; Chen et al.
2021; Jia et al. 2023) because they can learn to capture complex interactions amongst different stream segments (e.g.,
through mass advection and diffusion).
Although GNNs have shown promising results in improving the predictive accuracy in initial small-scale tests,
their application to large-scale stream network modeling frequently results in substantial bias related to spatial locations.
Such spatial bias can lead to harm to society by amplifying discrimination and social inequity in decision and policy
making, as reported in a recent National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) document (Schwartz et al.
2022). For example, Fig. 1 shows the distribution of temperature prediction errors (in root-mean-square errors (RMSE))
by a GNN model over locations (i.e., stream segments) with
different sensitive attribute values in the Delaware River
Basin. In this example, we consider two attributes, annual
household income and education level. Here the education
level is quantified numerically as the proportion of the pop-

Introduction
Water quality continues to degrade due to the increasing demand on water-related services (e.g., drinking water supply
and energy consumption) and the changing climate (Hoekstra et al. 2012; Carr et al. 2013). Timely monitoring of water
temperature, which serves as a master factor of water quality, can help inform water management decisions (e.g., water filtering, water release from reservoirs, enhanced management of nearby farmlands), maintain the desired habitat
for aquatic life, and better understand ecological processes
leading to the changes in water quality.
To address this problem, scientists from multiple disciplines have built physics-based models to simulate the internal water cycles and their interactions with weather, soil, and
other water bodies based on general physical relationships
such as energy and mass conservation (Hipsey et al. 2014;
Markstrom 2012; Dugdale et al. 2017). However, these models still rely on qualitative parameterizations (i.e., approxiCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28070

