The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S AFE I NFER: Context Adaptive Decoding Time
Safety Alignment for Large Language Models
Somnath Banerjee1 , Sayan Layek1 * , Soham Tripathy1 * , Shanu Kumar2 ,
Animesh Mukherjee1 , Rima Hazra3
1

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India
2
Microsoft IDC, India
3
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
{som.iitkgpcse, sayanlayek2002, soham_17}@kgpian.iitkgp.ac.in
Shanu.Kumar@microsoft.com, rima_hazra@sutd.edu.sg
Abstract
Language models aligned for safety often exhibit fragile and
imbalanced mechanisms, increasing the chances of producing
unsafe content. In addition, editing techniques to incorporate
new knowledge can further compromise safety. To tackle these
issues, we propose S AFE I NFER, a context-adaptive, decodingtime safety alignment strategy for generating safe responses
to user queries. S AFE I NFER involves two phases: the ‘safety
amplification’ phase, which uses safe demonstration examples
to adjust the model’s hidden states and increase the likelihood of safer outputs, and the ‘safety-guided decoding’ phase,
which influences token selection based on safety-optimized
distributions to ensure the generated content adheres to ethical guidelines. Further, we introduce H ARM E VAL, a novel
benchmark for comprehensive safety evaluations, designed to
address potential misuse scenarios in line with the policies of
leading AI technology companies.

Code — https://github.com/NeuralSentinel/SafeInfer

Introduction
The extensive use of LLMs in various applications presents
substantial challenges in safety and ethical alignment (Weidinger, Mellor, and et. al 2021; Wang et al. 2023), particularly in environments that demand strict adherence to ethical standards. Among the prominent issues is ‘jailbreaking’,
where models circumvent built-in restrictions to generate
undesirable content (Banerjee et al. 2024; Deng et al. 2024;
Zou et al. 2023b), thereby exposing the limitations of traditional prompting methods that may inadvertently trigger
sensitive topics. Traditional fine-tuning offers a measure of
control by retraining models on specific datasets, but it falls
short in effectively managing complex inputs that can provoke such issues (Qi et al. 2024). Instead, decoding time
alignment, through techniques like controlled text generation
(CTG) (Liu et al. 2021), offers a more nuanced solution by
allowing dynamic, real-time moderation of outputs without
necessitating changes to the model’s architecture or extensive retraining. This approach tailors outputs directly in response to the input context, ensuring certain attribute (such
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27188

as detoxification, politeness) aligned interactions across various applications (Huang et al. 2024). In parallel, previous
studies (Subramani, Suresh, and Peters 2022; Hernandez, Li,
and Andreas 2023; Zou et al. 2023a; Todd et al. 2024) have
demonstrated that the in-context learning mechanism can
guide specific tasks through the model’s activations. Activation engineering techniques have shown promise in steering
model behavior by manipulating these activations.
Drawing on these findings, we introduce S AFE I NFER, an
novel strategy for in-context adaptive decoding time alignment which comprises two phases. The initial phase, termed
as Safety amplification (SA) phase, utilizes demonstration
examples to derive the safety amplification vector, which
is then integrated into the hidden state of the language
model. The second phase employs a Safety guided decoding strategy (sGDS) that combines/removes the biased attributes through the integration of different distributions from
language models. This phase enhances safety by preferentially selecting tokens from certain distributions over others,
thereby optimizing the overall output distribution for safety.
The key novelty of our work lies in judiciously coupling these
two phases to reap benefits from each of them to ensure a
more effective safety alignment compared to what is existing
in the literature. The first phase is motivated by the recent
works which proved that moving the latent space of the model
toward a specific task can help the model to actually solve
the task better (Todd et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024a). For the
decoding time intervention, we next use the concept of controlled text generation in the lines of (Dekoninck et al. 2024).
We do not know of any work that couples these two ideas
simultaneously to achieve safety alignment. Overall, in this
paper, our primary objective is to realign the model toward
heightened safety by employing contextual adaptation alongside a decoding strategy. This approach not only prioritizes
safety alignment but also ensures the preservation of the overall utility benchmark of the language model. In addition, we
have designed this methodology to be seamlessly adaptable
to different language model architectures, thereby broadening
its utility and applicability in a variety of settings.
Key contributions: Our contributions are as follows.
• We introduce S AFE I NFER, a versatile and effective context aware decoding-time strategy that operates in two

