The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Siamese Masked Autoencoder with Global Optimization for
Unsupervised Point Cloud Shape Correspondence
Jiacheng Deng, Jiahao Lu*
University of Science and Technology of China
{dengjc,lujiahao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised point cloud shape correspondence aims to establish point-wise correspondences between point clouds without annotated data. Ensuring efficiency and accuracy is crucial for practically implementing point cloud shape correspondence. Although the current methods have achieved desirable
performance, the nature of encoding at dense points limits their
application in actual scenarios. Moreover, independently computing per-point correspondences results in numerous multipleto-one erroneous correspondences. To address these issues, we
present an Adaptive siamese Masked autoencoder wIth Global
Optimization (AMIGO), comprising a siamese masked autoencoder and a global optimization module. In the siamese masked
autoencoder, we downsample the input point cloud and employ adaptive siamese mask operations to boost the coding capabilities of the encoder, thereby mitigating the information
loss caused by downsampling. In the global optimization module, optimal transport is only utilized to generate pseudo-labels
during the training phase, facilitating the efficient global planning of the correspondence results. Extensive experiments on
four standard human and animal benchmarks demonstrate that
AMIGO surpasses existing methods with remarkable margins,
achieving new state-of-the-art results.

GT

Baseline

Ground Truth

Source
Source

ASMAE

ASMAE + GO

Figure 1: The visualization of dense point matching results. The correspondences are visualized by transferring
colors from source to target according to matching results.
ASMAE corrects most of the mismatches in the baseline,
such as cat ears and front limbs. GO further refines the
multiple-to-one erroneous matches duiring training phase.

Introduction
As one of the most indispensable techniques for realworld applications like mixed reality (Mahmood and Han
2019; Lachat, Landes, and Grussenmeyer 2019), shape editing (Liu et al. 2019a), and non-rigid human body alignment (Brown and Rusinkiewicz 2007), point cloud shape
correspondence aims to establish precise point-to-point correspondences between source and target point clouds. However, non-rigid objects exhibit shape variations and body part
similarity, posing significant challenges in efficiently and accurately establishing point-to-point correspondences.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, a series of point
cloud shape correspondence methods has been introduced,
broadly classified into spectral-based (Bronstein, Bronstein,
and Kimmel 2006; Huang et al. 2008; Tevs et al. 2011) and
point-based (Deprelle et al. 2019; Zeng et al. 2021; Lang

et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2023; He et al. 2023). Spectralbased approaches calculate functional mappings between
projected features and learn transformations to establish
correspondences among deformable shapes, proven effective for mesh data. Nevertheless, these methods are limited by complex preprocessing and reliance on additional
vertex connectivity information. For point-based methods,
fully supervised strategies (Deprelle et al. 2019; Groueix
et al. 2018; Marin et al. 2020) use annotated data to guide
point-wise correspondences in point cloud pairs, obviating extra requirements for connectivity information. However, fully supervised methods still heavily rely on timeconsuming point-wise annotations. To ease annotation burden, researchers are increasingly exploring unsupervised
point cloud shape correspondence tasks (Zeng et al. 2021;
Lang et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2023; He et al. 2023).
Current methods target specific challenges in point cloud
shape correspondence, addressing issues like rotation sym-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2699

