The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SVTformer: Spatial-View-Temporal Transformer for Multi-View
3D Human Pose Estimation
Wanruo Zhang1 , Mengyuan Liu1 * , Hong Liu1 , Wenhao Li2
1

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
2
Nanyang Technological University
wanruo zhang@stu.pku.edu.cn; {liumengyuan, hongliu}@pku.edu.cn; wenhao.li@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

2D pose

Recently, transformer-based methods have been introduced
to estimate 3D human pose from multiple views by aggregating the spatial-temporal information of human joints
to achieve the lifting of 2D to 3D. However, previous approaches cannot model the inter-frame correspondence of
each view’s joint individually, nor can they directly consider all view interactions at each time, leading to insufficient
learning of multi-view associations. To address this issue, we
propose a Spatial-View-Temporal transformer (SVTformer)
to decouple spatial-view-temporal information in sequential order for correlation learning and model dependencies
between them in a local-to-global manner. SVTformer includes an attended Spatial-View-Temporal (SVT) patch embedding to attentively capture the local features of the input
poses and stacked SVT encoders to extract global spatialview-temporal dependencies progressively. Specifically, SVT
encoders perform three reconstructions sequentially to attended features with the learning through view decoupling
for temporal-enhanced spatial correlation, temporal decoupling for spatial-enhanced view correlation, and another view
decoupling for spatial-enhanced temporal relationship. This
decoupling-coupling-decoupling multi-view scheme enables
us to alternatively model the inter-joint spatial relationships,
cross-view dependencies, and temporal motion associations.
We evaluate the proposed SVTformer on three popular 3D
HPE datasets, and it yields state-of-the-art performance. It
effectively deals with ill-posed problems and enhances the
accuracy of 3D human pose estimation.

Feature
extraction Fusion

Receptive field

(a) View 1
View 𝑉
(b) View 1
View 𝑉

Fusion

View
Temporal

Time

Spatial View Temporal
…

…

View 𝑉

Spatial

…

(c) View 1

Time

Merge and decouple

Fusion

Time

Figure 1: Comparison between previous multi-view 3D HPE
methods and ours. (a) is the CNN/RNN/GCN-based method
with only the spatial receptive field. (b) is the transformerbased method with spatial and adjacent view receptive fields
and the temporal receptive field after view fusion. (c) is our
SVTformer, incorporating all spatial, view, and temporal receptive fields. Since our method models richer spatial, view,
and temporal correlations sequentially in a local-to-global
manner through continuous reshaping and attended learning
of the input 2D pose, our method outperforms others.
video. However, the issues of depth ambiguity and partial
occlusion in the single-view setting hinder more accurate 3D
HPE. A natural way to solve them is to use multi-view information for 3D HPE (Jiang, Hu, and Xia 2023; Zhang et al.
2022b; Wandt et al. 2021), which estimates human poses in
3D space by using data from multiple camera views.
The straightforward way to achieve multi-view 3D HPE
(Ma et al. 2021; Shuai, Wu, and Liu 2022; Hua et al. 2022)
is generally to first estimate the 2D pose of the human body
in each view, then use the 2D skeleton of different views as
the input of the feature extraction network for 2D-3D lifting, and fuse the multi-view information at a deeper stage
to obtain the 3D pose, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Its receptive
field is mainly confined to a single view. An off-the-shelf
2D pose estimator (Chen et al. 2018) is often used to detect the 2D pose of the human body. Our work mainly focuses on the progress of recovering 3D human poses from
the obtained multi-view 2D poses. This involves addressing
the correlation between joint positions corresponding to dif-

Code — https://github.com/Rowenazhang/SVTformer

Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) is essential in computer
vision. It aims to estimate the 3D coordinates of human
joints in images or videos to reconstruct human posture. It
is widely used in many fields, such as human action recognition (Rajasegaran et al. 2023), human motion prediction
(Wang et al. 2023b), person re-identification (Wang et al.
2022) and so on.
Monocular 3D HPE (Li et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2023; Li
et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2024) refers to estimating the positions of 3D human joints from a single image or monocular
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10148

