The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

How Not to Stitch Representations to Measure Similarity:
Task Loss Matching Versus Direct Matching
András Balogh1 , Márk Jelasity1,2
1

2

University of Szeged, Hungary
HUN-REN-SZTE Research Group on AI, Szeged, Hungary
{abalogh, jelasity}@inf.u-szeged.hu

Abstract

is functional similarity, that is, to ask the question whether
one representation can be transformed into the other while
preserving its functionally important aspects (Csiszárik et al.
2021; Bansal, Nakkiran, and Barak 2021a).
Functional similarity has the great advantage that it
grounds the meaning of similarity. A purely structural measure conveys very little information on whether the two
compared representations are actually compatible or interchangeable in any practical sense (Ding, Denain, and Steinhardt 2021). However, we argue that purely functional similarity approaches are not a panacea.

Measuring the similarity of the internal representations of
deep neural networks is an important and challenging problem. Model stitching has been proposed as a possible approach, where two half-networks are connected by mapping
the output of the first half-network to the input of the second
one. The representations are considered functionally similar
if the resulting stitched network achieves good task-specific
performance. The mapping is normally created by training an
affine stitching layer on the task at hand while freezing the
two half-networks, a method called task loss matching. Here,
we argue that task loss matching may be very misleading as a
similarity index. For example, it can indicate very high similarity between very distant layers, whose representations are
known to have different functional properties. Moreover, it
can indicate very distant layers to be more similar than architecturally corresponding layers. Even more surprisingly,
when comparing layers within the same network, task loss
matching often indicates that some layers are more similar
to a layer than itself. We argue that the main reason behind
these problems is that task loss matching tends to create outof-distribution representations to improve task-specific performance. We demonstrate that direct matching (when the
mapping minimizes the distance between the stitched representations) does not suffer from these problems. We compare
task loss matching, direct matching, and well-known similarity indices such as CCA and CKA. We conclude that direct
matching strikes a good balance between the structural and
functional requirements for a good similarity index.

1.1

Drawbacks of functional similarity. We show that a
purely functional notion of similarity also has significant
drawbacks. Not taking the structural properties into account
results in anomalies such as representations of one model
being transformed into highly out-of-distribution representations in the other model that do perform well functionally
but strongly violate some basic sanity checks required from
any similarity index, such as identifying architecturally corresponding layers.
A hybrid similarity index. We argue that for measuring
similarity, the most promising approach is to combine structural and functional aspects. We examine one such approach:
model stitching based on the direct matching of representations. We find that it is a good compromise between purely
structural and purely functional approaches.

Code — https://github.com/szegedai/stitching-ood

1

Contributions

1.2

Introduction

Related Work

Structural Similarity. Several methods have been proposed to quantitatively compare the learned internal representations of neural networks based on geometrical and statistical properties of the distribution of activations. For example, centered kernel alignment (Kornblith et al. 2019), orthogonal Procrustes distance (Schönemann 1966) and methods based on canonical correlation analysis (Raghu et al.
2017; Morcos, Raghu, and Bengio 2018) have been extensively used to analyze and compare representations (Smith
et al. 2017; Raghu et al. 2021; Yadav et al. 2024). However, these structural similarity indices do not take the functionality of the networks into account directly. Accordingly,
(Ding, Denain, and Steinhardt 2021) and (Hayne, Jung, and

Understanding the internal representations that emerge as a
result of training machine learning models is a crucial problem, and an important aspect of this problem is to measure
the similarity of representations (Kornblith et al. 2019).
However, this is a poorly defined problem, because similarity can be approached from many angles. One choice
is structural similarity based on the geometric properties
of the distribution of the activations of, for example, a set
of neurons of interest (Kornblith et al. 2019; Raghu et al.
2017; Morcos, Raghu, and Bengio 2018). Another approach
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15472

