The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging the Dual Capabilities of LLM: LLM-Enhanced Text Mapping Model
for Personality Detection
Weihong Bi1,2 * , Feifei Kou1,2 * † , Lei Shi3,4 , Yawen Li5 , Haisheng Li6 , Jinpeng Chen1,7 , Mingying Xu8
1

2

School of Computer Science (National Pilot School of Software Engineering), BUPT, Beijing, 100876, China
Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service, BUPT, Ministry of Education, Beijing, 100876, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, CUC, Beijing, 100024, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Game, Yangtze River Delta Research Institute of NPU, Taicang 215400, China
5
School of Economics and Management, BUPT, Beijing, 100876, China
6
Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing, 100048, China
7
Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha, 410205, China
8
North China University of Technology, Beijing, 100144, China
bwh2023140721@bupt.edu.cn; koufeifei000@bupt.edu.cn; leiky shi@cuc.edu.cn; warmly0716@126.com;
lihsh@btbu.edu.cn; jpchen@bupt.edu.cn; xumingying@ncut.edu.cn
Abstract

(Myers 1987). User posts on social media can be used to detect their MBTI personality type. Therefore, the goal of this
task is to map posts to specific personality types, as shown in
Figure 1(a). Using deep learning methods to solve personality detection task is generally effective. This approach uses a
data-driven method to extract text features from posts, fuses
them into a user vector, and then maps the user vector to
personality labels, as depicted in Figure 1(b). The previous
methods (Keh, Cheng et al. 2019; Jiang, Zhang, and Choi
2020) use BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) to encode each individual post or to encode a concatenated sequence of multiple posts from a user. Some alternative methods (Yang et al.
2021b, 2023a; Zhu et al. 2022) use BERT to obtain semantic
features and then apply graph neural networks to enhance
the representation of individual posts, followed by average
pooling to create a user vector. Other methods (Yang et al.
2023a; Zhu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023) manually extract
psychological and statistical features, combine them with
text features into a user vector. Previous methods face two
main issues. On one hand, these methods use BERT to extract text features, but this small model encoder cannot effectively represent multiple long posts. On the other hand,
they fail to capture the relationship between user representation vectors and personality labels. These issues collectively
lead to poor performance.

Personality detection aims to deduce a user’s personality from
their published posts. The goal of this task is to map posts to
specific personality types. Existing methods encode post information to obtain user vectors, which are then mapped to
personality labels. However, existing methods face two main
issues: first, only using small models makes it hard to accurately extract semantic features from multiple long documents. Second, the relationship between user vectors and
personality labels is not fully considered. To address the issue of poor user representation, we utilize the text embedding capabilities of LLM. To solve the problem of insufficient consideration of the relationship between user vectors
and personality labels, we leverage the text generation capabilities of LLM. Therefore, we propose the LLM-Enhanced
Text Mapping Model (ETM) for Personality Detection. The
model applies LLM’s text embedding capability to enhance
user vector representations. Additionally, it uses LLM’s text
generation capability to create multi-perspective interpretations of the labels, which are then used within a contrastive
learning framework to strengthen the mapping of these vectors to personality labels. Experimental results show that our
model achieves state-of-the-art performance on benchmark
datasets.

Code — https://github.com/BUPT-SN/ETM

Recently, large language models (LLM) have demonstrated powerful text understanding and generation capabilities, surpassing small models in tasks like translation and
question answering (Wang et al. 2023), but perform poorly
on classification tasks. Some research (Yang et al. 2023b)
has designed prompts based on psychological questionnaires
to leverage the capabilities of LLM for personality detection. This approach still underperforms compared to finetuning small models, showing that using only LLM with
prompts might not be an effective method for personality
detection. Some studies (Hu et al. 2024) have used LLM for
data augmentation from an emotional perspective, but the
results show that this approach does not significantly im-

Introduction
Personality plays a crucial role in understanding the relationship between individual behaviors and mental activities
(Kernberg 2016). It can also serve as a valuable tool for
guiding personal growth and career choices. The MBTI is
a widely used system for classifying personality, dividing
individuals into sixteen categories based on four dimensions
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23487

