The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unlocking the Potential of Black-box Pre-trained GNNs for
Graph Few-shot Learning
Qiannan Zhang1 , Shichao Pei2 , Yuan Fang3 * , Xiangliang Zhang4 *
1
Cornell University, USA
University of Massachusetts Boston, USA
3
Singapore Management University, Singapore
4
University of Notre Dame, USA
qiz4005@med.cornell.edu, shichao.pei@umb.edu, yfang@smu.edu.sg, xzhang33@nd.edu
2

Abstract

self-supervised pre-training strategies on large-scale labelfree graphs, thus reducing the dependence on labeling for
the downstream tasks. Second, meta-learning emerges as a
promising paradigm for achieving rapid adaptation to novel
tasks with few-shot annotations, provided that the model has
been “meta-trained” on a series of related tasks (Hospedales,
Antoniou, and Micaelli 2020).
However, each paradigm has its drawbacks thus hindering their effective application in real-world scenarios. On the
one hand, pre-trained GNNs mostly rely on intrinsic information from graph topology and features to capture the general knowledge within graphs. Yet the lack of task-specific
knowledge at pre-training may inhibit the pre-trained GNNs
from generalizing well to downstream few-shot tasks. On the
other hand, meta-learning aims to acquire meta-knowledge
from related meta-training tasks, assuming these tasks are
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), drawn from
the same task distribution as the meta-testing tasks. However, the i.i.d. assumption may not hold for graph data where
nodes are interconnected, such that the information gained
from meta-training tasks may not perform effectively on
meta-testing tasks. Here, general graph knowledge from pretrained GNNs might serve as a useful complement for task
adaptation in meta-learning. Given their respective drawbacks, the lack of integration between the two paradigms
can limit the ability to tackle data scarcity.
To fully capitalize on the advantages offered by both
trends, some endeavors are conducted to combine pretrained models and meta-learning in a white-box setting
where the parameters and gradients in pre-trained models are accessible (Sablayrolles et al. 2019). One straightforward approach applied on molecular graphs meta-trains
GNNs initialized with the pre-trained parameters (Guo et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2021). Recent work (Tan et al. 2023) also
gains insights from the success of prompt techniques in language models (Liu et al. 2023b) and meta-learns continuous prompts in the embedding space based on pre-trained
GNNs. However, the white-box assumption may not be
practical in some real-world scenarios. The prevalence of
pre-trained models inspires the Model-as-a-Service (MaaS)
(Brown et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021), which has been the
new norm of the interplay between the cloud infrastructure and edge devices. In this case, the pre-trained model
is hosted on a remote server or accessed via cloud services.

Few-shot learning has emerged as an important problem on
graphs to combat label scarcity, which can be approached by
current trends in pre-trained graph neural networks (GNNs)
and meta-learning. Recent efforts integrate both paradigms
in a white-box setting, leaving the more realistic black-box
setting largely underexplored, where the parameters and gradients in the pre-trained GNNs are inaccessible. In this paper, we study the critical problem: Leveraging black-box pretrained GNNs for graph few-shot learning. Despite its appeal,
two key issues hinder the unlocking of its potential: the inherent task gap between pre-training and downstream stages,
which can introduce irrelevant knowledge and undermine the
generalizability of a pre-trained black-box GNN on downstream tasks; and the inaccessibility of parameters and gradients, which limits the model’s adaptation to novel tasks. To
effectively leverage the black-box pre-trained GNNs and improve generalization, we propose a lightweight graph metalearner to extract relevant knowledge from a black-box pretrained GNN, meanwhile harnessing knowledge from related
tasks for rapid adaptation on novel tasks. Furthermore, we
prune the graph meta-learner to enhance its generalization on
novel tasks. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets for
few-shot node classification validate the effectiveness of our
proposed method in the black-box setting.

Introduction
Graph learning models (Chen et al. 2018; Kipf and Welling
2017; Xu et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020) have become pervasive in various real-world applications, ranging from social network analysis (Tang and Liu 2010) to drug discovery
(Gaudelet et al. 2021). Despite its popularity, conventional
supervised training on graphs usually necessitates a large
volume of annotated data to improve model performance
on a specific task. Thus, when a task has limited labels due
to high annotation expense, model performance is often degraded. To tackle label scarcity, two research trends for fewshot learning on graphs have emerged and gained significant
traction (Wang et al. 2020; Bose et al. 2019; Huang and Zitnik 2020; Ding et al. 2021). First, a growing trend on pretrained GNNs (Hu et al. 2020b; Jiang et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2023a) aims to harness the knowledge acquired with various
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22497

