The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pre-Training a Density-Aware Pose Transformer for Robust LiDAR-based 3D
Human Pose Estimation
Xiaoqi An, Lin Zhao* , Chen Gong, Jun Li, Jian Yang*
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{xiaoqi.an, linzhao, chen.gong, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Human Synthetic
& Augmentation

With the rapid development of autonomous driving, LiDARbased 3D Human Pose Estimation (3D HPE) is becoming
a research focus. However, due to the noise and sparsity of
LiDAR-captured point clouds, robust human pose estimation
remains challenging. Most of the existing methods use temporal information, multi-modal fusion, or SMPL optimization to correct biased results. In this work, we try to obtain sufficient information for 3D HPE only by modeling
the intrinsic properties of low-quality point clouds. Hence,
a simple yet powerful method is proposed, which provides
insights both on modeling and augmentation of point clouds.
Specifically, we first propose a concise and effective densityaware pose transformer (DAPT) to get stable keypoint representations. By using a set of joint anchors and a carefully designed exchange module, valid information is extracted from point clouds with different densities. Then 1D
heatmaps are utilized to represent the precise locations of the
keypoints. Secondly, a comprehensive LiDAR human synthesis and augmentation method is proposed to pre-train the
model, enabling it to acquire a better human body prior. We
increase the diversity of point clouds by randomly sampling
human positions and orientations and by simulating occlusions through the addition of laser-level masks. Extensive experiments have been conducted on multiple datasets, including IMU-annotated LidarHuman26M, SLOPER4D, and manually annotated Waymo Open Dataset v2.0 (Waymo), HumanM3. Our method demonstrates SOTA performance in all
scenarios. In particular, compared with LPFormer on Waymo,
we reduce the average MPJPE by 10.0mm. Compared with
PRN on SLOPER4D, we notably reduce the average MPJPE
by 20.7mm.

Initialize
Finetune

Noisy/Sparse
Point Cloud

…

Stable Joint
Representation
Learning

…

Pose

Figure 1: We propose a novel framework for LiDAR-based
3D HPE. With comprehensive LiDAR human synthesis &
augmentation for model pre-training as well as the learning
of stable joint representations, our method produces robust
results from low-quality point clouds.

results (Kang et al. 2023; Gong, Zhang, and Feng 2021).
However, these methods have difficulty predicting world coordinates, and robust pose estimation in the real scenario remains challenging.
To get global 3D keypoints, most traditional 3D HPE
methods are based on multi-view RGB images (Simon et al.
2017; Iskakov et al. 2019; Tu, Wang, and Zeng 2020; Ye
et al. 2022) or RGB-D images (Ying and Zhao 2021; Hong
and Kim 2018), which require in-door laboratory environments with complex calibrations (Su et al. 2020; Zheng et al.
2022). Alternatively, LiDAR sensors can obtain accurate
point-level depth in complex environments, which are more
adaptable to long-range 3D HPE in open-world scenes.
However, compared to clear and dense point clouds generated by RGB-D images (Fan et al. 2018; Ionescu et al.
2014), the LiDAR-captured point clouds have various inconsistencies, making them difficult to learn directly with
existing methods. As shown in Fig.2, the samples in Waymo
Open Dataset (Sun et al. 2020) have various point densities,
and the noisy points from the environment may lead to ambiguity and unstable predictions. Therefore, to achieve robust pose estimation, (Li et al. 2022a; Yan et al. 2024; Zhao
et al. 2024) integrate ST-GCNs to get stabilized pose results
from multiple LiDAR frames. (Cong et al. 2023; Fürst et al.
2021) perform multi-modal fusion to mitigate the lack of information in sparse point clouds, and (Li et al. 2022a; Yan
et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024) introduce SMPL (Loper et al.

Code — https://github.com/AnxQ/dapt

1

Density Aware Pose
Transformer

Introduction

3D human pose estimation (3D HPE) is a fundamental computer vision task with a wide range of downstream usages
such as human behavior understanding, trajectory prediction, autonomous driving (Cong et al. 2022; Lian et al.
2022), etc. To implement 3D HPE, a simple and direct way
is to regress 3D keypoint coordinates directly from 2D HPE
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1755

