The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FairTP: A Prolonged Fairness Framework for Traffic Prediction
Jiangnan Xia1 * , Yu Yang2 * , Jiaxing Shen3 , Senzhang Wang1† , Jiannong Cao4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
Centre for Learning, Teaching, and Technology, The Education University of Hong Kong
3
School of Data Science, Lingnan University
4
The Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
jiangnanx129@gmail.com, yangyy@eduhk.hk, jiaxingshen@LN.edu.hk, szwang@csu.edu.cn, jiannong.cao@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Traffic prediction is pivotal in intelligent transportation systems. Existing works focus mainly on improving overall accuracy, overlooking a crucial problem of whether prediction
results will lead to biased decisions by transportation authorities. In practice, the uneven deployment of traffic sensors in
different urban areas produces imbalanced data, making the
traffic prediction model fail in some urban areas and leading
to unfair regional decision-making that eventually severely
affects equity and quality of residents’ life. Existing fairness
machine learning models struggle to maintain fair traffic prediction over prolonged periods. Although these models might
achieve fairness at certain time slots, this static fairness will
break down as traffic conditions change. To fill this research
gap, we investigate prolonged fair traffic prediction, introducing two novel fairness metrics, i.e., region-based static fairness and sensor-based dynamic fairness, tailored to fairness
fluctuations over time and across areas. An innovative prolonged fairness traffic prediction framework, namely FairTP,
is then proposed. FairTP achieves prolonged fairness by alternating between “sacrifice” and “benefit” the prediction accuracy of each traffic sensor or area, ensuring that the number of these two actions are balanced over time. Specifically,
FairTP incorporates a state identification module to discriminate whether the traffic sensors or areas are in a “sacrifice”
or “benefit” state, thereby enabling prolonged fairness-aware
traffic predictions. Additionally, we devise a state-guided balanced sampling strategy to select training examples to further
enhance prediction fairness by mitigating the performance
disparities among areas with uneven sensor distribution over
time. Extensive experiments in two real-world datasets show
that FairTP significantly improves prediction fairness without
causing significant accuracy degradation.

(a) Traffic sensor distribution and regional traffic prediction error
in Hong Kong

(b) Change of static fairness

Figure 1: Illustration of fairness issues in traffic prediction.

and service provision (Miao et al. 2022, 2024, 2025; Xia
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024). However, existing models
merely focus on prediction accuracy while overlooking the
key social impacts of traffic forecasting. In practice, achieving equitable (or fair) traffic prediction across city areas is
essential, which enables transportation authorities to make
unbiased decisions and significantly improve the life quality
of urban residents.
The uneven distribution of traffic sensors installed in a
city creates data volume disparities, making the traffic prediction model fail to produce precise predictions in some
underprivileged regions with fewer sensors (Tedjopurnomo
et al. 2020). Figure 1(a) visualizes the uneven sensor distribution in Hong Kong and the regional traffic prediction
performance produced by DCRNN (Li et al. 2018), where
the color gradients highlight different areas. The prediction
error in regions with sparse sensors is notably higher versus
the regions with dense sensor deployment. The forecast bias
raises a fairness issue across city regions. Systematic underpredicting the traffic in certain areas can easily mislead
transportation departments to provide insufficient services,
thus forming an inequality treatment against privileged regions.
Existing fairness machine learning models fail to preserve

Code — https://github.com/jiangnanx129/FairTP
Extended version —
https://github.com/jiangnanx129/FairTP

Introduction
Traffic prediction is crucial to transportation planning, infrastructure management and optimizing resource allocation
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponsing author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26391

