The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ML-GOOD: Towards Multi-Label Graph Out-Of-Distribution Detection
Tingyi Cai1,2 , Yunliang Jiang2,1,3 * , Ming Li4,2 , Changqin Huang2 , Yi Wang1,2 , Qionghao Huang2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, China
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application, Zhejiang Normal University, China
3
School of Information Engineering, Huzhou University, China
4
Zhejiang Institute of Optoelectronics, China
tingyicai@zjnu.edu.cn, jyl2022@zjnu.cn, mingli@zjnu.edu.cn, cqhuang@zju.edu.cn, {wangyi, qhhuang}@zjnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The out-of-distribution (OOD) detection on graph-structured
data is crucial for deploying graph neural networks securely
in open-world scenarios. However, existing methods have
overlooked the prevalent scenario of multi-label classification
in real-world applications. In this work, we investigate the
unexplored issue of OOD detection within multi-label node
classification tasks. We propose ML-GOOD, a simple yet
sufficient approach that utilizes an energy function to gauge
the OOD score for each label. We further develop a strategy for amalgamating multiple label energies, allowing for
the comprehensive utilization of label information to tackle
the primary challenges encountered in multi-label scenarios.
Extensive experimentation conducted on seven diverse sets
of real-world multi-label graph datasets, encompassing crossdomain scenarios. The results show that the AUROC of MLGOOD is improved by 5.26% in intra-domain and 6.54%
in cross-domain compared to the previous methods. These
empirical validations not only affirm the robustness of our
methodology but also illuminate new avenues for further exploration within this burgeoning field of research.

Figure 1: OOD detection for multi-label node classification.
The OOD score of each label of a node is computed by a
OOD detector on graph data with distributional differences.

Code — https://github.com/ca1man-2022/ML-GOOD

1

on detecting OOD samples in the context of multi-class classification, where each sample is assigned to a single label.
This approach is impractical for many real-world applications (Zhao et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2024). For instance,
in protein-protein interaction networks, each protein is labeled with multiple functions or associated with various diseases. Similarly, in social networks, identifying anomalous
users can involve detecting multiple interest labels linked to
each user (Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016). The transition from
single-label to multi-label OOD detection is not as straightforward as it may seem. Multi-label scenarios introduce a
unique set of complexities. Figure 1.(a) visually delineates
the complexities inherent in the transition from single-label
to multi-label OOD detection. In multi-label node classification tasks, such as those found in protein prediction, the
initial challenge is to accurately estimate the uncertainty for
each node, as shown in Figure 1.(b).
If the detection process relies solely on information from
a dominant label, it may incorrectly deduce that two nodes
with similar OOD scores for that label belong to the same
distribution, resulting in substantial estimation bias. Effective estimation of sample uncertainty in a multi-label con-

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely applied
in various fields, ranging from fraud detection (Ma et al.
2023) to medical diagnosis (Xu et al. 2024). However, models deployed in open-world scenarios often encounter outof-distribution (OOD) input samples from different distributions that were not seen during training (Chen et al. 2022;
Shen et al. 2024; Sui et al. 2023). Ideally, a trustworthy GNN
model should not only generate accurate predictions for indistribution (IND) data but also be able to distinguish and
reject OOD samples without further prediction.
With the wide application of GNN, the problem of how to
recognize graph OOD samples has begun to attract the attention of researchers (Ju et al. 2024; Yu, Liang, and He 2023;
Guérin et al. 2023), and various graph OOD detection methods have recently emerged (Li et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2024b). However, these studies primarily focus
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15650

