The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Skill Disentanglement in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
Vedant Dave, Elmar Rueckert
Cyber-Physical-Systems Lab, Montanuniversität Leoben
vedant.dave@unileoben.ac.at, rueckert@unileoben.ac.at

Abstract

in the absence of extrinsic rewards (Srinivas and Abbeel
2022). Mutual Information Skill Learning (MISL) (Eysenbach, Salakhutdinov, and Levine 2022) addresses Unsupervised Skill Discovery by maximizing the Mutual Information (MI) between the state representations s and skill vector
z, which results in associating different skill vector to different state representations, leading to diverse behaviour and
covering maximum possible state space. Initially, the agent
is pre-trained using an intrinsic reward to maximize its behavioral diversity, and subsequently fine-tuned on various
downstream tasks with fewer steps (Gregor et al. 2016; Eysenbach et al. 2019). Due to the intractability of this MI, the
methods either optimize the Reverse-MI formulation by assuming a fixed skill prior distribution (Gregor et al. 2016;
Eysenbach et al. 2019; Achiam et al. 2018; Hansen et al.
2019) or optimize the Forward-MI and explicitly maximize
the state entropy to generate diverse states conditioned on
skills (Sharma et al. 2020; Campos et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2021b,a; Laskin et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022).
However, these MI based objectives does not necessarily
enforce large coverage of state-space and the agent may end
up learning static or redundant skills that focus on a limited
subset of the environment (Strouse et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2023, 2024b). This is primarily due to the reason that KL divergence is completely invariant to the underlying data distribution or any invertible transformation i.e. for any invertible function f , I(s; z) = I(f (s); z) (Kraskov, Stoegbauer,
and Grassberger 2004; Ozair et al. 2019; Park et al. 2022).
KL divergence is also highly sensitive to minor variations
in data samples, resulting in minute perturbations in statespace to significantly impact the maximization of KL divergence (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017) and produce
near-static skills. A few methods explicitly increase the state
coverage in their respective coordinate space and provide
high incentives on long-stretched trajectories (Zhao et al.
2021; Park et al. 2022, 2023). However, these methods are
usually confined to their respective coordinate space and often rely on strong assumptions about space. METRA (Park,
Rybkin, and Levine 2024) replaces KL divergence with the
Wasserstein Metric, but under strong assumptions, reduces
it to a Euclidean space and constrains temporal difference
between state representations.
These methods generally presume that by maximizing
state coverage, far-reaching trajectories will naturally lead

Unsupervised Skill Discovery aims at learning diverse skills
without any extrinsic rewards and leverage them as prior for
learning a variety of downstream tasks. Existing approaches
to unsupervised reinforcement learning typically involve discovering skills through empowerment-driven techniques or
by maximizing entropy to encourage exploration. However,
this mutual information objective often results in either static
skills that discourage exploration or maximise coverage at
the expense of non-discriminable skills. Instead of focusing
only on maximizing bounds on f-divergence, we combine it
with Integral Probability Metrics to maximize the distance
between distributions to promote behavioural diversity and
enforce disentanglement. Our method, Hilbert Unsupervised
Skill Discovery (HUSD), provides an additional objective
that seeks to obtain exploration and separability of state-skill
pairs by maximizing the Maximum Mean Discrepancy between the joint distribution of skills and states and the product
of their marginals in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space. Our
results on Unsupervised RL Benchmark show that HUSD
outperforms previous exploration algorithms on state-based
tasks.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has excelled in various tasks,
such as game playing (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016;
Vinyals et al. 2019), autonomous control (Lillicrap et al.
2015; Smith, Cao, and Levine 2023; Team et al. 2024),
and autonomous driving (Kendall et al. 2019; Jiang et al.
2023). Typically, RL algorithms train policies by optimizing
a task-specific reward function. However, this often results
in highly specialized policies that lack generalizability to
new tasks, remaining confined to their training environments
and demonstrating limited transferability (Cobbe et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2018; Packer et al. 2019). In contrast, Humans
possess the ability to independently learn skills, explore new
domains, and select and refine learned skill primitives to
utilise them in complex downstream tasks, demonstrating
remarkable adaptability and versatility in diverse environments (Lövdén et al. 2020). Can we leverage this behaviour
to our Reinforcement Learning agents?
Many unsupervised skill discovery approaches have been
proposed to provide good prior for the downstream tasks
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16153

