The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Factor Augmented Tensor-on-Tensor Neural Networks
Guanhao Zhou, Yuefeng Han, Xiufan Yu
Department of Applied and Computational Mathematics and Statistics
University of Notre Dame
gzhou4, yuefeng.han, xiufan.yu@nd.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the prediction task of tensor-on-tensor regression in which both covariates and responses are multidimensional arrays (a.k.a., tensors) across time with arbitrary
tensor order and data dimension. Existing methods either focused on linear models without accounting for possibly nonlinear relationships between covariates and responses, or directly
employed black-box deep learning algorithms that failed to
utilize the inherent tensor structure. In this work, we propose
a Factor Augmented Tensor-on-Tensor Neural Network (FATTNN) that integrates tensor factor models into deep neural
networks. We begin with summarizing and extracting useful
predictive information (represented by the “factor tensor”)
from the complex structured tensor covariates, and then proceed with the prediction task using the estimated factor tensor
as input of a temporal convolutional neural network. The proposed methods effectively handle nonlinearity between complex data structures, and improve over traditional statistical
models and conventional deep learning approaches in both
prediction accuracy and computational cost. By leveraging
tensor factor models, our proposed methods exploit the underlying latent factor structure to enhance the prediction, and in
the meantime, drastically reduce the data dimensionality that
speeds up the computation. The empirical performances of
our proposed methods are demonstrated via simulation studies
and real-world applications to three public datasets. Numerical
results show that our proposed algorithms achieve substantial
increases in prediction accuracy and significant reductions in
computational time compared to benchmark methods.

Introduction
Motivated by a wide range of industrial and scientific applications, forecasting tasks using one tensor series to predict
another have become increasingly prevalent in various fields.
In finance, tensor models are used to forecast future stock
prices by analyzing multi-dimensional stock attributes over
time (Tran et al. 2017). In meteorology, tensor models predict future weather conditions using historical data formatted
as multi-dimensional tensors (latitude, longitude, time, etc.)
(Bilgin et al. 2021). In neuroscience, tensor models are employed to process medical imaging like MRI/fMRI scans
(Wei et al. 2023). Though predictive modeling of tensors has
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22928

emerged rapidly over the past decade, most existing studies primarily focus on scenarios when either covariates or
responses are tensors, such as scalar-on-tensor regression
(Guo, Kotsia, and Patras 2011; Zhou, Li, and Zhu 2013;
Wimalawarne, Tomioka, and Sugiyama 2016; Li et al. 2018;
Ahmed, Raja, and Bajwa 2020), matrix-on-tensor regression (Hoff 2015; Kossaifi et al. 2020), and tensor-on-vector
regression (Li and Zhang 2017; Sun and Li 2017). Tensoron-tensor1 prediction, when both covariates and responses
are tensors, remains a challenging task due to the inherent
complexities of tensor structures.
One commonly used strategy for tensor-on-tensor modeling is to flatten the tensors into matrices (or even vectors)
(Kilmer and Martin 2011; Choi and Vishwanathan 2014) so
that matrix-based analytical tools become applicable. However, flattening can lead to a loss of spatial or temporal information, especially for datasets that are inherently dependent
on data structures. For instance, in image processing, the
relative positions of pixels carry important information about
object shapes, which is lost when the image is flattened.
Alternatively, there is a handful of recent works on tensoron-tensor regression models that do not adopt flattening but
deal with the tensor structures directly (Lock 2018; Liu, Liu,
and Zhu 2020; Gahrooei et al. 2021; Luo and Zhang 2024).
However, these methods posit a linear prediction model between covariates and responses, limiting their capacity to
capture potential nonlinear relationships.
Another emerging trend in tensor-on-tensor prediction involves neural networks, such as recurrent neural networks
(RNN), convolutional neural networks (CNN), recurrent convolutional neural networks (RCNN), and temporal convolutional networks (TCN), to name a few. Deep neural network
is a powerful tool in prediction tasks owing to its ability to
learn intricate patterns from complex datasets. Structured
with multiple layers of interconnected neurons, neural networks excel in capturing nonlinearity in data. Nevertheless,
they often operate in a black-box manner and typically require extensive computational resources.
1
Following the literature, we distinguish “tensor-on-tensor regression” from “tensor regression”. “Tensor regression” refers to
regression models with tensor covariates and scalar responses.
“Tensor-on-tensor regression” refers to regression models with both
tensor covariates and tensor responses. As a matter of fact, tensoron-tensor regression encompasses tensor regression.

