The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BindGPT: A Scalable Framework for 3D Molecular Design via Language Modeling
and Reinforcement Learning
Artem Zholus1,3, 4,5 * , Maksim Kuznetsov1 , Roman Schutski2 , Rim Shayakhmetov1 , Daniil
Polykovskiy1 , Sarath Chandar3,4, 5, 6 and Alex Zhavoronkov2
1
2

Insilico Medicine Canada Inc.
Insilico Medicine AI Limited
3
Mila – Quebec AI Institute
4
Polytechnique Montréal
5
Chandar Research Lab
6
CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Generating novel active molecules for a given protein is an
extremely challenging task for generative models that requires
an understanding of the complex physical interactions between
the molecule and its environment. This paper presents a novel
generative model, BindGPT, which uses a conceptually simple but powerful approach to create 3D molecules within the
protein’s binding site. Our model produces molecular graphs
and conformations jointly, eliminating the need for an extra
graph reconstruction step. We pre-train BindGPT on a largescale dataset and fine-tune it with reinforcement learning using
scores from external simulation software. We demonstrate how
a single pre-trained language model can serve at the same time
as a 3D molecular generative model, a conformer generator
conditioned on the molecular graph, and a pocket-conditioned
3D molecule generator. Notably, the model does not make
any representational equivariance assumptions about the domain of generation. We show how such a simple conceptual
approach combined with pre-training and scaling can perform
on par or better than the current best-specialized diffusion
models, language models, and graph neural networks while
being two orders of magnitude cheaper to sample.

Website — https://bindgpt.github.io/

1

Introduction

The drug discovery landscape presents immense challenges
and risks, demanding substantial investments of time and
resources to design, test, and deliver new medicines to the
market. Within this context, Computer-Aided Drug Design
(CADD) (Yu and MacKerell 2017) stands as a pivotal methodology, harnessing software screenings and physical simulations to facilitate a more efficient exploration of the vast
space of drug-like molecules, estimated to be around 1060
in size (Polishchuk, Madzhidov, and Varnek 2013). Deep
learning advancements have revolutionized this exploration
by leveraging neural generative models trained on extensive
compound datasets. Notably, the textual representation of
* Correspondence
to:
artem.zholus@mila.quebec,
r.schutski@insilicomedicine.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26083

molecular structures using SMILES (Weininger 1988) has
enabled the utilization of Language Models for the generation of novel, drug-like molecular compounds (Bagal et al.
2022).
Recent research has demonstrated the capability of deep
generative models to generate novel molecular compounds directly in 3D, with the flexibility to incorporate protein pocket
and ligand subfragment conditions. Among these, diffusion
models such as EDM (Hoogeboom et al. 2022) and DiffDock
(Corso et al. 2023) initiate the generation process with an arbitrary spatial distribution of atoms and progressively refine
their positions to yield physically viable molecular structures. Meanwhile, autoregressive models like Pocket2Mol
(Peng et al. 2022) sequentially predict the type and location
of each successive atom, building upon the existing molecular framework. Additionally, work by Flam-Shepherd and
Aspuru-Guzik (2023) has highlighted the proficiency of language models in handling spatial representations of molecular
and protein structures through formats like XYZ, CIF, and
PDB. However, it’s noteworthy that most spatial molecular
generators focus exclusively on atom types and locations.
They depend on supplementary tools, such as OpenBabel
(O’Boyle et al. 2011), for the critical task of bond reconstruction. This reliance can introduce vulnerabilities, as the precision required for atom placement means that minor positional
adjustments can significantly alter reconstructed molecular
bonds or even make the molecular graph disconnected.
In this work, we introduce a novel framework that applies language modeling to the domain of 3D molecular data
represented by textual tokens. This entirely data-driven approach, devoid of any inductive biases at both the model
and representation levels, capitalizes on the established GPT
paradigm, integrating cutting-edge techniques to enhance the
scalability of model training and inference. By adopting the
language model pre-training paradigm, our framework showcases the ability to foster a powerful causal language model
adept at navigating the complex space of 3D molecules. This
proficiency is demonstrated through successful applications
in downstream tasks, including learning the distribution of
molecules without conditions and conformations for a molecular graph, and, crucially, by generating specific molecules

