The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Pitfalls of “Security by Obscurity”
and What They Mean for Transparent AI
Peter Hall1 , Olivia Mundahl1 , Sunoo Park1
1

New York University
{pf2184, om2145, sunoo.park}@nyu.edu

Abstract

may have. In the commercial sphere, companies have generally (though not always) preferred to hide their methods
of data collection, training, fine-tuning, and other specifications (Carlini et al. 2023).
At the confluence of these circumstances, many are invested in achieving (various notions of) AI transparency. Researchers want to investigate what makes AI models, including production-line models, better or worse at various tasks
(e.g., (Bender et al. 2021)), and to understand unexpected or
possibly harmful effects of model use (e.g., (Awasthi et al.
2023; Carlini et al. 2019; Raimondo and Locascio 2023)).
Consumers, businesses, and other clients should have assurances that companies selling AI-based tools are able to
achieve what they are promising—and even before that, they
should be able to understand what they are being promised.
As increasingly consequential decisions are made with contributions from AI models, people impacted by these decisions need assurances about how AI impacts their lives
(e.g., in healthcare (Khan et al. 2023) or bail setting (Fine
and Marsh 2024)). Copyright holders want notice and fair
compensation and attribution when others are using their
works–often making large profits (S.D.N.Y. 2023; Gilbertson and Reisner 2024). Regulators want to understand and
protect their constituencies from potential harms (Weidinger
et al. 2021) while promoting innovation and competition in
AI (in the Office of Technology 2024a,b; Vestager 2024).
Meanwhile, skeptics have variously argued that too much
transparency will harm innovation, business interests (including trade secrets), data privacy, system security, national security/defense, and/or public safety (e.g., (Patel and
Toomey 2024; Hosanagar 2024)).
An important emerging literature in both research and
policy has responded to this ongoing debate by investigating transparency in AI. Some have been trying to
build in properties like explainability or interpretability to
LLMs (Graziani et al. 2022). Others are hoping to balance
data privacy with open source models (in the Office of Technology 2024a; Zuckerberg 2024). What this may mean is the
subject of ongoing debate (Gibney 2024). Others take a legal
or policy approach, like the Biden Administration’s Executive Order on Trustworthy AI and the European Union’s AI
Act (Biden 2023; Union 2024).
The idea that hiding how a system works protects it
in some way is a key recurring theme in the current dis-

Calls for transparency in AI systems are growing in number
and urgency from diverse stakeholders ranging from regulators to researchers to users (with a comparative absence of
companies developing AI). Notions of transparency for AI
abound, each addressing distinct interests and concerns.
In computer security, transparency is likewise regarded as a
key concept. The security community has for decades pushed
back against so-called security by obscurity—the idea that
hiding how a system works protects it from attack—against
significant pressure from industry and other stakeholders,
e.g., (Bellovin and Bush 2002). And over those decades, in
a community process that is imperfect and ongoing, security
researchers and practitioners have gradually built up some
norms and practices around how to balance transparency interests with possible negative side effects. This paper asks:
What insights can the AI community take from the security
community’s experience with transparency?
We identify three key themes in the security community’s
perspective on the benefits of transparency and their approach to balancing transparency against countervailing interests. For each, we investigate parallels and insights relevant
to transparency in AI. We then provide a case study discussion on how transparency has shaped the research subfield of
anonymization. Finally, shifting our focus from similarities to
differences, we highlight key transparency issues where modern AI systems present challenges different from other kinds
of security-critical systems, raising interesting open questions
for the security and AI communities alike.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence has proven to be highly impactful,
with impacts in critical domains such as biosciences (Jumper
et al. 2021), health (Rajpurkar et al. 2022), and public
safety (Fine and Marsh 2024). It is also continually reaching
new peaks in consumer and commercial interest, with foundation models such as Claude, Llama, Stable Diffusion, and
the GPT family posited to be adaptable to diverse uses (Jain,
Maleki, and Saade 2024). Despite their already widespread
impacts, there is still much to understand about how recent
developments in AI and machine learning models operate,
and the broader human consequences their use and misuse
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28042

