The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Practical Approach to Causal Inference over Time
Martina Cinquini* 1 , Isacco Beretta* 1 , Salvatore Ruggieri1 , Isabel Valera2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
Department of Computer Science, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
{martina.cinquini, isacco.beretta}@phd.unipi.it, salvatore.ruggieri@unipi.it, ivalera@cs.uni-saarland.de
2

Abstract

data. However, adapting existing methods to capture temporal dynamics remains a challenge (Bongers et al. 2021).
Alternatively, autoregressive models offer practical methods
for time-series analysis and forecasting (Lütkepohl 2005),
but their formalization of causal effects is limited. First, they
model interventions as shocks in a specific point in time,
with effects that fade away after a certain period (Moneta
et al. 2011). Second, they rely on Granger causality (Granger
1969) which is concerned with how well one variable can
predict another rather than identifying causal relations between them. Our work combines the strengths of both
frameworks, i.e., SCMs and vector autoregressive models
(VARs), to enable robust reasoning about the causal effect of
interventions on dynamical systems over time. To that end,
we first introduce a formal definition of causal interventions
on discrete-time stochastic processes (DSPs), proposing two
alternatives, additive and forcing interventions. Second, we
establish conditions under which the equilibrium state of a
DSP can be represented by an SCM. Third, we develop a
framework that maps VARs to linear SCMs, handling potentially cyclic structures and unmeasured confounders. Finally, our framework is empirically validated on synthetic
and real-world time-series data.

In this paper, we focus on estimating the causal effect of an
intervention over time on a dynamical system. To that end,
we formally define causal interventions and their effects over
time on discrete-time stochastic processes (DSPs). Then, we
show under which conditions the equilibrium states of a DSP,
both before and after a causal intervention, can be captured
by a structural causal model (SCM). With such an equivalence at hand, we provide an explicit mapping from vector
autoregressive models (VARs), broadly applied in econometrics, to linear, but potentially cyclic and/or affected by unmeasured confounders, SCMs. The resulting causal VAR framework allows us to perform causal inference over time from
observational time series data. Our experiments on synthetic
and real-world datasets show that the proposed framework
achieves strong performance in terms of observational forecasting while enabling accurate estimation of the causal effect of interventions on dynamical systems. We demonstrate,
through a case study, the potential practical questions that can
be addressed using the proposed causal VAR framework.

Code — https://github.com/marti5ini/ci-over-time
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10502

1

Related work The works most closely related to ours
are these from Mooij, Janzing, and Schölkopf (2013) and
Bongers, Blom, and Mooij (2018), as they theoretically connect dynamical systems to the causal semantics of SCMs
via the equilibration of deterministic and random differential
equations, and thus are capable of modeling cyclic causal
mechanisms. Our approach differs from this line of work
in two key aspects: i) we focus on discrete-time dynamical
systems parameterized using stochastic equations which, as
stated by Bongers, Blom, and Mooij (2018), become challenging for continuous-time processes; and ii) our mapping
from autoregressive DSPs to SCMs provides not only a theoretical but also, to the best of our knowledge, the first datadriven framework for performing causal inference over time
in dynamical systems.

Introduction

Dynamical systems often exhibit complex behaviors that
unfold over time, leading to delayed responses and feedback loops. Understanding the causal effect of interventions
within such systems is crucial across disciplines such as climate (Runge et al. 2019) and social sciences (Wunsch et al.
2022), where different time scales play a central role. For
instance, monetary policy adjustments may have immediate effects on consumer spending, but their impact on inflation and economic growth only becomes evident in the
medium/long-term. Similarly, the consequences of human
actions on climate change may take decades to manifest,
with the risk of endorsing public policies that underestimate
their relevance. To address these issues, it is essential to perform causal inference over time. From the perspective of
causality, structural causal models (SCMs) provide a formal
framework to enable causal inference from cross-sectional

2
2.1

* These authors contributed equally.

Preliminaries and Background

Structural Causal Models

Equation A SCM M = (F, E) determines how a
set of d endogenous (observed) random variables X :=

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14832

