The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SLIP: Spoof-Aware One-Class Face Anti-Spoofing with Language Image
Pretraining
Pei-Kai Huang 1 , Jun-Xiong Chong 1 , Cheng-Hsuan Chiang 1 , Tzu-Hsien Chen 1 , Tyng-Luh Liu 2 ,
Chiou-Ting Hsu 1
1

National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
2
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{alwayswithme,jxchong,jimmy890718,gapp111062570,}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw,
liutyng@iis.sinica.edu.tw, cthsu@cs.nthu.edu.tw
Abstract
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) plays a pivotal role in ensuring the
security and reliability of face recognition systems. With advancements in vision-language pretrained (VLP) models, recent two-class FAS techniques have leveraged the advantages
of using VLP guidance, while this potential remains unexplored in one-class FAS methods. The one-class FAS focuses
on learning intrinsic liveness features solely from live training
images to differentiate between live and spoof faces. However,
the lack of spoof training data can lead one-class FAS models
to inadvertently incorporate domain information irrelevant to
the live/spoof distinction (e.g., facial content), causing performance degradation when tested with a new application domain.
To address this issue, we propose a novel framework called
Spoof-aware one-class face anti-spoofing with Language Image Pretraining (SLIP). Given that live faces should ideally not
be obscured by any spoof-attack-related objects (e.g., paper, or
masks) and are assumed to yield zero spoof cue maps, we first
propose an effective language-guided spoof cue map estimation to enhance one-class FAS models by simulating whether
the underlying faces are covered by attack-related objects and
generating corresponding nonzero spoof cue maps. Next, we
introduce a novel prompt-driven liveness feature disentanglement to alleviate live/spoof-irrelative domain variations by
disentangling live/spoof-relevant and domain-dependent information. Finally, we design an effective augmentation strategy
by fusing latent features from live images and spoof prompts
to generate spoof-like image features and thus diversify latent
spoof features to facilitate the learning of one-class FAS. Our
extensive experiments and ablation studies support that SLIP
consistently outperforms previous one-class FAS methods.

Figure 1: Liveness feature disentanglement: (a) Existing
language-guided two-class FAS methods overlook the presence of domain information (e.g., face content) in prompt
learning to extract entangled live/spoof features. (b) Oneclass FAS methods learn entangled live features from live
training images. (c) By exploring the mutual relatedness in
the given text prompts, the proposed SLIP to one-class FAS
learns pure live features via separating domain and live/spoof
features.

Code — https://github.com/Pei-KaiHuang/AAAI25-SLIP
and spoof training samples to learn FAS models to distinguish between live and spoof facial attacks. For example, in
(Liu et al. 2024; Srivatsan, Naseer, and Nandakumar 2023;
Fang et al. 2024), the authors proposed adopting contrastive
language-image pretraining (CLIP) models (Radford et al.
2021) to align the live/spoof images with their corresponding
prompts to learn FAS models. However, as shown in Figure 1
(a), these two-class FAS methods often disregard domain
information existing in prompt learning. In particular, the
term “face” is unrelated to “live” and “spoof”. As a result,
these two-class methods easily overfit on seen attacks to learn
entangled live/spoof features, which may cause performance

Introduction
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) plays a critical role in ensuring the
security and reliability of face recognition systems, which
may be deceived by facial spoof attacks, including print attacks (printing faces on paper/photos), replay attacks (displaying faces on electronic screens), or 3D mask attacks
(wearing 3D masks). To counter potential facial spoof attacks, many two-class FAS methods proposed using both live
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3697

