The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FaceMe: Robust Blind Face Restoration with Personal Identification
Siyu Liu1 * , Zheng-Peng Duan1 * , Jia OuYang2 , Jiayi Fu1 ,
Hyunhee Park3 , Zikun Liu2 , Chun-Le Guo1, 4† , Chongyi Li1, 4
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
Samsung Research, China, Beijing (SRC-B)
3
The Department of Camera Innovation Group, Samsung Electronics
4
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
liusiyu29@mail.nankai.edu.cn, adamduan0211@gmail.com, jia.ouyang@samsung.com, fujiayi@mail.nankai.edu.cn,
{inextg.park, zikun.liu}@samsung.com, {guochunle, lichongyi}@nankai.edu.cn
2

Abstract

the actual identity. Such deviations in identity are unacceptable in practical applications, e.g., restoring facial images in
personal photo albums.
Recently, some studies have used high-quality reference
images of the same identity to enhance identity consistency
in restored facial images. These approaches improve results
through feature alignment (Li et al. 2018, 2020, 2022) or
by fine-tuning the diffusion model to constrain the generation prior (Varanka et al. 2024; Ding et al. 2024; Chari
et al. 2023). Although these methods have achieved significant results, they have obvious limitations. The feature
alignment-based methods are influenced by the degradation
of the input image and the pose of the reference image. If the
features are not well aligned, the quality of the restoration
can significantly deteriorate. The fine-tuning-based methods typically require 5∼20 reference images and need to be
fine-tuned again whenever the identity changes, making it
a time-consuming process. Additionally, the quality of the
reference images may significantly impact image restoration
quality. We illustrate the differences between our proposed
personalized method and the fine-tuning-based personalized
method in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we proposed FaceMe, a fine-tuning-free personalized blind face restoration method based on the diffusion model. Given a low-quality input and either a single
or a few high-quality reference images of the same identity,
FaceMe restores high-quality facial images and maintains
identity consistency within seconds. Remarkably, changing
identities does not require fine-tuning, and the reference images can have any posture, expression, or illumination. Furthermore, the quality of the reference image does not significantly impact the quality of the restored image. To our
knowledge, this is the first approach that leverages diffusion
prior for personalized face restoration tasks, which does not
require fine-tuning when changing identity.
The fine-tuning-free personalized blind face restoration
currently faces three significant challenges: 1) Influence of
identity-irrelevant features from reference images; 2) Balancing the dependency between low-quality input and reference images; and 3) Insufficient datasets for personalized
blind face restoration.
To address the first challenge, we propose to use an

Blind face restoration is a highly ill-posed problem due to the
lack of necessary context. Although existing methods produce high-quality outputs, they often fail to faithfully preserve the individual’s identity. In this paper, we propose a personalized face restoration method, FaceMe, based on a diffusion model. Given a single or a few reference images, we use
an identity encoder to extract identity-related features, which
serve as prompts to guide the diffusion model in restoring
high-quality and identity-consistent facial images. By simply
combining identity-related features, we effectively minimize
the impact of identity-irrelevant features during training and
support any number of reference image inputs during inference. Additionally, thanks to the robustness of the identity
encoder, synthesized images can be used as reference images during training, and identity changing during inference
does not require fine-tuning the model. We also propose a
pipeline for constructing a reference image training pool that
simulates the poses and expressions that may appear in realworld scenarios. Experimental results demonstrate that our
FaceMe can restore high-quality facial images while maintaining identity consistency, achieving excellent performance
and robustness.

Code — https://modyu-liu.github.io/FaceMe Homepage

Introduction
Face restoration focuses on improving the quality of facial images by removing complex degradation and enhancing details. In the real world, facial images frequently suffer from complex degradation, e.g., blurring, noise, and
compression artifacts, which can significantly impact downstream tasks like face recognition and detection.
Face restoration is inherently a highly ill-posed task because a single low-quality input can correspond to many
potential high-quality counterparts scattered throughout the
high-quality image space. Most advanced face restoration
methods cannot guarantee identity consistency, i.e., the identity of the restored portrait may significantly deviate from
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5567

