The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GenesisTex2: Stable, Consistent and High-Quality Text-to-Texture Generation
Jiawei Lu1,2 * , Yingpeng Zhang2 * † , Zengjun Zhao2 , He Wang3 , Kun Zhou1 , Tianjia Shao1†
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
Tencent IEG
3
AI Centre, Computer Science, University College London
lujiawei23@gmail.com, yingpengzhang@gmail.com, zengjunzhao@tencent.com,
he wang@ucl.ac.uk, kunzhou@zju.edu.cn, tjshao@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Large-scale text-guided image diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable results in text-to-image (T2I) generation.
However, applying these models to synthesize textures for
3D geometries remains challenging due to the domain gap
between 2D images and textures on a 3D surface. Early
works that used a projecting-inpainting approach managed
to preserve generation diversity, but often resulted in noticeable artifacts and style inconsistencies. While recent methods
have attempted to address these inconsistencies, they often
introduce other issues, such as blurring, over-saturation, or
over-smoothing. To overcome these challenges, we propose a
novel text-to-texture synthesis framework that takes advantage of pre-trained diffusion models. We introduce a local
attention reweighing mechanism in the self-attention layers
to guide the model in focusing on spatial-correlated patches
across different views, thereby enhancing local details while
preserving cross-view consistency. Additionally, we propose
a novel latent space merge pipeline, which further ensures
consistency across different viewpoints without sacrificing
too much diversity. Our method significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art techniques in terms of texture consistency and visual quality, while delivering results much faster
than distillation-based methods. Importantly, our framework
does not require additional training or fine-tuning, making it
highly adaptable to a wide range of models available on public platforms.

Figure 1: A gallery of high-quality and diverse textures generated by GenesisTex2.

3D surface textures. Therefore, most methods of text-guided
texture generation circumvent the limitations by employing
pretrained 2D text-to-image diffusion models. However, creating 3D consistent textures that maintain high quality remains a significant challenge, even with geometric guidance
like Depth maps in ControlNet.
Existing approaches typically navigate a trade-off between single-image quality and multi-view consistency,
falling into two main categories. The first group optimizes
an underlying 3D structure based on Score Distillation Sampling (Poole et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024).
However, these optimization-based methods are often timeconsuming and struggle to match the diversity and quality of
text-to-image generation. The second group generates images from various viewpoints to create the final texture in
an optimization-free fashion. This can be achieved through
sequential inpainting (Chen et al. 2023b; Richardson et al.
2023) or a multi-view diffusion approach (Liu et al. 2023c;
Gao et al. 2024). Our method falls in this category.
We tackle the challenges of achieving both consistency
and quality by introducing a cross-view local attention technique and a latent space merge pipeline specifically designed
for the text-to-texture task, using only pretrained T2I models. For local attention, we input a 3D mesh and construct
dense patch-level weight matrices based on the 3D locations
of patches across different views. Patches that are closer
in 3D receive higher weights, while farther ones get lower

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.18401

1

Introduction

Digital assets are essential for the gaming, film, and animation industries. The role of textures is pivotal, as they influence the visual effects and aesthetics. However, creating
appealing textures takes considerable effort, even for professionals. Recently, diffusion models trained on billions of
image-text pairs have enabled users to generate stunning images from text prompts. However, applying this approach
to texture synthesis faces significant challenges, primarily
due to: 1) a lack of high-quality text-labeled training data
for textures and 2) a domain gap between 2D images and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5820

