The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GapMatch: Bridging Instance and Model Perturbations for Enhanced
Semi-Supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Wei Huang1 , Lei Zhang1 * , Zizhou Wang2 , Yan Wang2
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
weihuang@stu.scu.edu.cn, leizhang@scu.edu.cn, {wang zizhou, wangyan}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Medical image segmentation provides detailed understanding and aids in diagnosis, treatment planning, and monitoring of diseases. Due to the high cost of acquiring labeled data
in the field of medical image analysis, semi-supervised segmentation methods have garnered increasing attention. Benefiting from their simplicity and effectiveness, consistency
regularization-based methods have emerged as a significant
research focus by utilizing perturbations. However, existing
methods typically consider perturbation strategies from only
a single perspective: either instance perturbation or model
perturbation, thus ignoring the potential benefit of effectively
combining both. In response, we propose a unified perturbation framework named GapMatch, which bridges instance
and model perturbations to broaden the perturbation space
and employs dual perturbation to impose consistency regularization on the model. Specifically, GapMatch involves using instance perturbation to update the decision boundary and
model perturbation to further optimize it. These two steps
mutually reinforce each other in an iterative manner, effectively pushing the decision boundary towards low-density regions while maximizing the class margin. Extensive experimental results on two popular medical image benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of the proposed
method.

Figure 1: Illustration of the change of decision boundary
of the previous methods and our proposed method. (a) Initial decision boundary and sample distribution; (b) Decision boundary update with instance perturbation-based consistency; (c) Sample distribution compression with model
perturbation-based consistency; (d) (Ours) Combined instance and model perturbation based consistency regularization for decision boundary update and sample distribution
compression.

Introduction
In the field of medical imaging, the accurate segmentation of
anatomical structures and pathological regions plays a critical role in diagnostic processes, treatment planning, and outcome prediction (Wang et al. 2021b; Tajbakhsh et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2022c). Deep learning models, particularly Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have achieved stateof-the-art performance in medical image segmentation tasks
(Isensee et al. 2021). However, their success is largely contingent upon the availability of large annotated datasets,
which are especially challenging to acquire in the medical
domain due to the need for expert knowledge and the privacy
concerns associated with patient data. Therefore, increasing attention is being focused on semi-supervised learning
(SSL) methods, which allow for the effective use of both

limited labeled data and the typically more abundant unlabeled data (Wu et al. 2022b; You et al. 2023b; Bai et al.
2023; You et al. 2023a).
Currently, the majority semi-supervised segmentation
methods can be divided into two main categories: entropy
minimization (Yu et al. 2019) and consistency regularization (Wang et al. 2021a; Zhang et al. 2017; Miyato et al.
2018; Liu and Zheng 2022; Grandvalet and Bengio 2004;
Huang et al. 2024). Entropy minimization methods are based
on the clustering assumption, which posits that the clusters should be compact within each class. It encourages
the model to make confident predictions, which indirectly
guides the decision boundary towards the low-density regions. Consistency regularization methods are based on
the smoothness assumption (Van Engelen and Hoos 2020),
which posits that small perturbations should not produce the

* Corresponding author: Lei Zhang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17458

