The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MChIRC: A Multimodal Benchmark for Chinese Idiom Reading Comprehension
Tongguan Wang* 1, 2, 3, 4 , Mingmin Wu* 4 , Guixin Su4 , Dongyu Su4 ,
Yuxue Hu1, 2, 3, 4 , Zhongqiang Huang4 , Ying Sha†1, 2, 3, 4
2

1
Key Laboratory of Smart Farming for Agricultural Animals, Wuhan, China
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, Wuhan, China
3
Hubei Engineering Technology Research Center of Agricultural Big Data, Wuhan, China
4
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China
{wang tg, wmm nlp, cometsue, su dy, hzq}@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, {hyx,shaying}@mail.hzau.edu.cn

Abstract
The meaning of this
Chinese idiom is …

The performance of various tasks of natural language processing has greatly improved with the emergence of large lanStudent
guage models.
However, there is still much room for improve最危险的时候得到生路
ment in understanding
certain specific linguistic phenomena,
D
from desperation:
such as Chinese idioms, which are usually composed of four
ribes being given acharacters.
way
Chinese idioms are difficult to understand due to
Text
dangerous time)
semantic gaps between their literal and actual meanings. Researchers have proposed the Chinese idiom reading compreA
the ability of large language models
Image hension task to examine
to represent and understand Chinese idioms. The task requires
choosing the correct Chinese idiom from a list of candidates
to complete the sentence. The current research mainly focuses
on text-based idiom comprehension. Nevertheless, there are
many idiom application scenarios that combine images and
text, and we believe that the corresponding images are beneficial for the model’s understanding of the idioms. Therefore,
to address the above problems, we first construct a largescale Multimodal Chinese Idiom Reading Comprehension
dataset (MChIRC), which contains a total of 44,433 imagetext pairs covering 2,926 idioms. Then, we propose a DualContrastive Idiom Graph Network (DCIGN), which employs
a dual-contrastive learning module to align the text and image features corresponding to the same Chinese idiom at both
coarse and fine levels, while utilizing a graph structure to capture the semantic relationships between idiom candidates. Finally, we use a cross-attention module to fuse multimodal features with graph features of candidate idioms to predict correct answers. The authoritativeness of MChIRC and the ef绝处逢生：在最危险的时候得到生路
fectiveness of DCIGN
are demonstrated through a variety of D
experiments,
which
provides a
new benchmark
(Rescued
from
desperation:
Describes
being for the multimodal
comprehension
given aChinese
way outidiom
at the reading
most dangerous
time) task.

Image

＋

Text

Teacher

＋

绝处逢生：在最危险的时候得到生路
Idiom: Rescued from desperation
Meaning: Describes being given a way out
at the most dangerous time

A

D

Student

Figure 1: An intriguing phenomenon is observed during the
classroom instruction of idioms.

sentation and understanding of idioms is crucial for downstream tasks such as machine translation (Li et al. 2024),
image generation (Ali et al. 2024), and image-text matching
(Yosef, Bitton, and Shahaf 2023).
Therefore, Zheng, Huang, and Sun (2019) proposed a
cloze task for idioms and established the widely used Chinese idiom completion dataset, ChID. The cloze task involving idioms typically requires the model to select the most
suitable idioms from the set of candidate idioms to be placed
in the blanks of the sentence, which requires the model to
maximize the understanding of the special meanings of different idioms in different contexts.
The current methods are mainly based on deep learning models and have achieved certain performances. Tan
and Jiang (2021) proposed a BERT-based dual embedding
model and a two-stage model with context pooling and fineTeacher
tuning to improve the accuracy of idiom prediction. Wang
Text & Image
绝处逢生：在最危险的时候得到生路
et al. (2020) introduced an attribute focus mechanism to corA
Introduction
Grades
rect idiomatic misuse. Sha et al. (2023) proposed a prompt(Rescued from desperation: Describes being
＋
Chinese idioms are a special form of linguistic expression,
based representation individual enhancement approach to
given a way out at the most dangerous time)
usually consisting of four Chinese characters, such as “绝
learn idiomatic metaphorical meaning. Wu et al. (2024a)
处逢生 (Rescued from desperation)”, as shown in Figure 1.
addressed the problem of inconsistency between idiomatic
The challenge in understanding Chinese idioms is the inconmetaphor and context through multi-semantic connectivity
sistency between the literal meaning and the metaphorical
and contrastive learning, achieving state-of-the-art performeaning, which usually requires some background knowlmance with their method in the ChID dataset. However, all
edge, such as history. Therefore, obtaining accurate reprethese existing methods consider only textual features. The
rapid development of social media has led to a diverse range
* These authors contributed equally.
†
of data sources for idioms. How to effectively utilize hetCorresponding author.
erogeneous information such as images corresponding to idCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
ioms to assist the model in accurately understanding the id25398

