The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Relation Also Knows: Rethinking the Recall and Editing of Factual Associations in
Auto-Regressive Transformer Language Models
Xiyu Liu1,2 , Zhengxiao Liu1,2 * , Naibin Gu1,2 , Zheng Lin1,2∗ , Wanli Ma3 , Ji Xiang1 , Weiping Wang1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
{liuxiyu, liuzhengxiao, gunaibin, linzheng, xiangji, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn, uestc_wlma@163.com
2

Abstract
BVB

The storage and recall of factual associations in auto-regressive
transformer language models (LMs) have drawn a great deal of
attention, inspiring knowledge editing by directly modifying
the located model weights. Most editing works achieve knowledge editing under the guidance of existing interpretations
of knowledge recall that mainly focus on subject knowledge.
However, these interpretations are seriously flawed, neglecting relation information and leading to the over-generalizing
problem for editing. In this work, we discover a novel relationfocused perspective to interpret the knowledge recall of transformer LMs during inference and apply it on single knowledge
editing to avoid over-generalizing. Experimental results on
the dataset supplemented with a new R-Specificity criterion
demonstrate that our editing approach significantly alleviates
over-generalizing while remaining competitive on other criteria, breaking the domination of subject-focused editing for
future research.

Marco
Reus

ROME
citizenship
Germany

Man Utd

Marco
Reus

German
Entity

ROME-edited
Entity

citizenship

Britain

British
Unexpectedly Changed
Entity

Figure 1: The over-generalizing problem. The circle in green
denotes the correctly edited target entity and circles in red
denote that the entities unrelated to target editing are also
changed unexpectedly.

Code — https://github.com/sunshower-liu/RETS
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.15091

Introduction
Language models are often regarded as knowledge bases,
storing factual associations in parameters which can be simply recalled through prompting (Petroni et al. 2019; Lester,
Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021; Jiang et al. 2020; Roberts, Raffel, and Shazeer 2020; Petroni et al. 2020; Heinzerling and
Inui 2021; Wang, Liu, and Zhang 2021). For instance, for the
factual association shown in triplet <Marco Reus, citizen-of,
O> with the subject Marco Reus and the relation citizen-of,
the object O can be obtained from the next token prediction of
GPT-like language models given the prompt "Marco Reus is
a citizen of ". Recent works investigate where factual knowledge is stored and how the factual knowledge is extracted
from auto-regressive transformer LMs, suggesting that the
feedforward MLP sublayer performs as key-value memories which is the key component for the storing and recall
of factual associations (Geva et al. 2021, 2022, 2023). The
sight into the interpretation of auto-regressive transformer
* Zhengxiao Liu and Zheng Lin are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24659

LMs makes renewing their knowledge by directly modifying the MLP weights possible, inspiring knowledge editing
via the locate-then-edit paradigm that modifies the located
weights (Yao et al. 2023; Meng et al. 2022a,b; Li et al. 2024a).
This sort of methods provide convenience for altering the behavior of models permanently on a small amount of facts
while ensuring least side-effects, especially meaningful in
the era of large language models.
However, existing locate-then-edit methods suffer from
various deficiencies (Li et al. 2024b; Hoelscher-Obermaier
et al. 2023). We note an over-generalizing problem that is
serious in practical applications where unrelated relationships
of the target editing subject experience unexpected alterations
during the editing of a certain factual association. For example, the wife and other relationships of Marco Reus predicted
by the models will be changed to Britain-related attributes
while ROME (Meng et al. 2022a) edits the citizenship of
Marco Reus to Britain, as illustrated in Figure 1. This makes
the contents generated by the edited models untrustworthy.
We conjecture that these locate-then-edit methods suffer
from over-generalizing since they only focus on subjects and
fail to take relations of factual associations into consideration
during editing. Thus we firstly investigate what happens on
relation tokens (e.g. "was born in") in knowledge recall during inference to understand why previous works fail to take
relations into account. The interpretation of knowledge recall
involves which positions of tokens and which layers of auto-

