The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BAYES CNS: A Unified Bayesian Approach to Address Cold Start and
Non-Stationarity in Search Systems at Scale
Randy Ardywibowo, Rakesh Sunki, Shin Tsz Lucy Kuo, Sankalp Nayak
Apple
{r ardywibowo, rsunki, l kuo, sankalpn}@apple.com

Abstract

due to seasonality, long-term trends, or through repeated interactions with the search system as a whole (Kulkarni et al.
2011; Moore et al. 2013).
Performing exploration over item recommendations may
alleviate cold start issues by providing a wider selection
of items to users. However, naively doing so may come
at the expense of key business metrics (Hu et al. 2011).
Indeed, over-exploration of items can hurt search quality
metrics, and recommending irrelevant items can damage
user trust (Schnabel et al. 2018). On the other hand, underexploration may prevent the search system from adapting to
shifts in user behavior over time (Pereira et al. 2018).
Though both cold start and non-stationarity of user interaction features are closely related and common problems in search and recommendation systems, to the best
of our knowledge, no method attempts to address these issues holistically at scale (Al-Ghossein, Abdessalem, and
Barré 2021). Existing methods that solve cold start rely on
heuristics to selectively boost item rankings (Taank, Cao,
and Gattani 2017; Haldar et al. 2020), or auxiliary information to make up for the absence of interaction data (Gantner
et al. 2010; Zhu et al. 2020; Missault et al. 2021). Meanwhile, non-stationary distribution shifts are handled in practice by periodic model retraining, which is costly and unstable due to the varying quality of data collected online (He
et al. 2014; Chaney, Stewart, and Engelhardt 2018; Ash and
Adams 2020; Haldar et al. 2020; Coleman et al. 2024).
Bayesian modeling offers a way to principally handle
the dynamic and uncertain nature of these user interaction
features (Barber 2012). Under a Bayesian paradigm, one
can model the prior distribution of the user interaction features which can be updated in real time as new data is
observed under non-stationary distribution shifts (Casella
1985; Russo et al. 2018; Ardywibowo et al. 2019). The posterior distribution can then inform an online learning algorithm which uses both the user interaction feature estimates
and the contextual query-item features to rank items accordingly.
Despite their advantages, Bayesian methods are computationally demanding, as exact estimation of the posterior
distribution is intractable. Promisingly, recent variational inference approaches that use neural networks enable modeling expressive distributions and allow efficient updates approximating the posterior distribution (Yin and Zhou 2018;

Information Retrieval (IR) systems used in search and recommendation platforms frequently employ Learning-to-Rank
(LTR) models to rank items in response to user queries.
These models heavily rely on features derived from user interactions, such as clicks and engagement data. This dependence introduces cold start issues for items lacking user engagement and poses challenges in adapting to non-stationary
shifts in user behavior over time. We address both challenges holistically as an online learning problem and propose
BayesCNS, a Bayesian approach designed to handle cold start
and non-stationary distribution shifts in search systems at
scale. BayesCNS achieves this by estimating prior distributions for user-item interactions, which are continuously updated with new user interactions gathered online. This online learning procedure is guided by a ranker model, enabling
efficient exploration of relevant items using contextual information provided by the ranker. We successfully deployed
BayesCNS in a large-scale search system and demonstrated
its efficacy through comprehensive offline and online experiments. Notably, an online A/B experiment showed a 10.60%
increase in new item interactions and a 1.05% improvement
in overall success metrics over the existing production baseline.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02126

Introduction
Information Retrieval (IR) techniques used in search and
recommendation systems often use Learning-to-Rank (LTR)
solutions to rank relevant items against user queries (Liu
et al. 2009; Zoghi et al. 2017). These LTR models heavily
rely on features derived from user interactions, such as user
clicks and engagement data, as they are often the most effective features for ranking items (Sorokina and Cantu-Paz
2016; Haldar et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2022). However, relying on user interaction signals in LTR can lead to several challenges. Besides being noisy, user interaction data
is sparse for new and tail items (Joachims 2002; Lam et al.
2008). This leads to cold start issues, where new items are
ranked poorly and receive no user engagement. User interaction signals are also dynamic and non-stationary, changing
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12

