The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedPop: Federated Population-based Hyperparameter Tuning
Haokun Chen1,2 * , Denis Krompaß2 , Jindong Gu3* , Volker Tresp1,4
1

Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Munich, Germany
2
Siemens Technology, Munich, Germany
3
University of Oxford, Oxford, England
4
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany
{haokun.chen, denis.krompass}@siemens.com,
jindong.gu@outlook.com, volker.tresp@lmu.de

Abstract

number of HPs needs to be evaluated, which involves repetitive training of models until convergence and subsequent
retraining after optimizing the optimal HP. Such approaches
can drastically increase the client’s local computational costs
and communication overheads, as it needs to execute multiple federated communications when evaluating only one
HP. Furthermore, the distributed validation datasets impose
a major challenge for HPT in FL, making it infeasible to
evaluate HP for a large number of participating clients.
Recently, a few approaches have emerged to address the
problem intersection of HPT and FL, but they still exhibit certain limitations: FedEx (Khodak et al. 2021) predefines a narrower HP search space, while FLoRA (Zhou
et al. 2023) requires costly retraining after HP-optimization.
Moreover, they are only applicable for tuning the HPs used
in client local updates. In this paper, we propose Federated
Population-based Hyperparameter Tuning (FedPop) to address the challenge of tuning HPs for FL. FedPop applies
population-based evolutionary algorithm (Jaderberg et al.
2017) to optimize the HPs, which adds minimal computational overheads and accommodates various HP types at the
client and server sides. Most importantly, FedPop employs
an online ”tuning-while-training” framework, enhancing efficiency and thereby allowing the exploration of a broader
HP search space.
In FedPop, we first construct multiple HP-configurations
as our tuning population, i.e., we initialize multiple tuning processes (members) with randomly initialized HPconfiguration, containing the HPs used in the server aggregation and the local client updates. Afterwards, we apply
an evolutionary update mechanism to optimize the HPs of
each member by leveraging information across different HPconfigurations (FedPop-G). Hereby, the HPs in underperforming members will be replaced by a perturbed version
of the HPs from better-performing ones, enabling an efficient and effective online propagation of the HPs. To further improve the HPs for the local client updates in a finegrained manner, we consider the active clients in each communication round as our local population, where each member contains one HP-vector used in the local client update
(FedPop-L). Similarly, evolutionary updates are executed
based on the local validation performance of each member
to tune these HP-vectors. Most importantly, all the tuning
processes, i.e., members of the population, are decentralized

Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
(ML) paradigm, in which multiple clients collaboratively
train ML models without centralizing their local data. Similar to conventional ML pipelines, the client local optimization and server aggregation procedure in FL are sensitive
to the hyperparameter (HP) selection. Despite extensive research on tuning HPs for centralized ML, these methods yield
suboptimal results when employed in FL. This is mainly
because their ”training-after-tuning” framework is unsuitable for FL with limited client computation power. While
some approaches have been proposed for HP-Tuning in FL,
they are limited to the HPs for client local updates. In this
work, we propose a novel HP-tuning algorithm, called Federated Population-based Hyperparameter Tuning (FedPop),
to address this vital yet challenging problem. FedPop employs population-based evolutionary algorithms to optimize
the HPs, which accommodates various HP types at both the
client and server sides. Compared with prior tuning methods,
FedPop employs an online ”tuning-while-training” framework, offering computational efficiency and enabling the exploration of a broader HP search space. Our empirical validation on the common FL benchmarks and complex realworld FL datasets, including full-sized Non-IID ImageNet1K, demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method,
which substantially outperforms the concurrent state-of-theart HP-tuning methods in FL.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an effective machine learning
paradigm suitable for decentralized data sources (McMahan et al. 2017). Similar to the conventional ML algorithms,
FL exhibits sensitivity to empirical choices of hyperparameters (HPs), such as learning rate, and optimization steps
(Kairouz et al. 2021). Hyperparameter Tuning (HPT) is a vital yet challenging component of the ML pipeline, which has
been extensively studied in the context of centralized ML
(Hutter, Kotthoff, and Vanschoren 2019). However, traditional HPT methods, such as Bayesian Optimization (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012), are not suitable for FL systems. These methods typically utilize the ”training-aftertuning” framework. Within this framework, a substantial
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15776

