The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Look Around Before Locating: Considering Content and Structure Information
for Visual Grounding
Shiyi Zheng1 , Peizhi Zhao1 , Zhilong Zheng1 , Peihang He1 , Haonan Cheng2 , Yi Cai3 , Qingbao
Huang1,4 *
2

1
School of Electrical Engineering, Guangxi University, Nanning, China
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, Communication University of China, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot of Ministry of Education, SCUT, Guangzhou, China
4
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Multimedia Communications and Network Technology, Nanning, China
qbhuang@gxu.edu.cn
Previous methods

Abstract

Our approach

As a long-term challenge and fundamental requirement in vision and language tasks, visual grounding aims to localize a
target referred by a natural language query. The regional annotations form a superficial correlation between the subject
of expression and some common visual entities, which hinder
models from comprehending the linguistic content and structure. However, current one-stage methods struggle to uniformly model the visual and linguistic structure due to the
structural gap between continuous image patches and discrete
text tokens. In this paper, we propose a semi-structured reasoning framework for visual grounding to gradually comprehend the linguistic content and structure. Specifically, we devise a cross-modal content alignment module to effectively
align unlabeled contextual information into a stable semantic space corrected by token-level prior knowledge obtained
with CLIP. A multi-branch modulated localization module is
also established to obtain modulation grounding by linguistic
structure. Through a soft split mechanism, our method can
destructure the expression into a fixed semi-structure (i.e.,
subject and context) while ensuring the completeness of linguistic content. Our method is thus capable of building a
semi-structured reasoning system to effectively comprehend
the linguistic content and structure by content alignment and
structure modulated grounding. Experimental results on five
widely-used datasets validate the performance improvements
of our proposed method.

Uncertain semantic
space
Content modulated
Visual
features
Textual
features

brown teddy bear printed
on a mug

grounding
Global

A corrected Structure modulated
semantic space
grounding

CLIP

brown teddy bear printed
on a mug

Visual
features

Subject

Textual
features

Context

Figure 1: Interpretation of our designed idea. In previous
methods, simple feature fusion leads to superficial predictions. In our method, a gradual process with fine-grained
alignment corrected by external prior from CLIP modulates
localization with semi-structural information.

detection frameworks. Typically, they utilize region features
(Liu et al. 2019b) or point features (Liao et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2020) as the visual representation, and match or fuse
with the linguistic embedding to rank or regress a bounding
box. Some methods achieve meticulous modeling of linguistic information by modular design (Yu et al. 2018; Hu et al.
2017a) or graph mechanism (Yang, Li, and Yu 2020; Wang
et al. 2019b), but they generally rely on numerous exact region proposals. Motivated by DETR (Carion et al. 2020),
recent studies (Deng et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022) attempt
to establish a flexible single-step localization by the transformer framework which can effectively interact with multimodal information. Concretely, (Deng et al. 2021; Ye et al.
2022) utilize a neat encoder for cross-modal information interaction, yet they struggle to align cross-modal information
and localize the referred entity within a unified module. To
tackle this issue, VLTVG assigns the alignment process to
a shallow interactive encoder and modulates the localization
process via a transformer decoder.
Although that recent works are fairly effective, the implicit modeling language structure by neural parameterizations may suffer from superficial bias (Cirik, Morency, and
Berg-Kirkpatrick 2018; Akula et al. 2020), resulting in suboptimal generalization. Concretely, for the case in Fig. 1,

Code — https://github.com/VILAN-Lab/SSRVG

Introduction
Visual grounding (VG) aims to comprehend the referring
expression and locate the referred object in the image. As
a fundamental task in the cross-modal domain, it attempts
to build an entity-level link for a text-image pair, which facilitates numerous downstream studies, such as vision-andlanguage navigation (Anderson et al. 2018), image captioning (Chen et al. 2020), and visual question answering (Wang
et al. 2020). Traditional paradigms, including early twostage and one-stage methods (Liu et al. 2019b; Liao et al.
2020; Yang et al. 2020), focus on developing existing object
* Corresponding author: Qingbao Huang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1656

