The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LTLf Synthesis Under Unreliable Input

Christian Hagemeier1 , Giuseppe De Giacomo1 , Mose Y. Vardi2
1

University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA
christian@hagemeier.ch, giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk, vardi@cs.rice.edu
2

Abstract

(or fluents, in planning terminology), and the agent who controls the output variables (or actions, in planning terminology). Given a specification, the agent has to find a strategy
(or plan in planning terms) to choose its outputs to fulfil the
specification by suitably reacting to the inputs chosen (possibly adversarially) by the environment.
In Formal Methods, the most common specification formalism is Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) (Pnueli 1977). In
AI, a finite trace variant of LTL (LTLf ) is popular (Gabbay
et al. 1980; Baier and Mcilraith 2006; De Giacomo and Vardi
2013; De Giacomo and Rubin 2018). The interest in finite
traces is due to the observation that, typically, intelligent
agents are not dedicated to a single task (specification) all
their lives but are supposed to accomplish one task after another. In this paper, we will focus on LTLf as a specification
language.
Note that in reactive synthesis, at any point, the agent observes the current input and, based on its value (along with
previous input values), decides how to react by choosing an
appropriate output towards satisfying the specification. Interestingly, machine-learning techniques are bringing about
notable advancements in sensing technologies (i.e., generation of input), as showcased by the success of vision and
autonomous driving techniques. However, machine-learning
techniques are typically data-oriented and hence have a statistical nature that may generate occasional unreliability
of the input produced. Consider a surgical robot that uses
machine-learning models to interpret sensory data and guide
its actions with precision during complex medical procedures. Due to the inherent imprecision of the input models, it may misinterpret a critical piece of data regarding the
patient’s anatomy (for instance, the robot might incorrectly
identify a blood vessel as a different tissue type due to subtle
variances in the imaging data that were not accounted for in
the training phase of the AI model). This misinterpretation
can lead the robot to make an inaccurate incision, potentially
causing unintended harm to the patient.
In this paper, we study how to address such potential unreliability in the values of input variables in reactive synthesis. One way to address this unreliability is to disregard the
unreliable input completely and not consider it in choosing
the next output (Bloem et al. 2019). This is related to planning/synthesis under partial observability (Rintanen 2004;
De Giacomo and Vardi 2016; Kupferman and Vardi 2000;

We study the problem of realizing strategies for an LTLf
goal specification while ensuring that at least an LTLf backup
specification is satisfied in case of unreliability of certain input variables. We formally define the problem and characterize its worst-case complexity as 2EXPTIME-complete, like
standard LTLf synthesis. Then we devise three different solution techniques: one based on direct automata manipulation, which is 2EXPTIME, one disregarding unreliable input
variables by adopting a belief construction, which is 3EXPTIME, and one leveraging second-order quantified LTLf
(QLTLf ), which is 2EXPTIME and allows for a direct encoding into monadic second-order logic, which in turn is worstcase nonelementary. We prove their correctness and evaluate
them against each other empirically. Interestingly, theoretical worst-case bounds do not translate into observed performance; the MSO technique performs best, followed by belief
construction and direct automata manipulation. As a byproduct of our study, we provide a general synthesis procedure for
arbitrary QLTLf specifications.

Code — http://github.com/whitemech/ltlf-synth-unrelinput-aaai2025
Extended version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14728

1

Introduction

One of the key challenges in Artificial Intelligence is to
equip intelligent agents with the autonomous capability to
deliberate and execute complex courses of action to accomplish desired tasks, see, e.g. the work on reasoning about
action (Reiter 2001) and on planning (Ghallab, Nau, and
Traverso 2016).
The problem we study is related to reactive synthesis in
Formal Methods (Pnueli and Rosner 1989; Finkbeiner 2016;
Ehlers et al. 2017), which shares deep similarities with planning in fully observable nondeterministic domains (FOND,
strong plans (Cimatti, Roveri, and Traverso 1998; Geffner
and Bonet 2013)). A reactive synthesis setting is characterized by (boolean) variables, partitioned into input and output
variables, changing over time. We have two entities acting in
this setting: the environment that controls the input variables
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14958

