The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GIM: A Million-scale Benchmark for Generative Image Manipulation Detection
and Localization
Yirui Chen1,3,* , Xudong Huang3,* , Quan Zhang 2,3,* , Wei Li3 , Mingjian Zhu3 , Qiangyu Yan3 ,
†
†
Simiao Li 3 , Hanting Chen3 , Hailin Hu3 , Jie Yang1 , Wei Liu1, , Jie Hu3,
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tsinghua University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{chenyirui,weiliucv}@sjtu.edu.cn zhangqua22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {huangxudong9,wei.lee,hujie23}@huawei.com
Abstract

ulation. However, traditional image manipulation detection
and location (IMDL) datasets (Dong, Wang, and Tan 2013;
Wen et al. 2016) overlook the powerful generative models
and generative IMDL (Jia et al. 2023; Guillaro et al. 2023)
datasets are limited with scale, it is thus not sufficient to
comprehensively evaluate the performance of IMDL methods and benefit the IMDL community.
To this end, we propose a million-level generative-based
IMDL dataset, termed GIM dataset, to provide a reliable
database for AI Generated Content (AIGC) security. GIM
leverages the generative models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Yin et al. 2025) and SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023a), with the
images in ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and VOC (Everingham et al. 2010) as the input. SAM is utilized to locate
the tampering region, and generative models paint the reasonable content in the tampering area. GIM contains a total
of over one million generative manipulated images. To develop an appropriate benchmark scale, we explore the impact of different amounts of training manipulated data. The
final benchmark contains about 320k manipulated images
with their tampering masks for training and testing. To simulate the real situation, we investigate the effect of degradation and apply random degradation to these benchmark images. Based on this GIM benchmark, the IMDL methods are
evaluated and benchmarked. Overall, GIM possesses the following advantages: 1) GIM has a large and reasonable data
scale, including rich image categories and contents. 2) GIM
contains various generative manipulation models and tasks.
3) GIM proposes two settings for verifying the performance
and generalization ability of IMDL methods.
Existing methods emphasize traditional image manipulations also known as “cheapfakes”. However, generative manipulations introduce lethal alterations in content with no
apparent frequency or structural inconsistency. To address
the above issue, we introduce GIMFormer, a transformerbased framework for generative IMDL. The ShadowTracer
is designed to embed the nuanced artifacts inherent in generative tampering and serves as the prior information. The
Frequency-Spatial Block captures the manipulation clues in
the frequency and spatial domains. Furthermore, the Multi
Windowed Anomalous Modelling module captures local inconsistencies at different scales to refine the features. GIMFormer extracts features from both the RGB and learned

The extraordinary ability of generative models emerges as a
new trend in image editing and generating realistic images,
posing a serious threat to the trustworthiness of multimedia
data and driving the research of image manipulation detection
and location (IMDL). However, the lack of a large-scale data
foundation makes the IMDL task unattainable. In this paper,
we build a local manipulation data generation pipeline that
integrates the powerful capabilities of SAM, LLM, and generative models. Upon this basis, we propose the GIM dataset,
which has the following advantages: 1) Large scale, GIM
includes over one million pairs of AI-manipulated images
and real images. 2) Rich image content, GIM encompasses
a broad range of image classes. 3) Diverse generative manipulation, the images are manipulated images with state-of-theart generators and various manipulation tasks. The aforementioned advantages allow for a more comprehensive evaluation
of IMDL methods, extending their applicability to diverse
images. We introduce the GIM benchmark with two settings
to evaluate existing IMDL methods. In addition, we propose
a novel IMDL framework, termed GIMFormer, which consists of a ShadowTracer, Frequency-Spatial block (FSB), and
a Multi-Window Anomalous Modeling (MWAM) module.
Extensive experiments on the GIM demonstrate that GIMFormer surpasses the previous state-of-the-art approach on
two different benchmarks.

Introduction
Images are one of the most essential media for information
transmission in modern society and they are widely spread
on public platforms such as news and social media. With
the rapid advancement of generative methods (Dhariwal and
Nichol 2021; Rombach et al. 2022), such natural information can be more easily manipulated for specific purposes
such as tampering with an object or person. The image of
this class is particularly convincing since its visual comprehensibility, leading to serious information security risks in
social areas. Therefore, it is of utmost urgency to develop
methods to detect whether an image is modified by generative models and identify the exact location of the manip* These authors contributed equally. Project lead: Wei Li.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2311

