The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Intelligent OPC Engineer Assistant for Semiconductor Manufacturing
Guojin Chen1 * , Haoyu Yang2 , Bei Yu1 , Haoxing Ren2
1

Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
NVIDIA
gjchen21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, haoyuy@nvidia.com, byu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, haoxingr@nvidia.com

Design target

Abstract
Advancements in chip design and manufacturing have enabled the processing of complex tasks such as deep learning
and natural language processing, paving the way for the development of artificial general intelligence (AGI). AI, on the
other hand, can be leveraged to innovate and streamline semiconductor technology from planning and implementation to
manufacturing. In this paper, we present Intelligent OPC Engineer Assistant, an AI/LLM-powered methodology designed
to solve the core manufacturing-aware optimization problem
known as optical proximity correction (OPC). The methodology involves a reinforcement learning-based OPC recipe
search and a customized multi-modal agent system for recipe
summarization. Experiments demonstrate that our methodology can efficiently build OPC recipes on various chip designs
with specially handled design topologies, a task that typically
requires the full-time effort of OPC engineers with years of
experience.

1

Mask
ut

o
ith

w

Wafer

C

OP

Lithography

wit

hO
PC

Figure 1: Motivation for optical proximity correction (OPC)
in semiconductor manufacturing process.

Cobb 2002; Lei et al. 2014). Foundries and EDA (Electronic Design Automation) vendors each have their own
OPC solver implementations, which are built on advanced
algorithms and follow similar workflows (Mentor Graphics,
Siemens 2024; Synopsys, Inc. 2024). The OPC recipe, however, contains specific configurations tailored to optimize a
particular design. It includes common optimization parameters such as step size, maximum iterations, shape movement constraints, polygon fragmentation policies, and error
control strategies. Recipes also incorporate specialized rules
for handling unique chip design patterns that cannot be effectively addressed through standard optimization settings.
These specialized rules are crucial in OPC and are typically
developed by experienced OPC engineers through extensive
trial and error.
To enhance the efficiency of chip development, we present
the Intelligent OPC Engineer Assistant, an AI-driven framework designed to assist human engineers in the rapid development of OPC recipes. This methodology integrates a reinforcement learning (RL)-based approach for optimizing objective searches and a multi-modality large language model
(MLLM)-backboned agent system to facilitate spatial reasoning and recipe summarization.
The remainder of the manuscript is organized as follows.
In Section 2, we delve into the background of OPC and
recipe development, highlighting several works that address
related challenges using RL and LLM agents. In Section 3,
we present the core framework of our algorithm, structured
in a two-stage approach. Experimental results and conclusions are provided in Section 4 and Section 5, respectively.

Introduction

Recent advancements in chip design and manufacturing
have enabled the handling of intricate tasks such as deep
learning and natural language processing, bringing us closer
to achieving artificial general intelligence (AGI). Meanwhile, AI is revolutionizing semiconductor technology by
optimizing every stage of the semiconductor lifecycle, from
conceptual planning to execution and manufacturing. By
leveraging AI-driven innovations, the industry can achieve
greater efficiency, precision, and performance, potentially
accelerating the development of next-generation chips.
In this paper, we utilize AI to address the complexities
of optical proximity correction (OPC), a critical process in
semiconductor manufacturing. As shown in Figure 1, OPC
involves adjusting chip designs to counteract lithography
distortions, ensuring that the final patterns on the silicon
wafer closely match the intended design with high precision.
As depicted in Figure 2, a complete OPC solution comprises
both the solver and the recipe. The OPC solver includes
the core OPC algorithms, such as lithography imaging computation, mask database management, gradient calculation,
and shape perturbation, among other processes (Granik and
* Work accomplished during internship at NVIDIA.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23144

