The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Conformal Thresholded Intervals for Efficient Regression
Rui Luo1 * and Zhixin Zhou2
1

Department of Systems Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Alpha Benito Research, Los Angeles, USA
ruiluo@cityu.edu.hk, zzhou@alphabenito.com

Abstract

Most existing conformal methods for regression either directly predict the lower and upper endpoints of the interval
using quantile regression models (Romano, Patterson, and
Candès 2019; Kivaranovic, Johnson, and Leeb 2020; Sesia
and Candès 2020; Gupta, Kuchibhotla, and Ramdas 2022) or
first estimate the full conditional distribution of the response
and then invert it to obtain prediction sets (Izbicki, Shimizu,
and Stern 2020a; Chernozhukov, Wüthrich, and Zhu 2021).
While these approaches perform well in many situations,
they may produce sub-optimal prediction sets if the conditional distribution is skewed. Conformal quantile regression
typically yields equal-tailed intervals, but the shortest valid
interval may be unbalanced. On the other hand, densitybased methods can adapt to skewness but typically involve
many tuning parameters and more difficult interpretation,
which can be complex for practitioners.
To address these limitations, we propose conformal
thresholded intervals (CTI), a conformal inference method
that seeks the smallest possible prediction set. Instead of relying on an estimate of the full conditional distribution, we
use off-the-shelf multi-output quantile regression and construct prediction set by thresholding the estimated conditional interquantile intervals. Compared with conformal histogram regression (CHR) (Sesia and Romano 2021), which
first partitions the response space into bins, CTI directly
trains a multi-output quantile regression model that uses
equiprobable quantiles. This allows us to estimate the conditional probability density for a new response to fall into each
interquantile interval, without the need for explicitly binning
the response space.
For each sample in the calibration set, we obtain the interquantile interval that its response falls into and find the
corresponding probability density estimate. We compute the
non-conformity scores based on these estimates. Intuitively,
the non-conformity score is higher for a sample that falls
into a long interquantile interval and lower for a sample that
falls into a short interquantile interval. By adopting a similar thresholding idea as in conformal classification (Sadinle,
Lei, and Wasserman 2019; Luo and Zhou 2024), we threshold the intervals according to their length, the inverse of
which corresponds to the probability density estimate. At
test time, the threshold, i.e., the quantile for non-conformity
scores, is used in constructing prediction sets for test samples. Specifically, the interquantile intervals are sorted in as-

This paper introduces Conformal Thresholded Intervals
(CTI), a novel conformal regression method that aims to
produce the smallest possible prediction set with guaranteed
coverage. Unlike existing methods that rely on nested conformal frameworks and full conditional distribution estimation, CTI estimates the conditional probability density for
a new response to fall into each interquantile interval using off-the-shelf multi-output quantile regression. By leveraging the inverse relationship between interval length and
probability density, CTI constructs prediction sets by thresholding the estimated conditional interquantile intervals based
on their length. The optimal threshold is determined using a
calibration set to ensure marginal coverage, effectively balancing the trade-off between prediction set size and coverage. CTI’s approach is computationally efficient and avoids
the complexity of estimating the full conditional distribution.
The method is theoretically grounded, with provable guarantees for marginal coverage and achieving the smallest prediction size given by Neyman-Pearson . Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that CTI achieves superior performance
compared to state-of-the-art conformal regression methods
across various datasets, consistently producing smaller prediction sets while maintaining the desired coverage level. The
proposed method offers a simple yet effective solution for reliable uncertainty quantification in regression tasks, making
it an attractive choice for practitioners seeking accurate and
efficient conformal prediction.

Code — https://github.com/luo-lorry/CTI
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.14495

1

Introduction

Conformal prediction is a powerful framework for constructing prediction sets with finite-sample coverage guarantees.
By leveraging exchangeability of the data, conformal methods can convert the output of any machine learning algorithm into a set-valued prediction satisfying the required
coverage level, without assumptions on the data distribution.
This paper develops a novel conformal prediction method
for regression that aims to produce the smallest possible prediction set with guaranteed coverage.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19216

