The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Model Probability Calibration by Integration of Large Data Sources
with Biased Labels
Renat Sergazinov 1, 2 , Richard Chen 2 , Cheng Ji 2 , Jing Wu 3 , Daniel Cociorva 2 , Hakan Brunzell 2
1

Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX USA
2
Buyer Risk Prevention at Amazon, San Diego, CA USA
3
WWPS Solution Architecture at Amazon, Herndon, VA USA
{renserg, rychardy, cjiamzn, jingwua, cociorva, brunzell}@amazon.com

Abstract
Probability calibration transforms raw output of a classification model into empirically interpretable probability. When
the model is purposed to detect rare event and only a small
expensive data source has clean labels, it becomes extraordinarily challenging to obtain accurate probability calibration.
Utilizing an additional large cheap data source is very helpful, however, such data sources oftentimes suffer from biased
labels. To this end, we introduce an approximate expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm to extract useful information
from the large data sources. For a family of calibration methods based on the logistic likelihood, we derive closed-form
updates and call the resulting iterative algorithm CalEM. We
show that CalEM inherits convergence guarantees from the
approximate EM algorithm. We test the proposed model in
simulation and on the real marketing datasets, where it shows
significant performance increases.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models, including neural networks and
gradient boosted trees, often suffer from calibration issues
(Zadrozny and Elkan 2001; Guo et al. 2017; Zadrozny and
Elkan 2001; Kuleshov, Fenner, and Ermon 2018; Fernández
et al. 2018). Calibration refers to the alignment of a model’s
predicted probabilities with the actual likelihood of outcomes.
For instance, if a model predicts a probability of 0.2 for a
specific class over 100 instances, ideally, 20 of those instances should belong to that class. This aspect of model
performance is crucial for model trustworthiness and safety.
There has been significant research on developing metrics
for calibration assessment (Nixon et al. 2019; Gupta et al.
2020; Gruber and Buettner 2022), methods to post-correct
mis-calibrated models (Platt et al. 1999; Zadrozny and Elkan
2002; Kumar, Liang, and Ma 2019; Gupta et al. 2020), and
techniques for creating better-calibrated classifiers (Bohdal,
Yang, and Hospedales 2023).
In this paper, we tackle a separate challenge of training a
probability calibration model under practical constraints of label imbalance and small sample size. Under such constraints,
accurate probability calibration becomes challenging as we
illustrate in Figure 1. As the sample size decreases and the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20338

label imbalance exacerbates, the variance (calibration error)
of the probability calibration model increases significantly.
A prominent example of real-world data with severe class
imbalance and small sample size comes from the marketing
literature (Diemert et al. 2018; Ke et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2023).
In this context, a key objective is to estimate the probability
that a customer will naturally convert to a given brand. With
accurate estimates, marketing firms can strategically allocate
budgets to target the most promising customer segments and
improve overall sales. The target variable, a binary conversion indicator, is highly imbalanced (often with fewer than
1% converting), and the only unbiased dataset is the control
group that receives no marketing intervention – data which
can be both costly and limited. Meanwhile, the treatment
group, exposed to marketing campaigns, produces biased
labels unsuitable for direct modeling (Ke et al. 2021). Similar
scenarios arise in (1) medical modeling, where the target is
disease susceptibility and the treatment is a vaccine; (2) fraud
prevention, where the target is fraudulent activity and the
treatment is a preventative measure; and (3) online education,
where the target is course completion and the treatment is
a learning intervention. In all of these cases, the goal is to
estimate the target, but the control data may be expensive,
while treated samples have modified outcomes and cannot be
used directly.
To solve this challenge, we propose a modified EM algorithm to fit any likelihood-based calibration model on the
combined control and treatment portions of the dataset. We
first estimate the calibration on the control data and then
proceed to estimating the transition probability between the
treatment and control sets. The calibration model could then
be re-fit on the combined dataset with weights computed
according to the transition probabilities. The algorithm then
proceeds by iteratively refining the transition probability and
calibration model estimates. As we illustrate in Figure 1, the
algorithm results in smaller variance (calibration error). We
theoretically show that our approach could be formulated as
an approximate EM (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977) and
demonstrate convergence guarantees. We empirically validate
its performance in simulation and on real marketing datasets,
where we show improvement over the baseline methods fitted
on the control-only data.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 3
we introduce a general EM algorithm with approximate E-

