The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adversarial Contrastive Graph Augmentation with Counterfactual Regularization
Tao Long1 , Lei Zhang1 , Liang Zhang2 * , Laizhong Cui1
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University , Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
longtao2021@email.szu.edu.cn, {leizhang,cuilz}@szu.edu.cn, zhangliangshuxue@gmail.com,

Abstract

Khosla et al. 2020). In GCL, each original graph generates
a set of positive and negative samples through sampling or
data augmentation. Due to the complex semantic structure
of graphs, the primary challenge in GCL is generating highquality positive and negative pairs. Empirical, rule-based
graph augmentation methods—such as node dropping, edge
perturbation, and subgraph sampling—are widely used to
create these pairs. For instance, GMI (Peng et al. 2020) and
SUBG-CON (Jiao et al. 2020) propose more efficient GCL
methods by generating positive and negative samples from
local subgraphs of each node. However, in these rule-based
graph augmentation methods, the patterns in the generated
samples can be quite limited. For example, in DGI (Hjelm
et al. 2018), a positive sample is defined as the mean representation of all nodes in the original graph. Such positive
samples may not be suitable for nodes with unique characteristics, such as users from minority communities in social
networks.
Recent works have started to focus on model-based graph
augmentation methods using adversarial training models,
which avoid ad-hoc decisions based on human priors and
have the potential to augment diverse heterogeneous graph
data. For example, ARIEL (Shengyu Feng and Tong 2021)
introduced a new adversarial approach to data augmentation in graph contrastive learning, regularizing the mutual information between positive pairs to stabilize training. AD-GCL (Susheel Suresh and Neville 2021) enabled
graph neural networks (GNNs) to capture key information
during training by optimizing adversarial graph augmentation strategies with edge regularization. However, all these
methods primarily focus on automatically augmenting positive graph samples and often overlook the importance of
negative samples. To illustrate the learning process with augmented graphs, we present a house example in Fig.1. The
goal is to train an optimal encoder that captures the key
information related to the house. Previous works like ADGCL and ARIEL generate only positive samples, which help
the encoder learn house-related information from a positive
perspective, as shown in Fig.1(a). However, learning from a
negative perspective is equally important for the encoder, as
illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Hard negative graph samples can assist the encoder in capturing a more complete understanding
of the house.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a novel

With the advancement of graph representation learning, selfsupervised graph contrastive learning (GCL) has emerged as
a key technique in the field. In GCL, positive and negative
samples are generated through data augmentation. While recent works have introduced model-based methods to enhance
positive graph augmentations, they often overlook the importance of negative samples, relying instead on rule-based
methods that can fail to capture meaningful graph patterns.
To address this issue, we propose a novel model-based adversarial contrastive graph augmentation (ACGA) method
that automatically generates both positive graph samples with
minimal sufficient information and hard negative graph samples. Additionally, we provide a theoretical framework to analyze the process of positive and negative graph augmentation in self-supervised GCL. We evaluate our ACGA method
through extensive experiments on representative benchmark
datasets, and the results demonstrate that ACGA outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines.

Code — https://github.com/longtao-09/ACGA

Introduction
Graphs, one of the most common non-Euclidean data structures, are found in a wide range of applications, such as citation networks (Tang et al. 2008), social networks (Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017), and recommender systems (Ying
et al. 2018). Graph representation learning (GRL) algorithms, which aim to encode graph-structured data into lowdimensional vector representations, have recently shown
great potential in these applications. Their effectiveness has
been demonstrated across various downstream tasks, including link prediction (Zhang and Chen 2018), node classification (Kipf and Welling 2016a), and graph classification (Lee,
Lee, and Kang 2019). However, annotating graph data labels requires significant resources (Vogel 1997). As a result,
self-supervised GRL, which operates with limited or even
no labels, has garnered significant attention.
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has recently emerged
as one of the most important techniques for self-supervised
graph representation learning (GRL) (Chen et al. 2020b;
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19086

