The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ESEG: Event-Based Segmentation Boosted by Explicit Semantic-Edge Guidance
Yucheng Zhao1 , Gengyu Lyu1 , Ke Li1 , Zihao Wang1 , Hao Chen2 , Zhen Yang1 , Yongjian Deng1 *
1
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
yzhao836@gatech.edu, {lyugengyu@, tokeli@emails., yangzhen@, yjdeng@}bjut.edu.cn, rex.wangzihao@gmail.com
haochen303@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Discussion:

Event-based semantic segmentation (ESS) has attracted researchers’ attention recently, as event cameras can solve problems such as under/over-exposure or motion blur that are
difficult for RGB cameras to handle. However, event data
are noisy and sparse, resulting in difficulties for the model
to locate and extract reliable cues from their sparse representations, especially when performing pixel-level tasks. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework ESEG to alleviate the dilemma. Given that event signals relate closely to
moving edges, instead of proposing complex structures to expect them to recognize those reliable edge regions behind
event signals on their own, we introduce the explicit edgesemantic supervision as a reference to let the ESS model
globally optimize semantics, considering the high confidence
of event data in edge regions. In addition, we propose a fusion module named Density-Aware Dynamic-Window Cross
Attention Fusion (D2 CAF), in which the density perception,
cross-attention, and dynamic window masking mechanisms
are jointly imposed to optimize edge-dense feature fusion,
leveraging the characteristics of event cameras. Experimental
results on DSEC and DDD17 datasets demonstrate the efficacy of the ESEG framework and its core designs.

Q: Can models
recognize
where reliable
regions from
sparse events
are?

Input

Encoding

Decoding

Results

Segmentation Results

Represented Events
Semantic Segmentation Features

A: Maybe! But
I am not sure Explicit Semantic Edge Supervision
since they are
in a total blackbox
Represented Events

Optimal Results by ESEG

Edge Semantic Results

Q: What if we
could explicitly Former Methods Ours with Explicit Edge Supervision
provide models
with regions
they should be
focused on?

Events

A: Should be
better! How
about a closer
look?
ESS

Semantic Edge

HMNet

GT

Edge Result

SegFormer ESEG (ours)

Figure 1: Our framework aims to assist models in focusing
on reliable regions of event-based representations by providing edge-semantic guidance, instead of expecting networks
to learn this ability without explicit assistance.

Code — https://github.com/cheesewawa/ESEG

Introduction
Semantic segmentation plays a significant role in computer
vision (Hao, Zhou, and Guo 2020), and has been successfully applied to numerous fields including autonomous driving (Papadeas et al. 2021; Muhammad et al. 2022), defect
detection (Usamentiaga et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022) and
computer-aided diagnosis (Huang et al. 2022; Qureshi et al.
2023). Recently, large-scale models like SAM (Kirillov et al.
2023) and DINOv2 (Oquab et al. 2023) have made remarkable progress in performance gains and scene generalization.
However, these semantic segmentation models usually
face challenges when the input data has quality issues, e.g.,
failure in extreme light conditions or high-speed motion
scenes. Event cameras show their potential to alleviate the
above issues (Gallego et al. 2020). Due to the special working principles such as asynchronously capturing brightness

changes at each pixel, these cameras have higher temporal
resolution and dynamic range, and limited power requirements, and new studies demonstrated that they are promising
to offer more dependable data in extreme conditions for better performance (Deng, Chen, and Li 2024; Liu et al. 2024).
Therefore, researchers turn their focus to exploring the design of segmentation models for event data which hold peculiar data formats with noise and sparsity. Ev-SegNet (Alonso
and Murillo 2019) is the first model to perform the task
based on event data, followed by research employing new
mechanisms such as posterior attention (Jia et al. 2023) and
SNNs (Hareb and Martinet 2024). Other attempts include
cross-modal distillation (Wang et al. 2021), transfer learning
from still images (Sun et al. 2022), adapting large-scale pretrained models (Yao et al. 2024), and hybrid pseudo-labeling
(Jing et al. 2024). Recognizing that the event-based repre-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10510

