The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BEVSync: Asynchronous Data Alignment for Camera-based
Vehicle-Infrastructure Cooperative Perception Under Uncertain Delays
Wentao Wang1 , Jiaqian Wang1,2 , Yuxin Deng1 , Guang Tan1 * ,
1

School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{wangwt66, wangjq86, dengyx35}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, tanguang@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Roadside
image features

Vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) cooperative perception systems can enhance the sensing abilities of autonomous vehicles. Existing V2I solutions often consider LiDAR devices
instead of cameras, the most prevalent sensors with low cost
and wide installation. In addition, a major challenge that has
been underexplored is the time asynchrony between image
frames from different sources. This asynchrony arises because of clock differences, varying times involved in data
processing and transmission, causing uncertain delays that
complicate data alignment and potentially reduce perception accuracy. We propose BEVSync, a camera-based V2I
cooperative perception system that adaptively aligns frames
from the ego-vehicle and infrastructure by compensating
for motion deviations. Specifically, we develop an extractorcompensator model to extract and predict perceptual features
using historical frames, thereby smoothing out the data misalignment. Experiments on the real-world dataset DAIR-V2X
show that our approach surpasses existing methods in terms
of performance and robustness.

Ego-vehicle’s view
Infra.

tip-2

Vehicle

tip-1

tv

ti

p

Aligned fusion with BEVSync

{

Infra. clock Veh. clock
Transmission
delays

Clock
diﬀerence

Uncertain delays

Figure 1: Data fusion under uncertain delays in a V2I environment. The data from the infrastructure are subject to various delays when arriving at the ego-vehicle. The left part
of the diagram shows the multi-frame features to be transmitted; the star in the right part represents the ego-vehicle.
The black boxes indicate the unaligned detection results produced by a naive fusion method, whereas the white boxes
show the aligned results achieved using BEVSync.

Introduction
Autonomous driving relies on complete and precise environmental perception (Wang, Xu, and Tan 2024; Li et al.
2022a). The advancement of Vehicle-to-everything (V2X)
communication technology has enabled the connected autonomous vehicles and infrastructure to exchange information, thereby enhancing the vehicles’ perception capability (Lin et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2022b, 2023).
In particular, the vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) approach
emerges as a viable solution due to the widespread deployment of roadside units (Shi et al. 2022). In this paper, we
focus on utilizing the V2I approach to improve the perception performance of autonomous vehicles.
We consider cameras as the primary sensors of the infrastructure. Cameras can obtain rich semantic information (Li,
Tan, and Gou 2024), are cost-effective, and have been widely
installed in the real world. When mounted on the poles, cameras can provide longer-range perception and are less affected by occlusion compared to vehicle-mounted cameras.
Recent studies have shown that roadside cameras can perform 3D object detection with decent accuracy (Zou et al.

2022; Yang et al. 2023). This success has led to further
research into camera-based cooperative perception (Wang
et al. 2023; Runsheng Xu 2022).
Current cooperative perception approaches commonly
rely on the assumption of temporal synchrony between the
ego-vehicle and infrastructure (Wei et al. 2024). That means
data frames from different sources can be perfectly aligned
in time, requiring only spatial alignment for data fusion.
However, this assumption may not hold in real-world scenarios. The infrastructure clock may not be precisely synchronized with the ego-vehicle’s clock, especially when using
traditional camera devices. Furthermore, an image from the
infrastructure typically goes through several phases: encoding, transmission to servers, decoding, application-related
processing (e.g., privacy protection), and finally, transmission to the ego-vehicle. The clock difference, combined
with the highly dynamic processing and transmission de-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14699

