The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Comprehensive Multi-Modal Prototypes Are Simple and Effective Classifiers
for Vast-Vocabulary Object Detection
Yitong Chen1,2∗ , Wenhao Yao1∗ , Lingchen Meng1∗ , Sihong Wu1 , Zuxuan Wu1,2† , Yu-Gang Jiang1
1 Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2 Shanghai Innovation Institute

{chenyt24, whyao23, shwu22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {lcmeng20, zxwu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Learnable Prototypes

Abstract

Class-name Prototypes

Multi-Modal Prototypes

!

A photo of

A photo of

28.7

25.4
10.4

!
…

Exotic Shorthair British Shorthair Persian Cat

Alignment Classifier

Faster R-CNN

Closed-Set

British Shorthair
A photo of

AP on V3Det

Exotic Shorthair
British Shorthair
Persian Cat
Dragon Li
Egyptian Mau
……

Conventional
Classifier

Enabling models to recognize vast open-world categories has
been a longstanding pursuit in object detection. By leveraging the generalization capabilities of vision-language models,
current open-world detectors can recognize a broader range
of vocabularies, despite being trained on limited categories.
However, when the scale of the category vocabularies during training expands to a real-world level, previous classifiers aligned with coarse class names significantly reduce the
recognition performance of these detectors. In this paper, we
introduce Prova, a multi-modal prototype classifier for vastvocabulary object detection. Prova extracts comprehensive
multi-modal prototypes as initialization of alignment classifiers to tackle the vast-vocabulary object recognition failure
problem. On V3Det, this simple method greatly enhances the
performance among one-stage, two-stage, and DETR-based
detectors with only additional projection layers in both supervised and open-vocabulary settings. In particular, Prova improves Faster R-CNN, FCOS, and DINO by 3.3, 6.2, and 2.9
AP respectively in the supervised setting of V3Det. For the
open-vocabulary setting, Prova achieves a new state-of-theart performance with 32.8 base AP and 11.0 novel AP, which
is of 2.6 and 4.3 gain over the previous methods.

FCOS
9.4

Coarse Class-name
!
…

15.6

3.4
DINO
36.4

33.5
17.7

Exotic Shorthair, British Shorthair Persian Cat,
a breed of cat
developed……

is domesticated
British cat……

a long-haired
breed of cat……

Prova

Figure 1: Left: When the category vocabularies scale up,
previous conventional closed-set classifiers and class name
alignment classifiers struggle to distinguish complex classes
such as Exotic Shorthair and British Shorthair. Our key idea
is to extract more detailed multi-modal prototypes to replace
coarse class names with templates in the alignment classifier. Right: AP on V3Det validation set in a supervised manner. The class name alignment classifier performs even worse
than the conventional classifier, and multi-modal prototype
classifier, i.e. Prova, achieves the best results.

Code — https://github.com/Row11n/Prova

Introduction
The ability of humans to recognize a vast number of object
categories in real-world scenarios has always been the goal
of open-world object detection. Although fully supervised
closed-set object detection methods have made significant
progresses (Ren et al. 2015; Tian et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2021; Zhu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023a), they still struggle
to handle vast categories in the wild due to the limited number of object categories in commonly used detection datasets,
e.g., COCO (Lin et al. 2014) with 80 categories and Object365 (Shao et al. 2019) with 365 categories. To address
this issue, remarkable advancements have been achieved in
an open-vocabulary manner which have acceptable zero-shot
ability to unseen categories during training and also comparable closed-set capability (Zhou et al. 2022; Zhong et al.

2022). Most of the recent open-vocabulary detectors leverage the generalization capabilities of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), by converting
the closed-set prediction head into vision-language alignment between objects and class names.
However, as shown in Figure 1, when the number of categories scales up in the detection dataset, e.g. V3Det (Wang
et al. 2023) with 13204 categories, the class name alignment
classifier, which is well done in open-vocabulary fields, fails
and performs even worse than the conventional closed-set
classifier. Previous vision-language alignment methods assume a mapping relationship from detected regions to class

∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2320

