The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hypergraph Learning for Unsupervised Graph Alignment via Optimal Transport
Yuguang Yan1 , Canlin Yang1 , Yuanlin Chen1 , Ruichu Cai1,2 * , Michael Ng3
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
ygyan@gdut.edu.cn, {yangcl0608,chenyuanlin27,cairuichu}@gmail.com, michael-ng@hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

find the node correspondences across two graphs (Chen
et al. 2019; Heimann et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019). The first
paradigm is to learn a shared node embedding space for
two graphs, so that the embeddings of nodes in different
graphs can be compared, and the node correspondences can
be found by nearest neighbor matching (Derr et al. 2021).
However, it is non-trivial to learn a shared embedding space
especially when the feature spaces of two graphs are diverse, making it challenging to compare the node embeddings in different graphs. To avoid directly comparing node
embeddings across graphs, another paradigm based on optimal transport between metric spaces is proposed for unsupervised graph alignment (Li et al. 2022). Specifically,
the Gromov-Wasserstein model is built on two graphs to
find the optimal transport plan across graphs, where the
transport plan reveals the probabilistic correspondences between nodes in different graphs (Peyré, Cuturi, and Solomon
2016). The transport cost across graphs is measured by the
difference between two metric matrices, each of which is
constructed within one graph.
Although existing methods achieve encouraging performance for unsupervised graph alignment, they still suffer
from the limitation of graph structure that only pairwise information between nodes is considered, while higher-order
relations among multiple nodes are neglected (Ju et al.
2024). For example, a community consisting of multiple
nodes contains complex dependencies among them, which
cannot be captured by pairwise edges between two nodes.
Compared with graphs in which one edge can connect only
two nodes, the hypergraph has shown a powerful ability
to characterize high-order relations among nodes, owing to
the property that one hyperedge can involve multiple nodes
(Gao et al. 2020). Figure 1 depicts the differences between
the hypergraph and the graph representing a co-authored citation network. In the figure, a node represents a paper, and
the edges in the graph can only describe the co-author relationship between the pairs of nodes, while the hyperedges in
the hypergraph can contain all the papers that an author participated in. This property also endows the hypergraph with
the ability to capture higher-order information.
Motivated by this, we seek to leverage hypergraphs to
extract high-order structural information for unsupervised
graph alignment, and design a method named Hypergraph
Learning via Optimal Transport(HLOT). Specifically, we

Unsupervised graph alignment aims to find corresponding
nodes across different graphs without supervision. Existing
methods usually leverage the graph structure to aggregate features of nodes to find relations between nodes. However, the
graph structure is inherently limited in pairwise relations between nodes without considering higher-order dependencies
among multiple nodes. In this paper, we take advantage of the
hypergraph structure to characterize higher-order structural
information among nodes for better graph alignment. Specifically, we propose an optimal transport model to learn a hypergraph to capture complex relations among nodes, so that
the nodes involved in one hyperedge can be adaptively based
on local geometric information. In addition, inspired by the
Dirichlet energy function of a hypergraph, we further refine
our model to enhance the consistency between structural and
feature information in each hyperedge. After that, we jointly
leverage graphs and hypergraphs to extract structural and feature information to better model the relations between nodes,
which is used to find node correspondences across graphs. We
conduct experiments on several benchmark datasets with different settings, and the results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method.

Introduction
Graph alignment aims to recognize node correspondences
across different graphs (Wang et al. 2018; Heimann et al.
2018). As structured data become ubiquitous, graph alignment has received much attention and been widely used in
real-world applications, such as finding the same users on
different social network platforms (Li et al. 2019), recognizing the same entities in different knowledge graphs (Liu
et al. 2022). In the problem of graph alignment with supervision, some node correspondences are given as ground-truth
information (Liu et al. 2016). However, it is difficult to obtain supervised information since annotation is usually expensive and time-consuming. Therefore, unsupervised graph
alignment without requiring supervision has drawn more attention in recent years (Chen et al. 2019).
Existing methods of unsupervised graph alignment usually leverage features of nodes and the graph structure to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21913

