The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BSAFusion: A Bidirectional Stepwise Feature Alignment Network for Unaligned
Medical Image Fusion
Huafeng Li1 , Dayong Su1 , Qing Cai2∗ , Yafei Zhang1∗
1

School of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology,
Kunming 650500, China
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China
hfchina99@163.com, dayongsu@outlook.com, cq@ouc.edu.cn, zyfeimail@163.com
Abstract

If unaligned multimodal medical images can be simultaneously aligned and fused using a single-stage approach within
a unified processing framework, it will not only achieve mutual promotion of dual tasks but also help reduce the complexity of the model. However, the design of this model faces
the challenge of incompatible requirements for feature fusion and alignment. To address this challenge, this paper proposes an unaligned medical image fusion method called Bidirectional Stepwise Feature Alignment and Fusion (BSFA-F)
strategy. To reduce the negative impact of modality differences on cross-modal feature matching, we incorporate the
Modal Discrepancy-Free Feature Representation (MDF-FR)
method into BSFA-F. MDF-FR utilizes a Modality Feature
Representation Head (MFRH) to integrate the global information of the input image. By injecting the information contained in MFRH of the current image into other modality images, it effectively reduces the impact of modality differences
on feature alignment while preserving the complementary information carried by different images. In terms of feature
alignment, BSFA-F employs a bidirectional stepwise alignment deformation field prediction strategy based on the path
independence of vector displacement between two points.
This strategy solves the problem of large spans and inaccurate deformation field prediction in single-step alignment. Finally, Multi-Modal Feature Fusion block achieves the fusion
of aligned features. The experimental results across multiple
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: Paradigm of existing unaligned image fusion methods compared to that of our method.

2018; Tang et al. 2022b; Mu et al. 2023). However, most
current methods assume that the source images being fused
are strictly aligned at the pixel level. The fusion algorithm
can produce the expected results only when this assumption
holds true. In real scenarios, however, this assumption is often invalid. To address this issue, registration algorithms are
typically used to first align the images to be fused, followed
by the fusion process (as shown in Fig.1(a)). Although this
two-stage method is effective, cross-modal image registration still faces numerous challenges due to differences in
modalities and inconsistencies in features between images.
In recent years, researchers have begun exploring the integration of multi-source image registration and fusion into
a unified framework to address the aforementioned issues.
By leveraging the supervision of fusion results, registration performance can be improved. Based on this idea, joint
processing frameworks for image registration and fusion
have emerged in recent years (Huang et al. 2022b; Wang
et al. 2022; Tang et al. 2022a; Xu et al. 2022). However,
these methods are not specifically designed for the registration and fusion of multimodal medical images. Although
MURF (Xu, Yuan, and Ma 2023) attempts to integrate mul-

Code — https://github.com/slrl123/BSAFusion/

Introduction
Multimodal medical image fusion (MMIF) involves the integration of medical image data from different imaging modalities (such as CT, MRI, PET, etc.) to create a new image that
contains more comprehensive and accurate lesion information. This technology is of great significance in improving
diagnostic accuracy, assisting in the development of treatment plans, promoting medical research and education, and
optimizing the utilization of medical resources. As a result,
it has garnered the attention of researchers, and a multitude
of effective fusion algorithms have been proposed (Li et al.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4725

