The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Semantic Consistency and Style Diversity for
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation
Hongwei Niu1,2 * , Linhuang Xie1 * , Jianghang Lin1 * , Shengchuan Zhang1†
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
{niuhw649, hunterjlin007}@stu.xmu.edu.cn
linhuangxie@gmail.com, zsc 2016@xmu.edu.cn

Semantic Consistency

Abstract

A photo of car

Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS) seeks
to utilize source domain data exclusively to enhance the
generalization of semantic segmentation across unknown
target domains. Prevailing studies predominantly concentrate on feature normalization and domain randomization, these approaches exhibit significant limitations. Feature normalization-based methods tend to confuse semantic features in the process of constraining the feature space
distribution, resulting in classification misjudgment. Domain randomization-based methods frequently incorporate
domain-irrelevant noise due to the uncontrollability of style
transformations, resulting in segmentation ambiguity. To address these challenges, we introduce a novel framework,
named SCSD for Semantic Consistency prediction and Style
Diversity generalization. It comprises three pivotal components: Firstly, a Semantic Query Booster is designed to enhance the semantic awareness and discrimination capabilities
of object queries in the mask decoder, enabling cross-domain
semantic consistency prediction. Secondly, we develop a
Text-Driven Style Transform module that utilizes domain difference text embeddings to controllably guide the style transformation of image features, thereby increasing inter-domain
style diversity. Lastly, to prevent the collapse of similar domain feature spaces, we introduce a Style Synergy Optimization mechanism that fortifies the separation of inter-domain
features and the aggregation of intra-domain features by synergistically weighting style contrastive loss and style aggregation loss. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed SCSD significantly outperforms existing state-of-theart methods. Notably, SCSD trained on GTAV achieved an
average of 49.11 mIoU on the four unseen domain datasets,
surpassing the state-of-the-art method by +4.08 mIoU.

Text

Source Domain

(Game)

(Snow, Night, …)

Target Domain

A photo of {C} in snow
A photo of {C} in night
A photo of {C}

Pull
Closer

A photo of {C}

Style Diversity

{C} Classes

Different
Classes

Gold / Blue Different
Black / Gray Domains

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivations. Semantic Consistency: Similarity map between domain-irrelevant general
text embeddings and image features in different domains.
Cross-domain consistent prediction can be achieved through
general text prompts. Style Diversity: Simplified version of
t-SNE visualization of image features. Domain text difference embeddings are used as style difference features guide
the style transformation of image features from source domain to target domain.

ject detection and image segmentation are trained and evaluated under the assumption that datasets are independent and
identically distributed. However, this assumption often fails
to hold in real-world scenarios due to variations in lighting,
weather conditions, and geographical differences. This challenge has spurred significant research in Domain Adaptive
Semantic Segmentation (DASS) (Hoyer, Dai, and Van Gool
2022; Xia et al. 2023; Cheng et al. 2023; Choe et al. 2024),
which seeks to minimize the distribution discrepancies between source and target domains by aligning their data distributions. Unlike DASS, which requires access to target domain data during training, an often impractical requirement,
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS) offers a promising alternative. DGSS focuses on learning only
from source domain data to enhance the model’s ability to
generalize to unknown target domains, thus better meeting
the challenges posed by real-world applications.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation, a core task in computer vision, involves assigning a semantic class label to each pixel in an
image. Traditionally, models (Strudel et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022; Mi et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023; Yue et al. 2024) for ob* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6245

