The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Information-theoretic Multi-task Representation Learning Framework for
Natural Language Understanding
Dou Hu1,2 , Lingwei Wei1 * , Wei Zhou1 , Songlin Hu1,2 *
1
2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hudou, weilingwei, zhouwei, husonglin}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

In recent years, some works (Qian, Chen, and Gechter
2020; de Freitas et al. 2022) introduce the information bottleneck (IB) principle (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 1999;
Tishby and Zaslavsky 2015) into the information encoding
process of multi-task learning to enhance the adaptability
to noisy data. Different from vanilla MTL, IB-based MTL
methods explicitly compress task-irrelevant redundant information by minimizing the mutual information between
the input and the task-agnostic representations during the
multi-task encoding process. However, in multi-task scenarios, redundant information often differs across tasks, leading
to situations where information beneficial for one task may
become redundant for another. For instance, target features
that are highly relevant to stance detection may be irrelevant
in emotion recognition. Directly applying the IB principle
to compress redundancy for one task is prone to losing necessary information for other tasks. As a result, the learned
shared representations would not only retain some redundant
features but also face the task-specific insufficiency issue.
In this paper, we propose a new principled multi-task representation learning framework, named InfoMTL, to extract
noise-invariant sufficient representations for all tasks. It ensures sufficiency of shared representations for all tasks and
mitigates the negative effect of redundant features, which
can enhance language understanding of pre-trained language
models (PLMs) under the multi-task paradigm.
Firstly, we propose a shared information maximization
(SIMax) principle to learn more sufficient shared representations for all target tasks. The SIMax principle simultaneously maximizes the mutual information between the input
X and the shared representations Z for all tasks, as well as
the mutual information between the shared representations
Z and the target Yt for each task t. It can preserve key information from the input and retain the necessary information
for all target tasks during the network’s implicit compression process. In the implementation of SIMax, we utilize
noise-contrastive estimation (Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2010;
van den Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018) to optimize the lower
bound of I(X; Z) in the multi-task encoding process. As
shown in Figure 1(b) and (c), unlike IB-based MTL methods (Qian, Chen, and Gechter 2020; de Freitas et al. 2022)
that minimize the input-representation information, our InfoMTL with SIMax handles the information in an opposite
manner to avoid the insufficiency issue arising from repre-

This paper proposes a new principled multi-task representation learning framework (InfoMTL) to extract noise-invariant
sufficient representations for all tasks. It ensures sufficiency
of shared representations for all tasks and mitigates the negative effect of redundant features, which can enhance language understanding of pre-trained language models (PLMs)
under the multi-task paradigm. Firstly, a shared information
maximization principle is proposed to learn more sufficient
shared representations for all target tasks. It can avoid the insufficiency issue arising from representation compression in
the multi-task paradigm. Secondly, a task-specific information minimization principle is designed to mitigate the negative effect of potential redundant features in the input for
each task. It can compress task-irrelevant redundant information and preserve necessary information relevant to the target
for multi-task prediction. Experiments on six classification
benchmarks show that our method outperforms 12 comparative multi-task methods under the same multi-task settings,
especially in data-constrained and noisy scenarios. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the learned representations are
more sufficient, data-efficient, and robust.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) has become a promising
paradigm in deep learning to obtain language representations from large-scale data (Liu et al. 2019a). By leveraging supervised data from related tasks, multi-task learning
approaches reduce expensive computational costs and provide a shared representation which is also more efficient
for learning over multiple tasks (Wu, Zhang, and Ré 2020;
Royer, Blankevoort, and Bejnordi 2023).
Most works (Kendall, Gal, and Cipolla 2018; Chennupati
et al. 2019; Liu, Johns, and Davison 2019; Yu et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2022) on MTL mainly focus on balancing learning process across multiple tasks such as lossbased and gradient-based methods. However, in real-world
scenarios, the labeled data resource is limited and contains
a certain amount of noise. The fact leads the above taskbalanced MTL methods to perform suboptimally and struggle to achieve promising task prediction results.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17276

