The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Weakly Supervised Video Anomaly Detection with Multimodal Prompt
Benfeng Wang1 , Chao Huang1 * , Jie Wen2 , Wei Wang1 , Yabo Liu2 , Yong Xu2
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
wangbf23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, huangch253@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wenjie@hit.edu.cn, wangwei29@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
yaboliu.ug@gmail.com, yongxu@ymail.com
2

Traditional Federated VAD

Abstract

Our Context-Driven Federated VAD
Client 𝒋𝒋

Client 𝒋𝒋

Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims at locating the abnormal events in videos. Recently, the Weakly Supervised VAD
has made great progress, which only requires video-level
annotations when training. In practical applications, different institutions may have different types of abnormal videos.
However, the abnormal videos cannot be circulated on the internet due to privacy protection. To train a more generalized
anomaly detector that can identify various anomalies, it is reasonable to introduce federated learning into WSVAD. In this
paper, we propose Global and Local Context-driven Federated Learning, a new paradigm for privacy protected weakly
supervised video anomaly detection. Specifically, we utilize
the vision-language association of CLIP to detect whether the
video frame is abnormal. Instead of leveraging handcrafted
text prompts for CLIP, we propose a text prompt generator.
The generated prompt is simultaneously influenced by text
and visual. On the one hand, the text provides global context related to anomaly, which improves the model’s ability of
generalization. On the other hand, the visual provides personalized local context because different clients may have videos
with different types of anomalies or scenes. The generated
prompt ensures global generalization while processing personalized data from different clients. Extensive experiments
show that the proposed method achieves remarkable performance.

C

Local
+ [class]

Server

…

C

C

Client 𝒊𝒊

D

Server

Global
+ [class]

Local

D

D

Classifier Dot Product Context

Client 𝒊𝒊

Figure 1: Comparison with different paradigms of federated
WSVAD. Traditional federated VAD method (left) simply
aggregates the classifier. In contrast, the proposed method
(right) focuses on context driven federated VAD.

methods typically adapt frame-level anomaly score to videolevel annotation with multiple instance learning (MIL) (Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018). WSVAD has great performance
while requiring little annotation cost. However, traditional
WSVAD only makes use of single modal.
Recently, large scale vision-language pre-trained models represented by Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining
(CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) have shown their great performance on various downstream tasks, such as object detection (Du et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2024), image segmentation (Xu et al. 2022; Yun et al. 2023; Luo et al.
2024) and video understanding (Wu, Sun, and Ouyang 2023;
Jin et al. 2024). The core idea of CLIP is to align image
and text in embedding space through contrastive learning.
Some researches try to adapt CLIP to WSVAD (Wu et al.
2024a,b,c; Yang, Liu, and Wu 2024). Despite those CLIPbased methods are superior to traditional methods due to
utilizing the vison-language association, they are only suitable for centralized training, which means all videos must be
send to a central server. In this context, the privacy cannot be
guaranteed.
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) is a distributed machine learning method, which aims to train a uni-

Code — https://github.com/wbfwonderful/Fed-WSVAD

Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) is an important task in
the field of computer vision (Zhang, Qing, and Miao 2019;
Huang et al. 2021, 2022b,c). For example, VAD can be applied to intelligent surveillance systems, which could detect
abnormal events to reduce property damage. Besides, VAD
can also be used for video content examination systems to
better detect the inappropriate content. Weakly supervised
VAD (WSVAD) (Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018; Huang et al.
2022a; Zhang et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2023) is an important branch of VAD. For WSVAD, the model will simultaneously take normal and abnormal videos as inputs. However, there is only video-level annotation provided. Existing
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21017

