The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning 2D Invariant Affordance Knowledge for 3D Affordance Grounding
Xianqiang Gao* 1,2 , Pingrui Zhang* 2,3 , Delin Qu2,3
Dong Wang2 , Zhigang Wang2 , Yan Ding2 , Bin Zhao2,4†
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Fudan University
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University
gaoxianqiang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhangpingrui,zhaobin}@pjlab.org.cn
Point Cloud
Contain

Abstract

Open

3D Object Affordance Grounding aims to predict the functional regions on a 3D object and lays the foundation for
a wide range of applications in robotics. Recent advances
tackle this problem via learning a mapping between 3D regions and a single human-object interaction image. However, the geometric structure of the 3D object and the object in the human-object interaction image are not always
consistent, leading to poor generalization. To address this issue, we propose to learn generalizable invariant affordance
knowledge from multiple human-object interaction images
within the same affordance category. Specifically, we introduce the Multi-Image Guided Invariant-Feature-Aware 3D
Affordance Grounding (MIFAG) framework. It grounds 3D
object affordance regions by identifying common interaction
patterns across multiple human-object interaction images.
First, the Invariant Affordance Knowledge Extraction Module (IAM) utilizes an iterative updating strategy to gradually
extract aligned affordance knowledge from multiple images
and integrate it into an affordance dictionary. Then, the Affordance Dictionary Adaptive Fusion Module (ADM) learns
comprehensive point cloud representations that consider all
affordance candidates in multiple images. In addition, the
Multi-Image and Point Affordance (MIPA) benchmark is
constructed and our method outperforms existing state-ofthe-art methods in various experimental comparisons.

Original Feature
Distribution

open

contain

Affordance
Decoder

Iteratively
Extracting
Invariant
Knowledge

Invariant Affordance
Knowledge Distribution

Figure 1: Motivation of Our Method. The reference
human-object images in each row exhibit significant variations in appearance, yet they consistently represent the same
affordance knowledge. We propose to iteratively extract the
invariant affordance knowledge from multiple images, leading to improved performance.

ing reinforcement learning, which requires an agent to interact with objects repeatedly in a simulated environment. Such
methods are usually time-consuming, and their generalization performance is often restricted by the limited number of
simulation scenes (Mo et al. 2021; Ning et al. 2024; Cheng
et al. 2023). The other category leverages labeled 3D object
affordance data and attempts to learn a mapping between objects and affordance in an end-to-end manner. This kind of
approach is more direct and has gained more and more popularity recently. Specifically, 3D AffordanceNet (Deng et al.
2021) first constructs a 3D point cloud affordance grounding benchmark. After that, to accommodate the diversity of
object affordances and incorporate human interaction references, many methods have been proposed, either combining
a single image or textual description with the point cloud for
3D affordance prediction (Yang et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024c).
Though pioneer research studies have achieved promising progress, they are still limited by failing to leverage the
strong correlations and implied invariant affordance knowledge among objects within the same affordance category. As

Code — https://github.com/goxq/MIFAG-code

1

Affordance
Prediction

Introduction

3D Object Affordance Grounding seeks to identify and predict functional regions on an object’s 3D point cloud. This
task has laid the foundation for connecting visual perception
with physical operation and paved the way for a wide range
of real-world applications, such as embodied systems (Ahn
et al. 2022; Driess et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023), object manipulation (Huang et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024b; Huang et al.
2023; Wu et al. 2021) and object grasping (Dai et al. 2023).
Currently, methods in 3D object affordance prediction can
be divided into two categories. One of them involves utiliz* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3095

