The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Procedure Knowledge Decoupled Distillation Strategy
for Procedure Planning in Instructional Videos
Xiaotian Pan1 , Zhaobo Qi1 , Xin Sun1 * , Yuanrong Xu1 , Weigang Zhang1 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
xiaotianpan@stu.hit.edu.cn, qizb@hit.edu.cn, sunxintyc@hit.edu.cn, xuyuanrong@hit.edu.cn, wgzhang@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

systems. Therefore, we concentrate on the procedure planning in instructional video task (Chang et al. 2020). Unlike
traditional task planning in structured environments, this endeavor necessitates inferring a structured and plannable action space from unstructured real-world videos that depict
the transition from the start state to the goal state given visual observations.
Recently, significant progress has been made in the procedure planning in instructional video task, which can be
categorized into two main families: the two-branch autoregressive prediction approach (Chang et al. 2020; Bi, Luo,
and Xu 2021; Sun et al. 2022) and the single-branch nonautoregressive prediction method (Zhao et al. 2022b; Wang
et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2023). The former considers the auxiliary role of the intermediate information between the start
and goal states for action reasoning. It utilizes intermediate
action labels and visual states (i.e. sampled video frames)
for supervised prediction in an iterative inference mechanism (as shown in Figure 1(a)), which tends to result in
cumulative errors, with the issue exacerbating in longer sequences. Therefore, the latter adopts a weakly supervised
training method to simultaneously predict all intermediate
action sequences (as shown in Figure 1(b)) at once.
However, the single-branch non-autoregressive prediction
method only incorporates action labels as supervision signals, relying exclusively on the start and goal state information without intermediate visual details. Consequently,
it struggles to effectively capture the semantic correlation
within the intermediate series of actions, which hinders the
model’s ability to anticipate actions related to elements absent in the start and target states, limiting the scope of action
space to be predicted. For example, as shown in Figure 1, it
is difficult for the AI systems to infer the existence of the visual concept “milk” in the intermediate action only from the
start and goal observations. Therefore, some weakly supervised models (Wang et al. 2023a; Niu et al. 2024) introduce
multiple learning objectives to address this limitation. Nevertheless, they only consider the similarity between individual actions during training, significantly overlooking the intricate spatio-temporal relationship inherent within instructional videos. This oversight manifests in two primary aspects: firstly, the evolution uncertainty of adjacent actions,
where even the same ancestral action may have different
subsequent ones; secondly, the multifaceted rationality of

Procedure planning in instructional videos, producing a
structured and plannable action sequence facilitating the
transition from the start to the goal states, has achieved
significant progress. The dominant single-branch nonautoregressive planning paradigm guides action sequence
generation through action labels, overlooking the limitation
of the absence of intermediate visual information. Hence,
we introduce the procedure knowledge decoupled distillation
strategy to address the above issue. This innovative strategy
deliberately lets the teacher model see the real visual information among the start and goal states to enhance its action semantic understanding and relationship modeling ability, producing the potential probability distribution containing
the real action class and other action classes that may occur.
Accordingly, we introduce a decoupled intermediate information knowledge distillation loss, which comprises single action knowledge distillation and sequence distribution knowledge distillation for the student model. The former improves
the student model’s precise inference ability for individual actions by transferring knowledge of a single action target category using binary classification loss. Conversely, the latter
uses MSE loss to constrain the student model to learn the action sequence probability distribution from the teacher model,
thereby enhancing the student model’s global planning capability. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate
that our strategy can improve the performance of multiple
weakly supervised models, achieving promising procedure
knowledge modeling ability and plug-and-play flexibility.

Code — https://github.com/xiaotianpan/PKDD

Introduction
Instructional videos, due to their educational and guiding
worth, have garnered considerable attention in the realm of
video understanding (Gao, Zhang, and Xu 2020; Tang et al.
2023; Zhong et al. 2023; Gao, Chen, and Xu 2023; Qi et al.
2021, 2024). By analyzing the multimodal content within
these videos, humans can easily grasp the sequence of operations to achieve goal-oriented tasks, such as repairing vehicles, cooking, making crafts, etc. While this ability appears
intuitive for humans, it poses a formidable challenge for AI
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6326

