The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Things Machine Learning Models Know That They Don’t Know
Salvatore Ruggieri, Andrea Pugnana
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
salvatore.ruggieri@unipi.it, andrea.pugnana@di.unipi.it

Abstract

tured according to those actions. The first case is further distinguishing based on the type of uncertainty of the model,
either aleatoric or epistemic (Hüllermeier and Waegeman
2021; Gruber et al. 2023). Aleatoric uncertainty is the (irreducible) uncertainty arising from the inherent randomness
of an event. Ambiguity rejection addresses aleatoric uncertainty of predictions by abstaining on instances close to the
decision boundary. Epistemic uncertainty is the (reducible)
uncertainty due to a lack of knowledge. Further, it can be
divided into model uncertainty, related to the correct choice
of the ML model structure, and estimation uncertainty, related to the correct estimation of model parameters. Novelty
rejection addresses estimation uncertainty of predictions for
instances far from the distribution of the training set, such as
outliers or (distribution) shifted data. Dynamic model selection addresses model uncertainty by deciding which model,
among a diverse set, to use on a given instance. Learning to
defer differs as the prediction is not deferred to another ML
model, but to a human expert with some costs/limitations in
the number of predictions the expert can provide. Moreover,
the human expert has already been “trained”, i.e., it cannot
be changed, and its structure is a possibly inconsistent black
box. Regarding the direct estimation of uncertainty, classical
(parametric and non-parametric) statistical approaches can
help estimate both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty of ML
models. Conformal prediction is a non-parametric approach
specific for ML classification and regression models.
This paper is structured as follows. First, we introduce
notation for canonical ML predictors. Then, we survey each
of the approaches, stating the problem it solves and pointing
to key references. Finally, we discuss open research lines
that deserve investigation from the scientific community.

This paper surveys Machine Learning approaches to build
predictive models that know what they don’t know. The consequential action of this knowledge can consist of abstaining from providing an output (rejection), deferring to another
model (dynamic model selection), deferring to a human expert (learning to defer), or informing the user (uncertainty
estimation). We formally state the problems each approach
solves and point to key references. We discuss open issues
that deserve investigation from the scientific community.

Introduction
Humans deem important to find ways of knowing what they
do not know. For example, a medical doctor that is given
contrasting medical test results may abstain from making
a diagnosis. The capability of knowing what one does not
know prevents making ineffective or even harmful decisions,
such as a wrong medical treatment. Also, it may triggers the
acquisition of additional information, such as new medical
tests, or the acquisition of new knowledge, e.g., through the
consultation with other doctors. Overall, such a capability is
at the core of the process of knowledge revision and expansion (Grant 2023).
As for humans, intelligent systems should be able to find
ways of knowing what they do not know. In many high-stake
domains, abstaining from providing an output is a better
strategy than bearing the risk of wrong outputs. Examples
include AI systems for job candidate screening, predictive
policing, medical diagnosis, and credit scoring. For instance,
chatbot developers struggle to detect questions whose answers are not in the capability of the language model (Cheng
et al. 2024). Overall, the ability of an intelligent system to
know what it does not know empowers the trust of the user
and supports accountability in its usage.
In this paper, we survey approaches in the Machine Learning (ML) research to build predictive models that know what
they don’t know. The consequential action of this knowledge
can consist of abstaining from providing an output (rejection), deferring to another model (dynamic model selection),
deferring to a human expert (learning to defer), or informing the user (uncertainty estimation). The paper is struc-

Canonical Predictors
Let X be an input space, Y the target space and P (X, Y)
the (unknown) joint probability distribution of random variables X, Y over X ×Y. Given a hypothesis space F of functions that map X to Y, the goal of a machine learning algorithm (a learner) is to find a hypothesis f : X → Y ∈ F ,
called a predictor, that minimizes the risk
R(f ) = E[l(f (X), Y )]
where l : Y × Y → R is a user-specified loss function.
We call f a classifier if Y is a finite set of classes; a prob-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28684

