The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SLR-MVTC: Smooth Low-Rank Multi-View Tensor Clustering
Zhen Long, Yipeng Liu, Yazhou Ren, Ce Zhu

graph Z
V
learning

XV subspace

Z1

shared
features

U

affinity
learning matrices
K-means

(a) Tensor based methods

X1

...

Multi-view tensor clustering (MVTC) has gained much attention for its effectiveness in capturing global high-order
correlations across views. However, current MVTC methods suffer from two limitations: 1) adopting a two-stage process to learn the latent features for clustering, and 2) either ignoring local similarities within views or treating local similarities and global high-order correlations equally.
In this paper, we propose a smooth low-rank MVTC (SLRMVTC) method, which aims to extract latent features that
are smooth within each view and low-rank across views, enhancing clustering performance. Specifically, we first learn
latent features from each view using orthogonal projection
and then construct the latent feature tensor by concatenation
and rotation. Then, we introduce a new smooth tensor nuclear norm to depict the low-rank components of the lowfrequency parts in the feature tensor. Benefiting from the
fast Fourier transform along the sample dimension, the obtained low-frequency components effectively capture local
smoothness within views, while their low-rank parts further
explore global correlations across views. Experimental results on six multi-view datasets demonstrate that SLR-MVTC
outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of clustering
performance and CPU time.

X1

...

Multi-view data

Abstract

Multi-view data

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China in Chengdu, 611731, China
{zhen.long,yipengliu,yazhou.ren,eczhu}@uestc.edu.cn

XV

Xv = Pv U v

shared
features
U

feature
learning K-means

(b) MF based methods

Figure 1: Two ways for exploring inter-view correlations.

segmentation (Zhou, Ruan, and Canu 2019), brain network
analysis (Liu et al. 2018), and single-cell multi-omics integration (Huizing et al. 2023).
Existing MVC methods are mainly categorized into similarity learning-based and feature learning-based approaches
based on the spaces in which they explore inter-view correlations. Similarity learning-based methods focus on capturing global high-order inter-view correlations by constructing affinity matrices. These matrices are typically derived
through subspace learning or graph learning, which map the
original data into sample spaces where the elements of the
affinity matrix represent the similarity between pairs of samples. The final shared affinity matrix is then transformed into
embedding features by performing eigenvalue decomposition on its Laplacian matrix, which is then used for K-means
clustering (Khan and Maji 2019; Xia et al. 2022; Long et al.
2023), as shown in Fig. 1 (a). It can be observed this group
employs a two-stage process to learn the latent features. Besides, one goal of clustering is to minimize the distance between samples within the same cluster, which means that
samples should exhibit local similarities. Therefore, both
high-order correlations across views and local similarities
within each view are crucial. However, this group either ignores local similarities or treats local and global high-order
correlations equally.
Another group focuses on directly learning consistent latent features from multi-view data for clustering, typically
using deep leaning (Xu et al. 2023b; Ren et al. 2024; Yan
et al. 2023) and matrix factorization (MF) (Liu et al. 2013;
Wan et al. 2023; He et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2021). However,
deep MVC requires substantial data and a meticulously designed network architecture. MF-based MVC maps the orig-

Code — https://github.com/longzhen520/SLR MVTC

Introduction
Multi-view data collected from multiple feature extractors
or sensors are ubiquitous in numerous real-world scenarios, with each view providing a distinct feature description (Zhang et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2021,
2023; Xu et al. 2024). For example, in assessing breast cancer risk, multi-view data include various types of ultrasound
(US) images, such as US B-mode, US color Doppler, and US
elastography images (Qian et al. 2021). Multi-view data can
provide both consistency and complementary information,
improving the performance of related data analysis tasks and
leading to the development of multi-view learning (Zhang
et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2023a; Yu et al. 2023). Among them,
multi-view clustering (MVC) aims to divide data into several clusters by fully leveraging information from different views. It has garnered much attention in medical image
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19095

