The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

NightHaze: Nighttime Image Dehazing via Self-Prior Learning
Beibei Lin1 * , Yeying Jin1 * , Wending Yan2 , Wei Ye2 , Yuan Yuan2 , Robby T. Tan1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Huawei International Pte Ltd
{beibei.lin, e0178303}@u.nus.edu, {yan.wending, yewei10, yuanyuan10}@huawei.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Liu et al. 2022) use either synthetic data or both synthetic
and real data in training. Unfortunately, as shown in Figure 1, their performance is unsatisfactory when evaluated
on real-world nighttime haze images. The main reason is
that there is a large domain gap between synthetic haze and
real-world haze, and unpaired real data cannot provide pixellevel guidance. As a result, models trained on these data lead
to inferior performance when applied to real haze images.
Table 1 shows five non-reference image quality assessment
(NF-IQA) scores of these methods on real night haze data.
Noticeably, there are significant gaps between the NF-IQA
scores of clear night images and those of restored results obtained from existing methods.
Masked autoencoders (MAE) (He et al. 2022) are known
to yield strong representations for high-level tasks. The core
design of MAE is to use severe augmentation for training.
MAE masks 75% of the input image before reconstructing it.
This paper aims to bring MAE-like strong representations to
nighttime image dehazing. However, MAE’s masking strategies are designed to capture structural spatial priors by filling in the masked regions. In contrast, nighttime image dehazing aims to restore a clear background behind haze and
nighttime degradations.
To obtain strong priors that are resilient to real-world
night haze degradations, we design the severe augmentation for our learning process. Our main novelty lies in defining “severe” based on proper augmentation. Specifically, we
first find two key challenging factors of nighttime images
for augmentation: light effects and noise. During training,
we intentionally degrade clear nighttime images by blending
them with various light effects, including glow, and adding
noise. As demonstrated in MAE (He et al. 2022), the severity of augmentation is key to yield strong feature representations or priors. Accordingly, we define “severe augmentation” as noise values approaching as high as the pixel intensity values blended with strong glow and other night light
effects.
Based on our severe augmentation, we propose NightHaze, a simple yet effective nighttime image dehazing
method with self-prior learning. Our main novelty, the design of severe augmentation, allows our network to learn the
strong priors that are robust to real-world haze effects. Once
the strong priors are obtained, our network can effectively
enhance the visibility of nighttime haze images. Like MAE,

Masked autoencoder (MAE) shows that severe augmentation
during training produces robust representations for high-level
tasks. This paper brings the MAE-like framework to nighttime image enhancement, demonstrating that severe augmentation during training produces strong network priors that
are resilient to real-world night haze degradations. We propose a novel nighttime image dehazing method with selfprior learning. Our main novelty lies in the design of severe
augmentation, which allows our model to learn robust priors.
Unlike MAE that uses masking, we leverage two key challenging factors of nighttime images as augmentation: light
effects and noise. During training, we intentionally degrade
clear images by blending them with light effects as well as
by adding noise, and subsequently restore the clear images.
This enables our model to learn clear background priors.
By increasing the noise values to approach as high as the
pixel intensity values of the glow and light effect blended images, our augmentation becomes severe, resulting in stronger
priors. While our self-prior learning is considerably effective in suppressing glow and revealing details of background
scenes, in some cases, there are still some undesired artifacts
that remain, particularly in the forms of over-suppression. To
address these artifacts, we propose a self-refinement module based on the semi-supervised teacher-student framework.
Our NightHaze, especially our MAE-like self-prior learning,
shows that models trained with severe augmentation effectively improve the visibility of input haze images, approaching the clarity of clear nighttime images. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our NightHaze achieves state-of-theart performance, outperforming existing nighttime image dehazing methods by a substantial margin of 15.5% for MUSIQ
and 23.5% for ClipIQA.

Introduction
Dehazing night images deals not only with haze but also
with nighttime degradations such as low light, noise, glow,
uneven light distribution, etc. The combination of these
degradations and the absence of paired real data make the
task significantly challenging.
Existing supervised and semi-supervised nighttime image
dehazing methods (Yan, Tan, and Dai 2020; Jin et al. 2023;
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5209

