The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Complex Reasoning over Knowledge Graph
with Logic-Aware Curriculum Tuning
Tianle Xia1 , Liang Ding2 , Guojia Wan1 * , Yibing Zhan3 , Bo Du1 * , Dacheng Tao4
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
Wuhan University, China
2
The University of Sydney
3
JD Explore Academy
4
College of Computing and Data Science at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
{2018302020065, guojiawan, dubo}@whu.edu.cn,{liangding.liam, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com,zhanyibing@jd.com
Abstract

Acyclic Graph (DAG), which can be addressed by a systematic traversal of a knowledge graph (KG). This process entails the allocation of suitable entities to intermediate variables based on their structural attributes (Dalvi and Suciu
2007).
In the wake of knowledge graph embedding (KGE)’s resounding success, (Bordes et al. 2013; Bai et al. 2021), a
series of work seeks to answer complex logical queries by
learning query embedding and simulating logical operators
with well-designed neural networks (Chen, Hu, and Sun
2022; Zhu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021; Arakelyan et al.
2020). In contemporary research, the exploration of KGE
method predominantly centers around the intricate design
of various embedding representations, including geometric
embedding like Euclidean geometry modeling (Hamilton
et al. 2018; Ren, Hu, and Leskovec 2019) and Riemannian
geometry modeling (Choudhary et al. 2021), and embedding based on probability modeling (Ren, Hu, and Leskovec
2019), seeking to encapsulate the semantic representation
and vector mapping of KGs’ entities and relations.
However, the embedding-based approach described above
also has some limitations. (1) Limited information: Knowledge graphs often contain incomplete and insufficient information. When only the information from the knowledge
graph is available, it becomes challenging to perform complex reasoning that requires additional or missing information. (2) Insufficient utilization of semantic information:
Current knowledge graph embedding (KGE) methods primarily focus on the structural information of the knowledge graph, paying little attention to the actual semantics
of entities and relationships. (3) High complexity of logical
queries: he intricate nature of real-world knowledge contributes to the complexity of reasoning in practical applications. As a result, it is challenging to accurately model the
relationships within real-world knowledge using simple geometric representations. Such simplifications may overlook
potentially complex relational information (Choudhary et al.
2021), thereby limiting the effectiveness of advanced logical reasoning. (4) Generalizability: A Knowledge Graph
Embedding (KGE) model tailored to a specific knowledge
graph cannot generalize across different knowledge graphs.

Answering complex queries over incomplete knowledge
graphs (KGs) is a challenging task. Most previous works have
focused on learning entity/relation embeddings and simulating first-order logic operators with various neural networks.
However, they are bottlenecked by the inability to share world
knowledge to improve logical reasoning, thus resulting in
suboptimal performance. In this paper, we propose a complex reasoning schema over KG upon large language models (LLMs), containing a curriculum-based logical-aware instruction tuning framework, named LACT. Specifically, we
augment the arbitrary first-order logical queries via binary
tree decomposition, to stimulate the reasoning capability of
LLMs. To address the difficulty gap among different types
of complex queries, we design a simple and flexible logicaware curriculum learning framework. Experiments across
widely used datasets demonstrate that LACT has substantial
improvements (brings an average +5.5% MRR score) over
advanced methods, achieving the new state-of-the-art.

Code — https://github.com/TianleXia0914/LACT

Introduction
Industrial-scale knowledge graphs (KGs) like FreeBase
store structural knowledge in a collection of fact triplets and
are widely adopted by many domains. Unfortunately, KGs
are often incomplete, leaving many missing triplets undiscovered. Thus, complex logical reasoning over such incomplete KGs (Hamilton et al. 2018; Bai et al. 2023) is a challenging task and has attracted much attention in the recent
years. In the realm of complex logical queries, Existential
First Order queries with a single free variable (EF O1 )
emerge as a powerful tool that includes logical operators
such as the basic projection operation (∃) and the corresponding negation operation (¬), two relational operation
intersection (∧) and union (∨), etc. A very straightforward
approach is to represent the computation graph as a Directed
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12881

