The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Integrating Sequence and Image Modeling in Irregular Medical Time Series
Through Self-Supervised Learning
Liuqing Chen1,2 , Shuhong Xiao1 , Shixian Ding1 , Shanhai Hu1 , Lingyun Sun1,2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
International Design Institute, Zhejiang University, China
sunly@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

assumption of time discretization, utilizing LSTMs (Neil,
Pfeiffer, and Liu 2016; Weerakody, Wong, and Wang 2023),
RNNs (Che et al. 2018; Ma, Li, and Cottrell 2020; Miao
et al. 2021), and Transformers (Horn et al. 2020; Huang
et al. 2024) to capture characteristics of discrete sequences.
Nonetheless, these methods often face difficulties in accumulating errors from missing observations (Ma et al. 2019).
Recently, vision models have also shown promising potential in handling irregular sequence data (Li, Li, and Yan
2024). By transforming series into corresponding RGB representations, visual frameworks can effectively capture dynamic trends and inter-sensor relationships within images
(Maroor et al. 2024; Li, Li, and Yan 2024). However, such
designs perform poorly with sparse series that exhibit heavy
missing rate (Li, Li, and Yan 2024).
We recognize that no one has yet integrated both sequence
and image representations in handling irregular medical time
series. This introduces a pivotal question: How can we effectively merge these two distinct representations to improve
the robustness of classification for irregular medical time series with extensive missing values?
To investigate this question, we utilize a joint learning framework that incorporates both sequence and image representations. Additionally, we propose different selfsupervised learning (SSL) strategies to enhance the integration and capture of supplementary information across
these two representations. Specifically, our approach consists of three main components, as shown in Figure 1. For
the sequence modeling branch, we employ a generatordiscriminator structure and adopt an adversarial strategy
(Ma et al. 2019; Miao et al. 2021) for sequence imputation
task to minimize the propagation of cumulative errors. In the
image branch, we implement different image transformation
strategies to improve the performance on sparse series, and
utilize a pre-trained Swin Transformer (Liu et al. 2022; Li,
Li, and Yan 2024) to obtain the corresponding image representations. Three different SSL losses are designed: (1) an
inter-sequence contrastive loss to stabilize the sequence imputation process; (2) a sequence-image contrastive loss with
margin to learn a more generalizable joint representation for
downstream classification; and (3) a clustering loss on joint
representations to push similar cases closer across different
batches.
We conduct experiments on three real-world clinical

Medical time series are often irregular and face significant
missingness, posing challenges for data analysis and clinical decision-making. Existing methods typically adopt a single modeling perspective, either treating series data as sequences or transforming them into image representations for
further classification. In this paper, we propose a joint learning framework that incorporates both sequence and image
representations. We also design three self-supervised learning strategies to facilitate the fusion of sequence and image representations, capturing a more generalizable joint representation. The results indicate that our approach outperforms seven other state-of-the-art models in three representative real-world clinical datasets. We further validate our approach by simulating two major types of real-world missingness through leave-sensors-out and leave-samples-out techniques. The results demonstrate that our approach is more robust and significantly surpasses other baselines in terms of
classification performance.

Code — https://github.com/zju-d3/AAAI25-IrregularMedical-Time-Series

Introduction
Multivariate time series are utilized in various real-world applications, particularly in the medical field, where they are
used to record vital signs and laboratory test results for diagnosis (Chaudhary et al. 2020; Brizzi et al. 2022). Typically, these time series are irregular, faced with asynchronicity across sensors and nonuniform sampling in the time domain (Chowdhury et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2024). Moreover, significant missing values are usually present in clinical data collection. For example, random missingness can
result from patients joining or leaving treatments midway,
or complete absence of data from a sensor when specific
tests are not conducted (de Jong et al. 2019). Some public
clinical datasets, such as PhysioNet2012, take even a 80%
missing rate, posing challenges for data analysis and clinical decision-making (Wang et al. 2024).
Deep learning methods have been widely adopted to
model irregular time series. Some methods rely on the
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15821

