The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Thought-Path Contrastive Learning via Premise-Oriented Data Augmentation for
Logical Reading Comprehension
Chenxu Wang1 , Ping Jian* 1,2 , Zhen Yang1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Engineering Research Center of High Volume Language Information Processing
and Cloud Computing Applications, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{wangchenxu, pjian, bityangzhen}@bit.edu.cn
Abstract

Question: The conclusion of the salesperson‘s argument is most strongly
supported if which one of the following is assumed?

Logical reading comprehension is a challenging task that involves understanding the underlying semantics of text and
applying reasoning to deduce the correct answer. Prior researches have primarily focused on enhancing logical reasoning capabilities through Chain-of-Thought (CoT) or data
augmentation. However, previous work constructing chainof-thought rationales concentrates solely on analyzing correct options, neglecting the incorrect alternatives. Addtionally, earlier efforts on data augmentation by altering contexts rely on rule-based methods, which result in generated
contexts that lack diversity and coherence. To address these
issues, we propose a Premise-Oriented Data Augmentation
(PODA) framework. This framework can generate CoT rationales including analyses for both correct and incorrect
options, while constructing diverse and high-quality counterfactual contexts from incorrect candidate options. We integrate summarizing premises and identifying premises for
each option into rationales. Subsequently, we employ multistep prompts with identified premises to construct counterfactual context. To facilitate the model’s capabilities to better differentiate the reasoning process associated with each
option, we introduce a novel thought-path contrastive learning method that compares reasoning paths between the original and counterfactual samples. Experimental results on three
representative LLMs demonstrate that our method can improve the baselines substantially across two challenging logical reasoning benchmarks (ReClor and LogiQA 2.0).

Counterfactual Context:
Salesperson: For those small,
uncarpeted areas that need, …
and tile floors remain spotless.

(a) The only types of floor surfaces
that most consumers encounter are
carpet, wood, and tile.

(b) If your household cleaning needs
include … , it is likely that you will
need a vacuum cleaner.

Figure 1: Generating counterfactual context from an incorrect candidate option.

model, GPT-4 (Achiam et al. 2023), has exhibited remarkable abilities to handle such tasks. However, a broad spectrum of open LLMs, including LLaMA2 (Touvron et al.
2023), Mistral (Jiang et al. 2023) and LLaMA3 (AI@Meta
2024), still fall short in logical reasoning, significantly trailing behind GPT-4. Consequently, improving the logical reasoning capabilities of community models has increasingly
attracted the attention of many researchers (Liu et al. 2023b;
Jiang et al. 2023).
For logical MRC tasks, LogiCoT (Liu et al. 2023b) constructs instruction-tuning data with Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
rationales. Nevertheless, these rationales only provide analyses for the correct options, neglecting the incorrect alternatives. This oversight limits the model’s ability to fully understand why certain answers are wrong, which is crucial
for enhancing its reasoning capabilities and overall performance in distinguishing between similar options. In addition, previous studies typically create counterfactual contexts based on rule-based data augmentation. For instance,
LReasoner (Wang et al. 2022) generates logically nonequivalent sentences by utilizing templates and syntax parsing.
AMR-LDA (Bao et al. 2023) constructs counterfactual sentences based on Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR,
Banarescu et al., 2013) graph and logical laws. These methods rely on complex principles and make minimal changes
to the text, that cannot ensure the diversity of generated content and accurate modifications to its underlying logic. Ad-

Code — https://github.com/lalalamdbf/TPReasoner

1

Original Context: Salesperson:
If your vacuuming needs are
limited to small areas, … and
works on wood and tile floors.

Introduction

Logical reasoning is a fundamental component of human
cognition, essential for comprehending text and applying
reasoning to deduce appropriate conclusions. Recently, challenging logical reasoning benchmarks have been proposed
through machine reading comprehension (MRC) tasks (Yu
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2023a), which require models to derive the correct answer based on the given context, question and options. With the advent of large language models (LLMs), enhancing their capabilities in logical reasoning is a crucial step toward achieving strong artificial intelligence (Chollet 2019). Especially, the highly advanced
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25345

