The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimal Classification Trees for Continuous Feature Data
Using Dynamic Programming with Branch-and-Bound
Catalin E. Brita1, 2 , Jacobus G. M. van der Linden2 * , Emir Demirović2
1

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
Catalin.Brita@student.uva.nl, {J.G.M.vanderLinden, E.Demirovic}@tudelft.nl
2

Abstract

real-world datasets. Therefore, these algorithms either use a
coarse binarization resulting in loss of optimality; or require
a binary feature for every possible threshold on the numeric
data, which drastically hurts scalability, because their runtime scales exponentially with the number of such features.
To the best of our knowledge, Quant-BnB (Mazumder,
Meng, and Wang 2022) is the only specialized optimal algorithm that processes continuous features directly. This BnB
algorithm considers splits at certain quantiles of the feature
distribution. Obtained solutions are used as bounds for pruning, whereas other parts are further explored with splits on
quantiles of subregions of the feature distribution. Though
Quant-BnB outperforms other algorithms by a large margin
on numeric data, scalability is still an issue: it requires several hours to find trees of depth three for some datasets and
the authors recommend against using it beyond depth three.
In this work, we present ConTree, which combines existing DP and BnB techniques with new bounding techniques
to improve the scalability of computing optimal classification trees for numeric data. Our new lower-bounding techniques prune large parts of the search space while adding
negligible computational overhead. Furthermore, for depthtwo trees, we propose a specialized subroutine that exploits
the fact that we can sort numeric data.
Our experiments show that these algorithmic improvements boost scalability by one or more orders of magnitude over Quant-BnB and three previous MIP and SAT approaches by an ever larger margin. This makes ConTree the
first approach to compute depth-four ODTs beyond small or
binarized datasets within a reasonable time. When trained
with the same size limit, ConTree’s test accuracy is on average 5% higher than CART and 0.7% higher than ODTs
trained with a coarse binarization.

Computing an optimal classification tree that provably maximizes training performance within a given size limit, is NPhard, and in practice, most state-of-the-art methods do not
scale beyond computing optimal trees of depth three. Therefore, most methods rely on a coarse binarization of continuous features to maintain scalability. We propose a novel algorithm that optimizes trees directly on the continuous feature
data using dynamic programming with branch-and-bound.
We develop new pruning techniques that eliminate many suboptimal splits in the search when similar to previously computed splits and we provide an efficient subroutine for computing optimal depth-two trees. Our experiments demonstrate
that these techniques improve runtime by one or more orders
of magnitude over state-of-the-art optimal methods and improve test accuracy by 5% over greedy heuristics.

1

Introduction

Decision trees combine human comprehensibility and accuracy and can capture complex non-linear relationships. As
such, decision trees are well-suited models for explainable
AI (Rudin 2019; Arrieta et al. 2020). Despite their straightforwardness, constructing an optimal decision tree (ODT, a
tree with the smallest training error) of limited size is NPhard (Hyafil and Rivest 1976). Therefore, greedy heuristics,
such as CART (Breiman et al. 1984) and C4.5 (Quinlan
1993), have been widely used. These methods attain scalability by locally optimizing an information gain metric at
each decision node, but yield on average less accurate and
larger trees than optimal (Van der Linden et al. 2024).
To compute ODTs, some employ general-purpose solvers
such as mixed-integer programming (MIP) (Bertsimas and
Dunn 2017), constraint programming (Verhaeghe et al.
2020), or Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solvers (Narodytska
et al. 2018). However, these approaches struggle to scale
with the number of observations and features.
Better scalability is obtained by specialized algorithms
using dynamic programming (DP) and branch and bound
(BnB) (Aglin, Nijssen, and Schaus 2020a; Demirović et al.
2022). However, most of these algorithms cannot directly
deal with numeric data which are frequently present in

2

Related Work

Heuristics Traditionally, decision trees are trained using
top-down induction heuristics such as CART (Breiman et al.
1984) and C4.5 (Quinlan 1993) because of their scalability.
These heuristics recursively divide the data based on local
criteria such as information gain or Gini impurity. On average this yields trees that are larger than the optimal tree
(Murthy and Salzberg 1995) or, if constrained by a fixed
depth, have lower out-of-sample accuracy than optimal trees
under the same size limit (Van der Linden et al. 2024).

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11131

