The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AutoMMLab: Automatically Generating Deployable Models from Language
Instructions for Computer Vision Tasks
Zekang Yang1 , Wang Zeng1 , Sheng Jin2,1 * , Chen Qian1 , Ping Luo2 , Wentao Liu1∗
1

SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
2
The University of Hong Kong
{yangzekang, zengwang, jinsheng, qianchen, liuwentao}@tetras.ai, pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract

Input: Request (Data & Model & Deploy)

Automated machine learning (AutoML) is a collection of
techniques designed to automate the machine learning development process. While traditional AutoML approaches have
been successfully applied in several critical steps of model
development (e.g. hyperparameter optimization), there lacks
a AutoML system that automates the entire end-to-end model
production workflow for computer vision. To fill this blank,
we propose a novel request-to-model task, which involves
understanding the user’s natural language request and execute the entire workflow to output production-ready models.
This empowers non-expert individuals to easily build taskspecific models via a user-friendly language interface. To facilitate development and evaluation, we develop a new experimental platform called AutoMMLab and a new benchmark called LAMP for studying key components in the endto-end request-to-model pipeline. Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is one of the most important components for AutoML. Traditional approaches mostly rely on trial-and-error,
leading to inefficient parameter search. To solve this problem,
we propose a novel LLM-based HPO algorithm, called HPOLLaMA. Equipped with extensive knowledge and experience
in model hyperparameter tuning, HPO-LLaMA achieves significant improvement of HPO efficiency.

Hi, I am working on a project related to autonomous driving.
I need a model to detect vehicles. The model should be able to
run on a GPU and process at least 30 frames per second.
AutoMMLab

Request
Data
Model
Model Model
Understanding Selection Selection Training Deployment
with HPO

Output: Deployment-ready model
AP50:95 = 0.68

Figure 1: AutoMMLab autmatically creates deployable
models from user’s language instructions.

Recent public computer vision (CV) communities (e.g.
OpenMMLab) have provided a wide variety of toolboxes
in various research areas such as image classification (MMPretrain (Contributors 2023)), object detection (MMDetection (Chen et al. 2019)), semantic segmentation (MMSegmentation (Contributors 2020a)), and pose estimation (MMPose (Contributors 2020b)). Considering large language
models (LLMs) have exhibited exceptional ability in language understanding, generation, interaction, and reasoning,
we are inspired to employ LLMs to connect AutoML with
public CV communities (e.g. OpenMMLab) for automating
the whole CV model production workflow via a natural language based interface.
In this paper, we introduce a novel comprehensive task
called request-to-model. Unlike traditional AutoML task
that focus on one particular step in the model production
workflow (e.g. neural architecture search or hyperparameter optimization), request-to-model extends the reach of AutoML to evolve towards fully automated model production
through a user-friendly language interface. This empowers
individuals to leverage the capabilities of AI without extensive expertise, driving progress in various fields.
To facilitate the development of the request-to-model
task, we propose a LLM-empowered platform called Au-

Code — https://github.com/yang-ze-kang/AutoMMLab
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.15351

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) has achieved considerable successes
in recent years and an ever-growing number of disciplines
rely on it. However, this success crucially relies on human
ML experts to perform tasks including data preparation,
model algorithm selection, model training with hyperparameter tuning and model deployment. The rapid growth of machine learning applications has created a demand for off-theshelf machine learning methods that can be used easily and
without expert knowledge. To this end, automated machine
learning, or AutoML, has been developed in literature. AutoML aims to minimize the workload of human experts in
the ML development process, making AI algorithms available and easily accessible even for non-AI experts.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22056

