The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-modal Deepfake Detection via Multi-task Audio-Visual Prompt Learning
Hui Miao, Yuanfang Guo* , Zeming Liu, Yunhong Wang
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
{huimiao, andyguo, zmliu, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
With the malicious use and dissemination of multi-modal
deepfake videos, researchers start to investigate multi-modal
deepfake detection. Unfortunately, most of the existing methods tune all the parameters of the deep network with limited speech video datasets and are trained under coarsegrained consistency supervision, which hinders their generalization ability in practical scenarios. To solve these problems,
in this paper, we propose the first multi-task audio-visual
prompt learning method for multi-modal deepfake video detection, by exploiting multiple foundation models. Specifically, we construct a two-stream multi-task learning architecture and propose sequential visual prompts and short-time
audio prompts to extract multi-modal features, which are
aligned at the frame level and utilized in subsequent finegrained feature matching and fusion. Due to the natural alignment of visual content and audio signal in real data, we propose a frame-level cross-modal feature matching loss function to learn the fine-grained audio-visual consistency. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superior generalization ability of our method against the stateof-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Overviews of multi-modal joint learning deepfake
video detection methods. a) Previous methods usually tune
all the visual and audio network parameters and some methods only consider audio-visual consistency to make the prediction. b) Our method proposes visual and audio prompts to
adapt different foundation models to multi-modal deepfake
video detection in a multi-task learning manner.

Introduction
Benefiting from the advances in deep learning technology,
malicious users can easily utilize DNN based generation
techniques, such as faceswap1 and SV2TTS (Jia et al. 2018),
to generate visual or audio content for producing deep
forged videos, which is also known as deepfakes, without
requiring too much professional knowledge. These deepfake
videos, which may be maliciously applied in fabricating political rumors2 and spreading misinformation3 , can induce
severe social problems and trust issues.
In real scenarios, since the majority of deepfake videos
possess both the visual and audio signals to jointly convey information, these multi-modal deepfake data can be
briefly produced via different types of manipulations, including visual-only manipulations, audio-only manipula-

tions, misalignment manipulations and visual-audio manipulations. Under such circumstances, uni-modal deepfake detection techniques (Rossler et al. 2019; Shiohara and Yamasaki 2022; Haliassos et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2023) only focus on predicting the authenticity of the visual content, even
though some methods (Haliassos et al. 2021, 2022) employ
audio signals to learn high-level semantic irregularities in
lip movements. They are less suitable for combating various
types of multi-modal deepfake videos, such as real visual
content with fake audio. Therefore, multi-modal deepfake
detection has received increasing attention in recent years.
Based on the uni-modal deepfake detection methods,
some approaches (Khalid et al. 2021a; Ilyas, Javed, and

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://faceswap.dev/
2
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=30NvDC1zcL8
3
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wVpVH0Wa6E

612

