The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sweeping Heterogeneity with Smart MoPs:
Mixture of Prompts for LLM Task Adaptation
Chen Dun1 * , Mirian Del Carmen Hipolito Garcia2 * , Guoqing Zheng2 , Ahmed Hassan Awadallah2 ,
Robert Sim2 , Anastasios Kyrillidis1, 3
1

Rice University, Computer Science Department
2
Microsoft
3
Ken Kennedy Institute at Rice University

Abstract
Prompt instruction tuning is a popular approach to better adjust
pretrained LLMs for specific downstream tasks. How to extend
this approach to simultaneously handle multiple tasks and data
distributions is an interesting question. We propose Mixture of
Prompts (MoPs) with smart gating functionality. Our proposed
system identifies relevant skills embedded in different groups
of prompts and dynamically weighs experts (i.e., collection
of prompts) based on the target task. Experiments show that
MoPs are resilient to model compression, data source, and task
composition, making them highly versatile and applicable in
various contexts. In practice, MoPs can simultaneously mitigate prompt training “interference” in multi-task, multi-source
scenarios (e.g., task and data heterogeneity across sources)
and possible implications from model approximations. Empirically, MoPs show particular effectiveness in compressed
model scenarios, while maintaining favorable performance in
uncompressed settings: MoPs can reduce final perplexity from
9% up to 70% in non-i.i.d. distributed cases and from 3% up
to 30% in centralized cases, compared to baselines.

Introduction
Advances in large language models (LLMs) show that they
are powerful general-purpose models (Bubeck et al. 2023),
with the ability to solve different tasks out of the box. (Soft)
prompt instruction tuning helps in this direction by finetuning
deployed models to adjust to individual downstream tasks,
without the need of full-model finetuning (Lester, Al-Rfou,
and Constant 2021; Kenton et al. 2021; Tamkin et al. 2021).1
Yet, vanilla finetuning procedures do not always behave
well in some practical scenarios. For instance, consider the
following: A company XYZ intends to develop a generalpurpose office assistant application that solves different tasks
at the same time. A desired solution would be to create a
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Similar attempts created the term parameter-efficient finetuning
(PEFT) methods (Houlsby et al. 2019), including adapter tuning
(Houlsby et al. 2019), prefix tuning (Li and Liang 2021), prompt
tuning (Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021), low-rank adaptation
(LoRA) (Hu et al. 2021), few-shot tuning (IA3 ) (Liu et al. 2022a)
and compression aware prompts (Xu et al. 2023); in this work,
without loss of generality and as a proof-of-concept, we focus on
soft prompt instruction pruning.

16426

family of prompts that can be combined on-the-fly and tackle
a wide variety of incoming tasks, without heavy supervision. With that goal in mind, company XYZ uses both human
“labelers” to generate demonstration data of related tasks
(maybe, stored in a central server) and client data to utilize
their own local demonstration.
Most existing approaches suggest the “centrally training
and finetuning” solution, where all data (company-owned and
private client) are gathered, and a pre-trained model is further finetuned. However, beyond the privacy concerns due to
centrally collecting all data, such an approach, while it would
work for the tasks and data included in the training dataset, it
would not necessarily adapt to new incoming tasks. Further,
company XYZ desires to decrease both training and inference
costs of the final model by deploying highly compressed
models and aiming for the generation of specialized “experts”
that can be used on the fly and just-in-time for most incoming
clients, without necessarily requiring further finetuning.2
Overview of our approach and contributions. Such scenarios suggest a multi-source, multi-task prompt tuning approach. We consider scenarios where the system does not
just face data from a single data distribution but has to learn
how to handle data and task heterogeneity. Following recent
literature (Mittal, Bengio, and Lajoie 2022), our emphasis
here is on training specialized prompts that operate in a modular way such that, when combined, they tackle tasks in a
just-in-time manner.
We propose to use Mixture of Prompts (or MoPs) in multisource, multi-task prompt instruction tuning to efficiently
leverage all available data from both the central server and
local clients while using highly compressed models.
The use of MoPs is guided by a gating functionality that
can identify relevant skills embedded in different groups of
prompts (“experts” in this work) based on the data domain of
the current input. This approach dynamically selects a “soft”
combination of relevant prompts, which we hypothesize is
critical to avoid the appearance of implicit “interference”
during training. Simply put, if prompts are not aware of
multiple data sources and we allow all prompts to “follow"
(=be trained toward) the streaming incoming tasks and data
2

The definition of an “expert” here will be apparent later in the
text; this should not necessarily be assumed as MLP experts in a
sparse mixture of expert scenarios (Puigcerver et al. 2023).

