The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GHOST: Gaussian Hypothesis Open-Set Technique
Ryan Rabinowitz1 , Steve Cruz2 , Manuel Günther3 , and Terrance E. Boult1
1

Vision and Security Technology Lab, University of Colorado Colorado Springs,
2
Computer Vision Research Lab, University of Notre Dame,
3
Department of Informatics, University of Zurich
{rrabinow, tboult}@uccs.edu, stevecruz@nd.edu, guenther@ifi.uzh.ch

1.0

Abstract
Evaluations of large-scale recognition methods typically focus
on overall performance. While this approach is common, it often fails to provide insights into performance across individual
classes, which can lead to fairness issues and misrepresentation. Addressing these gaps is crucial for accurately assessing
how well methods handle novel or unseen classes and ensuring
a fair evaluation. To address fairness in Open-Set Recognition (OSR), we demonstrate that per-class performance can
vary dramatically. We introduce Gaussian Hypothesis Open
Set Technique (GHOST), a novel hyperparameter-free algorithm that models deep features using class-wise multivariate
Gaussian distributions with diagonal covariance matrices. We
apply Z-score normalization to logits to mitigate the impact of
feature magnitudes that deviate from the model’s expectations,
thereby reducing the likelihood of the network assigning a
high score to an unknown sample. We evaluate GHOST across
multiple ImageNet-1K pre-trained deep networks and test it
with four different unknown datasets. Using standard metrics
such as AUOSCR, AUROC and FPR95, we achieve statistically significant improvements, advancing the state-of-the-art
in large-scale OSR. Source code is provided online.

Correct Classification Rate

0.8

0.6

0.4

GHOST (AUOSCR = 0.84)
MSP (AUOSCR = 0.78)
NNGuide (AUOSCR = 0.68)

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

False Positive Rate

0.8

1.0

Figure 1: C LASS - WISE O PEN -S ET R ECOGNITION. OSCR
comparison using the MAE-H architecture with OpenImageO as unknowns. Overall performance is the solid line; Average performance on easy (top 10%) and hard (bottom 10%)
classes shown as dashed/dotted lines, respectively. We compare GHOST with Maximum Softmax Probability (MSP) and
NNGuide. Also, we show the area under the curve (AUC)
of each method’s overall OSCR. In each setting, GHOST
maintains correct classification as FPR rate decreases while
others fall dramatically; hence, GHOST maintains fairness
in difficult cases while improving OSR.

Code Repository — https://github.com/Vastlab/GHOST

Introduction
When deploying deep neural networks (DNNs) in real-world
environments, they must handle a wide range of inputs. The
“closed-set assumption,” prevalent in most evaluations, represents a significant limitation of traditional recognitionoriented machine learning algorithms (Scheirer et al. 2012).
This assumption presumes that the set of possible classes
an algorithm will encounter is known a priori, meaning that
these algorithms are not evaluated for robustness against samples from previously unseen classes. Open-Set Recognition
(OSR) challenges this assumption by requiring systems to
manage errors from unknown classes during testing.
Often, OSR is performed by thresholding on confidence
(Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Vaze et al. 2022) or having
an explicit “other” class (Ge, Demyanov, and Garnavi 2017)
and computing overall performance, ignoring the effects of
per-class performance differentials (Li, Wu, and Su 2023).

However, evaluating recognition systems under OSR conditions is crucial for understanding their behavior in real-world
scenarios. This paper shows that as more unknowns are rejected, there is great variation in per-class accuracy, which
could lead to unfair treatment of underperforming classes,
see Fig. 1.
Recently, research has followed two primary methodologies for adapting DNNs to OSR problems: (1) training processes that enhance feature spaces and (2) post-processing
techniques applied to pre-trained DNNs to adjust their outputs for identifying known and unknown samples (Roady
et al. 2020). Although OSR training methods have occasionally proven effective (Zhou, Ye, and Zhan 2021; Miller et al.
2021; Dhamija, Günther, and Boult 2018), their application is
complex due to the evolving nature of DNNs and the specific,
often costly training requirements for each. If different DNNs
are trained in various ways, why should a single OSR training

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6666

