The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Know2Vec: A Black-Box Proxy for Neural Network Retrieval
Zhuoyi Shang1,2,3 , Yanwei Liu1,3 * , Jinxia Liu4 , Xiaoyan Gu1,3 , Ying Ding1 3 , Xiangyang Ji5
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security Defense, Beijing, China
4
College of Information and Intelligence Engineering, Zhejiang Wanli University, Ningbo, China
5
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{shangzhuoyi,liuyanwei}@iie.ac.cn, liujinxia@zjwu.edu.cn, {guxiaoyan,dingying}@iie.ac.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
For general users, training a neural network from scratch is
usually challenging and labor-intensive. Fortunately, neural
network zoos enable them to find a well-performing model
for directly use or fine-tuning it in their local environments.
Although current model retrieval solutions attempt to convert
neural network models into vectors to avoid complex multiple inference processes required for model selection, it is still
difficult to choose a suitable model due to inaccurate vectorization and biased correlation alignment between the query
dataset and models. From the perspective of knowledge consistency, i.e., whether the knowledge possessed by the model
can meet the needs of query tasks, we propose a model retrieval scheme, named Know2Vec, that acts as a black-box retrieval proxy for model zoo. Know2Vec first accesses to models via a black-box interface in advance, capturing vital decision knowledge from models while ensuring their privacy.
Next, it employs an effective encoding technique to transform
the knowledge into precise model vectors. Secondly, it maps
the user’s query task to a knowledge vector by probing the semantic relationships within query samples. Furthermore, the
proxy ensures the knowledge-consistency between query vector and model vectors within their alignment space, which is
optimized through the supervised learning with diverse loss
functions, and finally it can identify the most suitable model
for a given task during the inference stage. Extensive experiments show that our Know2Vec achieves superior retrieval
accuracy against the state-of-the-art methods in diverse neural network retrieval tasks.

Figure 1: Knowledge-consistency-based black-box proxy
for model retrieval.

2012) classification task than a model specialized in flower
classification. Assessing the suitableness of a Deep learning(DL) model by uploading the entire dataset to the huge
model market for comparison against inference results is
risky and impractical due to data disclosure and resource
constraints. Therefore, further research is needed to evaluate
the correlation between neural network models and query
tasks.
Source-Free model transferability estimation (SF-MTE)
(Bao et al. 2019; Nguyen et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2023)
methods are designed to rank the suitability of pre-trained
models for fine-tuning in downstream tasks. Traditional
methods (Bao et al. 2019; Nguyen et al. 2020) directly score
the candidate models by utilizing statistical data like features or joint distribution of models and query task. Typically, Model Spider(Zhang et al. 2023) vectorizes both neural network models and query tasks to avoid the high computational costs of forward propagation increased by traditional methods.
With the vectorization idea, Neural Network Retrieval
(NNR) (Jeong et al. 2021; Zhong, Qian, and Zhang 2021)
tries to transform models and datasets into specific embeddings that facilitates their matching. Generating vectors for
models and datasets, and calculating their correlations require an accurate understanding of the key knowledge of
both models and query tasks. The pioneering NNR study,
DNNR (Zhong, Qian, and Zhang 2021) utilizes litmus im-

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.16251

Introduction
Well-trained models in many domains have demonstrated
promising performance in various downstream tasks. The
training process refines knowledge from dataset into general rules and patterns, enabling the model to make accurate
predictions on new data (Tian et al. 2023). However, their
performances vary widely for a targeted downstream application (Zhang et al. 2023). The model whose knowledge is
more closely aligned with the task requirements tends to perform better. For example, a model with numerical knowledge would find it easier to complete the MNIST(Deng
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20346

