The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DualNet: Robust Self-Supervised Stereo Matching with Pseudo-Label Supervision
Yun Wang1 , Jiahao Zheng1 , Chenghao Zhang2 , Zhanjie Zhang3 ,
Kunhong Li4 , Yongjian Zhang4 Junjie Hu5,6 *
1
City University of Hong Kong
Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Automation, CASIA
3
Zhejiang University
4
Sun Yat-sen University
5
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
6
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
{ywang3875-c, jhzheng4-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, zhangchenghao18@mails.ucas.ac.cn, cszzj@zju.edu.cn,
{likh25,zhangyj85}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hujunjie@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Self-supervised stereo matching has drawn attention due
to its ability to estimate disparity without needing groundtruth data. However, existing self-supervised stereo matching methods heavily rely on the photo-metric consistency assumption, which is vulnerable to natural disturbances, resulting in ambiguous supervision and inferior performance compared to the supervised ones. To relax the limitation of the
photo-metric consistency assumption and even bypass this
assumption, we propose a novel self-supervised framework
named DualNet, which consists of two key steps: robust selfsupervised teacher learning and pseudo-label supervised student training. Specifically, the teacher model is first trained in
a self-supervised manner with a focus on feature-metric consistency and data augmentation consistency. Then, the output of the teacher model is geometrically constrained to obtain high-quality pseudo labels. Benefiting from these highquality pseudo labels, the student model can outperform its
teacher model by a large margin. With the two well-designed
steps, the proposed framework DualNet ranks 1st among
all self-supervised methods on multiple benchmarks, surprisingly even outperforming several supervised counterparts.

Figure 1: Visualized performance comparisons of state-ofthe-art stereo matching methods on KITTI 2012 and KITTI
2015 benchmarks (lower is better).
in 3D space is color-invariant across different views. The
hypothesis of photo-metric consistency is to maximize the
similarity between the left image and the reconstructed
left image after being warped from the right perspective.
However, this foundational premise can be compromised by
various real-world factors, such as low texture, occlusion,
reflections, and illumination changes, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
These challenges can confuse the self-supervision loss,
leading to ambiguous supervision and ultimately resulting
in inferior performance compared to supervised methods.
In this work, we address the challenges of self-supervised
stereo matching by introducing novel learning strategies. We
argue that stereo matching inherently requires establishing
dense correspondences along epipolar lines. The features
derived from this matching process allow for the encoding
of textureless patterns with sufficient local discriminability.
Consequently, these learned features, which capture distinctive textures, can serve as effective supervisory signals. To
this end, we propose a feature-metric consistency loss that
enforces consistency between the features of the left view
and its reconstructed counterpart, analogous to the photometric consistency loss.
To further address ambiguities arising from problematic regions, such as occlusions and illumination changes,
we explore the application of contrastive learning, which
has demonstrated success in self-supervised learning. However, the integration of contrastive learning into self-

Introduction
Stereo matching aims to find corresponding pixels between
a rectified image pair, which is crucial for various applications, e.g., AR, robotics, and navigation. Recently, learningbased supervised stereo matching methods (Li et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2024a,b, 2025) have obtained remarkable results. However, these methods are highly dependent on
large-scale ground-truth labels for supervision, the acquisition of which is a significant challenge (Yang et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2024a, 2025). As an alternative, self-supervised
learning approaches have emerged, offering competitive accuracy without the need for ground-truth disparity labels.
Existing self-supervised stereo matching methods (Zhong, Dai, and Li 2017; Wang et al. 2020; Su
and Ji 2022) rely on the photo-metric consistency assumption, which assumes that the appearance of a point
* Corresponding author is Junjie Hu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8178

