The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PA3 Fed: Period-Aware Adaptive Aggregation for Improved Federated Learning
Chengxiang Huang1 , Bingyan Liu1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{huangchengxiang2021, bingyanliu}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed approach that enables collaborative model training while safeguarding client
data privacy. Nevertheless, FL encounters difficulties due to
statistical heterogeneity from the varied data distributions
across numerous clients, which can affect overall efficiency
and performance. Existing state-of-the-art FL methods often concentrate on optimizing interactions between clients,
neglecting the potential insights from individual clients during training. Additionally, these approaches generally assume
that every period of training has an equal impact on the final model’s performance. To address these issues, this paper
introduces a novel method, PA3 Fed, which conducts periodaware adaptive aggregation for improved federated learning.
The key idea is to identify the most critical periods, i.e., those
with the highest information content and entropy, where we
leverages each client’s own performance variations during
training for adaptive aggregation. Furthermore, because it operates independently of inter-client optimization approaches,
it can be easily incorporated into other baselines for improved
performance. Experimental results show that our method improves accuracy by up to 15% and significantly enhances stability.

Figure 1: Illustration of the Loss Curve for A Single Local Client. The FedAvg algorithm curve shows significant
oscillations in the early stages, whereas our method is not
only much smoother but also achieves a lower overall loss.

Liu et al. 2023): the challenge posed by non-i.i.d. (nonidentical and independent distribution) datasets can lead to
a pronounced divergence in the gradient updates from local clients (Liu et al. 2021; Liu, Guo, and Chen 2021). This
divergence causes the global model’s updates to stray from
the reasonable gradient direction. As a result, given the federated global model in each round, the loss function (such as
CrossEntropy Loss) on individual clients can become highly
unstable, experiencing considerable fluctuations during the
update process. These fluctuations are not merely minor deviations but can represent substantial swings that undermine
the consistency of local training. Consequently, the overall
stability of the federated learning system is compromised,
making it challenging to converge to an optimal status, and
ultimately reducing the effectiveness and reliability of the
model in real-world applications.
Many state-of-the-art methods have been proposed to address these challenges. For instance, FedProx (Li et al. 2020)
and SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al. 2020) introduce global
constraints to help local models align more closely with the
global model’s updates, thereby achieving more stable and
consistent training. Additionally, techniques such as clustering (Ruan and Joe-Wong 2022), contrastive learning (Mu
et al. 2023), and knowledge distillation (Lin et al. 2020; Fan
et al. 2023) have been employed to further enhance the infer-

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al.
2020; Karimireddy et al. 2020) has revolutionized the field
of distributed machine learning by effectively addressing
the challenges posed by real-world data heterogeneity and
privacy concerns (Kairouz et al. 2021). Classical Federated
Learning methods primarily rely on the Federated Averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al. 2017) algorithm, which can
be seen as the first state-of-the-art method in FL. In each
communication round, FedAvg utilizes local computations
at each client to train models on their unique datasets and
then relies on a centralized server to aggregate these local
models for a better global model.
Despite the success of FL in various real-world applications (Wang, Liu, and Li 2024; Long et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2024), Federated Learning continues to grapple with the statistical heterogeneity challenge (Imteaj et al. 2022, 2021;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17395

