The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

How Your Location Relates to Health: Variable Importance and Interpretable
Machine Learning for Environmental and Sociodemographic Data
Ishaan Maitra1 * , Raymond Lin1 * , Eric Chen1 , Jon Donnelly1 , Sanja Šćepanović2 , Cynthia Rudin1
1

Duke University, North Carolina, United States
Nokia Bell Labs, Cambridge, United Kingdom
ishaan.maitra@duke.edu, raymond.lin@duke.edu, eric.y.chen@duke.edu, jon.donnelly@duke.edu,
sanja.scepanovic@nokia-bell-labs.com, cynthia@cs.duke.edu
2

Abstract

Prior work has utilized other integrated datasets to uncover relationships between environmental or sociodemographic variables and health outcomes, but these studies
tend to 1) rely on a single variable importance method, 2)
fail to measure spatially local relationships, and 3) do not
create tools that provide extremely interpretable and auditable models. A group of recent works have focused on
demonstrating how air pollution triggers respiratory and cardiovascular diseases (Annesi-Maesano et al. 2021; RazaviTermeh, Sadeghi-Niaraki, and Choi 2021; Ravindra et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2024). Other works have aimed to determine risk factors for depression and anxiety (Qasrawi et al.
2022; Byeon 2021; Elshawi, Al-Mallah, and Sakr 2019).
These studies have a primary limitation: the lack of a comprehensive dataset that would enable the disentangling of
contributions from multiple factors to health outcomes. The
lack of a large, complex dataset has been a challenge for
environmental public health studies for years (Comess et al.
2020), but MEDSAT addresses this gap by including diverse
environmental, sociodemographic, and health variables, enabling more nuanced analysis.
Newer works examining risk factors and mortality for
COVID-19 (Shao, Xu, and Wu 2021; Hu et al. 2024; Scarpone et al. 2020) have popularized the use of spatial modeling techniques to account for inherent spatial heterogeneity within geographic data. We draw inspiration from these
works but highlight the need for comprehensive variable
filtering to identify only the most relevant factors in large
datasets, improving interpretability and actionable insights
(Elshawi, Al-Mallah, and Sakr 2019). To do this, our modeling uses a dual approach: global interpretability techniques
that generalize over the entire population of England and local interpretability techniques that provide explanations at
much smaller levels. This allows us to have very detailed insight into which variables are important, and more crucially,
where they are important.
We develop a robust framework that integrates comprehensive importance ranking with interpretable machine
learning techniques to effectively filter and analyze sociodemographic, geographic, and environmental variables. This
approach is applied to key health outcomes such as diabetes, anxiety, hypertension, asthma, and depression, allowing us to examine their associations both locally and globally, across pre- and post-COVID-19 periods. For our vari-

Health outcomes depend on complex environmental and sociodemographic factors whose effects change over location
and time. Only recently has fine-grained spatial and temporal data become available to study these effects, namely the
MEDSAT dataset of English health, environmental, and sociodemographic information. Leveraging this new resource,
we use a variety of variable importance techniques to robustly identify the most informative predictors across multiple health outcomes. We then develop an interpretable machine learning framework based on Generalized Additive
Models (GAMs) and Multiscale Geographically Weighted
Regression (MGWR) to analyze both local and global spatial
dependencies of each variable on various health outcomes.
Our findings identify NO2 as a global predictor for asthma,
hypertension, and anxiety, alongside other outcome-specific
predictors related to occupation, marriage, and vegetation.
Regional analyses reveal local variations with air pollution
and solar radiation, with notable shifts during COVID. This
comprehensive approach provides actionable insights for addressing health disparities, and advocates for the integration
of interpretable machine learning in public health.

Code — github.com/maitraishaan/VI-and-IML-MEDSAT
Datasets — mediatum.ub.tum.de/1714817

Introduction
Recent increases in the prevalence of chronic diseases such
as diabetes and hypertension (Jia 2022) along with empirical evidence of the health risks associated with climate
change (Obradovich et al. 2018) highlight the pressing need
to understand what environmental and sociodemographic
features impact health. Only recently has a very detailed
dataset (MEDSAT, Scepanovic et al. 2023) become available that integrates health determinants, including sociodemographic, environmental, and geographic features, with
outcome-related prescription data as a proxy for health outcomes. It offers an unprecedented opportunity for exploring these relationships in close detail across England – if we
have the trustworthy tools to do it.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28240

