The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

COMM: Concentrated Margin Maximization for Robust Document-Level
Relation Extraction
Zhichao Duan1 , Tengyu Pan1 , Zhenyu Li1 , Xiuxing Li2 , Jianyong Wang1 *
1

2

Tsinghua University
Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract

part of

“The Way You Make Me Feel” is a song by American recording
producer, performer, lyrics by

Document-level relation extraction (DocRE) is the process
of identifying and extracting relations between entities that
span multiple sentences within a document. Due to its realistic settings, DocRE has garnered increasing research attention in recent years. Previous research has mostly focused
on developing sophisticated encoding models to better capture the intricate patterns between entity pairs. While these
advancements are undoubtedly crucial, an even more foundational challenge lies in the data itself. The complexity inherent in DocRE makes the labeling process prone to errors, compounded by the extreme sparsity of positive relation samples, which is driven by both the limited availability
of positive instances and the broad diversity of positive relation types. These factors can lead to biased optimization
processes, further complicating the task of accurate relation
extraction. Recognizing these challenges, we have developed
a robust framework called COMM to better solve DocRE.
COMM operates by initially employing an instance-aware
reasoning method to dynamically capture pertinent information of entity pairs within the document and extract relational
features. Following this, COMM takes into account the distribution of relations and the difficulty of samples to dynamically adjust the margins between prediction logits and the
decision threshold, a process we call Concentrated Margin
Maximization. In this way, COMM not only enhances the extraction of relevant relational features but also boosts DocRE
performance by addressing the specific challenges posed by
the data. Extensive experiments and analysis demonstrate the
versatility and effectiveness of COMM, especially its robustness when trained on low-quality data (achieves >10% performance gains).

country of citizenship

artist Michael Jackson. It was released by Epic Records on
record label

November 9, 1987, as the third single from his seventh studio
publication date

album, Bad (1987). It was written and composed by Jackson, and
producer

publication date

produced by Quincy Jones and Jackson. Aside from appearing ……

Figure 1: A sample document in Re-DocRED (Tan et al.
2022b). Different entities are highlighted in distinct colors,
with all mentions of the same entity sharing the same color.
For brevity, some sentences and relations have been omitted
from the illustration.

flects more closely the natural flow of information in realworld documents, such as news articles (Yamamoto et al.
2017), scientific papers (Jain et al. 2020), and financial reports (Oral et al. 2020), making DocRE a crucial task for
various natural language processing (NLP) applications.
A significant challenge in DocRE lies in identifying the
relevant contextual information for a given entity pair and
extracting their relational features. To illustrate this challenge, we present an example from the Re-DocRED dataset
(Tan et al. 2022b), a well-regarded resource in DocRE, as
shown in Figure 1. This example features a range of complex relations both within and across sentences. For instance, determining the country of citizenship relation between Michael Jackson and American requires the DocRE
model to focus on a specific sentence and perform intrasentence relation inference. Meanwhile, for inter-sentence
relations like the part of between The Way You Make Me
Feel and Bad, the model must capture relevant information across multiple sentences to accurately infer the relation types between the entity pair. To address this challenge,
considerable effort is frequently directed toward enhancing sophisticated and advanced relational encoding models (Christopoulou, Miwa, and Ananiadou 2019; Zeng et al.
2020; Duan et al. 2022; Jain et al. 2024). While such efforts
have achieved certain success, they often fall short to adequately address the underlying challenge of data.
In the example shown in Figure 1, the complete document

Introduction
In recent years, the task of document-level relation extraction (DocRE) has garnered significant research attention due
to its realistic and practical settings (Duan et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024; Xiao, Jin, and Hao 2024). Unlike
sentence-level relation extraction (Lyu and Chen 2021; Zhou
and Chen 2022), DocRE involves identifying and extracting relations between entities that span multiple sentences
within a document (Yao et al. 2019). This complexity re* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23841

