The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploit your Latents: Coarse-Grained Protein Backmapping with
Latent Diffusion Models
Rongchao Zhang1 , Yu Huang2 * Yiwei Lou1 , Yi Xin3 , Haixu Chen4 , Yongzhi Cao1 , Hanpin Wang1
1

Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University), Ministry of Education, School of Computer
Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
4
Institute of Geriatrics&National Clinical Research Center of Geriatrics Disease, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China
rcz@stu.pku.edu.cn, hy@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

and subsequent refinement through Monte Carlo relaxation
or molecular dynamics simulations, which exhibit high repeatability. Consequently, the choice of scoring functions and
relaxation methods in these approaches must be appropriate
and partially empirical (Yang and Gómez-Bombarelli 2023),
leading to varying optimization outcomes that might not
fully reflect the actual behavior of biomolecules. AlphaFold2
(Jumper et al. 2021) has shown a sensation in structural biology by precisely addressing the protein structure prediction
problem, facilitating the gradual integration of AI-generated
content into interdisciplinary molecular modeling. Then, several studies (Wang et al. 2022; Yang and Gómez-Bombarelli
2023) have achieved successful backmapping performance
by introducing condition-based autoencoders for modeling
all-atom distributions.

Coarse-grained (CG) molecular dynamics of proteins is a preferred approach to studying large molecules on extended time
scales by condensing the entire atomic model into a limited
number of pseudo-atoms and preserving the thermodynamic
properties of the system. However, the significantly increased
efficiency impedes the analysis of substantial physicochemical information, since high-resolution atomic details are sacrificed to accelerate simulation. In this paper, we propose
LatCPB, a generative approach based on diffusion that enables
high-resolution backmapping of CG proteins. Specifically,
our model encodes an all-atom into discrete latent embeddings, aligned with learnable multimodal discrete priors for
circumventing posterior collapse and maintaining the discrete
properties of the protein sequence. During the generation, we
further design a latent diffusion process within the continuous
latent space due to the potential stochastics in the data. Moreover, LatCPB performs a contrastive learning strategy in latent
space to separate feature representations of various molecules
and conformations of the same molecule, thus enhancing the
comprehension of molecular representational diversity. Experimental results demonstrate that LatCPB is able to backmap
CG proteins effectively and achieve outstanding performance.

Nevertheless, the atomic feature space is typically composed of diverse physical quantities like atomic types and
coordinates (Xu et al. 2023). These features exhibit multimodal attributes of discrete, integer, and continuous variables,
particularly in protein sequences that are codes formed by
discrete values (Santos et al. 2023; Ingraham et al. 2019). Protein sequences exhibit a high degree of regularity in nature
and shift rapidly among few stable conformations, which are
typically maintained by specific geometrical conformations
(Li et al. 1996; Škrbić et al. 2024; Roche and Royer 2018).
Current generative approaches (Wang et al. 2022; Yang and
Gómez-Bombarelli 2023) directly model all-atom conformations in the continuous domain feature space of atoms, failing
to capture the high-dimensional intricacies of input features.
Recently, diffusion models have achieved state-of-the-art performance by modeling in latent spaces, including applications
in image generation (Ni et al. 2023; Singh, Gould, and Zheng
2023), voice synthesis (Lee, Chung, and Chung 2023; Takahashi, Singh, and Mitsufuji 2023), and molecular design (Xu
et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023). Up until the date of this work,
the exploration of latent diffusion models for backmapping
has remained scarce. Besides, due to the dynamic diversity
of protein conformational trajectories, a multitude of feasible
atomic configurations can be associated with a single CG
structure (Shmilovich et al. 2022). There is suffering from
identifying features of various molecules and conformations
of the same molecule while dealing with new.

Introduction
Coarse-grained (CG) models are utilized to facilitate scalable
molecular dynamics simulations by simplifying atomic properties and their interactions, thus reducing computational demands and accelerating simulations, particularly in processes
like aggregation (Jones, Shmilovich, and Ferguson 2023) and
cardiolipin-selective (Mohr et al. 2022). Simultaneously, the
ongoing attention to reintegrating missing all-atom details
back into the CG protein structures enables researchers to
derive particular structural insights from CG simulations.
Proteins are not strictly static entities but rather ensembles
of occasionally similar conformations. Transitions between
these states may even occur over length scales from 1/10 Å to
nm and time scales from ns to s (Conti Nibali and Paciaroni
2023). Previous backmapping works primarily adopt geometric rules or random placement to generate initial structures
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1111

