The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Achieving Ensemble-Like Performance in a Single Model:
A Feature Diversification Framework for Image-Text Matching
Zhao Zhou1,2 , Yiqun Wang1 , Weizhong Zhang1,3∗ , Yingbin Zheng4 , Xiangcheng Du1 , Cheng Jin1,2 *
1

Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Innovation Center of Calligraphy and Painting Creation Technology, MCT, China
3
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, China
4
Videt Lab, Shanghai, China
{zzhou21,yiqunwang23,xcdu22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, zyb@videt.cn, {weizhongzhang,jc}@fudan.edu.cn
2

Q:People are gathered around the table filled with food.

Abstract
Model ensembling is a widely used technique that enhances
performance in image-text matching tasks by combining multiple models, each trained with different initializations. However, the inefficiencies associated with training several models and generating outputs from them constrain their practical
applicability. In this paper, we argue that while the parameters
of two randomly initialized models can differ significantly,
their feature distributions can be similar at certain stages. By
employing a proposed technique called cross-modal realignment, we demonstrate that features derived from differently
initialized models maintain similarity at the feature extraction stage and can be effectively transformed by fine-tuning
a small number of parameters. These findings provide an efficient way to achieve ensemble-like performance within a
single model. Specifically, we propose a Feature Diversification Framework (FDF) that emulates the outputs of multiple
model initializations to generate diverse features from a common shared feature. Firstly, we introduce feature conversion
methods to transform shared features into a set of distinct
features. Next, a realignment training strategy is presented
to optimize negative pairs for realigning these transformed
features, thereby enhancing their diversification to resemble
the outputs of different models. Additionally, we propose a
reweighting module that assigns weights to these features,
enabling a weighted fusion approach for robust feature representation. Extensive experiments on the Flickr30K and MSCOCO datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of our framework.

𝒎𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒍𝟏

𝒎𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒍𝟐

𝒎𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒍𝟏

realignment model

(a) Image matching fragments according to the query text
Image Feature
Extracter

Text Feature
Extracter

Image Encoder Text Encoder

Image Encoder Text Encoder
Image Feature
Extracter

Text Feature
Extracter

𝒎𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒍𝟐

Image Feature
Extracter

Text Feature
Extracter
105.2M

Image Encoder Text Encoder
10.0M
Step1: Copy feature extracter
weights from 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙1 .
Step2: Copy encoder weights from
𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙2 .
Step3: Use dataloder initialization
of 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙2 to optimize the weights.

(b) Pipeline for cross-model realignment

Figure 1: (a) Models trained with diverse initializations
demonstrate varying degrees of cross-model alignment. (b)
A cross-model realignment technique to demonstrate that
features from models with distinct initializations are similar
at feature extractor stage and can be effectively transformed.

Introduction

learning the semantic correspondence between images and
texts for measuring their similarity.
Due to the intrinsic complexity of vision and language
tasks, models trained with distinct initializations can generate diverse alignment results between images and text and
biased understandings of data, as depicted in Figure 1(a).
To alleviate the impacts of initialization variance and explore the peak of performance, some image-text matching
methods (Chen et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a;
Lee et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2022; Kim, Kim, and Kwak
2023) adopt model ensembling techniques. These methods
average the similarity outputs of multiple models and capitalize on the complementary strengths of each, thereby integrating their predictions to enhance overall performance.

In recent years, the task of image-text matching has attracted considerable attention due to its extensive applications in multimedia retrieval (Li et al. 2022b), image
captioning (Luo et al. 2021), and visual question answering (Anderson et al. 2018). Image-text matching methods
encompass a wide array of techniques aimed at establishing meaningful correspondences between images and textual descriptions, which is learned through a large number of
positive and negative sample pairs during training. The crucial challenge of image-text matching resides in accurately
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10879

