The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diff-Shadow: Global-guided Diffusion Model for Shadow Removal
Jinting Luo1 , Ru Li2 , Chengzhi Jiang1 , Xiaoming Zhang3 ,
Mingyan Han1 , Ting Jiang1 , Haoqiang Fan1 , Shuaicheng Liu4 *
1
Megvii Technology Inc.
Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Southwest Jiaotong University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{k531756653, morven126, zxiaoming360, hanmy628, tjhedlen}@gmail.com,
liru@hit.edu.cn, fhq@megvii.com, liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn
2

(a) ShadowFormer

Abstract
We propose Diff-Shadow, a global-guided diffusion model
for shadow removal. Previous transformer-based approaches
can utilize global information to relate shadow and nonshadow regions but are limited in their synthesis ability
and recover images with obvious boundaries. In contrast,
diffusion-based methods can generate better content but they
are not exempt from issues related to inconsistent illumination. In this work, we combine the advantages of diffusion
models and global guidance to achieve shadow-free restoration. Specifically, we propose a parallel UNets architecture:
1) the local branch performs the patch-based noise estimation
in the diffusion process, and 2) the global branch recovers the
low-resolution shadow-free images. A Reweight Cross Attention (RCA) module is designed to integrate global contextual
information of non-shadow regions into the local branch. We
further design a Global-guided Sampling Strategy (GSS) that
mitigates patch boundary issues and ensures consistent illumination across shaded and unshaded regions in the recovered image. Comprehensive experiments on datasets ISTD,
ISTD+, and SRD have demonstrated the effectiveness of DiffShadow. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, our method
achieves a significant improvement in terms of PSNR, increasing from 32.33dB to 33.69dB on the ISTD dataset.

PSNR:
26.14

(b) ShadowDiffusion

PSNR:
25.48

Crop

(c) Our global-guided diffusion model

Downsample

Globalguided
Sample
PSNR:
27.80

Figure 1: (a) shows the result of ShadowFormer (Guo et al.
2023a), which suffers from residual shadow artifacts due to
the limited modeling ability, while the result of (b) ShadowDiffusion (Guo et al. 2023b) shows obvious illumination
inconsistency across the images because it cannot exploit the
global information. (c) exhibits the proposed Diff-Shadow,
which generates high-quality shadow removal results that
maintain illumination consistency and are free from block
boundary artifacts through the design of a parallel network
structure and a novel global-guided sampling strategy.

Introduction
Shadows are a phenomenon that exists when an optical image is captured with light blocked. The presence of shadow
can complicate image processing as well as many subsequent vision tasks, e.g., object detection, tracking, and semantic segmentation (Guo et al. 2023a). The goal of shadow
removal is to enhance the brightness of the image shadow
regions and to achieve a consistent illumination distribution
between shadow and non-shadow regions. The shadow removal task is essentially an image restoration task designed
to utilize the information available in the shadow-affected
image to recover the information lost due to light occlusion.
Shadow removal has received intensive and long-lasting
attention. Traditional approaches use hand-crafted features
and are based on physical lighting models (Gryka, Terry, and
Brostow 2015; Zhang, Zhang, and Xiao 2015; Xiao et al.

2013). Inspired by the successes of deep learning, many approaches that utilize large amounts of data (Guo et al. 2023a;
Chen et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2022a) have been
introduced to improve shadow removal and reveal promising improvements, e.g., Guo et al. proposed a transformerbased architecture, named ShadowFormer, to exploit nonshadow information to help shadow region restoration. Their
shadow-interaction module plays an important role in exploring global information. However, this method often
overlooks the modeling of the underlying distribution of natural images. Consequently, the generated results appear to
have significant residual shadows, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
Recently, diffusion models have gained wide interest in
the field of image restoration (Saharia et al. 2022a,b; Jiang
et al. 2023) due to its powerful modeling ability. Guo et
al. proposed ShadowDiffusion to jointly pursue shadow-free
images and refined shadow masks (Guo et al. 2023b).
Although it covers the whole input image, the kind of

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5856

