The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Int*-Match: Balancing Intra-Class Compactness and Inter-Class Discrepancy
for Semi-Supervised Speaker Recognition
Xingmei Wang, Jinghan Liu, Jiaxiang Meng* , Boquan Li, Zijian Liu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
{wangxingmei, liujinghan, mjxwjy, liboquan, 32185246}@hrbeu.edu.cn

Abstract

Speaker recognition is to recognize the identity of a speaker
based on voices (Kinnunen and Li 2010; Lee et al. 2011).
Due to unique pronunciation organs and speaking styles, including vocal tract shapes, larynx sizes, accents, and rhythm,
each speaker possesses a distinctive voice, akin to fingerprints, enabling speaker identification (Bai and Zhang
2021; Irum and Salman 2019). Based on this characteristic, speaker recognition often performs open-set recognition
tasks, where the cosine similarity between two non-enrolled
category samples is evaluated to determine whether they belong to the same speaker. In this paper, we focus on studying
the open-set speaker recognition task.
Utilizing extensive high-quality labeled data, existing
methods normalize speaker embeddings onto a hypersphere

and utilize margins to explicit decision boundaries between
different classes (Xiang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018b; Deng
et al. 2019). This approach optimizes cosine distance during
training, enhancing inter-class discrepancy and intra-class
compactness. However, obtaining high-quality labeled data
is challenging, and the scarcity of such data leads to generalization issues (Ying 2019). Therefore, the lack of highquality labeled data is still the main challenge faced by existing efforts.
To address such issues, semi-supervised learning
(SSL) (Zhu and Goldberg 2022) leverages abundant unlabeled data alongside a small portion of labeled ones
during training, emerging as a reliable alternative to
supervised learning. Specifically, existing SSL methods
achieve satisfactory performance in image classification
tasks, especially those state-of-the-art (SOTA) ones (Sohn
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023) assign
pseudo labels (Lee et al. 2013) for unlabeled data based
on confidence thresholds. The produced pseudo-label data
plays the role of labeled ones to complete model training.
The success of SSL indicates a prospective direction of
devising effective semi-supervised speaker recognition
models, towards addressing the labeled data lack issue.
We have empirically evaluated the SOTA threshold-based
SSL methods (in Section 4.2) on the speaker recognition
tasks, and find (1) these methods show limited success, (2)
the utilization rate of pseudo labels is limited. That is, if the
quality (correctness) of pseudo labels is over-focused, the
quantity of the selected pseudo-label data is not enough to
complete the recognition task. Moreover, in speaker recognition, enhancing both intra-class compactness and inter-class
discrepancy is crucial for effectively performing open-set
recognition tasks. However, we find that existing thresholdbased SSL methods select pseudo labels based solely on
inter-class discrepancy as thresholds, neglecting intra-class
compactness. Based on such intuitions, in this work, we
propose an effective SSL method (Int*-Match) for speaker
recognition, towards selecting both high-quality and highquantity pseudo labels for unlabeled data with intra-class
compactness and inter-class discrepancy. To be specific, our
contributions in this work mainly include:

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose Int*-Match, an SSL method to balance the
quality and quantity of the selected pseudo labels for
speaker recognition. The proposed approach takes both

Open-set speaker recognition is to identify whether the voices
are from the same speaker. One challenge of speaker recognition is collecting large amounts of high-quality data. Based
on the promising results of image classification, one intuitively feasible solution is semi-supervised learning (SSL)
which uses confidence thresholds to assign pseudo labels
for unlabeled data. However, we empirically demonstrated
that applying SSL methods to speaker recognition is nontrivial. These methods focus solely on inter-class discrepancy as thresholds to select pseudo labels, overlooking intraclass compactness, which is particularly important for openset speaker recognition tasks. Motivated by this, we propose
Int*-Match, a semi-supervised speaker recognition method
selecting reliable pseudo labels with intra-class compactness
and inter-class discrepancy for speaker recognition. In particular, we use the inter-class discrepancy of labeled data as
the threshold for pseudo-label selection and adjust the threshold based on the intra-class compactness of the pseudo labels dynamically and adaptively. Our systematic experiments
demonstrate the superiority of Int*-Match, presenting an
outstanding Equal Error Rate (EER) of 1.00% on the VoxCeleb1 original test set, which is merely 0.06% below the
performance achieved by fully supervised learning.

Code — https://github.com/LiuJinghan2001/IntMatch

1

Introduction

25407

