The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rapid Learning in Constrained Minimax Games with Negative Momentum
Zijian Fang1 * , Zongkai Liu1, 3 * , Chao Yu1, 2† , Chaohao Hu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Shanghai Innovation Institute, Shanghai, China
{fangzj, liuzk}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn, huchh9@mail3.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

gorithm more closely aligned with game theory and becomes the building block of solving imperfect-information
games (Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and Sandholm 2018).
However, these algorithms are known to exhibit rotation behaviour and fail to converge pointwise even in simple bilinear cases (Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, Flokas, and Piliouras
2019). A corpus of studies aim to address this divergence
issue through plain modifications of standard algorithms,
with a specific focus on achieving an enhanced convergence rate and/or securing last-iterate convergence guarantees (Golowich, Pattathil, and Daskalakis 2020).
Among these techniques, regularization and optimistic
gradient are two widely used methods, with Magnet Mirror
Descent (MMD) (Sokota et al. 2023) and Optimistic Gradient Descent Ascent (OGDA) (Mertikopoulos et al. 2019)
as their respective representative algorithms. MMD provides
a linear convergence rate to the regularized equilibrium by
utilizing the influences of regularization on last-iterate convergence. OGDA, on the other hand, introduces an optimistic gradient estimate to guide the convergence process
more effectively by predicting future gradients. In addition,
Negative Momentum (NM) is introduced as an enhancement
technique in recent research (Gidel et al. 2019), achieving a
linear convergence rate comparable to Extragradient (Korpelevich 1976) and OGDA in unconstrained bilinear games.
Subsequent works have further delved into the convergence
properties of NM (Zhang and Wang 2021; Lorraine et al.
2022). However, recent analysis of NM predominantly focus
on the impact of its integration with GDA and the learning
dynamics over the unconstrained setting, leaving a gap in
discussions concerning its interaction with game-solver algorithms and its performance in constrained settings. Hence,
this paper places particular emphasis on the following two
questions:

In this paper, we delve into the utilization of the negative momentum technique in constrained minimax games. From an
intuitive mechanical standpoint, we introduce a novel framework for momentum buffer updating, which extends the findings of negative momentum from the unconstrained setting to
the constrained setting and provides a universal enhancement
to the classic game-solver algorithms. Additionally, we provide theoretical guarantee of convergence for our momentumaugmented algorithms with entropy regularizer. We then extend these algorithms to their extensive-form counterparts.
Experimental results on both Normal Form Games (NFGs)
and Extensive Form Games (EFGs) demonstrate that our
momentum techniques can significantly improve algorithm
performance, surpassing both their original versions and the
SOTA baselines by a large margin.

Code — https://github.com/kkkaiaiai/NM-Method

Introduction
In recent years, a broad spectrum of applications in
machine learning and robust optimization have been
cast as a minimax optimization problem in the form
of minx∈X maxy∈Y f (x, y). Examples formulated under this framework include generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2020), adversarial training (2018), fair statistical inference (Madras et al. 2018),
market equilibrium (Kroer et al. 2019), primal-dual reinforcement learning (Du et al. 2017) and numerous others.
This optimization problem can be conceptualized as a zerosum game involving two players: the first player minimizes
f (x, y) by tuning x, while the other player maximizes
f (x, y) by tuning y.
With the inextricably intertwined advancement of online learning and game theory, several algorithms have become foundational solvers for minimax games, including
the Online Mirror Descent (OMD) (Warmuth, Jagota et al.
1997), Follow-The-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) (Abernethy,
Hazan, and Rakhlin 2008), and particularly Regret Matching (RM) (Hart and Mas-Colell 2000), which is an al-

• Can NM be extended from the unconstrained setting to
the constrained setting?
• Can NM provide a significant empirical improvement
over existing methods like regularization and optimistic?
To provide affirmative answers to these questions, we
make the following contributions in this paper:

* These authors contributed equally.

• We introduce a negative momentum updating framework tailored for the constrained setting, coupled with
an intuitive paradigm for updating the momentum buffer,

†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16541

