The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diverse Rare Sample Generation with Pretrained GANs
Subeen Lee1 , Jiyeon Han1 , Soyeon Kim1 and Jaesik Choi1,2
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
2
INEEJI, South Korea
{sbrblee7, j.han, soyeon.k, jaesik.choi}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

(Sagar et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2022), and natural hazard analysis (Ma, Mei, and Xu 2024).
Several studies have been conducted to enhance the overall diversity of GAN-generated outputs and to promote the
generation of rare samples (Chang et al. 2024; Allahyani
et al. 2023; Humayun, Balestriero, and Baraniuk 2022,
2021; Heyrani Nobari, Rashad, and Ahmed 2021; Ghosh
et al. 2018; Tolstikhin et al. 2017; Srivastava et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2016). Due to the high computational cost of
training GANs (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018), techniques without model retraining are appealing. For example, Humayun, Balestriero,
and Baraniuk (2022) proposed a resampling technique for
pretrained GANs with a controllable fidelity-diversity tradeoff parameter. However, the proposed method requires extensive sampling to cover the data manifold fully. On the
other hand, Chang et al. (2024) proposed a method to obtain
diverse samples that satisfy text conditions by optimizing latent vectors with a quality-diversity objective.
Han et al. (2023) proposes a rarity score for samples using
relative density measures based on k-nearest neighbor (kNN) manifolds in the feature space of pretrained classifiers.
Although k-NN density estimation is straightforward and reliable (Naeem et al. 2020; Kynkäänniemi et al. 2019), its
non-differentiable nature complicates gradient-based optimization. In contrast, normalizing flows (NFs) excel at highdimensional density estimation in differentiable form (Papamakarios et al. 2021; Kingma and Dhariwal 2018; Dinh,
Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2016; Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2014). We employ NFs for density estimation in the feature space, which incurs a lower training cost compared to
retraining or fine-tuning GANs, and analyze how NF-based
density estimates relate to the rarity score.
This study aims to generate diverse rare samples for
a given high-resolution image datasets and GANs. Our
method does not require any fine-tuning or retraining of the
GANs but instead explores the latent space of the given
model through gradient-based optimization. Our contributions are as follows:
• Our method can generate diverse versions of rare images
utilizing the multi-start method in optimization, without
being trapped at the same local optima.
• Rarity and diversity of generated images and similarity to
the initial image can be controlled via a multi-objective

Deep generative models are proficient in generating realistic
data but struggle with producing rare samples in low density
regions due to their scarcity of training datasets and the mode
collapse problem. While recent methods aim to improve the
fidelity of generated samples, they often reduce diversity and
coverage by ignoring rare and novel samples. This study proposes a novel approach for generating diverse rare samples
from high-resolution image datasets with pretrained GANs.
Our method employs gradient-based optimization of latent
vectors within a multi-objective framework and utilizes normalizing flows for density estimation on the feature space.
This enables the generation of diverse rare images, with controllable parameters for rarity, diversity, and similarity to a
reference image. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach both qualitatively and quantitatively across various
datasets and GANs without retraining or fine-tuning the pretrained GANs.

Code — https://github.com/sbrblee/DivRareGen

1

Introduction

Deep generative models have shown impressive generative
capabilities across various domains. The primary focus of
current generative model research is on enhancing the fidelity of generated images (DeVries, Drozdzal, and Taylor 2020; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Azadi et al. 2018;
Turner et al. 2019). However, these approaches often compromise sample diversity and encounter difficulties generating rare samples, primarily due to their limited representation in the training dataset (Sehwag et al. 2022; Lee et al.
2021). In GANs, this issue is worsened by the mode collapse problem (Thanh-Tung and Tran 2020). Investigating
rare samples is crucial for several reasons: it enhances the
creation of synthetic datasets that embody diversity and creativity (Sehwag et al. 2022; Agarwal, D’souza, and Hooker
2022), ensures fairness in generative processes (Teo, Abdollahzadeh, and Cheung 2023; Hwang et al. 2020), and aligns
with the human tendency to favor unique features (Snyder
and Lopez 2001; Lynn and Harris 1997). Additionally, exploring edge cases and unusual scenarios is essential in various domains, such as drug discovery or molecular design
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4553

