The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning to Manipulate Under Limited Information
Wesley H. Holliday1 , Alexander Kristoffersen1 , Eric Pacuit2
1

University of California, Berkeley
2
University of Maryland
wesholliday@berkeley.edu, akristoffersen@berkeley.edu, epacuit@umd.edu

Abstract

However, the mere existence of a preference profile in
which a voter has an incentive to misreport their preferences
tells us little about the frequency with which a voter will
have such an incentive or the difficulty of recognizing that
such an incentive exists—under either full information or
limited information about the profile. Thus, a manipulable
voting method might be relatively resistant to manipulation,
either because the frequency just cited is low, the difficulty
just cited is high, or a mixture of both factors. Such resistance to manipulation has been considered an important
criterion for comparing voting rules (Merrill 1988; GreenArmytage, Tideman, and Cosman 2016).
As for the difficulty of manipulation, there is now a large
literature in computational social choice on the worst-case
complexity of computing whether there is a strategic ranking
that will elect a desired candidate. Faliszewski and Procaccia (2010) call this “AI’s war on manipulation.” A series of
hardness results have been proved since Bartholdi, Tovey,
and Trick 1989 and Conitzer, Sandholm, and Lang 2007.
There is evidence for and against the view that high worstcase computational complexity is a barrier to manipulation
(Walsh 2011), and the situation with average-case manipulability might be quite different (Mossel and Rácz 2013).
In this paper, we take a different approach than previous
work, measuring resistance to manipulation by whether neural networks of various sizes can learn to profitably manipulate a given voting method in expectation, given different
types of information about how other voters will vote. Like
the classic results on manipulation, we focus on the case of
a single manipulating voter. A single voter can almost never
affect the outcome of a large election with thousands of voters or more by changing their vote, so rational manipulation
by a single voter is most relevant for small elections in committees, boards, etc. The classic results on manipulation also
in effect assume that the manipulator knows exactly how all
other voters will vote, which is unrealistic in many voting
contexts. By contrast, we train neural networks to manipulate on the basis of different types of limited information.

By classic results in social choice theory, any reasonable preferential voting method sometimes gives individuals an incentive to report an insincere preference. The extent to which
different voting methods are more or less resistant to such
strategic manipulation has become a key consideration for
comparing voting methods. Here we measure resistance to
manipulation by whether neural networks of various sizes can
learn to profitably manipulate a given voting method in expectation, given different types of limited information about
how other voters will vote. We trained over 100,000 neural
networks of 26 sizes to manipulate against 8 different voting
methods, under 6 types of limited information, in committeesized elections with 5–21 voters and 3–6 candidates. We find
that some voting methods, such as Borda, are highly manipulable by networks with limited information, while others,
such as Instant Runoff, are not, despite being quite profitably
manipulated by an ideal manipulator with full information.
For the three probability models for elections that we use, the
overall least manipulable of the 8 methods we study are Condorcet methods, namely Minimax and Split Cycle.

Code — https://github.com/epacuit/ltm

Introduction
A fundamental problem in multi-agent decision making
is that of aggregating heterogeneous preferences (Conitzer
2010). Voting theory provides many possible methods of
preference aggregation with different benefits and costs
(Zwicker 2016). However, no reasonable preferential voting
method escapes the problem of manipulability. As shown
by classic results such as the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem
(Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1973) and its generalizations
(Duggan and Schwartz 2000; Taylor 2005), for any such voting method, there is some preference profile in which some
voter has an incentive to report an insincere preference in
order to obtain a result that is preferable, according to their
sincere preference, to the result they would obtain if they
were to submit their sincere preference. Thus, sincere voting is not a Nash equilibrium of the game derived from this
preference profile, where the players are the voters and the
actions are the possible preference rankings to report.

Related work
Manipulation under Limited Information A number of
previous papers study whether a voter can successfully manipulate in an election under limited information about how
other voters will vote (Myerson and Weber 1993; Conitzer,

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13915

