The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SLRL: Semi-Supervised Local Community Detection Based on Reinforcement
Learning
Li Ni1,2 , Rui Ye1 , Wenjian Luo3 , Yiwen Zhang1 * , Lei Zhang1 , Victor S. Sheng4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, China
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
4
School of Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University, USA
nili@ahu.edu.cn, e22301212@stu.ahu.edu.cn, luowenjian@hit.edu.cn, zhangyiwen@ahu.edu.cn, zl@ahu.edu.cn,
victor.sheng@ttu.edu
2

Abstract

Complex systems are often represented as networks (Wang
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Xiong et al. 2024), such as
social networks (Girvan and Newman 2002). Real-world
networks often exhibit community structures (Fortunato
2010; Zhang et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2021) and some useful prior information exists, such as node label (Liu et al.
2014a,b), pairwise constraints between nodes (Ganji, Bailey, and Stuckey 2018; Li et al. 2014), and real community structures (Zhang et al. 2020), which can enhance the
detection of community structures. To utilize prior information, some semi-supervised community detection methods have been devised. For example, Bakshi et al. (Bakshi,
Parthasarathy, and Srinivasan 2018) extract the size and patterns of communities from known communities, and subsequently detect communities that are similar to the patterns.
Zhang et al. introduced a semi-supervised community detection algorithm based on generative adversarial networks

(Zhang et al. 2020). It leverages known communities to identify seed nodes and detects the communities that are similar
to the known ones, starting from these identified seed nodes.
Wu et al. (Wu et al. 2022) employ a community locator to
identify candidate communities similar to known communities and then use a community rewriter to refine these candidates by removing or adding nodes.
The above works (Bakshi, Parthasarathy, and Srinivasan
2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2022) utilize known communities to detect a specified number of communities from
the network that are similar to the known communities. In
some cases, users are only interested in the community to
which a given node belongs. A simple idea is to directly
find the community to which a given node belongs from
the multiple communities detected. However, the communities detected by these methods may not contain the given
nodes. To mine a community for a given node, Ni et al. (Ni
et al. 2024a) proposed a heuristic algorithm that leverages
partially known communities to guide the generation of local community to which a given node belongs. Chen et al.
(Chen, Xia, and Gao 2023) proposed CommunityAF, which
learns a general community structure from known communities and uses an autoregressive flow generative model to generate the community containing a query node. The general
community structure learned by CommunityAF may be inappropriate for the community structure containing a given
node. So far, the research of semi-supervised local community detection is at the initial stage, necessitating more dedicated efforts urgently.
In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised local community detection algorithm based on reinforcement learning,
called SLRL, only exploring parts of the network surrounding the given node. SLRL acquires a local structure around
the given node through the extractor. This local structure,
which is a rough community, is utilized to select useful communities from known communities. These useful selected
communities then form a high-quality training set to train
the expander to expand the community. The main contributions are summarized as follows:

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Due to the outstanding performance of reinforcement
learning, we employ it for local community detection and
propose SLRL. To the best of our knowledge, this is the

Most existing semi-supervised community detection algorithms leverage known communities to learn community
structures, subsequently identifying communities that align
with these learned community structures. However, differences in community structures may render the community
structures learned by these methods inappropriate for the
community containing the given node of interest. As a result,
the identified community may exclude the given node or be of
poor quality. Inspired by the success of reinforcement learning, we propose a Semi-supervised Local community detection method based on Reinforcement Learning, named SLRL,
which only explores parts of the network surrounding the
given node. It first extracts the local structure around a given
node with an extractor, followed by selecting communities
that are similar to this local structure to distill useful communities. These selected communities are employed to train the
expander, which expands the community containing a given
node. Experimental results demonstrate that SLRL outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms on five real-world datasets.

Introduction

631

