The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

STraj: Self-training for Bridging the Cross-Geography Gap
in Trajectory Prediction
Zhanwei Zhang1 , Minghao Chen2 , Zhihong Gu3 , Xinkui Zhao4 , Zheng Yang5 * ,
Binbin Lin4 , Deng Cai1 , Wenxiao Wang4
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
Hangzhou Dianzi University
3
Beijing Automobile Works
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
5
FABU Inc.
{zhanweizhang, zhaoxinkui, binbinlin, wenxiaowang}@zju.edu.cn,
{minghaochen01, dengcai}@gmail.com, guzhihong@baw.com.cn, yangzheng@fabu.ai
The distribution of lane segment
number in each scenario

Percent

Accurate trajectory prediction has prominent significance in
autonomous driving scenarios. Most existing methods predict the trajectory of an agent by learning its interaction with
other agents and the map within the scenario. However, the
heterogeneous distribution of these elements across different
geographical scenarios is always ignored. Thus, trajectory predictors might struggle to generalize well when deployed in different geographical scenarios. To bridge the cross-geography
gap, in this paper, we propose a plug-and-play self-training
pipeline, termed STraj, for cross-geography trajectory prediction. STraj comprises three progressive steps: pseudo label
(i.e., time-series trajectory) generation, update, and utilization.
First, to generate pseudo labels that generalize to the crossgeography scenarios, STraj pre-trains the predictor through
the complementary agent and map augmentations. Second,
to facilitate the stable training of the predictor, we design a
specific pseudo label update strategy. This strategy selects
high-consistency pseudo trajectories from the current and historical epochs to supervise the target domain samples. Third,
with generated pseudo trajectories, we introduce trajectoryinduced contrastive learning to mitigate the representation
bias of cross-geography agents. Extensive experiment results
on various cross-geography trajectory prediction benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of STraj.

Percent

The distribution of agent
number in each scenario

Abstract

(a)
The agent number

(b)
The lane segment number

Figure 1: The cross-geography gap is a common issue in
the trajectory prediction task. (a) and (b) present significant
cross-geography distribution differences in terms of agent
and lane segment numbers, respectively.

Code — https://github.com/Zhanwei-Z/STraj

Introduction
Trajectory prediction is a critical task in self-driving scenarios, which is significant for autonomous vehicles to take safe
and reliable actions (Liu et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024). This
task involves predicting the future trajectories of agents (i.e.,
traffic participants) in motion, considering their interactions
within the scenarios. Specifically, lane segments incorporated
in road maps, together with other agent states, are vital interactive clues (Liang et al. 2020; Liao et al. 2024; Gu et al.
2024). However, these components are distributed heterogeneously across different geographical scenarios. As a result,
the generalization ability of most trajectory predictors might
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22723

be limited when transferred to diverse geographical scenarios. For instance, as shown in Fig. 1, the distribution of agent
and lane segment numbers in Pittsburgh exhibit notable dissimilarities compared to that in Miami (Chang et al. 2019).
Consequently, as shown in Table 1, a well-known predictor
LaneGCN (Liang et al. 2020) and a state-of-the-art (SOTA)
predictor HPNet (Tang et al. 2024) trained in Pittsburgh both
experience a substantial performance decline (of 44.0-61.3%
and 53.0-68.6% in terms of the minADE and minFDE metrics) when directly applied to Miami scenarios. While the
potential solution lies in the collection of additional data,
the feasibility is unfortunately hindered due to diverse realworld scenarios and the substantial costs entailed in trajectory
annotation. Thus, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
for trajectory prediction becomes a challenging but highly
demanded topic, which aims to explore an effective way to
reduce the annotated trajectories in the target domain while
maintaining satisfactory generalization. In this field, existing methods (Xu et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022; Bahari et al.
2022; Bhattacharyya, Huang, and Czarnecki 2023; Kothari
et al. 2023; Qian et al. 2024; Park, Jeong, and Yoon 2024)
commonly concentrate on addressing general generalization
issues, while (Ye, Zhou, and Wang 2023) specifically addresses domain gaps arising from the road infrastructure. In
contrast, we delve into the cross-geography domain gap and
focus on alleviating this gap, since most trajectory predictors

