The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Proportionally Fair Matching via Randomized Rounding
Sharmila Duppala1 , Nathaniel Grammel1 , Juan Luque1 , Calum MacRury2 , Aravind Srinivasan1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park
2
Graduate School of Business, Columbia University
sduppala@umd.edu, ngrammel@umd.edu, jluque@umd.edu, cm4379@columbia.edu, asriniv1@umd.edu

Abstract

In many applications, algorithms are employed to make
decisions that could significantly impact the lives of individuals. In such settings, we ought to ensure fairness and
equity in the decision-making process. However, classical
algorithms typically do not consider such socially motivated
objectives and constraints such as fairness or diversity. For
instance, a ride-sharing platform may provide better quality assignments (e.g., with shorter wait times, newer vehicles, or better pricing) to riders from certain demographic
groups while providing lower quality assignments to others
as studied by (Esmaeili et al. 2023). Similarly, cognitive biases from workers can negatively impact the result of crowdsourced data, which may potentially be mitigated by assigning a diverse set of workers to a wide range of different task
types.
There are many ways to formalize and incorporate some
notion of fairness into the computed solutions of matching problems (see, e.g., Esmaeili et al. (2023); Bandyapadhyay et al. (2023)). Following the work of Bandyapadhyay et al. (2023), we consider a notion of proportional fairness. This notion is closely related to the notion of disparate impact (Feldman et al. 2015) and has
been explored in various fundamental problems, including matroid optimization (Chierichetti et al. 2019), clustering (Bera et al. 2019), online matching (Sankar et al. 2021),
set packing (Duppala et al. 2023), spectral clustering (Kleindessner et al. 2019), and others. In the present work,
we consider a formulation of proportional fairness known
as (α, β)-BALANCED M ATCHING: given an edge-colored
graph (where edge colors may denote membership in specific groups), the objective is to find a maximum weight
matching ensuring that the proportion of edges of any color
among all matched edges lies between α and β where 0 ≤
α ≤ β ≤ 1. We highlight that (α, β)-BALANCED M ATCHING
adheres to two key criteria: restricted dominance, which limits the fraction of edges selected from any given group to at
most β, and minority protection, which ensures that the fraction of edges from any given group is at least α.
This notion of fairness can be applied to the applications
discussed above, such as in ride-sharing, job hiring, and
crowd sourcing. By assigning colors to edges (rather than
only to vertices), the color is able to capture information
about both sides of the match. For instance, in ridesharing, the edge color may encode information about both the

Given an edge-colored graph, the goal of the proportional
fair matching problem is to find a maximum weight matching while ensuring proportional representation (with respect
to the number of edges) of each color. The colors may correspond to demographic groups or other protected traits where
we seek to ensure roughly equal representation from each
group. It is known that, assuming ETH, it is impossible to approximate the problem with ℓ colors in time 2o(ℓ) nO(1) (i.e.,
subexponential in ℓ) even on unweighted path graphs. Further, even determining the existence of a non-empty matching satisfying proportionality is NP-Hard. To overcome this
hardness, we relax the stringent proportional fairness constraints to a probabilistic notion. We introduce a notion we
call δ-P ROBABLY FAIR, where we ensure proportionality up
to a factor of at most (1 ± δ) for some small δ > 0 with high
probability. The violation δ can be brought arbitrarily close to
0 for some good instances with large values of matching size.
We propose and analyze simple and fast algorithms for bipartite graphs that achieve constant-factor approximation guarantees, and return a δ-P ROBABLY FAIR matching.

1

Introduction

Graph matching, in particular the special case of bipartite matching, is a classical computational problem with
many applications such as ad allocation (Mehta et al. 2007;
Mehta 2013), crowdsourcing (Ho and Vaughan 2021; Tong
et al. 2016; Hikima et al. 2021; Dickerson et al. 2019),
job hiring (Purohit, Gollapudi, and Raghavan 2019), organ exchange (Dickerson, Procaccia, and Sandholm 2013;
McElfresh, Bidkhori, and Dickerson 2019; Farnadi et al.
2021; Farhadi, Gilbert, and Hajiaghayi 2022), and ride sharing (Hikima et al. 2021; Nanda et al. 2020; Dickerson et al.
2018). Matching is also a fundamental subroutine in several domains including computer vision (Belongie, Malik,
and Puzicha 2002), text similarity estimation (Pang et al.
2016) in natural language processing, machine learning algorithms (Huang and Jebara 2007; Jebara, Wang, and Chang
2009; Huang and Jebara 2011; Choromanski, Jebara, and
Tang 2013) and computational biology (Zaslavskiy, Bach,
and Vert 2009) among others.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16435

