The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MM-CamObj: A Comprehensive Multimodal Dataset
for Camouflaged Object Scenarios
Jiacheng Ruan1 * , Wenzhen Yuan1 * , Zehao Lin2 , Ning Liao2 ,
Zhiyu Li2† , Feiyu Xiong2 , Ting Liu1 , Yuzhuo Fu1†
2

1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Institute for Advanced Algorithms Research, Shanghai, China
jackchenruan@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Large visual-language models (LVLMs) have achieved great
success in multiple applications. However, they still encounter challenges in complex scenes, especially those involving camouflaged objects. This is primarily due to the
lack of samples related to camouflaged scenes in the training dataset. To mitigate this issue, we construct the MMCamObj dataset for the first time, comprising two subsets:
CamObj-Align and CamObj-Instruct. Specifically, CamObjAlign contains 11,363 image-text pairs, and it is designed for
VL alignment and injecting rich knowledge of camouflaged
scenes into LVLMs. CamObj-Instruct is collected for finetuning the LVLMs with improved instruction-following capabilities, and it includes 11,363 images and 68,849 conversations with diverse instructions. Based on the MM-CamObj
dataset, we propose the CamObj-Llava, an LVLM specifically designed for addressing tasks in camouflaged scenes.
To facilitate our model’s effective acquisition of knowledge
about camouflaged objects and scenes, we introduce a curriculum learning strategy with six distinct modes. Additionally, we construct the CamObj-Bench to evaluate the existing LVLMs’ capabilities of understanding, recognition, localization and count in camouflage scenes. This benchmark
includes 600 images and 7 tasks, with a total of 9,449 questions. Extensive experiments are conducted on the CamObjBench with CamObj-Llava, 8 existing open-source and 3
closed-source LVLMs. Surprisingly, the results indicate that
our model achieves a 25.84% improvement in 4 out of 7 tasks
compared to GPT-4o.

What is the camouflaged animal in
the picture?

What is the camouflaged animal in
the picture?

Llava

The image shows a polar bear.
Polar bears are well-adapted to
their Arctic environment, with their
white fur providing excellent
camouflage in the snow.

The image shows a flower with a
long stem and a green leaf. There is
no camouflaged animal visible in
this picture. The focus is on the
flower and its stem, and there are
no animals present that would be
camouflaged in this context.

GPT-4o

The camouflaged animal in the
picture is an arctic fox. Its white fur
helps it blend into the snowy
environment, providing effective
camouflage in its natural habitat.

The camouflaged animal in this
picture is a stick insect. Its body
mimics the appearance of twigs or
branches, which helps it blend into
its surroundings and avoid predators.

Figure 1: Empirical studies in camouflaged scenarios. We
compare Llava-v1.5-7b and GPT-4o in understanding the
two classical images with camouflage object existed. There
is a certain gap between existing open-source models and
advanced closed-source models in camouflage scenes.

alignment (Zhu et al. 2023) and instruction fine-tuning (Lin
et al. 2024), LVLMs have demonstrated outstanding performance in various tasks, including image description, visual
question answering, object localization, and visual reasoning. These achievements not only showcase the flexibility
and adaptability of LVLMs in multimodal scenarios but also
drive their widespread applications in fields such as medical
imaging (Li et al. 2023), remote sensing (Li et al. 2024b),
and autonomous driving (Cui et al. 2024).
Despite the significant progress made by LVLMs in various multimodal applications, they still suffer from significant challenges in complex scenes, particularly those involving camouflaged objects. The primary cause of the difficulty
and complexity of tasks in such scenarios lies in the high
similarity between the camouflaged objects and their surroundings in terms of texture, shape, and color. As illustrated
in Figure 1, our empirical experiments provide a preliminary
demonstration of the performance of LVLMs in these sce-

Code — https://github.com/JCruan519/MM-CamObj

Introduction
Benefiting from the revolutionary breakthroughs of large
language models (LLMs) (Minaee et al. 2024; Touvron
et al. 2023b; Zhu et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024b; Yu et al.
2024) and the continuous advancements in visual foundational models (Li et al. 2024a), large vision-language
models (LVLMs) have achieved remarkable progress (Li
et al. 2024a). Via training processes such as vision-language
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Zhiyu Li and Yuzhuo Fu are co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6740

