The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FFCG: Effective and Fast Family Column Generation
for Solving Large-Scale Linear Program
Yi-Xiang Hu1 , Feng Wu1* , Shaoang Li1 , Yifang Zhao2 , Xiang-Yang Li1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{yixianghu,lishaoa,zhaoyifang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{wufeng02,xiangyangli}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

improve the solution of the current RMP, by solving a pricing subproblem (SP). When no more columns with negative
reduced cost are found, CG will provably converge to an
optimal solution to the LP. In practice, CG is often used by
LP relaxation solvers in the branch-and-price algorithm (Desaulniers, Desrosiers, and Solomon 2005) for large MILP.
Here, we focus on how to select columns in each iteration efficiently and speed up the convergence of CG. Typically, CG greedily selects a single column with the most
negative reduced cost, which can be sped up by adding multiple columns at once (Desaulniers, Desrosiers, and Solomon
2002). To distinguish from single-column selection, we refer to CG with multi-column selection as Family Column
Generation (FCG). Unfortunately, adding multiple columns
raises another issue: if CG greedily selects all columns with
negative reduced costs, many redundant columns that do
not improve the objective value will be selected, which increases the computing time. Therefore, how to 1) identify the
most effective columns and 2) decide the appropriate column
number are keys to the performance of FCG.
In the last few years, researchers have become increasingly interested in machine learning methods for mathematical optimization including large LPs (Bengio, Lodi, and
Prouvost 2021). Most related to our work, Chi et al. (2022)
proposed the first Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework
for CG, modeling column selection as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP). Recently, Yuan, Fang, and Song (2024)
devised a multiple-column selection strategy based on RL
for CG. Specifically, they limited the action space size by
adding only a fixed number of columns per CG iteration.
Note that the action space grows exponentially when all
possible combinations of candidate columns are considered.
Most importantly, when multiple columns are added, the
contribution of each column towards convergence varies
with the combination of columns in different phases of CG.
Thus, it is essential to efficiently select the best combination
of columns from candidates at each CG iteration to avoid increasing computational overhead with redundant columns.
This raises the issue of the so-called credit assignment for
columns, which pertains to determining the contribution of
each column toward CG convergence.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a
novel Fast Family Column Generation, named FFCG. Our
main contributions are summarized as follows:

Column Generation (CG) is an effective and iterative algorithm to solve large-scale linear programs (LP). During each
CG iteration, new columns are added to improve the solution
of the LP. Typically, CG greedily selects one column with
the most negative reduced cost, which can be improved by
adding more columns at once. However, selecting all columns
with negative reduced costs would lead to the addition of
redundant columns that do not improve the objective value.
Therefore, selecting the appropriate columns to add is still
an open problem and previous machine-learning-based approaches for CG only add a constant quantity of columns per
iteration due to the state-space explosion problem. To address
this, we propose Fast Family Column Generation (FFCG) —
a novel reinforcement-learning-based CG that selects a variable number of columns as needed in an iteration. Specifically, we formulate the column selection problem in CG as an
MDP and design a reward metric that balances both the convergence speed and the number of redundant columns. In our
experiments, FFCG converges faster on the common benchmarks and reduces the number of CG iterations by 77.1% for
Cutting Stock Problem (CSP) and 84.8% for Vehicle Routing
Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW), and a 71.4% reduction in computing time for CSP and 84.0% for VRPTW on
average compared to several state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, the successful solution
of large-scale Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP)
problems requires solving Linear Programming (LP) relaxations that have a huge number of variables. For example,
in the Cutting Stock Problem (CSP) with a length of n, each
integer variable represents the number of times a cutting pattern is used, and there are exponentially many (2n ) cutting
patterns. However, LP involving a large number of variables
(i.e., columns) often cannot be handled at once by the solver.
To address this, Gilmore and Gomory (1961) proposed an iterative algorithm, called Column Generation (CG), which is
widely used to solve large-scale LPs. Specifically, CG starts
by solving a Restricted Master Problem (RMP) with a subset
of columns and gradually includes new columns, which can
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11238

