The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Evaluation Framework for Product Images Background Inpainting Based on
Human Feedback and Product Consistency
Yuqi Liang1 2 , Jun Luo1 , Xiaoxi Guo1 , Jianqi Bi1 *
1

Ant Group
South China University of technology
{liangyuqi.lyq, wuguo.lj, xiaoxi.gxx, bijianqi.bjq}@antgroup.com
2

Abstract
In product advertising applications, the automated inpainting
of backgrounds utilizing AI techniques in product images has
emerged as a significant task. However, the techniques still
suffer from issues such as inappropriate background and inconsistent product in generated product images, and existing
approaches for evaluating the quality of generated product
images are mostly inconsistent with human feedback causing
the evaluation for this task to depend on manual annotation.
To relieve the issues above, this paper proposes Human Feedback and Product Consistency (HFPC), which can automatically assess the generated product images based on two modules. Firstly, to solve inappropriate backgrounds, human feedback on 44,000 automated inpainting product images is collected to train a reward model based on multi-modal features
extracted from BLIP and comparative learning. Secondly, to
filter generated product images containing inconsistent products, a fine-tuned segmentation model is employed to segment the product of the original and generated product images
and then compare the differences between the above two. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that HFPC can effectively evaluate the quality of generated product images and
significantly reduce the expense of manual annotation. Moreover, HFPC achieves state-of-the-art(96.4% in precision) in
comparison to other open-source visual-quality-assessment
models.

Figure 1: Examples of original and AI-inpainting product
images. Issues identified include (a-b) inappropriate background (pillows should not be placed on the ground), (c-d)
inappropriate background(poor aesthetics), (e-f) product inconsistency between the original image and the generated
image, (g-h) product inconsistency between the original image and the generated image.

et al. 2023; Qureshi et al. 2017; Voronin et al. 2015). As
illustrated in Fig. 1, generated product images often suffer
from the following problems: inappropriate background and
product inconsistency. Currently, in real-world scenarios, a
necessary way to filter these low-quality generated product
images is human annotation, which is expensive and demanding.
The existing methods used for image quality assessment
tend to evaluate generated images in isolation, without considering the need to preserve the integrity of the original
product, position it appropriately, or ensure its harmony
with the background. Common automatic evaluation metrics, such as the referenced metrics Fréchet Inception Distance(FID) (Yu, Zhang, and Deng 2021) and Cumulative
Maximum Mean Discrepancy(CMMD) (Jayasumana et al.
2024), focus on image distribution but usually fail to capture nuances in individual images. Reference-free metrics
such as CLIP-IQA (Wang, Chan, and Loy 2023) merely assess the appearance and aesthetics of the images. More recent approaches exert to collecting human preferences and
train reward models to predict the preferences for improving

Code — https://github.com/created-Bi/HFOC

Introduction
AI-based background inpainting techniques (Chen et al.
2024; Verma et al. 2024; Phutke and Murala 2023; Feng
et al. 2021; Bhargavi, Sindwani, and Gholami 2023; Alam,
Sokhandan, and Goodman 2024) have become crucial in improving the homogeneity of products and backgrounds in the
visual needs of markets, notably in e-commerce and advertising, as well as sectors prioritizing high-quality images for
profitability. (Wang et al. 2012; Hao et al. 2021; He, Wang,
and Wu 2021).
Compared to the rapid development of AI-based background inpainting techniques, the core challenge shifts to the
evaluation of images generated by these techniques (Zhang
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

478

