The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SubjectDrive: Scaling Generative Data in Autonomous Driving via Subject Control
Binyuan Huang1 * † , Yuqing Wen2 * † , Yucheng Zhao3 * , Yaosi Hu4 * , Yingfei Liu3 , Fan Jia3 ,
Weixin Mao3 , Tiancai Wang3‡ , Chi Zhang5 , Chang Wen Chen4 , Zhenzhong Chen1 , Xiangyu Zhang3
2

1
Wuhan University
University of Science and Technology of China
3
MEGVII Technology
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
5
Mach Drive

Abstract

tracking(Li et al. 2023a). Motivated by these successes, there
is a growing interest in applying generative models to the synthesis of natural data for more discriminative tasks (Sarıyıldız
et al. 2023; Azizi et al. 2023; Nguyen et al. 2024).

Autonomous driving progress relies on large-scale annotated
datasets. In this work, we explore the potential of generative
models to produce vast quantities of freely-labeled data for
autonomous driving applications and present SubjectDrive,
the first model proven to scale generative data production in a
way that could continuously improve autonomous driving applications. We investigate the impact of scaling up the quantity
of generative data on the performance of downstream perception models and find that enhancing data diversity plays a
crucial role in effectively scaling generative data production.
Therefore, we have developed a novel model equipped with a
subject control mechanism, which allows the generative model
to leverage diverse external data sources for producing varied
and useful data. Extensive evaluations confirm SubjectDrive’s
efficacy in generating scalable autonomous driving training
data, marking a significant step toward revolutionizing data
production methods in this field.

Introduction
Deep generative models (Rombach et al. 2022; Blattmann
et al. 2023b; Yu et al. 2023; Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023;
Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)
have achieved remarkable progress recently, demonstrating
excellence in generating high-quality and realistic visual content. Diffusion models(Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020), a key contributor to this advancement,
are renowned for their stable and top-quality sample generation. Through the utilization of modern diffusion models, the
recent breakthroughs in controllable technology (Zhang, Rao,
and Agrawala 2023) now facilitate precise and flexible content customization. These developments enable the creation
of synthetic samples that are almost indistinguishable from
real, human-annotated data. By leveraging the generative
data, methods dependent on supervised training can be substantially enhanced for tasks such as image classification(Fan
et al. 2024), object detection(Wang et al. 2024a), and object

Figure 1: The comparison between existing method and SubjectDrive framework.(a) Existing data generation framework
that uses the control sequence and sampling noise to generate
synthetic data with limited sample diversity and scalability.
(b) Compared with the traditional framework, SubjectDrive
introduces additional synthesis diversity by incorporating extra subject control to enhance the scalability of generative
model. (c) Evaluation of data scaling on the nuScenes detection and tracking task.
Autonomous driving, as a key application domain, heavily relies on large-scale annotated data and has increasingly
paid attention to generative data collection methods. One of
the most challenging tasks in autonomous driving is BEV
(Bird’s Eye View) perception, which includes 3D object de-

* Equal Contribution.
†

This work was done during the internship at MEGVII.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

3617

