The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boundary Decomposition for Finding Nadir Objective Vector
in Multi-Objective Discrete Optimization
Ruihao Zheng, Zhenkun Wang*
School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
12132686@mail.sustech.edu.cn, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com

Abstract

to apply preference-based algorithms (e.g., interactive algorithms) (Branke et al. 2008; Wang, Olhofer, and Jin 2017;
Mena et al. 2023). Moreover, the nadir objective vector is
frequently utilized to guide the search of algorithms in both
continuous and discrete optimization (Vodopija, Tušar, and
Filipič 2024; Mesquita-Cunha, Figueira, and Barbosa-Póvoa
2023). In addition, the nadir objective vector, along with the
ideal objective vector, is widely used for the normalization
of the objective space (Miettinen 1998; He et al. 2021).
In this paper, we investigate the computation of the nadir
objective vector for the multi-objective discrete optimization
problem (MODOP). The MODOP can be written as

The exact nadir objective vector of a multi-objective discrete optimization problem (MODOP) is crucial for decisionmaking but remains challenging to find. Existing methods
for tackling this issue have limitations in theoretical guarantees or high computational costs. This paper applies boundary decomposition to the MODOP and proposes an exact
algorithm called BDNC. BDNC is designed to address a
bilevel optimization problem for each objective with finitetime convergence guarantees. The lower-level optimization
problem, termed the boundary subproblem, is a scalarization
of the MODOP. It can be solved using any suitable singleobjective exact solver. According to the theoretical foundations of boundary decomposition, some specific settings of
the boundary subproblem can ensure alignment with the nadir
objective vector under mild conditions. The upper-level optimization problem evaluates a potential setting using the optimal solution to the lower-level one. It employs our proposed
novel pruning method to efficiently identify the specific settings. Moreover, BDNC can leverage a trade-off provided
by the decision-makers, potentially facilitating the decisionmaking process. Experiments on various MODOPs demonstrate that BDNC exhibits superior and reliable performance
in terms of runtime compared to existing exact methods.

min. f (x) = (f1 (x), . . . , fm (x))⊺ ,
s.t. x ∈ X,

(1)

where x = (x1 , . . . , xn )⊺ is the decision vector (also called
solution), and X ⊂ Zn denotes the feasible set. f : Zn →
Zm is composed of m objective functions, and f (x) is the
objective vector corresponding to x.
Definition 1. Given two vectors u, v ∈ Rm , u is said to
dominate v (denoted as u ≺ v), if and only if ui ≤ vi for
every i ∈ {1, . . . , m} and uj < vj for at least one j ∈
{1, . . . , m}.
Definition 2. A decision vector x∗ ∈ X and the corresponding objective vector f (x∗ ) are Pareto-optimal, if there is no
x ∈ X such that f (x) dominates f (x∗ ).
Definition 3. The set of all Pareto-optimal solutions is
called the Pareto set (P S), and the set of all Pareto-optimal
objective vectors is called the Pareto front (P F ).
Definition 4. The ideal objective vector zide is composed
of the lower bounds of the P F , i.e., ziide = minx∈P S fi (x)
for i = 1, . . . , m. The nadir objective vector znad consists
of the upper bounds of the P F , i.e., zinad = maxx∈P S fi (x)
for i = 1, . . . , m.
Definition 5. For the i-th objectivec function fi with i ∈
{1, . . . , m}, an objective vector z(i) is called the critical
point ofcfi if it is Pareto-optimal and has the worst fi value,
i.e., z(i) ∈ {f (x)|x = arg maxx∈P S fi (x)}.
The nadir objective vector is often determined by obtaining the critical point on each objective, since zinad =
(i)c
zi
for each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}. We propose a novel exact algorithm utilizing boundary decomposition (Zheng and

Introduction
Multi-objective optimization involves an optimization scenario where several conflicting objectives must be considered simultaneously, often occurring in real-world applications. There is no single optimal solution to a multiobjective optimization problem (MOP). Instead, there is a
set of Pareto-optimal solutions, representing different tradeoffs between these objectives. The component-wise worst
objective function values of Pareto-optimal solutions define the nadir objective vector. Obtaining the nadir objective
vector is crucial for solving MOPs in various applications,
such as engineering design (Weerasuriya et al. 2021; Mena
et al. 2023) and multi-objective learning (Momma, Dong,
and Liu 2022; Zhang et al. 2023). Specifically, the nadir
objective vector provides a promising region in the objective space. This serves as a prerequisite for decision-makers
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27170

