The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Language Models of Code are Few-Shot Planners and Reasoners for
Multi-Document Summarization with Attribution
Abhilash Nandy1 * , Sambaran Bandyopadhyay2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India
2
Adobe Research
nandyabhilash@gmail.com, samb.bandyo@gmail.com

Abstract

However, such works (Kurisinkel and Chen 2023; Xiao et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2023; Shi et al. 2023) are few in number,
and suffer from drawbacks such as need for expensive finetuning and lack of a source document attribution (citation)
module, which is essential to make the summary more reliable, transparent, and interpretable. Also, several methods
augment annotated data/metadata as training inputs to the
collection of documents to be summarized, such as graphs
(Zhang et al. 2023; Pasunuru et al. 2021), document timestamps (Song et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023b, 2019), which
are difficult to obtain. Hence, there is a lack of an LLMbased multi-document attribution-inclusive summarization
framework to generate intent-based summaries with negligible training cost and annotations.
In this paper, we propose MiDAS-PRo (Multi-Document
Attribution-inclusive Summarization via Planning-cumReasoning) to mitigate aforementioned issues. MiDAS-PRo
uses a Code-LLM to plan the layout of the attribution
of source documents in the final summary (where attribution is the citations to the source documents) and to
reason by generating important domain-specific entities/topics corresponding to the citations. Finally, we utilize
this planning-cum-reasoning information to enhance the
attribution-inclusive summary generation capability of an
LLM of interest. The planning-cum-reasoning and the summarization modules are all carried in an in-context learning setting, thus requiring no LLM training. The In-Context
Examples having the most similar attribution/reference layout to the test example in their summaries are selected by
training a 2-layer Graph Attention Network (GAT), which
incurs minimal training cost and time. MiDAS-PRo Framework is depicted in Fig. 1. MiDAS-PRo provides a sizeable
improvement in summarization metrics and a massive improvement in clustering-based metrics when applied across
different LLMs and varying number of in-context examples.
We make the following contributions in this paper (1) Code LLMs are Few-Shot Planners and Reasoners
for Multi-Document Summarization. To that effect, we
propose MiDAS-PRo for multi-document summarization,
where planning-cum-reasoning is carried out in 2 stages
- Hierarchical Reference Layout Tree (HRLT) Generation,
followed by Sentence-Wise Entity Generation (2) We introduce several clustering-based metrics to evaluate the attribution of references in the generated summary (3) Strate-

Document summarization has greatly benefited from advances in large language models (LLMs). In real-world situations, summaries often need to be generated from multiple
documents with diverse sources and authors, lacking a clear
information flow. Naively concatenating these documents and
generating a summary can lead to poorly structured narratives and redundancy. Additionally, attributing each part of
the generated summary to a specific source is crucial for reliability. In this study, we address multi-document summarization with attribution using our proposed solution MiDASPRo, consisting of three stages: (i) Planning the hierarchical
organization of source documents, (ii) Reasoning by generating relevant entities/topics, and (iii) Summary Generation.
We treat the first two sub-problems as a code completion task
for LLMs. By incorporating well-selected in-context learning examples through a graph attention network, LLMs effectively generate plans and reason topics for a document collection. Experiments on summarizing scientific articles from
public datasets show that our approach outperforms state-ofthe-art baselines in both automated and human evaluations.

1

Introduction

The exploration of text-to-text generation within the NLP
community has evolved through a variety of methodologies, experiencing considerable progress (Zhang et al. 2020;
Song et al. 2018; Wiseman, Shieber, and Rush 2018; Zhang
et al. 2020). In recent years, the exponential growth of digital information has led to an increased demand for automated methods to summarize this vast amounts of data (ElKassas et al. 2021). Emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) enables effective and efficient summarization of
huge amount of text data (Grail, Perez, and Gaussier 2021;
Jin et al. 2024). In real-world situations, text may be derived
from a variety of sources, each with its distinct characteristics. In these instances, a user might have a particular intent
in mind, such as a specific topic, and desire to create a coherent summary that encompasses relevant information from
those diverse sources in relation to the intended topic.
With ever-increasing context windows, LLMs could be
leveraged for the task of multi-document summarization.
* This work was done during the internship at Adobe Research
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24930

