The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Orpheus: Engineering Multiagent Systems via Communicating Agents
Matteo Baldoni,1 Samuel H. Christie V,2 Munindar P. Singh,2 Amit K. Chopra3
1

Dipartimento di Informatica, Università degli Studi di Torino, Corso Svizzera 185, 10149 Torino, Italy
2
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
3
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4WA, UK
baldoni@di.unito.it, schrist@ncsu.edu, mpsingh@ncsu.edu, amit.chopra@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract

Moraitis 2022), are enhanced state machines. ASEME, a
communicating state-machine model, doesn’t accommodate
multi (≥ 3) party protocols over asynchronous communication. ASEME role skeletons move in lockstep with matching send and receive states in different roles. Choreographies
(Baldoni et al. 2006, 2009), a class of communicating statemachine model of interactions, share ASEME’s limitations.
We adopt information protocols, a fully declarative and
fully asynchronous model for communication because it
yields highly flexible interactions between agents to undergird our contribution. Specifically, we adopt the Blindingly
Simple Protocol Language (BSPL) (Singh 2011), for which
there have been recent advances in formal semantics and
verification tools (Singh and Christie 2021). For a detailed
discussion of the advantages of information protocols over
alternative models of interaction, such as choreographies,
see (Chopra, Christie, and Singh 2020).
Second, prevalent programming models for communication are lacking. They are reactive, i.e., structured as separate message handlers for each incoming message (Desai
et al. 2005), as in message-oriented middleware (Hohpe and
Woolf 2004). However, doing so ignores the structuring provided by a protocol and considers each message independently. But, messages are rarely independent, and an agent
usually needs to act based on its state, which depends on the
messages it has received or sent. Thus, the agent reconstructs
the necessary state computation (1) tied up with the requisite internal reasoning and (2) in more than one place, based
on what message emissions and receptions can lead to that
state. Kiko (Christie, Singh, and Chopra 2023) shares our
focus on information protocols, though for Python agents.
Kiko computes not the relevant messages queried by agent
logic but (somewhat unnecessarily) all messages that are enabled (i.e., legal to complete and emit).
Leading cognitive programming models, e.g., Jason
(Vieira et al. 2007) and JADEL (Bergenti et al. 2017), do
not support protocols. Others, e.g., (Rooney, Collier, and
O’Hare 2004) support protocols but not information protocols. JaCaMo (Boissier et al. 2013) includes Jason but notably acknowledges (p. 748, n1) its lack of protocol-based
programming abstractions; it deemphasizes messaging in
favor of operations on centralized artifacts reminiscent of
Web services. JADE (Bellifemine, Caire, and Greenwood
2007) supports implementing MAS based on the rigid, as ex-

We propose Orpheus, a novel programming model for communicating agents based on information protocols and realized using cognitive programming. Whereas traditional models are focused on reactions to handle incoming messages,
Orpheus supports organizing the internal logic of an agent
based on its goals. We give an operational semantics for Orpheus and implement this semantics in an adapter to help
build agents. We use the adapter to demonstrate how Orpheus
simplifies the programming of decentralized multiagent systems compared to the reactive programming model.

Code — https://gitlab.com/masr

1

Introduction

Interaction between autonomous agents is the hallmark of a
multiagent system (MAS). An interaction protocol models
the communication constraints between agents. Engineering MAS based on protocols offers key benefits in domains
such as business (Lichtenstein et al. 2024) and the Internet of
Things (Singh and Chopra 2017). One, protocols enable realizing MAS in a decentralized manner, i.e., without relying
on a distinguished locus of state or control. Two, protocols
enable structuring an agent’s implementation by cleanly separating the coordination aspects of its communications from
its internal logic. Three, protocols streamline coordination,
reducing agent complexity and avoiding programming errors pertaining to communication. Four, protocols support
loose coupling: changes in one agent’s implementation do
not affect the implementations of others.
Yet, current approaches fail to realize the above benefits
of protocols when engineering flexible MAS. There are two
reasons why this is so. First, prevalent protocol models are
flawed. FIPA interaction protocols (FIPA 2003) are specified
in Agent UML (AUML) (Odell, Parunak, and Bauer 2001),
a language similar to UML sequence diagrams. An agent
plays a role in a protocol and communicates accordingly.
However, FIPA and UML provide no formal model of the
protocol. Lacking a semantics, we cannot reason about information to (1) provide a principled programming model
and (2) check whether each message respects the protocol semantics. Statecharts, as in ASEME (Spanoudakis and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23135

