The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Faithful and Accurate Self-Attention Attribution for Message Passing Neural
Networks via the Computation Tree Viewpoint
Yong-Min Shin1 , Siqing Li2 , Xin Cao2 , Won-Yong Shin1 *
1

Yonsei University
University of New South Wales
jordan3414@yonsei.ac.kr, {siqing.li, xin.cao}@unsw.edu.au, wy.shin@yonsei.ac.kr
2

Sun et al. 2023).1 Furthermore, several studies have focused
solely on analyzing GAT (Velickovic et al. 2018), the most
representative Att-GNN model (Mustafa, Bojchevski, and
Burkholz 2023; Fountoulakis et al. 2023).
Similarly as in other neural network models, GNNs are regarded as black-box models that lack interpretability, which
has led to numerous studies developing explanation methods for GNNs (Li et al. 2022; Yuan et al. 2023). While such
explanation methods have been widely developed, attention
has also been frequently considered as a fundamental tool
for GNN explanations (Ying et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2020;
Sánchez-Lengeling et al. 2020). The choice of attention as
a baseline is natural, as self-attention itself can be viewed
as a direct way to provide model interpretations without
any separate explanation method (Lee, Shin, and Kim 2017;
Ghaeini, Fern, and Tadepalli 2018; Hao et al. 2021; Aflalo
et al. 2022; Deiseroth et al. 2023). This viewpoint has
already been extensively investigated in transformers, the
most representative architecture with attention (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2015; Xu et al. 2015; Vig 2019; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Caron et al. 2021). There is even a significant body of research debating the validity of self-attention
as explanations in natural language processing (NLP) (Jain
and Wallace 2019; Wiegreffe and Pinter 2019; Bibal et al.
2022). However, there has been no such in-depth discussion
from the domain of GNN explanations, mostly employing
the layer-wise average of attention weights retrieved from a
GAT model as explanations at best.
We argue that such naı̈ve usage of attention for interpretations largely undermines the potential of AttGNNs as an explainable model. In the case of transformers, a number of advanced attribution methods using attention have been proposed to calculate token attributions, and
have been empirically proven that attention can be effectively used to decipher the underlying model (Abnar and
Zuidema 2020; Chefer, Gur, and Wolf 2021a,b; Hao et al.
2021). Analogous to transformers, our study aims to formulate a post-processing method for the attention weights in
Att-GNNs that is able to extract high-quality edge attributions (i.e., to assign contributions of edges to the model) and
capture the behavior of Att-GNNs more precisely. To the

Abstract
The self-attention mechanism has been adopted in various
popular message passing neural networks (MPNNs), enabling
the model to adaptively control the amount of information
that flows along the edges of the underlying graph. Such
attention-based MPNNs (Att-GNNs) have also been used as
a baseline for multiple studies on explainable AI (XAI) since
attention has steadily been seen as natural model interpretations, while being a viewpoint that has already been popularized in other domains (e.g., natural language processing
and computer vision). However, existing studies often use
naı̈ve calculations to derive attribution scores from attention,
undermining the potential of attention as interpretations for
Att-GNNs. In our study, we aim to fill the gap between the
widespread usage of Att-GNNs and their potential explainability via attention. To this end, we propose GATT, edge attribution calculation method for self-attention MPNNs based
on the computation tree, a rooted tree that reflects the computation process of the underlying model. Despite its simplicity, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of GATT in
three aspects of model explanation: faithfulness, explanation
accuracy, and case studies by using both synthetic and realworld benchmark datasets. In all cases, the results demonstrate that GATT greatly improves edge attribution scores, especially compared to the previous naı̈ve approach.

Code — https://github.com/jordan7186/GAtt

1

Introduction

Background & motivation. In graph learning, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al. 2021) have been used as the
de facto architecture, since they can effectively encode the
graph structure along with node (or edge) features. Among
various GNNs, several models have successfully incorporated the self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017)
into message passing neural networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer
et al. 2017; Bronstein et al. 2021). Such (self-)attentionbased MPNNs (dubbed Att-GNNs) have been one of the staple GNN architectures, and the self-attention mechanism of
Att-GNNs themselves has been extensively analyzed in the
literature (Knyazev, Taylor, and Amer 2019; Lee et al. 2019;
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
As such, we refer to the term ‘GNN’ as MPNN-style architectures unless explicitly stated otherwise.

20461

