The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UniFORM: Towards Unified Framework for Anomaly Detection on Graphs
Chuancheng Song1,2 , Xixun Lin1,2 , Hanyang Shen1,2 , Yanmin Shang1,2 , Yanan Cao1,2 *
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{songchuancheng, linxixun, shenhanyang, shangyanmin, caoyanan}@iie.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Graph anomaly detection has attracted significant attention
due to its critical applications, such as identifying money
laundering in financial systems and detecting fake reviews
on social networks. However, two major challenges persist:
(1) anomaly detection at the node, edge, and graph levels is often addressed in isolation, hindering the integration
of complementary information to identify anomalies arising
from collective behaviors; and (2) the inherent label sparsity in graph data, coupled with the difficulty of obtaining
high-quality annotations, exacerbates bias in detection. To address these challenges, we propose UniFORM, a unified selfsupervised anomaly detection framework comprising three
modules: UIO, UMC and UPL. UIO unifies node-, edge-,
and graph-level tasks from a subgraph perspective, leveraging
an energy-based GNN for iterative multi-granular anomaly
detection. UMC enhances meta-learning through contrastive
learning and employs Langevin dynamics to generate phantom samples as substitutes for anomalous data, reducing reliance on labeled data. UPL design unified loss in intra-inter
perspectives. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets
demonstrate that UniFORM significantly outperforms stateof-the-art methods across multiple granularities.

Figure 1: Toy examples for anomaly detection on graphs in
node-, edge-, and graph-level. (Left) Money laundering in
financial systems: fraudster, abnormal transaction, and criminal activity. (Right) Fake reviews on social networks: fake
review, spammer, and collaborative group.

unsupervised framework, employs hierarchical contrastive
learning to detect out-of-distribution graphs by capturing latent patterns. GRADATE (Duan et al. 2023a) and NLGAD
(Duan et al. 2023b) also use the idea of contrastive learning,
aiming to use multi-scale contrasts and multi-view augmentations to construct diverse positive and negative pairs.
Synchronously, more researches consider the relationship between the locality and globality of anomalies in the
network. AANE (Duan et al. 2020) consider anomalous
nodes and edges with employing GCN to generate node embeddings and calculates link probability using the hyperbolic tangent of these embeddings. GLocalKD (Ma et al.
2022) utilizes knowledge distillation to learn comprehensive
global and local normal patterns for detecting anomalous
graphs. BOURNE (Liu et al. 2024b) represents a unified
framework that employs self-supervised bootstrap learning
to detect anomalies at the node and the edge using graph
and hypergraph representations.
Despite recent advancements, graph anomaly detection
faces two critical challenges: (1) Limited integration of
multi-granular anomalies. Current methods often treat
node-, edge-, and graph-level anomalies as separate tasks,
overlooking their interconnectedness in real-world scenarios. For example, in financial networks, fraudsters (nodelevel), suspicious transactions (edge-level), and overarching
criminal activities (graph-level) are interdependent. Insights
from node-level anomalies can enhance edge-level detection
(Liu et al. 2024b), and vice versa, while graph-level anomalies often emerge from collective behaviors across nodes and

Introduction
Anomaly detection is a data mining process that aims to
identify these unusual patterns that deviate from the majority and represent a specific case of out-of-distribution detection (Ma et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024).
Recently, anomaly detection on graphs has garnered significant attention due to its critical applications in financial risk
control (Shi et al. 2022; Motie and Raahemi 2023), social
networks (Lin et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2024), etc.
In recent years, state-of-the-art advances have leveraged
contrastive techniques increasingly. CoLA (Liu et al. 2021)
employs node-subgraph pairs in contrastive learning to generate node representations, with anomaly scores derived
from agreement between these pairs. SL-GAD (Zheng et al.
2021) constructs contextual views around a target node and
integrates generative attribute regression with multi-view
contrastive training. GOOD-D (Liu et al. 2023a), as an
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12559

