The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SWAMamba: A Sliding Window Attention Mamba Framework for Predicting
Translation Elongation Rates
Xi Zeng1 , Fei Ni2 , Shaoqing Jiao1 , Dazhi Lu1 , Jianye Hao2 * , Jiajie Peng1, 3 , 4 *
1

AI for Science Interdisciplinary Research Center, School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
3
School of Computer Science, Research and Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data Storage and Management, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology
{xizeng,jiaosq22,dzlu}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {fei ni,jianye.hao}@tju.edu.cn, jiajiepeng@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract
Deacylated
tRNA released
from E site

Translation elongation is essential for cellular proteostasis
and is implicated in cancer and neurodegeneration. Accurately predicting the rate of ribosome elongation in each
codon (also called ribosomal A site) on mRNA is important
for understanding and modulating protein synthesis. However, predicting elongation rates is challenging due to the
trade-off between capturing distal codon interactions and focusing on proximal codon effects at the A site. Approaches
capturing distal codon interactions in the coding sequences
(CDS) of mRNA fail to effectively differentiate critical regions (codons near the A site) due to insufficient effective
mechanisms for focusing on these regions. Conversely, due
to the limitations of models when handling long mRNA
sequences, some methods simplify inputs by conditioning
solely on proximal codons surrounding the A site, leading
to the loss of important information from distal codons. To
address this issue, we leverage Mamba’s success in capturing
long-range dependencies to enable the consideration of distant codons’ impact on the A site. Additionally, we introduce
a sliding window attention mechanism to emphasize the proximal codons around the A site during ribosome elongation.
Building on these advancements, we present Sliding Window
Attention Mamba (SWAMamba), a novel framework that simultaneously leverages both proximal and distal codon effects on the A site. We conduct comprehensive evaluations on
ribosome data across four species and find that SWAMamba
significantly outperformed current state-of-the-art methods in
predicting translation elongation rates.

Growing
polypeptide chain
U

A

G

C A G

5'

U G C A C A A U G A U C A U C G U C

E

P

A U C

A

U A G A G

A

C A U G C A C A A U U G C A C

3'

Decoding
center

Movement of ribosome

Figure 1: Translation elongation phase

Liu 2017). Therefore, accurately predicting these rates is
crucial for understanding and modulating protein synthesis.
The emergence of ribosome profiling has significantly advanced our comprehension of mRNA translation elongation
(Andreev et al. 2017; Ingolia, Hussmann, and Weissman
2019). Ribosome profiling involves sequencing the reads of
ribosome-protected fragments (RPFs) (Ingolia et al. 2009;
Ingolia 2014). After normalization, these RPFs counts directly reflect the ribosome density distribution along the
CDS. Moreover, Codons with higher ribosome density have
slower translation rates, while those with lower ribosome
density translate faster (Tunney et al. 2018).
A variety of computational approaches have been developed from the accumulating public ribosome profiling data.
Tunney et al. (2018) demonstrated the critical role of codons
near the A site in accurately predicting ribosome density,
emphasizing their importance in computational models. In
contrast, Tian et al. (2021) found that codons far from the
A site also affect ribosome density predictions, highlighting
the need to model ribosome density across the entire CDS
region of mRNAs to capture long-range codon influences.
However, models modeling the CDS region of mRNA overlook crucial codons near the A site due to insufficient effective mechanisms for focusing on these codons. Meanwhile,
architectural limitations with long mRNA sequences com-

Introduction
Translation elongation is a critical phase of protein synthesis that significantly affects cellular function and protein
homeostasis (Brar 2016; Ingolia 2016; Shao et al. 2024).
This process involves ribosomes moving along mRNAs at
variable rates, recruiting tRNAs to the ribosomal A site for
accurate codon-anticodon pairing, and sequentially adding
amino acids to the growing polypeptide chain (Figure 1)
(Tian et al. 2021). Designing coding sequences based on
translation elongation rates can lead to substantial differences in protein output (Tunney et al. 2018; Zhao, Yu, and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1013

