The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Re2LLM: Reflective Reinforcement Large Language Model for
Session-based Recommendation
Ziyan Wang1 , Yingpeng Du1 * , Zhu Sun2 , Haoyan Chua1 ,
Kaidong Feng2,3 , Wenya Wang1 , Jie Zhang1
1
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
Yanshan University
wang1753@e.ntu.edu.sg, dyp1993@pku.edu.cn,sunzhuntu@gmail.com,
haoyan001@e.ntu.edu.sg,kaidong3762@gmail.com,wangwy@ntu.edu.sg,zhangj@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Emerging advancements in large language models (LLMs)
show significant potential for enhancing recommendations.
However, prompt-based methods often struggle to find ideal
prompts without task-specific feedback, while fine-tuningbased methods are hindered by high computational demands
and dependence on open-source backbones. To address these
challenges, we propose a Reflective Reinforcement Large
Language Model (Re2LLM) for session-based recommendation, which refines LLMs to generate and utilize specialized knowledge effectively and efficiently. Specifically, we
first devise the Reflective Exploration Module to extract and
present knowledge in a form that LLMs can easily process.
This module enables LLMs to reflect on their recommendation mistakes and construct a hint knowledge base to rectify
them effectively. Next, we design the Reinforcement Utilization Module to train a lightweight retrieval agent that elicits
correct LLM reasoning. This module recognizes hints as signals to facilitate LLM recommendations and learns to select
appropriate hints from the constructed knowledge base using
task-specific feedback efficiently. Lastly, we conduct experiments on real-world datasets and demonstrate the superiority
of our Re2LLM over state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Our method (c) obtains effective task-specific
feedback without costly fine-tuning in comparison to
prompt-based (a) and fine-tuning-based (b) methods.

LLMs vulnerable to hallucinations without effective supervision. The latter methods focus on fine-tuning LLMs (Geng
et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Bao et al. 2023) with domainspecific knowledge (e.g., user-item interactions) in a supervised manner as in Figure 1(b). Nonetheless, such methods
often suffer from high computational costs and reliance on
open-source backbones. These drawbacks limit the practical
application of existing LLM-based methods for SBR.
In this paper, we propose to direct LLMs to effectively and
efficiently leverage specialized knowledge for SBR without costly fine-tuning, but there remain two primary challenges: (1) How can we effectively extract and craft specialized knowledge embedded within extensive user-item
interactions to better align with LLM comprehension? (2)
How can we enable LLMs to utilize the specialized knowledge efficiently for better recommendations, without relying
on resource-intensive supervised fine-tuning? To overcome
these challenges, we devise a Reflective Reinforcement
Large Language Model (Re2LLM) for SBR. As illustrated
in Figure 1(c), the LLM extracts specialized knowledge as
hints into a knowledge base, and obtains effective taskspecific feedback from the data without costly fine-tuning.
This paradigm combines the strengths of LLMs’ capabilities
and the efficiency of lightweight retrieval. Re2LLM consists
of two main components: the Reflective Exploration Module
and the Reinforcement Utilization Module.
Specifically, Reflective Exploration Module leverages the
self-reflection of LLMs (Madaan et al. 2023) to extract

Introduction
Session-based recommendation (SBR) (Wu et al. 2019) aims
to capture users’ dynamic preferences based on their previous interactions within a session. However, the interactions are often sparse, and users’ profiles are inaccessible
in anonymous sessions. Recently, large language models
(LLMs) have been applied in recommendation to address
these issues with their extensive knowledge and sophisticated reasoning, primarily through two approaches: promptbased and fine-tuning-based methods. The former methods
exploit in-context learning and prompt optimization (Hou
et al. 2024; Wang and Lim 2023; Sun et al. 2024) to engage LLMs as recommenders without training as in Figure
1(a). However, the crafted prompts not only require extensive expert knowledge and human labor but also may not
align well with LLMs’ understanding of SBR tasks, making
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12827

