The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FEAST-Mamba: FEAture and SpaTial Aware Mamba Network with Bidirectional
Orthogonal Fusion for Cross-Modal Point Cloud Segmentation
Chade Li1,2 , Pengju Zhang1 * , Bo Liu1 , Hao Wei1 , Yihong Wu1,2 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
lichade2021@ia.ac.cn, {pengju.zhang@ia, bo.liu@nlpr.ia, weihao2019@ia, yhwu@nlpr.ia}.ac.cn
fence
vegetation

Abstract
Point cloud segmentation has a wide range of applications
in autonomous driving, augmented reality and virtual reality.
Multi-modal fusion strategies have received increasing attention in point cloud segmentation recently. Despite the success, existing methods usually generate unnecessary information loss or redundancy. In this paper, we propose FEASTMamba, a novel FEAture and SpaTial aware Mamba network to tackle multi-modal point cloud segmentation. To
exploit the complementarity between different modals, we
propose a bidirectional orthogonal attention module, where
features are first bidirectionally interacted with each other
through cross-modal attention, and then orthogonal fusion
is used to reduce feature redundancy. Furthermore, a reordering strategy is proposed for the Mamba architecture
that takes into account both spatial and semantic information
during cross-modal feature ordering. Experiments on indoor
datasets, S3DIS and ScanNet, and outdoor datasets, nuScenes
and SemanticKITTI, show that the proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performances.

(a) Error by PTv3

fence
vegetation

(b) Error by Ours

(c) Ground Truth

Figure 1: Visualization of the segmentation error maps of
the proposed FEAST-Mamba and PTv3 (Wu et al. 2024a) in
outdoor scenes.

Landrieu 2023) employ the Transformer as the backbone
for feature interaction between regions. Although their accuracy has been substantially improved, the Transformer, as a
quadratic complexity network, has significant computational
resources. In order to reduce computational resources and to
better model long-range context, Mamba (Gu and Dao 2024)
is proposed. As a linear processing network, Mamba only
performs feature interactions between neighboring elements
of the input, thus making it more sensitive to the input order.
Consequently, if a disordered point cloud is used as input,
the Mamba network may not be able to interact effectively
with the input information, thus affecting the overall performance of the network. Most of the existing Mamba networks
(Zhang et al. 2024b,a; Liang et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024; Li
et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024a) simply consider the information at the 3D spatial coordinate level when sorting the
unordered point clouds.
To address the above problems, we propose FEASTMamba, a feature and spatial aware Mamba network for
point cloud segmentation, where multi-modal data are fused
in an orthogonal way. Specifically, according to the type of
information characterized by each modality, we first divide
the input into those containing spatial or texture information. We then project the augmented uni-modal data into the
orthogonal space using independent projection layers and
concatenate them in the order of voxels, range images, and
points. Furthermore, a novel reordering strategy is proposed,
which decides the order using the distribution of the data not
only in 3D space but also in high-dimensional features.

Introduction
Point clouds, a commonly used modality in computer vision, can provide reliable and accurate spatial information.
Due to the lack of professional acquisition equipment and
the difficulty of ground truth labeling, the number of labeled
point cloud data is far less than that of other data such as
images, and point cloud lacks texture information, so some
point cloud segmentation methods fuse other modal data to
enhance the input. PMF (Zhuang et al. 2021) projects the
point cloud into a perspective view using residual-based fusion of multi-modal features. RPVNet (Xu et al. 2021) performs range image and voxel feature transfer to 3D points
in each layer of the network. There are also methods that
use large 2D semantic models such as Semantic-SAM (Li
et al. 2023) to process the images and post-fuse the features
or 2D labels with 3D data. However, these methods are incremental stacking in different modal data and lack effective
constraints to reduce redundancy among fused data.
After obtaining the processed data like methods described
above, some methods (Park et al. 2022; Robert, Raguet, and
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4634

