The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DreamPhysics: Learning Physics-Based 3D Dynamics with Video Diffusion Priors
Tianyu Huang1,2 , Haoze Zhang1 , Yihan Zeng3 , Zhilu Zhang1 ,
Hui Li1 , Wangmeng Zuo1, * , Rynson W. H. Lau2, *
1
2

Harbin Institute of Technology
City University of Hong Kong
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract

the one hand, some works (Xie et al. 2023; Feng et al.
2024b) first inject physical parameters into 3D GS objects,
and then perform motion predictions in a physics-based simulator. However, as all these parameters have to be manually
assigned, it is difficult to set them accurately, thus producing
unnatural simulation results, as demonstrated in Figure 1(a).
On the other hand, pre-trained video generators (Singer
et al. 2022; Khachatryan et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023b)
are trained on real-world video data, which has naturally incorporated physical phenomena and regulations. These generators should contain, to some extent, physics-based prior
knowledge. Thus, some works (Singer et al. 2023; Bahmani
et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2023) directly learn time-dependent
deformation with the distillation of video models. However,
the generated motions tend to exhibit small and discontinuous motions across frames. We hypothesize that the main
reason for this drawback is the inappropriate extraction and
application of the physics prior, rather than the utilization of
video models. We therefore ask this question: how can we
mine and apply the physics knowledge of video generative
models to achieve realistic dynamic 3D synthesis?
To this end, we rethink the usage of physics-based simulation and video generative models in this work. We propose to learn a material field, rather than a deformation field,
from video diffusion models, and then deploy a physicsbased simulator to animate the 3D object in this field. As
such, the advantages of the above two related approaches are
combined, while their shortcomings can be complemented.
Learnable physical properties from video diffusion models
eliminate the need for manual modulation, and the physics
simulator based on reasonable properties ensures more realistic motion generation.
Specifically, we introduce a new framework named
DreamPhysics. DreamPhysics takes 3D GS (Kerbl et al.
2023) as a 3D representation. It first learns the physical properties of a material field with the distillation of video diffusion priors, and then adopts a simulator based on Material
Point Method (MPM) (Stomakhin et al. 2013; Jiang et al.
2016) to model the time-dependent deformation of each
Gaussian kernel. During the distillation from video diffusion
models, the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) (Poole et al.
2022) may focus more on color information, and is not completely suitable for extracting motion information. Instead,
we propose motion distillation sampling (MDS) to avoid the

Dynamic 3D interaction has been attracting a lot of attention
recently. However, creating such 4D content remains challenging. One solution is to animate 3D scenes with physicsbased simulation, which requires manually assigning precise physical properties to the object or the simulated results
would become unnatural. Another solution is to learn the deformation of 3D objects with the distillation of video generative models, which, however, tends to produce 3D videos
with small and discontinuous motions due to the inappropriate extraction and application of physics priors. In this work,
to combine the strengths and complementing shortcomings
of the above two solutions, we propose to learn the physical properties of a material field with video diffusion priors, and then utilize a physics-based Material-Point-Method
(MPM) simulator to generate 4D content with realistic motions. In particular, we propose motion distillation sampling
to emphasize video motion information during distillation. In
addition, to facilitate the optimization, we further propose a
KAN-based material field with frame boosting. Experimental results demonstrate that our method enjoys more realistic
motions than state-of-the-arts do.

Code — https://github.com/tyhuang0428/DreamPhysics

Introduction
With the development in 3D representations, e.g., Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) and
3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) (Kerbl et al. 2023), significant
progress has been made in creating 3D assets through reconstruction and generation (Poole et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2024). However, interacting with these 3D assets in a simulation environment (Savva et al. 2019; Xia et al. 2018) remains challenging, despite its importance in many applications, e.g., video games (Fan et al. 2022), virtual reality (Jiang et al. 2024), and robotics (Lu et al. 2024).
Animating static 3D objects based on instructions is an
important step toward this interaction goal. In the real world,
object movement is intertwined with the object’s internal
properties (e.g., material types). Hence, we can see that on
* Joint corresponding authors. Email: wmzuo@hit.edu.cn; rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3733

