The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

De-singularity Subgradient for the q-th-Powered ℓp -Norm Weber Location
Problem
Zhao-Rong Lai1,2 , Xiaotian Wu1 , Liangda Fang3,4 , Ziliang Chen5 , Cheng Li2 *
1

College of Cyber Security, Jinan University
Department of Mathematics, College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University
3
Department of Computer Science, College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University
4
Pazhou Laboratory
5
Research Institute of Multiple Agents and Embodied Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
{laizhr, wxiaotian, fangld}@jnu.edu.cn, c.ziliang@yahoo.com, licheng@stu2020.jnu.edu.cn
2

the data points {xi }m
i=1 are distinct and non-collinear in the
rest of the paper.

Abstract
The Weber location problem is widely used in several artificial intelligence scenarios. However, the gradient of the objective does not exist at a considerable set of singular points.
Recently, a de-singularity subgradient method has been proposed to fix this problem, but it can only handle the q-thpowered ℓ2 -norm case (1 ⩽ q < 2), which has only finite singular points. In this paper, we further establish the
de-singularity subgradient for the q-th-powered ℓp -norm case
with 1 ⩽ q ⩽ p and 1 ⩽ p < 2, which includes all the
rest unsolved situations in this problem. This is a challenging
task because the singular set is a continuum. The geometry of
the objective function is also complicated so that the characterizations of the subgradients, minimum and descent direction are very difficult. We develop a q-th-powered ℓp -norm
Weiszfeld Algorithm without Singularity (qPpNWAWS) for
this problem, which ensures convergence and the descent
property of the objective function. Extensive experiments on
six real-world data sets demonstrate that qPpNWAWS successfully solves the singularity problem and achieves a linear
computational convergence rate in practical scenarios.

1

1.1

There is no closed-form solution to (1), and the gradienttype method is an intuitive and tractable approach. This approach includes those do not explicitly show a gradient form,
like the Weiszfeld algorithm (Brimberg and Love 1993). To
take a glimpse of the singularity problem, we first compute
the gradient of the objective function Cp,q as
(t)
∇Cp,q (y)
m
X
(t)
(t)
:= qξi ∥y − xi ∥q−p
|y (t) − xi |p−2 (y (t) − xi ), (2)
p
i=1

(t)
where ∇Cp,q (y)
denotes the t-th dimension (1 ⩽ t ⩽
d) of the gradient. Note that if q < p or p < 2, the singularity
problem can occur if y hits the following singular set:


(t)

Sp := y∈Rd |∃i∈{1, . . . , m}, t∈{1, . . . , d} s.t. y (t) =xi
if 1 ⩽ p < 2,

S :={x }m
if 1 ⩽ q < 2, p = 2.
2
i i=1
(3)
This singularity problem occurs frequently and unexpectedly. Chandrasekaran and Tamir (1989); Vardi and Zhang
(2000) indicate that the “bad” points that can yield such singularity in a gradient-type method may constitute a continuum set that can be dense in an open region of Rd (d ⩾ 2)
or even the entire Rd . Moreover, this problem cannot be circumvented by straightforward treatments like perturbations
and random restarts. More details can be found in (Lai et al.
2024).
(t)
If q ⩾ p or p ⩾ 2, the term ∥y−xi ∥q−p
or |y (t) −xi |p−2
p
in (2) will not be singular. For p ⩾ 2 but 1 ⩽ q < p, the singularity problem can be solved by (Lai et al. 2024). Hence
this paper mainly focuses on the rest unsolved singular cases
with the two key hyperparameters 1 ⩽ q ⩽ p and 1 ⩽ p < 2.
Users can select any values of p and q within this range to
suit their specific needs. As p approaches 2, the distance between data points becomes closer to the Euclidean distance.

Introduction

The Weber location problem is a fundamental problem that
is extensively investigated in artificial intelligence (Lai et al.
2024), machine learning (Li, Sahoo, and Hoi 2016; Lai et al.
2018c, 2020), financial engineering (Lai and Yang 2023),
computer vision (Aftab, Hartley, and Trumpf 2015), and operations research (Ostresh 1978). For a general definition,
it seeks a point x∗ that minimizes the weighted sum of
the q-th power of the ℓp distances to m fixed data points
d
{xi }m
i=1 ⊆ R (Weber 1909; Morris 1981; Chen 1984;
Brimberg and Love 1993), defined as the q-th-powered ℓp norm Weber location problem (qPpNWLP):
m
X
x∗ ∈ arg min Cp,q (y) :=
ξi ∥y − xi ∥qp ,
(1)
y∈Rd

The Singularity Problem

i=1

where ξi denotes the weight for the i-th data point, ∥ · ∥p denotes the ℓp norm, Cp,q (·) denotes the cost function related
to the q-th power of the ℓp norm, 1 ⩽ q ⩽ p and p ⩾ 1. Due
to the same reasons as (Lai et al. 2024), we can assume that
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

** The supplementary material and codes for this paper are available at https://github.com/laizhr/qPpNWAWS.

18026

