The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Numeric Planning with Patterns
Matteo Cardellini, Enrico Giunchiglia
DIBRIS, Università degli Studi di Genova, Italy
matteo.cardellini@edu.unige.it, enrico.giunchiglia@unige.it

able to produce valid plans with a bound n possibly lower
and never higher than) both the relaxed-relaxed R2 ∃ encoding (Balyo 2013; Bofill, Espasa, and Villaret 2017), and the
action rolling R encoding (Scala et al. 2016b); (ii) that both
the R2 ∃ and R encodings dominate the standard one, and
(iii) that theoretical dominance leads to improved experimental performance, as shown by the analysis in (Cardellini,
Giunchiglia, and Maratea 2024) on the numeric benchmarks
of the 2023 International Planning Competition.
To test the effectiveness of our approach, we compare
our planner with all publicly available temporal planners
(both symbolic and based on search) on 10 temporal domains with required concurrency (Cushing et al. 2007). The
results highlight the strong performances of our planner,
which achieved the highest coverage (i.e., number of solved
problems) in 9 out of 10 domains, while the second-best
planner had the highest coverage in 4 domains. Additionally,
compared to the other symbolic planners, our system is able
to find a valid plan with a lower bound on all the problems.
The main contributions of this paper are thus:

Abstract
We consider temporal numeric planning problems Π expressed in PDDL 2.1 level 3, and show how to produce SMT
formulas (i) whose models correspond to valid plans of Π,
and (ii) that extend the recently proposed planning with patterns approach from the numeric to the temporal case. We
prove the correctness and completeness of the approach and
show that it performs very well on 10 domains with required
concurrency.

Introduction
We consider temporal numeric planning problems expressed
in PDDL 2.1 level 3 (Fox and Long 2003). Differently from
the classical case, where plans are sequences of instantaneous actions and variables are Boolean, in these problems
actions may have a duration, are executed concurrently over
time, and can affect Boolean and numeric variables at both
the start and end of their execution. These two extensions
make the problem of finding a valid plan much more difficult –even undecidable in the general case (Helmert 2002;
Gigante et al. 2022)– and extending state-of-the-art solving
techniques from the classical/numeric to the temporal numeric setting is far from easy.
In this paper, we extend the recently proposed Symbolic
Pattern Planning (SPP) approach (Cardellini, Giunchiglia,
and Maratea 2024) to handle temporal numeric problems.
Specifically, given one such problem Π and a bound n ∈
N≥0 , we show how to produce a Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) formula (Barrett et al. 2021) (i) whose models
correspond to valid plans of Π (correctness), (ii) which is
ensured to be satisfiable for some value of the bound n
when Π has a valid plan (completeness), and (iii) which
is equivalent to the pattern encoding proposed by Cardellini,
Giunchiglia, and Maratea when the problem is numeric, i.e.,
when all the actions are instantaneous. These results significantly advance the state-of-the-art, as all symbolic temporal numeric planners are based on the standard encoding
with effect and explanatory frame axioms. Given this, we
expect to obtain also in the temporal setting the substantial improvements achieved in the numeric case, where it
was shown (i) that the pattern encoding dominates (i.e., is

1. We extend the SPP approach to handle temporal numeric
problems specified in PDDL 2.1.
2. We prove the correctness and completeness of our SMT
encoding.
3. We conduct an extensive comparative analysis with
all available temporal numeric planners, both searchbased and symbolic-based, and show that our approach
achieves the highest coverage in 9 out of 10 domains.
After the preliminary definitions, we present the basic
ideas underlying current standard encodings in SMT, followed by the presentation of our approach, the experimental
comparative analysis and the conclusions. A running example is used to illustrate the features of our encoding.

Preliminaries
In PDDL2.1 (Fox and Long 2003) a temporal numeric planning problem is a tuple Π = ⟨VB , VN , A, I, G⟩, where
1. VB and VN are finite sets of Boolean and numeric variables, ranging over {⊤, ⊥} and Q respectively,
2. I is a selected initial state, and a state is a function mapping each variable to an element in its domain,

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26481

