The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CAGE: Unsupervised Visual Composition and Animation
for Controllable Video Generation
Aram Davtyan1 , Sepehr Sameni1 , Björn Ommer2 , Paolo Favaro1
1

Computer Vision Group, Institute of Informatics, University of Bern, Switzerland
2
CompVis @ LMU Munich and MCML, Germany
aram.davtyan@unibe.ch, sepehr.sameni@unibe.ch, b.ommer@lmu.de, paolo.favaro@unibe.ch

1st
source

Abstract
The field of video generation has expanded significantly in
recent years, with controllable and compositional video generation garnering considerable interest. Most methods rely
on leveraging annotations such as text, objects’ bounding
boxes, and motion cues, which require substantial human effort and thus limit their scalability. In contrast, we address the
challenge of controllable and compositional video generation
without any annotations by introducing a novel unsupervised
approach. Our model is trained from scratch on a dataset of
unannotated videos. At inference time, it can compose plausible novel scenes and animate objects by placing object parts
at the desired locations in space and time. The core innovation of our method lies in the unified control format and the
training process, where video generation is conditioned on a
randomly selected subset of pre-trained self-supervised local
features. This conditioning compels the model to learn how
to inpaint the missing information in the video both spatially
and temporally, thereby learning the inherent compositionality of a scene and the dynamics of moving objects. The abstraction level and the imposed invariance of the conditioning
input to minor visual perturbations enable control over object
motion by simply using the same features at all the desired
future locations. We call our model CAGE, which stands for
visual Composition and Animation for video GEneration. We
conduct extensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of
CAGE across various scenarios, demonstrating its capability
to accurately follow the control and to generate high-quality
videos that exhibit coherent scene composition and realistic
animation.

2nd
source

3rd
source

control

generated sequence →

Figure 1: Scene composition and animation with CAGE on
the CLEVRER and the BAIR datasets. CAGE is able to
combine multiple object features from different source images and use them to compose and animate the scene in a
controllable way. The selected features are shown as overlaying red patches. Blue patches in the controls correspond
to the intended future locations of the objects. Notice the
ability of the model to carefully adjust the appearances (e.g.,
sizes, shadows and lights) of the objects based on their location in the target layout. Use the Acrobat Reader to play the
first images in the generated sequences as videos.

ulate the outcomes of desired changes in the environment,
such as editing scene composition or assigning specific actions (e.g., moving the agent or other objects in a certain
direction). Unlike traditional simulators, which require extensive manual effort to design and maintain synthetic environments, controllable video generation models can learn
directly from real-world data, capturing interactions within
complex scenes. This capability allows for the creation of
realistic and dynamic environments that can be used to train
and evaluate intelligent agents in a more flexible manner (Ha
and Schmidhuber 2018; Mendonca, Bahl, and Pathak 2023).
However, integrating control presents challenges due to
the unavailability of information about ongoing actions in
real-world video data. Existing models often rely heavily on large-scale and expensive supervision, such as textannotations (Hu, Luo, and Chen 2021), objects’ bounding
boxes (Wang et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024), segmentation (Han
et al. 2022), and motion cues (Shi et al. 2024). These requirements not only limit the scalability and flexibility of these
models but also constrain their applicability to new domains
where such annotated data is scarce or nonexistent.
To address this limitation, recent advancements have pro-

Project website — https://araachie.github.io/cage

Introduction
Video generation has gained significant attention in recent
years, offering a transformative approach to various domains, ranging from content creation (Bar-Tal et al. 2024) to
robotics (Guo et al. 2023a), autonomous driving1 (Hu et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2024; Gao et al. 2024) and video games
(Menapace et al. 2024). Controllable video generation models are of particular interest, as they enable users to simCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For example, GAIA by Wayve (https://wayve.ai) and the world
models developed by Waabi (https://waabi.ai)

16163

