The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Distilling Knowledge from Heterogeneous Architectures
for Semantic Segmentation
Yanglin Huang1 , Kai Hu1, * , Yuan Zhang1 , Zhineng Chen2 , Xieping Gao3
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Information Processing of Ministry of Education, Xiangtan University
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
Key Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence and International Communication, Hunan Normal University
ylhuang@smail.xtu.edu.cn, {kaihu, yuanz}@xtu.edu.cn, zhinchen@fudan.edu.cn, xpgao@hunnu.edu.cn
Abstract

Current knowledge distillation (KD) methods for semantic segmentation focus on guiding the student to imitate
the teacher’s knowledge within homogeneous architectures.
However, these methods overlook the diverse knowledge contained in architectures with different inductive biases, which
is crucial for enabling the student to acquire a more precise
and comprehensive understanding of the data during distillation. To this end, we propose for the first time a generic
knowledge distillation method for semantic segmentation
from a heterogeneous perspective, named HeteroAKD. Due
to the substantial disparities between heterogeneous architectures, such as CNN and Transformer, directly transferring
cross-architecture knowledge presents significant challenges.
To eliminate the influence of architecture-specific information, the intermediate features of both the teacher and student are skillfully projected into an aligned logits space. Furthermore, to utilize diverse knowledge from heterogeneous
architectures and deliver customized knowledge required by
the student, a teacher-student knowledge mixing mechanism
(KMM) and a teacher-student knowledge evaluation mechanism (KEM) are introduced. These mechanisms are performed by assessing the reliability and its discrepancy between heterogeneous teacher-student knowledge. Extensive
experiments conducted on three main-stream benchmarks using various teacher-student pairs demonstrate that our HeteroAKD outperforms state-of-the-art KD methods in facilitating distillation between heterogeneous architectures.

1

Figure 1: Comparison of the vanilla KD methods ((a) and
(b)) with our HeteroAKD (c).

by (Romero et al. 2015), extend the form of taught knowledge from the prediction distribution to the feature representation of the model. It aims to enforce the feature consistency
between the teacher-student pair.
Currently, both logits-based (Shu et al. 2021; Baek et al.
2022) and feature-based (He et al. 2019; Liu, Zhang, and
Wang 2022) KD approaches for semantic segmentation focus on knowledge transfer between teacher-student pairs
in homogeneous architectures, while the distillation of heterogeneous architectures has not been explored. However,
it is crucial to distill knowledge from heterogeneous architectures in practical scenarios. In general, architectures
with different inductive biases tend to focus on distinct
patterns, enabling them to understand the data from various perspectives to attain diverse knowledge (Ren et al.
2022). Therefore, gaining diverse knowledge from heterogeneous architectures enables students to achieve a more
precise and comprehensive understanding of the data during distillation. For example, when distilling the student
model on the ADE20K (Zhou et al. 2019) dataset, as our
experiments will demonstrate, transferring knowledge from
DeepLabV3-ResNet-101 to SegFormer-Mix TransformerB1 (our HeteroAKD ∆mIoU: +3.66%) can easily surpass
the performance increment achieved by transferring knowledge to DeepLabV3-ResNet-18 (Af-DCD (Fan et al. 2023)

Introduction

Knowledge Distillation (KD), as a model compression technique, has been extensively researched in the field of semantic segmentation and has achieved remarkable progress (Liu
et al. 2019; He et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Shu et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2023). According to the distillation position of the segmenters, existing KD methods can
be roughly classified into two categories: logits-based and
feature-based. Logits-based methods (See Figure 1a) follow the idea proposed in (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015),
which forces the student to mimic the prediction distribution of the teacher to acquire more accurate knowledge. Differently, feature-based methods (See Figure 1b), inspired
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3824

