The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decoupling Scattering: Pseudo-Label Guided NeRF for Scenes with Scattering
Media
Mingyang Zhang1 , Junkang Zhang1 , Faming Fang 1,2 * , Guixu Zhang 1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
{myzhang, jkzhang}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {fmfang, gxzhang}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has been widely used in
computer vision and graphics, achieving impressive results
in novel view synthesis and multi-view 3D reconstruction.
However, despite its excellent performance under ideal conditions, NeRF struggles in challenging environments such as
hazy, foggy, and underwater scenes, primarily due to the difficulty in decoupling objects from the scattering medium. To
mitigate this limitation, we proposed a novel approach for
NeRF in scenes with scattering media. Specifically, we leverage pseudo-labels during the early stage of training to guide
NeRF in decoupling the densities of objects and the scattering
medium, guiding the model toward a more appropriate search
space. Furthermore, we introduce a Cyclical Progressive Dimensional Optimization Strategy (CPDOS) that focuses on
optimizing a single or a few variables during specific periods. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can
effectively simulate hazy and underwater scenes, accurately
decouple the scattering medium from objects, estimate atmospheric parameters, and outperform existing methods in novel
view synthesis and image restoration tasks.

Figure 1: Our method can produce accurate dehazed images
and transmission map estimation results.

Code — https://github.com/MMMazart/DecoNeRF
this challenge. One intuitive method treats the scattering
medium as semi-transparent densities or voxels within the
NeRF framework, extracting clear images by applying density thresholds, as seen in FogNeRF (Teigen et al. 2023)
and (Jin et al. 2023). However, in practice, NeRF models
haze as a coloration on object surfaces, complicating the
distinction between objects and the scattering medium. Approaches like Seathru-NeRF (Levy et al. 2023), DehazeNeRF (Chen et al. 2023) and ScatterNeRF (Ramazzina
et al. 2023) have been designed to handle scattering medium
within rendering models, aiming to distinguish between
medium and object densities using independent parameters
within the NeRF framework. Despite these advances, it is
highly under-constrained to decompose the scene into objects and medium components in an unsupervised way without robust constraint (Guo et al. 2022b). For instance, as illustrated in Figure 2, Seathru-NeRF (Levy et al. 2023) may
converge to a trivial solution: one of the components explains the whole scene while leaving the other empty (Guo
et al. 2022b).
Dehaze-NeRF (Chen et al. 2023) and ScatterNeRF (Ramazzina et al. 2023) incorporate handcrafted priors like

Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) effectively reconstruct 3D scenes and generate novel views
from multi-view 2D images using coordinate-based implicit
representations, and has been widely used in computer vision and graphics. Although NeRF has demonstrated excellent performance under ideal conditions, it still struggles
with challenging conditions, such as hazy, foggy and underwater scenes (Chen et al. 2023). The initial NeRF model assumes each ray path intersects only one opaque object and
neglects scattering in the air (Levy et al. 2023), leading to
its failure in handling environments with scattering media
such as fog, haze and water, as it does not fully account for
scattering effects.
When input images are severely degraded by scattering media like haze and water, NeRF reconstructions often exhibit blurred appearances and color distortions. Recent studies have proposed innovative approaches to address
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10031

