The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Time Series Supplier Allocation via Deep Black-Litterman Model
Xinke Jiang1 * , Wentao Zhang2 * , Yuchen Fang1 * , Xiaowei Gao3† , Hao Chen4
Haoyu Zhang5 , Dingyi Zhuang6 , Jiayuan Luo7†
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
3
University College London, London, United Kingdom
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan, China
6
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
7
University of Macau, Macau, China
{thinkerjiangpku, wentaozh2001, fyclmiss}@gmail.com

Abstract

spatiotemporal resource management problem but is a critical challenge in enhancing supply chain efﬁciency due to
its NP-hard complexity (Nasiri et al. 2018; Kawtummachai
and Van Hop 2005). (See Appendix A.1 for TSSA related
work). Similar to the equilibrium-return dilemma in ﬁnancial management (Markowitz 1952; Treynor 1962; Mossin
1966), TSSA focuses on maximizing proﬁts while minimizing risks, highlighting the importance of supply-demand
alignment in overall performance.
Inspired by the controllable proﬁt variance assumptionbased Markowitz model can optimize asset returns against
portfolio risks (Fabozzi, Markowitz, and Gupta 2015; Steinbach 2001; Sharpe 1963), the Black-Litterman (BL) model
integrates subjective investor insights as perspective matrices to enhance portfolio optimization, thus can generate
more accurate portfolios that reﬂect expert predictions of expected returns across different investments (Black and Litterman 1991; Xing et al. 2018). However, the application of
the BL model within supply chain management still faces
distinct challenges. The manual creation of perspective matrices introduces uncertainty, struggling to capture real-time
market conditions, and the non-linear complex dynamics of
supplier-enterprise relationships (Kara, Ulucan, and Atici
2019; Islam, Amin, and Wardley 2021). A notable example
of complex relationships is the difﬁculty in determining a
supplier’s maximum supply capabilities at speciﬁc moments
(Alikhani, Torabi, and Altay 2019; Lee 2009), i.e. supplier
A’s capacity at time ti−1 in Figure 1.
From a practical standpoint, the quest for effective TSSA
in supply chains marks a promising avenue for research
(Tan, Kannan, and Handﬁeld 1998; Chen, Lin, and Huang
2006). On the scientiﬁc front, the challenge extends beyond
merely incrementally applying conventional BL models. It
involves developing an effective model capable of generating comprehensive perspective matrices that accurately reﬂect supplier performance and dynamics among the supplyorder gaps. Deep learning (DL) frameworks have emerged
as leading solutions to capture non-linear correlations for
analysis (Chai and Ngai 2020; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton

As a typical problem of Spatiotemporal Resource Management, Time Series Supplier Allocation (TSSA) poses a complex NP-hard challenge, aimed at reﬁning future order dispatching strategies to satisfy the trade-off between demands
and maximum supply. The Black-Litterman (BL) model,
which comes from ﬁnancial portfolio management, offers a
new perspective for the TSSA by balancing expected returns
against insufﬁcient supply risks. However, the BL model is
not only constrained by manually constructed perspective
matrices and spatio-temporal market dynamics but also restricted by the absence of supervisory signals and unreliable
supplier data. To solve these limitations, we introduce the pioneering Deep Black-Litterman Model (D BLM) for TSSA,
which innovatively adapts the BL model from ﬁnancial domain to supply chain context. Speciﬁcally, D BLM leverages
Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Networks (STGNNs) to capture spatio-temporal dependencies for automatically generating future perspective matrices. Moreover, a novel Spearman
rank correlation is designed as our D BLM supervise signal to
navigate complex risks and interactions of the supplier. Finally, D BLM further uses a masking mechanism to counteract
the bias of unreliable data, thus improving precision and reliability. Extensive experiments on four datasets demonstrate
signiﬁcant improvements of D BLM on TSSA.

1

Introduction

As a typical problem of Spatiotemporal Resource Management, the goal of Time Series Supplier Allocation (TSSA)
is to reduce discrepancies and boost efﬁciency by optimizing supplier capabilities to precisely match order quantities in the future (Wan, Rao, and Dong 2023; Alikhani,
Torabi, and Altay 2019; Gören 2018). The TSSA optimization involves space and time thus can be seen as a typical
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Xiaowei Gao and Jiayuan Luo are corresponding authors. This
work was done when Xinke was at UESTC.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11870

