The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unaligned Message-Passing and Contextualized-Pretraining for Robust
Geo-Entity Resolution
Yuwen Ji1,2 , Wenbo Xie1 * , Jiaqi Zhang1 , Chao Wang1 , Ning Guo1 , Lei Shi2 , Yue Zhang3
1

Amap, China
Beihang University, China
3
Westlake University, China
daoqian.xwb@alibaba-inc.com, {jiyuwen, leishi}@buaa.edu.cn, zhangyue@westlake.edu.cn
2

Abstract

pecially for nearby entities. Previous work (Balsebre et al.
2022) has shown that entities with similar names and locations might not match due to inaccuracies of geo-positional
systems or being chain brands like Starbucks in a mall.
However, incorporating neighboring entities can assist us in
making such inferences. For instance, the same-name pair
in Figure 1(a) is not a match due to different neighbors
(blue icon). Pre-trained transformer-based language models
(Vaswani et al. 2017) effectively represent geo-entities by
capturing deep semantic relationships, outperforming traditional rule-based methods. The research question is how
to extend these semantics-centric representations with geocontext from spatial neighbors to enhance GER robustness.
In the field of GER, methods have evolved from earlier rule-based approaches (Deng et al. 2019; Shivaprabhu,
Balasubramani, and Cruz 2017; Miller et al. 1990; Morana
et al. 2014; Isaj, Zimányi, and Pedersen 2019) to emerging
deep learning-based solutions (Li et al. 2023, 2022; Tempelmeier, Gottschalk, and Demidova 2021; Balsebre et al.
2022, 2023a). These methods primarily focus on comparing semantic aspects between entities, often neglecting geocontext, w.r.t. spatial neighbors. As a result, they rely heavily
on clean and complete records to construct accurate attribute
representations, and their performance suffers with even minor data quality issues, like spelling errors or missing values. We argue that leveraging geo-context can mitigate performance degradation in noisy datasets. For instance, erroneous or missing values can be corrected by examining finegrained tokens of neighbors (Figure 1(b)), and having common neighbors (e.g., Beer in blue icon) can serve as a matching criterion. Although some works, such as SpaBERT (Li
et al. 2022) and Geo-ER (Balsebre et al. 2022), have considered neighbor names, they fail to fully utilize the finegrained tokens of neighbor attributes. To the best of our
knowledge, our problem remains underexplored.
Towards robust geo-entity resolution, we use pre-trained
language models to construct attribute representations and
graph neural networks (GNNs) to incorporate geographical context from neighboring entities. The motivation is that
the unordered message-passing mechanism of GNNs (Kipf
and Welling 2016; Dwivedi et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020) is
well-suited for this task as it aligns with the non-sequential
propagation of attributes from neighbors. Despite advancements in semantics-centric representations with language

Geo-entity resolution involves linking records that refer to
the same entities across different spatial datasets, which underpins location-based services. Given the varying quality of
geo-data, this task is known to be challenging, as directly
comparing the semantic-centric representations of two entities is no longer reliable. To robustify geo-entity resolution
in this context, the main research question is how to effectively extend the current semantics-centric representations of
geo-entity with geographical context from its spatial neighbors. Existing methods consider names from neighbors, but
they struggle to fully utilize the unaligned neighbor attributes.
In this paper, we study the representation of geo-context
for robust geo-entity resolution and propose two adaptations
that efficiently leverage unaligned geo-entity attributes across
spatial neighbors: (1) A plugin module, namely Unaligned
Message-Passing (UMP), that propagates unaligned neighbor
features to integrate geo-context into the token embeddings
output by language model; (2) a contextualized pretraining
framework (CP) that allows the former to leverage unlabelled
geo-entity data. Experiments show that our method surpasses
the baselines, achieving higher F1 scores on 8 real-world geodatasets in terms of robustness, with an improvement of up to
7.9%. The ablation study further justifies our proposal.

Introduction
Geo-entity resolution (GER) (Sehgal, Getoor, and Viechnicki 2006) involves linking records that refer to the same
entities across spatial datasets, which underpins locationbased services. As shown in Figure 1, a geo-entity record is
typically identified by textual attributes (name, address, etc.)
and the spatial position (latitude & longitude). The task is to
determine whether the geo-entity records from one source
(red table) match the records from another source (green
table). Typically, GER consists of two steps: (1) extracting
underlying features to create a robust record representation
for generic understanding, and (2) classifying whether two
records represent same entity based on their representations.
This work focuses on the first step, as a better understanding of geo-entities aids in matching. The varying quality of
geospatial data, such as aliases, spelling errors, and missing attributes, complicates direct semantic comparison, es* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11852

