The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Structured World Models From and For Physical Interactions
Yunzhu Li
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
500 W. 120th Street, New York, NY 10027
yunzhu.li@columbia.edu

Humans have a strong intuitive understanding of the physical world. Through observations and interactions with the
environment, we build mental models that predict how the
world would change if we applied a specific action (i.e., intuitive physics). My research draws on these human insights
to develop model-based RL agents that learn from their interactions and build predictive models that generalize widely
across a range of objects made with different materials. The
core idea behind my research is to introduce novel representations and integrate structural priors into learning systems
to model dynamics at different levels of abstraction. I will
discuss how such structures can make model-based planning
algorithms more effective, helping robots accomplish complex manipulation tasks (e.g., manipulating an object pile,
shaping deformable foam into a target configuration, and
making a dumpling from dough using various tools).
Specifically, I will first discuss Dynamic Particle Interaction Networks (DPI-Net) (Li et al. 2019), in which we propose learning a particle-based simulator for complex control tasks. Combining learning with particle-based systems
offers two major benefits: first, the learned simulator, like
other particle-based systems, applies broadly across objects
of different materials; second, the particle-based representation introduces a strong inductive bias, as particles of the
same type follow the same dynamics. This enables the model
to quickly adapt to new environments with unknown dynamics, laying the foundation for robot learning in dynamic
scenes with particle-based representations.
Next, I will cover the integration of DPI-Net into a modelbased RL framework, enabling perception, modeling, and
long-horizon manipulation of elasto-plastic objects with various tools. The resulting system, RoboCook, won the Best
Systems Paper Award at CoRL-23 (Shi et al. 2023). We
demonstrate that with just 20 minutes of real-world interaction data per tool, a general-purpose robot arm can learn
complex long-horizon soft object manipulation tasks, such
as making dumplings and alphabet-shaped cookies.
Towards the end of the talk, I will also discuss our recent advances in the fine-grained modeling of a broader
range of materials, including both rigid and deformable objects (Zhang et al. 2024) (Figure 1a), as well as our approach
to determining the optimal abstraction level for constructing

graphs to balance efficiency and effectiveness (Wang et al.
2023) (Figure 1c). These two papers won the Best Paper
Awards at an ICRA-24 Workshop and an IROS-23 Workshop, respectively.

References
Li, Y.; Wu, J.; Tedrake, R.; Tenenbaum, J. B.; and Torralba, A.
2019. Learning Particle Dynamics for Manipulating Rigid Bodies,
Deformable Objects, and Fluids. In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
Shi, H.; Xu, H.; Clarke, S.; Li, Y.; and Wu, J. 2023. RoboCook: Long-Horizon Elasto-Plastic Object Manipulation with Diverse Tools. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning.
Wang, Y.; Li, Y.; Driggs-Campbell, K.; Fei-Fei, L.; and Wu, J.
2023. Dynamic-Resolution Model Learning for Object Pile Manipulation. In Robotics: Science and Systems.
Zhang, K.; Li, B.; Hauser, K.; and Li, Y. 2024. AdaptiGraph:
Material-Adaptive Graph-Based Neural Dynamics for Robotic Manipulation. In Robotics: Science and Systems.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28717

