The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hubness Change Point Detection
Ikumi Suzuki1 , Kazuo Hara1 , Eiji Murakami2
1

Yamagata University
Azbil Kimmon Co.,Ltd., Keio University
suzuki.ikumi@gmail.com, kazuo.hara@gmail.com, e.murakami.y8@azbil.com
2

Abstract

Existing change detection methods can be broadly classified into two categories: those that assume probabilistic models and those that are model-free. Methods based
on probabilistic models first estimate a probabilistic model
that generates data using past data. When data that is significantly unlikely according to the estimated probabilistic
model appears consecutively, a change is considered to have
occurred. Model-free methods, on the other hand, involve dividing time-series data into two groups before and after each
point in time to determine whether a change has occurred. If
a significant difference between the two groups is observed,
a change is deemed to have occurred at that point.
The new change detection method we propose is categorized as a model-free method. We focus on the hubness phenomenon that occurs in the two datasets obtained by dividing the time-series data. When using entries from one dataset
as queries to perform nearest neighbor search on the entries
from the other dataset, certain entries from the other dataset
frequently appear in the search results for many queries,
indicating the occurrence of the hubness phenomenon. To
manage this hubness, we apply hubness reduction methods,
specifically centering and vector length normalization. Importantly, if no changes occur and, as a result, there is no
difference between the two datasets, hubness reduction will
succeed, resulting in a uniform data distribution. Conversely,
if changes occur and there is a difference between the two
datasets, hubness will not be reduced, and the data distribution will not become uniform.
Our contributions are as follows.

This study proposes a new change detection method that
leverages hubness. Hubness is a phenomenon that occurs in
high-dimensional spaces, where certain special data points,
known as hub data, tend to be closer to other data points. Hubness is known to degrade the accuracy of methods based on
nearest neighbor search. Therefore, many studies in the past
have focused on reducing hubness to improve accuracy. In
contrast, this study utilizes hubness to detect changes. Specifically, if there is no change, suppressing the hubness occurring in the two datasets obtained by dividing the time-series
data will result in a uniform data distribution. However, if
there is a change, even if we try to reduce the hubness in the
two datasets obtained by dividing the time-series data before
and after the change, the hubness will not be reduced, and the
data distribution will not become uniform. We use this finding to detect changes. Experiments with synthetic data show
that the proposed method achieves accuracy comparable to
or exceeding that of existing methods. Additionally, the proposed method achieves good accuracy with real-world data
from hydraulic systems and gas sensors, along with excellent
runtime performance.

Introduction
This study proposes a novel change detection method. The
changes targeted for detection in this study are those that
occur in time-series data obtained by monitoring the state
of machines. Examples of time-series data include data obtained from sensors monitoring the state of machines operating in factories (Yi, Huang, and Li 2017; Lei et al. 2018),
and data obtained from meters measuring the usage of water or gas in households (Gungor et al. 2011). These data
typically change due to intentional state changes, such as
switching operating modes. However, they can also change
due to unintentional state changes caused by machine failures. Missing these unintentional state changes can threaten
the safety and reliability of the machines. Furthermore, it is
desirable to perform change detection through edge computing on-site, without sending data to a cloud data center, and
to trigger alarms as quickly as possible when changes occur. Therefore, developing a change detection algorithm that
does not require extensive computation time is a crucial task.

• Propose a novel method that applies the concept of hubness to change detection.
• Introduce a novel method for hubness suppression in detecting differences between two datasets and provide analytical proofs to support its effectiveness.
• Propose employing a uniformity test to measure hubness
phenomena between two datasets, which advances effective change point detection.
• Develop the Hubness Change Point Detection (HubCPD) algorithm and present comparative experiments
against state-of-the-art approaches. Due to the absence of
complex computations, our method achieves faster computation times and accuracy that is either comparable to
or superior to existing methods.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12622

