The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Human and AI Perceptual Differences in Image Classification Errors
Minghao Liu1 , Jiaheng Wei2 , Yang Liu1 , James Davis1
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz
Data Science and Analytics Thrust, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
mliu40@ucsc.edu, jiahengwei@hkust-gz.edu.cn, yangliu@ucsc.edu, davisje@ucsc.edu

Abstract

human annotators (Han, Dong, and Demartini 2021; Joshi,
Porikli, and Papanikolopoulos 2009; Yao et al. 2012; Taleb
et al. 2021; Roels et al. 2019), or utilizing human feedback reinforcement learning methods to bridge the performance gap between humans and machines (Yang et al. 2024;
Ouyang et al. 2022; Shnayder et al. 2016; Ramakrishnan
et al. 2019). Human workers have also been requested to
diagnose AI system failures given semantic explanations of
the AI decision (Yang and Alonso 2024; Nushi, Kamar, and
Horvitz 2018; Nushi et al. 2017). However, these works focus on developing training schemes to improve the model
performance, and limited work explores the perceptual difference between human and machine classifiers. 1
Our work quantifies the perceptual difference between humans and machines in the image classification task. We first
analyzed the statistical distribution of mistakes made by human annotators and AI annotators (robust machine learning
classifiers), where we found that machines tend to make similar mistakes to other machines, while mistakes differ from
those made by humans. Next, we attempt to understand the
differences using implicit information from machine and
human classifiers, such as machine confidence scores, human annotation time, and agreement levels, to rank the difficulty of each classification task. Comparing the performance of humans and machines on various task difficulty
levels, we observe that despite being worse overall, humans
outperform the machines in some conditions, such as when
machines have low confidence or low agreement. Finally,
we demonstrate the potential of studying human-to-machine
differences by using our findings to show that appropriate
human-machine collaboration significantly outperforms collaboration between any two machine classifiers.
The contributions of this work are:
• A comparison of human-machine perceptual differences
on an image classification task.
• Showing that understanding perceptual differences can
improve overall system accuracy.

Artificial intelligence (AI) models for computer vision
trained with supervised machine learning are assumed
to solve classification tasks by imitating human behavior
learned from training labels. Most efforts in recent vision research focus on measuring the model task performance using standardized benchmarks such as accuracy. However, limited work has sought to understand the perceptual difference
between humans and machines. To fill this gap, this study
first analyzes the statistical distributions of mistakes from the
two sources and then explores how task difficulty level affects these distributions. We find that even when AI learns
an excellent model from the training data, one that outperforms humans in overall accuracy, these AI models have significant and consistent differences from human perception.
We demonstrate the importance of studying these differences
with a simple human-AI teaming algorithm that outperforms
humans alone, AI alone, or AI-AI teaming.

1

Introduction

One motivation of neural networks (NN) is creating artificial intelligence that can learn from human intelligence and
mimic human behavior. In computer vision, researchers often build their work upon the assumption that neural networks learn a feature representation similar to visual cortex activity (Agrawal et al. 2014; Mur et al. 2013; Kuzovkin
et al. 2018). It is believed that a well-trained machine network learns to represent input stimuli in a way that is similar
to human visual perception (Battleday, Peterson, and Griffiths 2020). As a result, most current work in computer vision that aims to develop “better” computer models focuses
on summary benchmark scores (e.g., prediction accuracy).
As a result, the evaluation of human-to-machine similarity
across the entire distribution of answers is ignored.
Human-centric studies do exist in some areas of AI research. Human-centric explainable AI conducts user studies to identify the “explanations” that are most meaningful
to human users. Noisy label researchers utilize human disagreements as soft labels to train neural networks (Branson
et al. 2010; Kovashka et al. 2016; Peterson et al. 2019; Wei
et al. 2023). Human-in-the-loop work utilizes active learning to iteratively expand or update the training set by using

2
2.1

Preliminary

The Multi-Class Classification Task

In this work, we focus on the multi-class image classification
task. Assume that labels y ∈ [1, 2, ..., K] are generated by

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14318

More related works are included in appendix (arXiv version).

