The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multiplex Graph Representation Learning
with Homophily and Consistency
Yudi Huang1 , Ci Nie1 , Hongqing He1 , Yujie Mo2 ,
Yonghua Zhu1,3 * , Guoqiu Wen1 , Xiaofeng Zhu1,2
1

2

Guangxi Key Lab of Multisource Information Mining Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
Information Systems Technology Design Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
yhzhu9423@gmail.com
Abstract

Chawla, and Swami 2017) aim to learn node representations without the help of labels by random walk strategies. However, these works only focus on learning structural information and ignore the discriminative information in the node representation. To address these issues,
Self-supervised methods are proposed to make full use of
node features and structural information for representation
learning. Previous self-supervised methods can be categorized into two subgroups, i.e., intra-graph contrastive learning methods and inter-graph contrastive learning methods.
Intra-graph contrastive learning methods aims to improve
the quality of node representations by capturing global attributes. For example, HDMI (Jing, Park, and Tong 2021)
encourages improved mutual information between node representations and global representations to capture global attributes. However, this method ignores the intrinsic correlation among different graphs. Therefore, inter-graph contrastive learning methods have been proposed to address
these issues by capturing consistent information across different graphs. For example, CKD (Wang et al. 2022) models
the correlation among different graphs by performing collaborative distillation.

Although unsupervised multiplex graph representation learning (UMGRL) has been a hot research topic, existing UMGRL methods still has limitations to be addressed. For example, previous works either preserve structural information by
ignoring the impact of heterophily in the graph structure or
only focus on node-level consistency by ignoring class-level
consistency. To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a new UMGRL method to explore both homophily and
consistency in the multiplex graph. Specifically, we propose
to restructure the multi-order relationships of every graph between every node and its multi-order neighbors to improve
the homophily and reduce the impact of the heterophily in the
graph structure. We also design a contrastive loss based on a
self-expression matrix of the node representation to achieve
node-level and class-level consistency. Furthermore, we theoretically prove our method to achieve class-level consistency.
Extensive experimental results on real datasets verify the effectiveness of the proposed method with respect to node classification tasks, compared to SOTA methods.

1

Introduction

Although existing UMGRLs have achieved good results
in many tasks, these works still have limitations to be
addressed. First, previous UMGRL works mainly focus
on exploring the homophily where two connected nodes
come from the same class, but ignoring the impact of heterophily of the graph structure, where two connected nodes
come from different classes. For example, previous UMGRL works (Mo et al. 2023b; Peng, Wang, and Zhu 2023)
rely on either homophilic GNNs (e.g., graph convolutional
layers) or node representation to reconstruct the original
graph for preserving the structural information. Their key
idea is to keep representation smooth on the graph structure,
which implicitly assumes the homophily of the graph structure. However, heterophily has been found to be prevalent in
real-world scenarios. If the heterophily in the graph structure is ignored, the model will inevitably introduce noise
(Zheng et al. 2022). Hence, existing methods significantly
limit the rationality of real applications. Second, previous
works mainly focus on exploring the consistency of the same
node across different graphs, i.e., node-level consistency, to
obtain consistent information among graphs, which has been
widely used to conduct node identification (Zhu et al. 2022).

Multiplex graph consists of multiple graphs to share the
same node representation. Benefiting from the richness and
variety of graph structures, the relationships between two
nodes in the multiplex graph can be fully and comprehensively described. Hence, multiplex graph learning has
been popularly designed to conduct representation learning in various real-world applications such as social networks and biological networks (Wan et al. 2020; Peng et al.
2023). Recently, Unsupervised Multiplex Graph Representation Learning (UMGRL), as an effective method for modeling complex relationships of nodes without using node labels, has shown great potentiality in a wide range of applications such as anomaly detection and recommendation systems (Chu et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2022).
Existing UMGRL methods can be broadly categorized
into two groups, i.e., traditional unsupervised methods and
self-supervised methods. Traditional UMGRL methods such
as PMNE (Liu et al. 2017) and Metapath2vec (Dong,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11835

