The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SIDE: Socially Informed Drought Estimation Toward Understanding Societal
Impact Dynamics of Environmental Crisis
Lanyu Shang1,3 , Bozhang Chen1 , Shiwei Liu1 , Yang Zhang1 , Ruohan Zong1 , Anav Vora2
Ximing Cai2 , Na Wei2 , Dong Wang1
1

School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA
Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
3
Computer Science, Loyola Marymount UNiversity, Los Angeles, CA, USA
lanyu.shang@lmu.edu, {bozhang4, shiweil2, yzhangnd, rzong2, amvora3, xmcai, nawei2, dwang24}@illinois.edu
2

Abstract

turing human observations and experiences and the computational power of AI, this paper focuses on a novel problem
of socially informed AI-driven drought estimation. Our goal
is to jointly estimate drought severity and identify salient
determinants of the societal impact precipitated by drought.
A few recent efforts have been made to investigate the
societal impact posed by drought (Sugg et al. 2020). These
solutions have mainly focused on scientific measurements,
such as meteorological and hydrological data, or economic
losses in specific sectors like agriculture (Naumann et al.
2021). However, these approaches often overlook the diverse nature of drought’s impact on human society, which
often extends beyond quantifiable metrics and encompasses
various aspects of the human community, such as public
health, ecosystem, recreation, and tourism (Savelli et al.
2022). Moreover, traditional drought monitoring and assessment methods heavily rely on physical sensors and remote sensing technologies, which may not capture the diverse and localized perceptions of communities affected by
drought (Savelli et al. 2022). The lack of human-centric perspectives in drought severity assessment can lead to an incomplete understanding of the societal impact and hinder the
development of effective mitigation strategies that address
the diverse needs and concerns of communities affected by
drought.
To bridge this gap, in this paper, we study the problem of
socially informed AI-driven drought estimation by leveraging the collective intelligence on social and news media to
jointly estimate the severity and societal impact of drought.
Social media platforms and online news outlets have become
vital sources of timely, localized, and human-centric information during various natural disasters and crises (Bathaiy
et al. 2021). Figure 1 shows an overview of the socially informed drought severity estimation problem. Our proposed
framework integrates physical drought severity indicators,
social media data, and news media content to provide a comprehensive and human-centric estimation of drought severity
and its societal impact. Specifically, while social media inputs reflect the observations and experiences of individual
users, news media data offers broader coverage and more
neutral perspectives of drought conditions and their consequences analyzed by professional journalists and domain experts. However, two technical challenges exist in developing
such a framework.

Drought has become a critical global threat with significant
societal impact. Existing drought monitoring solutions primarily focus on assessing drought severity using quantitative measurements, overlooking the diverse societal impact of
drought from human-centric perspectives. Motivated by the
collective intelligence on social media and the computational
power of AI, this paper studies a novel problem of socially
informed AI-driven drought estimation that aims to leverage social and news media information to jointly estimate
drought severity and its societal impact. Two technical challenges exist: 1) How to model the implicit temporal dynamics of drought societal impact. 2) How to capture the socialphysical interdependence between the physical drought condition and its societal impact. To address these challenges, we
develop SIDE, a socially informed AI-driven drought estimation framework that explicitly quantifies the societal impact
of drought and effectively models the social-physical interdependency for joint severity-impact estimation. Experiments
on real-world datasets from California and Texas demonstrate SIDE’s superior performance compared to state-of-theart baselines in accurately estimating drought severity and its
societal impact. SIDE offers valuable insights for developing
human-centric drought mitigation strategies to foster sustainable and resilient communities.

Introduction
With the increasing frequency and severity, drought has become a critical global threat and poses significant challenges to our societies, leading to detrimental impacts on
human well-being, environmental sustainability, and socioeconomic development (Sugg et al. 2020). For example,
drought has cost the agricultural sector of California an estimated $1.7 billion in direct revenue losses and over 19,000
job losses in 2022 (Medellin-Azuara et al. 2022). Existing
solutions have mainly focused on assessing drought severity
with quantitative measurements, such as meteorological and
hydrological records, and agricultural yield data (Dantas,
da Silva, and Santos 2020; Becker and Sparks 2020). However, the underlying societal impact of drought (e.g., public
health, ecosystem, recreation) has not been systematically
explored, especially from human-centric perspectives. Motivated by the collective intelligence on social media in capCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28359

