The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Single Image Rolling Shutter Removal with Diffusion Models
Zhanglei Yang1,2 * , Haipeng Li1,2 * , Mingbo Hong2 , Chen-Lin Zhang3 , Jiajun Li4 , Shuaicheng Liu1,2,

†

1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Megvii Technology
3
Moonshot AI
4
Noumena AI
yangzl11974@gmail.com, {lihaipeng@std.,liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn
mingbohong97@gmail.com, zclnjucs@gmail.com, taringlee@noumena.com.cn
Abstract
We present RS-Diffusion, the first Diffusion Models-based
method for single-frame Rolling Shutter (RS) correction. RS
artifacts compromise visual quality of frames due to the rowwise exposure of CMOS sensors. Most previous methods
have focused on multi-frame approaches, using temporal information from consecutive frames for the motion rectification. However, few approaches address the more challenging but important single frame RS correction. In this work,
we present an “image-to-motion” framework via diffusion
techniques, with a designed patch-attention module. In addition, we present the RS-Real dataset, comprised of captured
RS frames alongside their corresponding Global Shutter (GS)
ground-truth pairs. The GS frames are corrected from the RS
ones, guided by the corresponding Inertial Measurement Unit
(IMU) gyroscope data acquired during capture. Experiments
show that RS-Diffusion surpasses previous single-frame RS
methods, demonstrates the potential of diffusion-based approaches, and provides a valuable dataset for further research.

Code — https://github.com/lhaippp/RS-Diffusion
Datasets — https://huggingface.co/Lhaippp/RS-Diffusion
Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed dataset and our results.
The first row features a rolling-shutter (RS) image captured
in realistic scenes, along with the corresponding groundtruth global-shutter (GS) image. The ground-truth flow used
for correcting the RS image to the GS image is displayed
on the left side of the second row. In the bottom right, we
showcase our corrected RS image.

Introduction
Rolling shutter (RS) is a common effect encountered when
capturing images with CMOS sensors. It results from varying exposure times for different rows in each frame, causing
artifacts like distorted straight lines and skewed image content, as shown in Fig. 1 (RS Image). These distortions are
not only visually unpleasing but also detrimental to downstream tasks (Hedborg et al. 2012; Saurer, Pollefeys, and Lee
2016; Albl, Kukelova, and Pajdla 2015; Saurer et al. 2013).
Prior methods for RS removal can be categorized as multiframe and single-frame based. The former relies on temporal motion in consecutive frames for motion compensation,
while the latter solely depends on a single frame for restoration. Single-frame RS correction is particularly challenging
yet crucial in data-scarce situations. Many existing methods,
including non-learning-based approaches (Rengarajan, Rajagopalan, and Aravind 2016; Rengarajan, Balaji, and Rajagopalan 2017; Purkait, Zach, and Leonardis 2017; Zhuang

et al. 2019; Kandula, Kumar, and Rajagopalan 2020), rely
on salient structures, such as straight lines. However, they
may falter in cases where such salient structures are absent.
The majority of deep RS correction methods are multiframe based (Liang, Chang, and Chen 2008; Ringaby and
Forssén 2012; Zhuang, Cheong, and Hee Lee 2017; Vasu,
Rajagopalan et al. 2018), with only a few considering a single frame as input. Among single-frame methods, Rengarajan et al. (Rengarajan, Balaji, and Rajagopalan 2017) directly learn the mapping between global shutter (GS) and
RS frames, facing the challenge of large solution space for
row-wise motion estimation. Zhuang et al. (Zhuang et al.
2019) addressed this by estimating an additional depth map,
although depth estimation from RS frames is inherently ill-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9373

