The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BEV-TSR: Text-Scene Retrieval in BEV Space for Autonomous Driving
Tao Tang1∗‡ , Dafeng Wei2∗ , Zhengyu Jia2∗ , Tian Gao2∗ ,
Changwei Cai2∗∗ , Chengkai Hou2∗∗ , Peng Jia2 , Kun Zhan2 , Haiyang Sun2 ,
Jingchen Fan2 , Yixing Zhao2 , Xiaodan Liang1† , Xianpeng Lang2 , Yang Wang2†
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
Li Auto Inc.
{weidafeng, jiazhengyu, gaotian, wangyang25}@lixiang.com
Abstract
The rapid development of the autonomous driving industry
has led to a significant accumulation of autonomous driving
data. Consequently, there comes a growing demand for retrieving data to provide specialized optimization. However,
directly applying previous image retrieval methods faces several challenges, such as the lack of global feature representation and inadequate text retrieval ability for complex driving scenes. To address these issues, firstly, we propose the
BEV-TSR framework which leverages descriptive text as
an input to retrieve corresponding scenes in the Bird’s Eye
View (BEV) space. Then to facilitate complex scene retrieval
with extensive text descriptions, we employ a large language
model (LLM) to extract the semantic features of the text
inputs and incorporate knowledge graph embeddings to enhance the semantic richness of the language embedding. To
achieve feature alignment between the BEV feature and language embedding, we propose Shared Cross-modal Embedding with a set of shared learnable embeddings to bridge
the gap between these two modalities, and employ a caption generation task to further enhance the alignment. Furthermore, there lack of well-formed retrieval datasets for effective evaluation. To this end, we establish a multi-level
retrieval dataset, nuScenes-Retrieval, based on the widely
adopted nuScenes dataset. Experimental results on the multilevel datasets show that BEV-TSR achieves state-of-the-art
performance, e.g., 85.78% and 87.66% top-1 accuracy on
scene-to-text and text-to-scene retrieval respectively.

Hard to Match
A man having a
glass of wine

Match well

Arrive at intersection, ped loading car trunk, ped with dog
crossing crosswalk, many cars, several trucks, several buses. Is
there a bus on the right rare? Yes.

(a) Previous Retrieval

(b) Text-Scene Retrieval

Figure 1: (a) Existing methods are primarily tailored for
simple retrieval scenarios. (b) On the contrary, autonomous
driving scenarios are challenging with numerous traffic participants and road elements. Then the BEV space offers a
clearer global context of the scene than the previous image
space, which aligns well with the textual query and serves
as an ideal retrieval space. To this end, we propose the novel
BEV-TSR framework for text-scene retrieval in autonomous
driving, which retrieves scenes in BEV space and demonstrates a significant capability to retrieve traffic scenarios.
to retrieve a sufficient amount of rural road data to fine-tune
the models. Therefore, data mining has become an essential working schema to provide specialized optimization for
autonomous driving models, and a well-designed retrieval
method plays a crucial role in the closed-loop data-driven
pipeline of autonomous driving data (Fu et al. 2024; Li et al.
2024).
On the other hand, cross-modal image-text retrieval (ITR)
has been a longstanding research task and presents a significant advancement over the past few years as to the prosperity
of deep models for language and vision (Cao et al. 2022; Ma
et al. 2021). However, as shown in Fig. 1, despite significant
recent progress in the field of ITR, when applied to challenging autonomous driving scenarios, modern retrieval methods
often struggle to achieve satisfactory results. While previous
methods (Fang et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b; Zhai et al. 2023)
have been successful in handling simpler tasks such as identifying objects like ”a brown dog” or more complex descriptions like ”a man having a glass of wine,” autonomous driving datasets contain numerous traffic participants and road
elements, e.g., ”arrive at intersection, ped loading car trunk,

Introduction
The past few years have witnessed rapid advancements in
the autonomous driving industry (Ma et al. 2022; Li et al.
2023a), which transitioned from a phase of data scarcity to
one where data is abundant, owing to the substantial data
generated by both data collection vehicles and crowdsourcing vehicles. However, the mere accumulation of uniformly
distributed data is no longer sufficient to achieve significant
improvements (Long et al. 2022). For example, if we aim to
ensure effective performance on rural roads, it is imperative
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Equal contribution
‡
Work done during an internship at Li Auto Inc.
∗∗
Equal contribution
†
Co-corresponding author

7275

