The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CustomCrafter: Customized Video Generation with Preserving Motion and
Concept Composition Abilities
Tao Wu 1 , Yong Zhang 2 * , Xintao Wang 2,4 , Xianpan Zhou 3 , Guangcong Zheng 1 , Zhongang Qi 4 ,
Ying Shan2,4 , Xi Li 1 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
Polytechnic Institute, Zhejiang University
4
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
taowucs@zju.edu.cn, {norriszhang,xintaowang}@tencent.com, {zhouxianpan,guangcongzheng}@zju.edu.cn, {zhongangqi,
yingsshan}@tencent.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn
Previous Methods

Abstract

Motion Restoring

Subject Learning
Only Learn Appearance

Customized video generation aims to generate high-quality
videos guided by text prompts and subject’s reference images.
However, since it is only trained on static images, the finetuning process of subject learning disrupts abilities of video
diffusion models (VDMs) to combine concepts and generate
motions. To restore these abilities, some methods use additional video similar to the prompt to fine-tune or guide the
model. This requires frequent changes of guiding videos and
even re-tuning of the model when generating different motions, which is very inconvenient for users. In this paper, we
propose CustomCrafter, a novel framework that preserves the
model’s motion generation and conceptual combination abilities without additional video and fine-tuning to recovery. For
preserving conceptual combination ability, we design a plugand-play module to update few parameters in VDMs, enhancing the model’s ability to capture the appearance details and
the ability of concept combinations for new subjects. For motion generation, we observed that VDMs tend to restore the
motion of video in the early stage of denoising, while focusing on the recovery of subject details in the later stage. Therefore, we propose Dynamic Weighted Video Sampling Strategy. Using the pluggability of our subject learning modules,
we reduce the impact of this module on motion generation in
the early stage of denoising, preserving the ability to generate
motion of VDMs. In the later stage of denoising, we restore
this module to repair the appearance details of the specified
subject, thereby ensuring the fidelity of the subject’s appearance. Experimental results show that our method has a significant improvement compared to previous methods.

…
…

Additional
Train
Forget Conceptual Combination

Additional Video

Our Method
Temporal Attention
Self Attention
Cross Attention
Stage 1 Train
Stage 2 Train
Frozen

Fine-tune conceptual combination
Learn Appearance
DWV Sampling Strategy

Conceptual Combination

Motion Generation Ability

Figure 1: Comparison of our approach with previous work.
Our method can better learn the appearance of the subject
while preserving the concept combination ability and motion generation ability, only requires one stage of training
without additional videos.

three requirements: consistent subject appearance, free concept combination, and smooth motion generation. Concept
combination refers to the ability to combine the learned specific subject with other different concepts. For example, as
shown in Figure 1, when we learn about a specific guitar, we
hope that this guitar can be combined with other concepts
(e.g., a person) to generate videos. Numerous studies (Gal
et al. 2023; Ruiz et al. 2023; Han et al. 2023; Gu et al. 2024b;
Kumari et al. 2023; Ruiz et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024b,a)
have proposed many methods for customized image generation and have achieved good results. When these approaches
are applied directly to customized video generation, they often fail to generate videos well. These methods damage the
conceptual combination ability and motion generation ability of the text-to-video model during the fine-tuning process,
which means that the subject learned by the model cannot be
combined with other concepts and the motion in the generated video tends to be static.
Recent methods for customized video generation have
noticed these issues. Some works (Wei et al. 2024; He

Code — https://github.com/WuTao-CS/CustomCrafter

Introduction
With the development of diffusion models and multimodal, text-to-video generation has made significant
progress (Brooks et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2023, 2024a,b;
Miao et al. 2023; Su et al. 2023a,b). Challenges still arise
when users want to generate videos of specific subjects. Customized video generation needs to simultaneously satisfy
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8469

