The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Partial Point Cloud Registration with Multi-view 2D Image Learning
Yue Zhang, Yue Wu* , Wenping Ma* , Maoguo Gong, Hao Li, Biao Hou
Xidian University, China
yzhang9812@outlook.com, {ywu@, wpma@mail., haoli@}xidian.edu.cn, gong@ieee.org, avcodec@163.com

Abstract

of partial registration, the establishment of the correspondence is still challenging due to the limitation of geometric information and imprecise correspondences. 2D images,
as a significant way to depict the 3D world, enable people
to understand the 3D environment easily. At the same time,
image and point cloud may be acquired by the different sensors, and the emphasis placed on them in their representations vary. This indicates that complementing information
may be carried by the two modalities and fusing them effectively may be the source of unlocking the better registration
performance. Nevertheless, although the fact that 2D-to-3D
learning has started to receive attentions (Chen et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2023a), the literature on the topic of partial point
cloud registration still largely focuses on the single-modality
(Mei et al. 2023a; Zhang et al. 2022b). Therefore, we ask the
question: how to leverage the 2D knowledge to boost partial
point cloud registration?
To tackle this issue, we present IAPReg, an ImageAssisted Partial point cloud Registration framework that
leverages specific knowledge in 2D modality to assist point
cloud registration. As shown in Figure 1, with the assistance
of 2D information, our IAPReg can learn the 2D-3D joint
feature to produce high-quality matching map, and then the
correspondence confidence generated by 2D knowledge is
used as the weight of the Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) to estimate rigid transformation.
Specifically, different from existing methods (Zhang et al.
2022a; Wang et al. 2022b) to introduce the extra RGB training images, we project the point cloud from a few specific
viewpoints into multi-view depth maps since the majority of
3D sensors do not directly collect 2D images corresponding to the point clouds. To bridge the gap between 2D and
3D modalities, the inter-modality multi-view learning module consumes the features extracted from the 2D and 3D encoders, and outputs the 2D-3D joint feature. There are inevitable outliers in point clouds, and they could interfere
with the establishment of correspondence. Weighted SVD
method is commonly used to reduce the interference but determining the correspondence weights is not trivial. Therefore, we propose 2D-weighted SVD method to assist in calculating the weights by the well-established 2D model and
estimate the rigid transformation. We conduct experiments
on extensive benchmark datasets, and the experimental results demonstrate the performance of our method.

Learning representations from numerous 2D image data has
shown promising performance, yet very few works apply
this representations to point cloud registration. In this paper, we explore how to leverage the 2D information to assist
the point cloud registration, and propose IAPReg, an ImageAssisted Partial 3D point cloud Registration framework with
the multi-view images generated by the input point cloud. It
is expected to enrich 3D information with 2D knowledge, and
leverage 2D knowledge to assist with point cloud registration.
Specifically, we create multi-view depth maps by projecting
the input point cloud from several specific views, and then extract 2D and 3D features using some well-established models.
To fuse the information learned from 2D and 3D modalities,
inter-modality multi-view learning module is proposed to enhance geometric information and complement semantic information. Weighted SVD is a common method to reduce the
impact of inaccurate correspondences on registration. However, determining the correspondence weights is not trivial.
Therefore, we design a 2D-weighted SVD method, where the
2D knowledge is employed to provide weight information
of correspondences. Extensive experiments perform that our
method outperform the state-of-the-art method without additional 2D training data.

Introduction
Point cloud registration is a key concept in the field of 3D
vision, and has been extensively used in a variety of vision
tasks, including 3D object detection (Wang et al. 2023a; Hu,
Liu, and Hu 2023), scene reconstruction (Xu et al. 2023;
Sayed et al. 2022) and others (Yuan et al. 2023b, 2024b,a;
Wu et al. 2022). The goal of point cloud registration is to find
the rotation and translation parameters that align a pair of
point clouds. In the real scenario, occlusions from surrounding objects and different viewing angles frequently result in
incomplete point clouds acquired by the 3D scanner. These
outliers, or the points in the other point cloud that have no
correspondences, make point cloud registration even more
difficult.
Although there are several registration methods (Huang
et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2021) that can alleviate the problem
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10329

