The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Computationally Grounded Framework for Cognitive Attitudes
Tiago de Lima1 , Emiliano Lorini2 , Elise Perrotin3 , François Schwarzentruber4
1

CRIL, Univ Artois and CNRS, Lens, France
2
IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse University, France
3
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan
4
ENS Lyon, LIP, France
delima@cril-lab.fr, Emiliano.Lorini@irit.fr, elise.perrotin@aist.go.jp, francois.schwarzentruber@ens-lyon.fr
Abstract

2009; Icard, Pacuit, and Shoham 2010; Lorini and Herzig
2008), BDI (belief, desire, intention) logics (Cohen and
Levesque 1990; Herzig and Longin 2004; Meyer, van der
Hoek, and van Linder 1999; Wooldridge 2000). The idea
of describing rational agents in terms of their epistemic and
motivational attitudes is shared with classical decision theory and game theory, according to which rational agents are
assumed to make decisions on the basis of their beliefs and
preferences.
Most logics of cognitive attitudes rely on extensional semantics based on so-called Kripke models: sets of possible
worlds (or states) supplemented with one or more binary
accessibility relations for each agent representing, e.g., the
agent’s epistemic uncertainty or preference ordering over
the states. Multi-relational Kripke models are general and
mathematically elegant. Nonetheless, they are limited from
a modeling point of view as they are not succinct. Even a
simple situation like a card game (e.g., Hanabi) with 4 players having 5 cards each among a set of 50 cards require
a Kripke model with 5.5 × 1023 states to represent all alternatives on which an agent’s uncertainty and preferences
bear. For this reason, it is hard, if not unfeasible, to implement model checking for a logic of cognitive attitudes using a Kripke semantics since the model cannot be explicitly constructed. Some alternatives to solve this succinctness problem have been proposed in the area of epistemic
logic including semantics based on BDDs (van Benthem
et al. 2018), Boolean formulas and programs (Charrier and
Schwarzentruber 2015, 2017, 2018; Charrier, Pinchinat, and
Schwarzentruber 2019), and the notion of visibility (Cooper
et al. 2021; van der Hoek, Troquard, and Wooldridge 2011).
However, to our knowledge no general succinct semantics
for a logic of cognitive attitudes, combining epistemic ones
with motivational ones, has been proposed up to now.
In this paper, we tackle this problem by relying on a semantics for cognitive attitudes based on the notion of belief
base that has been shown to provide an interesting computationally grounded alternative to Kripke models in representing epistemic concepts in the single-agent case (Konolige
1986) as well as in the multi-agent case (Lorini 2018, 2019,
2020; Lorini and Rapion 2022). Unlike standard Kripke semantics for logics of cognitive attitudes in which possible
states and agents’ accessibility relations are given as primitive, in our semantics they are defined from and grounded on

We introduce a novel language for reasoning about agents’
cognitive attitudes of both epistemic and motivational type.
We interpret it by means of a computationally grounded semantics using belief bases. Our language includes five types
of modal operators for implicit belief, complete attraction,
complete repulsion, realistic attraction and realistic repulsion.
We give an axiomatization and show that our operators are
not mutually expressible and that they can be combined to
represent a large variety of psychological concepts including ambivalence, indifference, being motivated, being demotivated and preference. We present a dynamic extension of
the language that supports reasoning about the effects of belief change operations. Finally, we provide a succinct formulation of model checking for our languages and a PSPACE
model checking algorithm relying on a reduction into TQBF.
We present some experimental results for the implemented
algorithm on computation time in a concrete example.

Code — https://gitlab.in2p3.fr/tiago.delima/cognitiveattitudes-source-code
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14073

Introduction
An agent’s cognitive state encompasses its epistemic attitudes (e.g., beliefs) and motivational (or conative) attitudes
(e.g., desires and preferences). Their relationships as well as
their influence on the agent’s behavior are objects of study
in cognitive psychology (Albarracı́n et al. 2018) and philosophy of mind (Searle 2001; Humberstone 1992). They play
a prominent role in the explanation of others’ behaviours
and of our own behaviours through the so-called intentional
stance (Dennett 1987). Cognitive (or mental) attitudes have
also been studied by logicians, both in philosophy and in
AI. Several logics dealing with epistemic and practical reasoning of rational agents have been proposed. These include
epistemic logics (Hintikka 1962; Fagin et al. 1995), logics of preferences (Wright 1963, 1972; Liu 2011; van Benthem, Girard, and Roy 2009), logics of beliefs and preferences (Boutilier 1994; Lorini 2021; Azimipour and Naumov
2021), logics of desires and pro-attitudes (Dubois, Lorini,
and Prade 2017; Su et al. 2007), logics of intention (Shoham
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14858

