The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Medical Manifestation-Aware De-Identification
Yuan Tian1 , Shuo Wang2 , Guangtao Zhai2 *
1

2

Shanghai AI Laboratory
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
tianyuan168326@outlook.com, zhaiguangtao@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Face de-identification (DeID) has been widely studied for
common scenes, but remains under-researched for medical
scenes, mostly due to the lack of large-scale patient face
datasets. In this paper, we release MeMa, consisting of over
40,000 photo-realistic patient faces. MeMa is re-generated
from massive real patient photos. By carefully modulating
the generation and data-filtering procedures, MeMa avoids
breaching real patient privacy, while ensuring rich and plausible medical manifestations. We recruit expert clinicians to annotate MeMa with both coarse- and fine-grained labels, building the first medical-scene DeID benchmark. Additionally,
we propose a baseline approach for this new medical-aware
DeID task, by integrating data-driven medical semantic priors
into the DeID procedure. Despite its conciseness and simplicity, our approach substantially outperforms previous ones.

(a) DeID

(b) Med-DeID

(c) MeMa

(d) MeMa-Seg

Figure 1: (a) Common DeID approaches, focus on removing identity. (b) Our medical-aware DeID (Med-DeID), also
considers preserving the diagnosis-necessary medical information. (c) Our MeMa, a large-scale patient face dataset. (d)
Our MeMa-Seg, the tumor segmentation subset of MeMa.

Dataset and Code —
https://github.com/tianyuan168326/MeMa-Pytorch

due to not particularly preserving the disease manifestations
of the origin image. This leads to the lost of diagnosisnecessary disease signs, deteriorating the medical utilities.
In this paper, we release a Medical Manifestation-rich patient face dataset, termed MeMa, containing over 40,000
photo-realistic virtual patient images. To construct MeMa,
we obtained permission from the hospital’s medical ethics
committee to photograph patients. Then, these patient photos are annotated by expert physicians, before being used to
train a specialized generative model. By carefully modulating the sampling procedure of the generative model and filtering the generated data, we created a diverse, high-quality,
and real-world-like patient face dataset.
Furthermore, we propose a baseline medical semanticspreserved DeID approach, termed MedSem-DeID, to eliminate the patient identity from the facial image, at the premise
of preserving the medical utility. Concretely, we first condense the rich medical priors within the MeMa into a medical semantics encoder, and then adopt it to (1) enhance the
medical knowledge of the features within the DeID pipeline,
and (2) minimize the medical-aware distortion of the deidentified images. Despite its simplicity, our approach easily
outperforms previous DeID approaches for medical scenes,
thanks to the rich medical manifestation knowledge embodied in the MeMa dataset. Our main contributions are:
• We release, to the best of our knowledge, the first large-

Introduction
The public sharing of large-scale image datasets has facilitated the rapid progress in Artificial Intelligence (AI). However, this also poses great privacy concerns, especially for
facial images, which are widely used for identity authentication. To address this issue, many de-identification (DeID)
algorithms (Cao et al. 2021; Maximov, Elezi, and Leal-Taixé
2020; Gu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2023; Cai et al. 2024) have
been continuously proposed for protecting the facial identity, achieving promising results on common-scene facial
datasets (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2017).
However, rare researches are conducted for the medical
scenes, although patient privacy leakage is a big concern in
the medical AI era (Price and Cohen 2019). Research on
medical-aware DeID (Med-DeID) mainly faces two obstacles. First, there are few medical-scene facial datasets available, due to the difficulty in accessing patients compared to
healthy individuals. Moreover, it is often not acceptable to
package real patient faces as datasets and make them publicly downloadable. Second, the current DeID approaches
may not be appropriate for protecting medical facial images,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26363

