The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ARTICLE: Annotator Reliability Through In-Context Learning
Sujan Dutta1 , Deepak Pandita1 , Tharindu Cyril Weerasooriya1 , Marcos Zampieri2 ,
Christopher M. Homan1 , Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh1 *
1

Rochester Institute of Technology
2
George Mason University
{sd2516, cmhvcs}@rit.edu, {deepak, cyril, khudabukhsh}@mail.rit.edu, mzampier@gmu.edu

Abstract

outlier-based approaches can potentially muffle minority or
unique perspectives, leading to annotation echo chambers.
Consider a war corpus where annotators hail from countries A and B. Even simple questions like who is winning
the war could have drastically different responses depending on which country the annotator belongs to. If a pool has
an overwhelming presence of A, any perspective that annotators from B could contribute to will be eliminated since
their responses will be visibly different from the majority
view.
This paper introduces an alternative path to estimate annotator quality through the lens of self-consistency. Prior work
in this domain explored to address it through the lens of annotation patterns of individual annotators (Dawid and Skene
1979; Hovy et al. 2013; Ustalov, Pavlichenko, and Tseitlin
2024), without taking into account what is being annotated
(context) and information of the annotator. Suppose we are
interested in collecting a dataset of offensive speech. If we
observe that a given annotator has marked one instance that
attacks an ethnic group as highly offensive while marking
another instance with an even sharper attack on the same
group as not offensive, the annotator’s responses could be
self-consistent. Incorporating self-consistency into the annotation quality estimation process has the following benefits.
First, it bypasses the requirement of having annotations from
multiple other annotators to compute divergence from aggregate opinion, thus promising to be more resource-efficient.
Second, this approach preserves unique but self-consistent
perspectives, which outlier-based methods might eliminate.
While the notion of self-consistency has been applied to
diverse settings (see, e.g., Wang et al. (2023); Cooper et al.
(2024a)), to our knowledge, this paper first applies selfconsistency for rater quality estimation on subjective annotation tasks. The introduction of large language models (LLM)
with larger context lengths for language understanding has
also led to research on utilizing LLMs (Gilardi, Alizadeh,
and Kubli 2023; He et al. 2024) as human annotators. However, prior research has focused on using the LLM (He et al.
2024) to replace the majority opinion of data annotation but
not the intricate annotator-level labels.

Ensuring annotator quality in training and evaluation data is
a key piece of machine learning in NLP. Tasks such as sentiment analysis and offensive speech detection are intrinsically
subjective, creating a challenging scenario for traditional
quality assessment approaches because it is hard to distinguish disagreement due to poor work from that due to differences of opinions between sincere annotators. With the goal
of increasing diverse perspectives in annotation while ensuring consistency, we propose ARTICLE, an in-context learning (ICL) framework to estimate annotation quality through
self-consistency. We evaluate this framework on two offensive speech datasets using multiple LLMs and compare its
performance with traditional methods. Our findings indicate
that ARTICLE can be used as a robust method for identifying
reliable annotators, hence improving data quality.

Code — https://github.com/Suji04/ARTICLE

Introduction
From classical supervised systems (Carbonell, Michalski,
and Mitchell 1983) to the RLHF framework (Christiano
et al. 2017), human input plays a central role in human
value-aligned AI and NLP systems. Crowdsourcing is a
well-studied, affordable, and distributed framework that allows data collection from broad and diverse annotator pools
within a short period (Gray and Suri 2019; Kahneman, Sibony, and Sunstein 2021; Wang, Hoang, and Kan 2013). The
benefits of crowdsourcing notwithstanding, enforcing quality control and estimating annotation quality remain a longstanding challenge (Lease 2011; Huang, Fleisig, and Klein
2023).
Conventional approaches to distinguish high from poor
quality annotators are typically based on outlier detection,
where the divergence from aggregate opinions is considered
a signal of poor quality annotation (Dumitrache et al. 2018a;
Leonardelli et al. 2021; Davani, Dı́az, and Prabhakaran
2022; Ustalov, Pavlichenko, and Tseitlin 2024). However,
for subjective tasks (Passonneau et al. 2012; Pavlick and
Kwiatkowski 2019; Uma et al. 2021; Nie, Zhou, and Bansal
2020; Jiang and Marneffe 2022; Deng et al. 2023), such

Contributions. Our contributions are the following.

* Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh is the corresponding author.

1. We introduce ARTICLE, a novel framework to estimate
annotator quality through self-consistency;

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14230

