The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Addressing Multi-Label Learning with Partial Labels:
From Sample Selection to Label Selection
Gengyu Lyu1,2,4 , Bohang Sun1 , Xiang Deng2,3 , Songhe Feng* 2,5
1

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
4
Idealism Beijing Technology Co., Ltd.
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation (Beijing Jiaotong University), Ministry of Education
lyugengyu@gmail.com, sunbohang@emails.bjut.edu.cn, 20120346@bjtu.edu.cn, shfeng@bjtu.edu.cn
2

[a] [b]

[c]

dog

3

3

3

person

3

?

2

tree

3

?

2

mountain
river

3
2

3
?

3
3

car

2

?

2

horse

2

?

2

Abstract
Multi-label Learning with Partial Labels (ML-PL) learns
from training data, where each sample is annotated with part
of positive labels while leaving the rest of positive labels
unannotated. Existing methods mainly focus on extending
multi-label losses to estimate unannotated labels, further inducing a missing-robust network. However, training with single network could lead to confirmation bias (i.e., the model
tends to confirm its mistakes). To tackle this issue, we propose a novel learning paradigm termed Co-Label Selection
(CLS), where two networks feed forward all data and cooperate in a co-training manner for critical label selection.
Different from traditional co-training based methods that networks select confident samples for each other, we start from a
new perspective that two networks are encouraged to remove
false-negative labels while keep training samples reserved.
Meanwhile, considering the extreme positive-negative label
imbalance in ML-PL that leads the model to focus on negative
labels, we enforce the model to concentrate on positive labels
by abandoning non-informative negative labels to alleviate
such issue. By shifting the cooperation strategy from “Sample
Selection” to “Label Selection”, CLS avoids directly dropping samples and reserves training data in most extent, thus
enhancing the utilization of supervised signals and the generalization of the learning model. Empirical results on various
multi-label datasets demonstrate that our CLS is significantly
superior to other state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Example of sample with ground-truth labels [a],
partial label [b], and noisy labels [c]. Samples in ML-PL
are annotated with a subset of positive labels and needs less
annotation cost than multi-label learning, and can be viewed
as a special case of noisy labels.

learn from a few available labels and automatically distinguish false-negative and true-negative labels. Following this,
(Durand, Mehrasa, and Mori 2019) conduct the first attempt
to empirically compare various labelling methodologies to
demonstrate the possibility for employing partial labels on
multi-label datasets. (Huynh and Elhamifar 2020) regularise
the cross-entropy loss with a cost function that gauges the
smoothness of labels and sample features characteristics to
avoid the overfitting problem in ML-PL. (Cole et al. 2021)
extend multi-label losses to handle the extreme case of MLPL, where annotators only provide one relevant label for
each instance. Although these techniques greatly advance
the learning of missing-robust network by extending various loss function variations, all of them are formulated with
a single network, which inevitably results in confirmation
bias since the model tends to corroborate the erroneous data
(Tarvainen and Valpola 2017).
In order to combat such confirmation bias problem, cotraining based approaches have recently received a lot of attention. (Han et al. 2018) suggest a co-teaching technique
that trains two models concurrently, which allows them to
choose small loss instances for one another. (Yu et al. 2019)
adopt the “Update by Disagreement” strategy to ensure the
divergence between two models, which only selects prediction disagreement samples for further co-teaching. (Wei
et al. 2020) propose a joint training with co-regularization
method named JoCoR, which increases the effective num-

Introduction
Multi-label learning aims to predict a set of labels related
to a sample, which has been widely applied in a variety of
fields ranging from document classification (Liu et al. 2021),
image annotation (Wang et al. 2022), social tag recommendation (Vu et al. 2020) and emotion recognition of internetbased multimedia data (Wang et al. 2015). Current studies strongly rely on high-quality fully labelled multi-label
datasets with complete and accurate labels, while it is almost
impossible to annotate large-scale benchmarks, especially
when the number of categories is large. Considering the significant effort required to collect an adequate and exhaustive
list of labels for each instance, it is appealing if model can
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19251

