The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Temporal Point Processes for Forecasting Directional Relations
in Evolving Hypergraphs
Tony Gracious, Arman Gupta, Ambedkar Dukkipati
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore - 560012, INDIA
{tonygracious, arman, ambedkar}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

general form by considering all the above characteristics.
This paper provides a comprehensive solution to this problem.
Temporal network representations entail learning a model
that aggregates historical data into finite-dimensional vectors on each node or entity. These vectors can subsequently
be utilized to predict future interactions among the entities. The previous research has characterized relationships
as pairwise edge formations within a network, employing
temporal graph neural network-based models to derive representations (S. Gupta and Dukkipati 2019; Trivedi et al.
2019; Xu et al. 2020; Liu, Ma, and Li 2022; Cao et al. 2021;
Rossi et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2022). However, this setting
has very limited applicability as most real-world relations,
as mentioned earlier, are higher-order with groups of entities involved in each relation and sizes of the groups can
vary in a network. These problems have been modeled and
studied as hypergraphs in a static case (Ghoshdastidar and
Dukkipati 2017a,b). While (Gracious and Dukkipati 2023) is
the first work that studies evolving hypergraphs, in this paper
we study this problem in a very general setting considering
that most real-world relations can be directional involving
groups of interacting entities (Kim et al. 2022). Such examples can be seen in sports such as football or cricket, where
two groups compete. Similarly, in citation networks, authors
draw upon the works of other authors to support their arguments. Hence, in this work, we model models relations as
edge formation in a directed hypergraph.
An example of relationships in a Bitcoin transaction network as directed hyperedges is depicted in Figure 1. Here,
we can see that Bitcoin transactions involve two groups
of entities: one group representing the senders and another
group representing the receivers. The goal is to create models that can track the evolution of users in the Bitcoin network, represented by addresses, over time so that we can
forecast transactions. Using learned dynamic representations, these models can then be used to detect anomalous
transactions occurring within the network, such as money
laundering (Wu et al. 2022).
Existing works on directed hyperedge prediction use hypergraph neural networks based unsupervised learning (Wei
et al. 2022; Lee and Shin 2023; Bai, Zhang, and Torr 2021;
Hwang et al. 2022). These models cannot be applied to
the proposed problem as hypergraphs cannot be constructed

Forecasting relations between entities is paramount in the
current era of data and AI. However, it is often overlooked
that real-world relationships are inherently directional, involve more than two entities, and can change with time. In
this paper, we provide a comprehensive solution to the problem of forecasting directional relations in a general setting,
where relations are higher-order, i.e., directed hyperedges in
a hypergraph. This problem has not been previously explored
in the existing literature. The primary challenge in solving
this problem is that the number of possible hyperedges is
exponential in the number of nodes at each event time. To
overcome this, we propose a sequential generative approach
that segments the forecasting process into multiple stages,
each contingent upon the preceding stages, thereby reducing the search space involved in predictions of hyperedges.
The first stage involves a temporal point process-based node
event forecasting module that identifies the subset of nodes
involved in an event. The second stage is a candidate generation module that predicts hyperedge sizes and adjacency vectors for nodes observing events. The final stage is a directed
hyperedge predictor that identifies the truth by searching over
the set of candidate hyperedges. To validate the effectiveness
of our model, we compiled five datasets and conducted an extensive empirical study to assess each downstream task. Our
proposed method achieves a performance gain of 32% and
41% compared to the state-of-the-art pairwise and hyperedge
event forecasting models, respectively, for the event type prediction.

Code & Datasets — https://tinyurl.com/hypernodetpp
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2301.12210

1

Introduction

The formation and evolution of real-world networks result
from intricate relationships among entities. These relations
can be characterized as (i) higher-order, (ii) directional, and
(iii) temporal. For example, interactions via email involve a
variable number of users engaged in directed relations that
evolve with time. While there is a substantial body of literature focused on representation learning of networks, each
study typically addresses these aspects in isolation. It is extremely challenging to study these networks in their most
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16888

