The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Region-Based Image Editing of Denoising Diffusion Models
Zixiang Li1,2 , Yue Song4 , Renshuai Tao1,2 , Xiaohong Jia5 , Yao Zhao1,2,3 * , Wei Wang1,2 *
1

2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Visual Intellgence +X International Cooperation Joint Laboratory of MOE
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
University of Trento, Italy
5
Lanzhou Jiaotong University
{zixiangli, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Although diffusion models have achieved remarkable success
in the field of image generation, their latent space remains
under-explored. Current methods for identifying semantics
within latent space often rely on external supervision, such
as textual information and segmentation masks. In this paper,
we propose a method to identify semantic attributes in the latent space of pre-trained diffusion models without any further
training. By projecting the Jacobian of the targeted semantic region into a low-dimensional subspace which is orthogonal to the non-masked regions, our approach facilitates precise semantic discovery and control over local masked areas,
eliminating the need for annotations. We conducted extensive experiments across multiple datasets and various architectures of diffusion models, achieving state-of-the-art performance. In particular, for some specific face attributes, the
performance of our proposed method even surpasses that of
supervised approaches, demonstrating its superior ability in
editing local image properties.

Figure 1: Motivation of our proposed method. In this figure, mouth editing is used as an example. Direct editing often results in significant changes to areas beyond the mouth.
By using Jacobian matrix projection, we can suppress these
unwanted changes, allowing for more precise editing.

demonstrated unexpected versatility across various domains,
it becomes imperative to explore and leverage their intrinsic
capabilities to fully realize their potential. Therefore, it is
more favored to leverage the pre-trained models for unsupervised image editing.
Diffusion models have achieved impressive results in
guided generation tasks. The most outstanding one is the use
of Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) to convert the user input text prompt into the
condition of the diffusion model input, thereby generating
high-quality images. GLIDE (Nichol et al. 2021), DALL·E
2 (Ramesh et al. 2022), and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.
2022) are some of the best models currently. These models
use CLIP to align the text space with the latent space of the
diffusion model, so as to achieve text-guided image generation. However, there is still no comprehensive exploration of
the properties of the latent space of the diffusion model itself. Current research on the latent space of diffusion models
remains a bit under-explored.
In the denoising process of the diffusion model, the image
space is generally represented as x{1:T } , where {1 : T } represents the time step of denoising. In the denoising process
of the diffusion model, the denoised image space is generally represented as x. All vector dimensions in x{1:T } are the
same as the initial input x0 and the output ϵ{1:T } after the denoising network. In this article, we abbreviate the pixel space
of the diffusion model as x-space. The x-space within diffusion models is generally considered to be devoid of seman-

Introduction
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in the
field of image generation, with notable examples including
the Denoising Diffusion Probability Model (DDPM) (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020), the Denoising Diffusion Implicit
Model (DDIM) (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020), and scorebased generative models (Song et al. 2020). Diffusion models have set new benchmarks in various applications such
as image generation, video generation, image editing, and
inverse problems. When deploying diffusion models for
downstream tasks like image editing, additional supervision
such as textual descriptions or sketches is typically required,
and this often involves the integration of supplementary
modules or fine-tuning pre-trained models (e.g., Lora (Hu
et al. 2021), DiffusionClip (Kim, Kwon, and Ye 2022)).
These techniques are meticulously engineered to minimize
undesired alterations to the noise space, thereby avoiding
irregular changes or artifacts. The necessity for such additional supervision or training underscores the current limitations in the inherent information available within diffusion
models. Nevertheless, as pre-trained diffusion models have
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18638

