The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Knowledge Graph Completion with Relation-Aware Anchor Enhancement
Duanyang Yuan1 * , Sihang Zhou1 * , Xiaoshu Chen2 , Dong Wang1 , Ke Liang2 ,
Xinwang Liu2 , Jian Huang1†
1

College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{ydy n1, shzhou, chenxs, lizexin, liangke22, xinwangliu, huang jian}@nudt.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Text-based knowledge graph completion methods take advantage of pre-trained language models (PLM) to enhance
intrinsic semantic connections of raw triplets with detailed
text descriptions. Typical methods in this branch map an input query (textual descriptions associated with an entity and
a relation) and its candidate entities into feature vectors, respectively, and then maximize the probability of valid triples.
These methods are gaining promising performance and increasing attention for the rapid development of large language
models. According to the property of the language models,
the more related and specific context information the input
query provides, the more discriminative the resultant embedding will be. In this paper, through observation and validation, we find a neglected fact that the relation-aware neighbors of the head entities in queries could act as effective contexts for more precise link prediction. Driven by this finding, we propose a relation-aware anchor enhanced knowledge
graph completion method (RAA-KGC). Specifically, in our
method, to provide a reference of what might the target entity
be like, we first generate anchor entities within the relationaware neighborhood of the head entity. Then, by pulling the
query embedding towards the neighborhoods of the anchors,
it is tuned to be more discriminative for target entity matching. The results of our extensive experiments not only validate
the efficacy of RAA-KGC but also reveal that by integrating
our relation-aware anchor enhancement strategy, the performance of current leading methods can be notably enhanced
without substantial modifications.

Figure 1: In this figure, the yellow bricks denote relationaware entities which share the same head entity and relation
in the testing triple. These entities share important concept
information with the target entity (the dashed blue brick),
thus can be used to guide for better link prediction.

2016; Chen et al. 2023). Due to the intricate relations between entities, manually constructed knowledge graphs often struggle to encompass knowledge comprehensively. As a
consequence, knowledge graph completion, which uncovers
missing links by reasoning over known facts, is an important
task for enhancing the application effects in this field.
The existing methods in this field can be broadly divided into two categories, i.e., triple-based (Li et al. 2024;
Wang et al. 2014) and text-based methods (Wang et al.
2022a; Shang et al. 2023). Algorithms in the second category, which utilize pre-trained language models to incorporate additional relations and entity descriptions for improved
predictive accuracy, have garnered escalating interest in recent years. Specifically, the text embedding methods (Wang
et al. 2022a; Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019), as typical representatives of text-based methods, are achieving promising performance with appealing efficiency by adopting a bi-encoder
network structure and a contrastive learning manner. In these
methods, the visible components of the triplets, either (h, r,
?) or (?, r, t), together with the corresponding descriptions
serve as queries, while the tail or head entities considered
as the candidate values. Employing language models, this
branch’s methods map queries and candidate values into a
shared hidden space with structure identical but independent
sub-networks. They perform link prediction by aligning the
embeddings of valid triples and repelling those of the invalid
ones. Our proposed method also falls into this group.
The performance of these methods is highly related to two
vital factors. First, the representative capability of the pretrained language model. To this aspect, thanks to the rapid

Code — https://github.com/DayanaYuan/RAA-KGC

Introduction
A knowledge graph is a structured semantic knowledge base
that stores world knowledge through triples, i.e., ( head entity, relation, tail entity), or (h, r, t) for short (Fan et al.
2024a). It is the cornerstone of many important applications
(Liang et al. 2023), such as question answering (Hao et al.
2017; Xu et al. 2022), information retrieval (Qin et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2018) and recommendation system (Zhang et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15239

