The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MMJ-Bench: A Comprehensive Study on Jailbreak Attacks and Defenses for Vision
Language Models
Fenghua Weng, Yue Xu* , Chengyan Fu* , Wenjie Wang†
Shanghaitech University
{wengfh2023, xuyue2022, fuchy, wangwj1}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Warning: This paper contains unsafe model responses.
As deep learning advances, Large Language Models (LLMs)
and their multimodal counterparts, Vision-Language Models (VLMs), have shown exceptional performance in many
real-world tasks. However, VLMs face significant security
challenges, such as jailbreak attacks, where attackers attempt
to bypass the model’s safety alignment to elicit harmful responses. The threat of jailbreak attacks on VLMs arises from
both the inherent vulnerabilities of LLMs and the multiple
information channels that VLMs process. While various attacks and defenses have been proposed, there is a notable gap
in unified and comprehensive evaluations, as each method is
evaluated on different dataset and metrics, making it impossible to compare the effectiveness of each method. To address
this gap, we introduce MMJ-Bench, a unified pipeline for evaluating jailbreak attacks and defense techniques for VLMs.
Through extensive experiments, we assess the effectiveness
of various attack methods against SoTA VLMs and evaluate
the impact of defense mechanisms on both defense effectiveness and model utility for normal tasks. Our comprehensive
evaluation contributes to the field by offering a unified and
systematic evaluation framework and the first public-available
benchmark for VLM jailbreak research. We also demonstrate
several insightful findings that highlight directions for future
studies.

Code — https://github.com/thunxxx/MLLM-Jailbreakevaluation-MMJ-Bench

Introduction
Continuous breakthroughs in deep learning and the expansion
of model scales have led to the exceptional performance of
Large Language Models (LLMs) in language understanding
and generation tasks (Achiam et al. 2023). Building on the
success of single-modal models, multimodal models have
emerged, capable of comprehending the physical environment and simulating human perception (Yin et al. 2023).
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) extend the
architecture of LLMs (such as the GPT series) by integrating
visual, audio, and other modalities. This integration enhances
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27689

cross-modal semantic understanding and generation while
maintaining the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. As a subset
of MLLMs, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) focus specifically on integrating visual and textual data to offer services
like visual question answering (Liu et al. 2024c).
As VLM inference services become widely integrated into
daily life, enhancing their security and reliability has become
a critical issue. Many existing studies have explored the potential to break the inherent safety alignment of LLMs and elicit
harmful responses, a phenomenon referred to as ”Jailbreak
Attacks” (Zou et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a; Deng et al. 2024;
Zhou and Wang 2024). This vulnerability is also present in
VLMs and is even more severe due to several factors:
• VLMs, built upon the architecture of LLMs, inherit the
vulnerabilities of LLMs related to jailbreak attacks, making them susceptible to jailbreak attacks.
• The multimodal nature of VLMs, which process both
textual and visual data, introduces greater risks. Attackers
can exploit multiple information channels, increasing the
likelihood of eliciting responses that violate regulatory
compliance boundaries.
• The continuous and high-dimensional nature of image
inputs and the underlying LLM’s limited ability to generalize its safety guardrails to unseen visual modalities
makes VLM more vulnerable to jailbreak attacks.
Jailbreaking threats were first discovered and studied
in LLMs (Zou et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a). Following
this, many studies have extended focus to VLMs. Compared to jailbreak attacks on LLMs, which use manually
designed templates or automatically designed triggers to bypass safety alignment, attacks on VLMs primarily target the
image modality. There are two main strategies for jailbreaking VLMs: generation-based and optimization-based. The
generation-based approach aims to create new images that
embed harmful behaviors from harmful queries while rephrasing the original text input into a non-harmful form (Gong
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2024). This approach
is motivated by the intuition that VLMs are primarily safety
aligned for text but not extended to images. On the other hand,
optimization-based jailbreak attacks, similar to adversarial
attacks in the image classification domain, aim to optimize
an adversarial perturbation with a sophisticated designed objective function to bypass the safeguards of VLMs (Qi et al.
2024; Niu et al. 2024; Zhao et al. 2024).

