The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Black-Box Test-Time Prompt Tuning for Vision-Language Models
Fan’an Meng1 , Chaoran Cui1 * , Hongjun Dai2 * , Shuai Gong1
1

Shandong University of Finance and Economics
2
Shandong University
fameng@mail.sdu.edu.cn, crcui@sdufe.edu.cn, dahogn@sdu.edu.cn, gsh8210@163.com

Abstract

with annotations are costly and difficult to obtain in practice. To address the above challenge, test-time prompt tuning
(TPT) (Shu et al. 2022) has been proposed to learn domainspecific prompts from test data in the absence of labeled
training data.
Typically, existing TPT methods leverage tunable
prompts to adapt PTMs to unseen domains and many studies (Zhang, Zhou, and Li 2024; Ma et al. 2024; Tsai, Mao,
and Yang 2024; Ben-David, Oved, and Reichart 2022) have
investigated tuning prompts via back-propagation. For example, TPT (Shu et al. 2022) and PromptSync (Khandelwal
2024) optimize instance-specific prompts under the guidance of entropy minimization (Grandvalet and Bengio 2004)
or contrastive learning objectives (Cui et al. 2023) based on
inputs. PromptAlign (Abdul Samadh et al. 2024) extends
TPT by incorporating a token alignment strategy, which addresses distribution shifts in test samples. The means and
variances of the test image token embeddings are aligned
with the image token embeddings of an offline proxy source
dataset.
Nevertheless, existing TPT methods overlook that VLMs
are often released as services due to commercial use and the
potential for misuse. In this scenario, referred to as Model as
a Service (MaaS), the model can only be accessed through
black-box APIs. It offers several APIs that allow users to design custom prompts for querying the VLMs without access
to gradients. However, all previous methods rely on backpropagation to tune the prompts, and they become ineffective when gradients are unavailable for prompt updates.
In the absence of gradients, one can apply derivative-free
optimization algorithms (Kennedy and Eberhart 1995; Bertsimas and Tsitsiklis 1993; Hansen and Ostermeier 2001).
Despite relying solely on the function values without gradient back-propagation, such algorithms converge slowly
when the search space is large. Fortunately, several studies
(Aghajanyan, Gupta, and Zettlemoyer 2021; Qin et al. 2021)
have demonstrated that VLMs, despite having recent parameters, possess low intrinsic dimensionality. Sun et al. (2022)
successfully applied derivative-free optimization algorithms
to the large language model RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019),
but their approach focused on optimizing text prompts for
NLP, which makes it inapplicable to TPT in VLMs. Yu et al.
(2023) demonstrated the feasibility of optimizing the visionlanguage model CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) using similar

Test-time prompt tuning (TPT) aims to adjust the visionlanguage models (e.g., CLIP) with learnable prompts during the inference phase. However, previous works overlooked
that pre-trained models as a service (MaaS) have become a
noticeable trend due to their commercial usage and potential risk of misuse. In the context of MaaS, users can only
design prompts in inputs and query the black-box visionlanguage models through inference APIs, rendering the previous paradigm of utilizing gradient for prompt tuning is infeasible. In this paper, we propose black-box test-time prompt
tuning (B2 TPT), a novel framework that addresses the challenge of optimizing prompts without gradients in an unsupervised manner. Specifically, B2 TPT designs a consistent or
confident (CoC) pseudo-labeling strategy to generate highquality pseudo-labels from the outputs. Subsequently, we propose to optimize low-dimensional intrinsic prompts using a
derivative-free evolution algorithm and to project them onto
the original text and vision prompts. This strategy addresses
the gradient-free challenge while reducing complexity. Extensive experiments across 15 datasets demonstrate the superiority of B2 TPT. The results show that B2 TPT not only
outperforms CLIP’s zero-shot inference at test time, but also
surpasses other gradient-based TPT methods.

Introduction
Recent large Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), have attracted widespread attention for their robust zero-shot capabilities, significantly improving performance on downstream tasks. Adapting large
models to downstream tasks poses considerable challenges.
Fine-tuning all parameters of a large model is not only costly
but also impractical, particularly for modern transformerbased architectures. Consequently, instead of modifying
or fine-tuning the pre-trained model, the inputs are adjusted. Drawing inspiration from natural language processing (NLP) techniques, prompt tuning provides a straightforward and efficient method to adapt large models to downstream tasks. However, on the one hand, the diverse range
of downstream tasks makes it challenging to design prompts
for each specific domain. On the other hand, training data
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6099

