The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multiple Purchase Chains with Negative Transfer Elimination
for Multi-Behavior Recommendation
Shuwei Gong1 , Yuting Liu1 , Yizhou Dang1 , Guibing Guo1 * , Jianzhe Zhao1* , Xingwei Wang2
1

Software College, Northeastern University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
{shuweigong,yutingliu,yzdang}@stumail.neu.edu.cn, {guogb,zhaojz}@swc.neu.edu.cn, wangxw@mail.neu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

the target behavior. Different behaviors reflect the semantic
preferences of users at different levels (Gao et al. 2019; Xia
et al. 2021). Moreover, as the cost of auxiliary behaviors is
much lower than that of target behaviors, there are usually
a lot more auxiliary behaviors than target ones. Therefore,
auxiliary behaviors can be used to extract user preferences
and thus largely alleviate the problems of data sparsity and
cold start (Zhao et al. 2015; Loni et al. 2016; Jin et al. 2020;
Qiu et al. 2018). In fact, users usually impose multiple lowcost auxiliary behaviors in a certain sequence on the same
item before real purchase, e.g., view→cart→purchase, referred to as a purchase chain in this paper. In such a chain, a
latter behavior exhibits a stronger signal of user preference
than the former one does (Wan and McAuley 2018). Therefore, the representations learned from the previous behavior
can be used to facilitate the embedding learning of the latter
one.
Although a number of methods have considered the chain
dependencies among multiple behaviors (Gao et al. 2019;
Yan et al. 2024; Cheng et al. 2023), they still suffer from two
main issues. Firstly, most existing works only consider the
dependencies from a single purchase chain, ignoring other
valuable purchase chains (e.g., view→purchase), resulting
in sub-optimal performance. The different conversion rates
by distinct purchase chains indicate the necessity of adopting multiple chains simultaneously (Chu et al. 2022). Secondly, most existing works assume that all auxiliary behaviors are useful to model target behaviors and pay little attention to the negative transfer problem. That is, some auxiliary
behaviors may negatively transfer the influence to the modeling of target ones (e.g., items viewed but not purchased).
As a matter of fact, since the volume of auxiliary behaviors
is much larger than that of target behavior, such a problem
cannot be simply ignored and left unresolved.
To alleviate the above issues, we propose a novel Multiple
Purchase2 Chains (MPC) model with negative transfer elimination for multi-behavior recommendation. Specifically, for
the first issue, we construct multiple purchase chains to better model dependencies among all kinds of user behaviors.
In this way, multiple purchase chains are adopted simultaneously for better recommendations. For the second issue,

Multi-behavior recommendation exploits auxiliary behaviors
(e.g., view, cart) to help predict users’ potential target behavior (e.g., purchase) on a given item. However, existing works suffer from two issues: (1) They generally consider only a single chain from auxiliary behaviors to the
target behavior, referred to as a purchase chain (e.g., view
→cart→ purchase), ignoring other valuable purchase chains
(e.g, view→purchase) that are beneficial for recommendation performance. (2) Most studies presume that interacted
items in auxiliary behaviors are good for recommendations,
and pay little attention to the negative transfer problem. That
is, some auxiliary behaviors may negatively transfer the influence to the modeling of target ones (e.g., items viewed but
not purchased). To alleviate these issues, we propose a novel
Multiple Purchase Chains (MPC) model with negative transfer elimination for multi-behavior recommendation. Specifically, we construct multiple purchase chains from auxiliary
to target behaviors according to users’ historical interactions,
while the representations of a previous behavior will be fed to
initialize the next behavior on the chain. Then, we construct
a negative graph for the latter behavior and learn the negative
representations of users and items which will be filtered out to
eliminate negative transfer. Experimental results on two real
datasets outperform the best baseline by 40.97% and 47.26%
on average in terms of Recall@10 and NDCG@10 respectively, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method.

Code — https://github.com/VanillaCreamer/MPC

Introduction
Recommender systems are widely used to solve the problem of information overload (Guo, Zhang, and Yorke-Smith
2015; Zhang et al. 2019; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009;
Rendle et al. 2009). It learns the representation of users and
items from user-item historical interactions. Many models
learn user and item representations merely based on users’
target behaviors (e.g., purchase), leading to serious coldstart or data sparsity issues. In real scenarios, users may have
multiple kinds of behaviors on the same item, that is, a number of auxiliary behaviors (e.g., view, cart1 ) exist other than
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Behavior ‘cart’ is exchangeable with ‘add-to-cart’ in this paper.

2
Purchase indicates target behavior in e-commerce systems. It
can be replaced with other domain-specific target behaviors.

11717

