The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Transferable Adversarial Face Attack with Text Controlled Attribute
Wenyun Li1,2 , Zheng Zhang1,2 * , Xiangyuan Lan2,3 * , Dongmei Jiang2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory , Shenzhen, China
3
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
liwy@pcl.ac.cn, darrenzz219@gmail.com, lanxy@pcl.ac.cn, jiangdm@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract

to evaluate the strength of the adversarial example (Szegedy
et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2021). Common values for p include 0, 2, and ∞. With a sufficiently small ϵ, the adversarial image is quasi-indistinguishable from the natural sample. Such norm-based attacks have demonstrated outstanding adversarial performance against face recognition (FR)
systems. However, there are limitations: 1) Despite being designed to be indistinguishable, norm-based attacks may still
contain visible perturbations, making them detectable by
human eyes or specially designed detectors (Massoli et al.
2021); 2) Numerous adversarial defense methods have been
introduced to counter norm-based attacks, leading to a relatively low attack success rate against real-world FR models
(Madry et al. 2017).
Recently proposed unrestricted adversarial attack (UAA)
methods generate adversarial images with more stealthy and
semantically meaningful perturbations compared to noisebased adversarial attacks. Some unrestricted adversarial attacks hide the adversarial perturbations as decorative accessories like glasses (Sharif et al. 2016) or hat (Komkov and
Petiushko 2021) to improve stealthiness. Notably, makeupbased adversarial attacks (Yin et al. 2021) generate perturbations as natural makeup. Moreover, (Li et al. 2021) generate
more natural face images than previous methods with the
help of pre-trained GANs. Adv-Attribute (Jia et al. 2022)
automatically injects a pre-defined pattern from a target image to complete an adversarial edit. Adv-Diffusion (Liu et al.
2024) extracts latent codes from both source and target images, then exploits a diffusion model to generate adversarial
faces. Although these UAA methods demonstrate improved
stealthiness, they have limited ability to change attributes
and primarily edit a pre-defined set of semantic information
from the target image. We argue that it is essential to rapidly
generate adversarial images with specific attributes, such as
skin color, expression, or hairstyle, guided by attribute text.
Such adversarial attacks can help security researchers expose vulnerabilities in existing FR models due to changes in
facial attributes that are likely to occur.
Notwithstanding their effectiveness in attacking face
recognition (FR) systems, these adversarial attacks have significant limitations. Although some previous works achieve
relative transferability in black-box scenarios, they still
struggle to attack FR models in real-world scenarios. Specifically, works such as Adv-Attribute (Jia et al. 2022) and

Traditional adversarial attacks typically produce adversarial
examples under norm-constrained conditions, whereas unrestricted adversarial examples are free-form with semantically meaningful perturbations. Current unrestricted adversarial impersonation attacks exhibit limited control over adversarial face attributes and often suffer from low transferability. In this paper, we propose a novel Text Controlled
Attribute Attack (TCA2 ) to generate photorealistic adversarial impersonation faces guided by natural language. Specifically, the category-level personal softmax vector is employed
to precisely guide the impersonation attacks. Additionally,
we propose both data and model augmentation strategies to
achieve transferable attacks on unknown target models. Finally, a generative model, i.e, Style-GAN, is utilized to synthesize impersonated faces with desired attributes. Extensive
experiments on two high-resolution face recognition datasets
validate that our TCA2 method can generate natural textguided adversarial impersonation faces with high transferability. We also evaluate our method on real-world face recognition systems, i.e, Face++ and Aliyun, further demonstrating
the practical potential of our approach.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11735

Introduction
Recent studies have shown that deep learning-based face
recognition (FR) model systems are vulnerable to adversarial examples (Vakhshiteh, Nickabadi, and Ramachandra
2021; Dong et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2022). Adding deliberately designed but imperceptible noise to a clean image
can fool even state-of-the-art commercial FR models (Ali
et al. 2021). This vulnerability poses a direct threat to socially critical applications such as customs inspection and
mobile device face identification. Consequently, the security
community has increasingly focused on studying adversarial examples to improve the robustness and generalization
ability of existing FR systems.
Early well-studied works focus on norm-constrained
attacks, where the adversarial image lies within an ϵneighborhood of a real sample using the Lp distance metric
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4977

