The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An And-Sum Circuit with Signed Edges
That Is More Succinct than SDD
Ryoma Onaka, Kengo Nakamura, Masaaki Nishino, Norihito Yasuda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Kyoto, Japan
{ryoma.onaka,kengo.nakamura,masaaki.nishino,norihito.yasuda}@ntt.com

Abstract

succinct than SDD but also supports similar operations. The
one closest to this ideal solution is a structured d-DNNF (std-DNNF) (Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2008). St-d-DNNFs
are more succinct than SDDs, but they do not support certain
tractable operations, such as logical negation, bounded disjunction, and single forgetting (Vinall-Smeeth 2024), all of
which are supported by SDDs. To the best of our knowledge,
no generalization of an st-d-DNNF has produced a representation that supports these operations.
In this paper, we propose structured Decomposable AndSum Circuits (st-DASCs), which decompose Boolean functions with ∧ and + nodes; existing methods use ∧ and ∨.
Here, signed edges are applied to st-DASC to enable it to
perform logical negation. St-DASC is a generalization of
st-d-DNNF, where the ∨ nodes are replaced into + nodes
with binary edge signs. We show that st-DASCs are more
succinct than st-d-DNNFs, meaning that they are also more
succinct than SDDs. Moreover, we also show that st-DASCs
support in polynomial time all of the operations that are on
knowledge compilation map (Darwiche and Marquis 2002)
and that SDDs support in polynomial time. In that sense,
st-DASCs actually break the trade-off of succinctness and
tractability over SDDs and st-d-DNNFs. More precisely,
representation A breaks the trade-off over representation B
when (I) A supports all the operations that B supports and
is more succinct than B, or (II) A is at least as succinct as
B and supports more transformations and the same queries
compared to B. Within this definition, st-DASCs meet both
(I) and (II) over st-d-DNNFs and meet (I) over SDDs.
The key capability is logical negation. By imposing
edge signs, st-DASCs support logical negation, which st-dDNNFs do not. Some operations that st-d-DNNFs do not
support can be reduced to negation, which contributes to
the tractability of st-DASCs. Such tractable negation also
demonstrates a proof of succinctness. As a result, st-DASCs
overcome the current trade-off because they are not only
more succinct than st-d-DNNFs but also support more operations in polytime, at least concerning the knowledge compilation map.

Knowledge compilation is a method of transforming knowledge into a compressed and tractable form for permitting
more efficient operations. For Boolean functions, numerous
representations have been proposed that enhance succinctness and tractability. In this paper, we introduce a new representation named structured Decomposable And-Sum Circuit (st-DASC), which employs ∧ and + nodes with signed
edges, in place of the standard ∧ and ∨ nodes with unsigned
edges. Notably, incorporating negative signs permits polytime logical negation. By following a knowledge compilation map, we show that st-DASCs are more succinct than
Sentential Decision Diagrams (SDDs) while maintaining support for every operation on the knowledge compilation map
that SDD supports. Furthermore, st-DASCs are even more
succinct than structured d-DNNFs (st-d-DNNFs), which are
more succinct than SDDs although they support fewer operations than SDDs. Accordingly, st-DASCs break the traditional trade-off between succinctness and tractability over
SDDs and st-d-DNNFs.

Introduction
Knowledge compilation is a method for handling propositional reasoning at high speed (Darwiche 1999). In this
method, propositional logic is compiled into a certain representation and various operations can be performed on it.
The many representations of Boolean functions are characterized by the trade-off relationship between their succinctness and tractability. Among them, an Ordered Binary
Decision Diagram (OBDD) (Bryant 1986) is a popular language due to its high succinctness and traceability, and it has
been used in a wide range of applications (Álvaro Torralba
et al. 2017; Chaki and Gurfinkel 2018; Hardy, Lucet, and
Limnios 2007). Sentential Decision Diagrams (SDDs) (Darwiche 2011) are more succinct than OBDDs, although they
have identical tractable operations. Thanks to its succinctness and tractability, an SDD also have numerous applications including probabilistic inference by weighted model
counting (Choi, Kisa, and Darwiche 2013), neuro-symbolic
AI (Manhaeve et al. 2018; Ahmed et al. 2022), and learning
neural network parameters (Xu et al. 2018). A remaining
challenge is finding a representation that is not only more

Related Work
Various target languages of knowledge compilation have
been proposed to represent Boolean functions. In addition to
OBDD, SDD, and st-d-DNNF, NNF subsets include NNF,

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15100

