The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

M 3 EL: A Multi-task Multi-topic Dataset for Multi-modal Entity Linking
Fang Wang1 , Shenglin Yin1 , Xiaoying Bai2 * , Minghao Hu2 , Tianwei Yan3 , Yi Liang4
1
Peking University
Advanced Institute of Big Data,Beijing
3
National University of Defense Technology
4
Xinjiang University
{fangwang, yinsl}@stu.pku.edu.cn, baixy@aibd.ac.cn, huminghao16@gmail.com, augusyan@hotmail.com,
107556522207@stu.xju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

are generally small in scale; for instance, WIKIPerson (Sun
et al. 2022) involves 13K entities and WIKIDiverse (Wang
et al. 2022a) covers 40K entities, which are insufficient for
complex tasks. Secondly, the scope of modal tasks is restricted (Hoffart et al. 2011; Moon, Neves, and Carvalho
2018; Gan et al. 2021), primarily to Text-Text, Image-Text,
or Image-(Image+Text), while neglecting other potentially
valuable tasks such as Text-Image and Text-(Image+Text).
Additionally, most datasets are confined to single topic (Guo
and Barbosa 2018; Zhang, Li, and Yang 2021), such as person or news, and lack the ability to generalise across topics.
These constraints significantly impede the development of
MEL tasks.

Multi-modal Entity Linking (MEL) is a fundamental component for various downstream tasks. However, existing MEL
datasets suffer from small scale, scarcity of topic types and
limited coverage of tasks, making them incapable of effectively enhancing the entity linking capabilities of multi-modal
models. To address these obstacles, we propose a dataset construction pipeline and publish M 3 EL, a large-scale dataset
for MEL. M 3 EL includes 79,625 instances, covering 9 diverse multi-modal tasks, and 5 different topics. In addition,
to further improve the model’s adaptability to multi-modal
tasks, We propose a modality-augmented training strategy.
Utilizing M 3 EL as a corpus, train the CLIPND model based
on CLIP (ViT-B-32), and conduct a comparative analysis with
an existing multi-modal baselines. Experimental results show
that the existing models perform far below expectations (ACC
of 49.4%-75.8%), After analysis, it was obtained that small
dataset sizes, insufficient modality task coverage, and limited
topic diversity resulted in poor generalization of multi-modal
models. Our dataset effectively addresses these issues, and
the CLIPND model fine-tuned with M 3 EL shows a significant improvement in accuracy, with an average improvement
of 9.3% to 25% across various tasks. Our dataset publicly
available to facilitate future research.

In this paper, we address these challenges by releasing
the large-scale multi-task, multi-topic, multi-modal entity
linking dataset, termed M 3 EL, which has three unique
key properties. First, the dataset contains 79K instances
and 318.5K images, which is nearly 10 times the instances
in WIKIPerson (Sun et al. 2022) and 6.37 times the images in WIKIDiverse (Wang et al. 2022a). Second, M 3 EL
covers the widest range of multi-modal tasks, including:
Text-Text, Text-Image, Text-(Image+Text), Image-Text, Image-Image, Image-(Image+Text), (Image+Text)-Text, (Image+Text)-Image, (Image+Text)-(Image+Text). Finally, the
M 3 EL dataset provides more extensive topics (movies,
common, person, books, sports), while others provide only
a single topic. This implies that our dataset is a more challenging setting.

Introduction
Multi-modal Entity Linking is a crucial research direction
in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) (Sevgili et al. 2022). It aims to achieve crossmodal information integration and understanding by associating entities in different modalities (e.g., text, images, etc.),
and to improve the accuracy of linking to entities in the
Knowledge Graph (KG). It is an important foundation for
NLP downstream tasks, e.g., Information Retrieval (Chang
et al. 2006; Martinez-Rodriguez, Hogan, and Lopez-Arevalo
2020) and Question-Answer systems (Allam and Haggag
2012; Mollá, Van Zaanen, and Smith 2006). Despite recent
research progress, existing MEL methods face the following
challenges existing in training data, thus far from meeting
the requirements of real-world applications.
There are many limitations of current MEL datasets,
which are summarised in Table 1. Firstly, existing datasets

Furthermore, we benchmark many existing models in our
dataset, the experimental results reveal that existing models exhibit sub-optimal performance, with accuracy (ACC)
ranging from 49.4% to 75.8%. To improve the adaptability
of MEL methods, we introduce a modality-augmented training strategy to fine-tune the CLIP (ViT-B-32) (Radford et al.
2021) model. This strategy, by expanding the expressiveness
of modal features, augments the training process, resulting
in the model CLIPND . Following experimentation and analysis, the CLIPND model obtained after training demonstrates
significant performance improvements in ACC, with an average increase of 9.3% to 25%. This illustrates the considerable potential of the modal enhancement strategy in handling multi-modal data and emphasizes the research value of
the M 3 EL dataset.

* Correspond author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12712

