The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Label Few-Shot Image Classification via Pairwise Feature Augmentation
and Flexible Prompt Learning
Han Liu1 , Yuanyuan Wang1 , Xiaotong Zhang1 * , Feng Zhang2 ,
Wei Wang3 , Fenglong Ma4 , Hong Yu1
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, Shenzhen, China
4
The Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania, USA
liu.han.dut@gmail.com, wangy9yuan@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zxt.dut@hotmail.com,
zfeng.maria@gmail.com, ehomewang@ieee.org, fenglong@psu.edu, hongyu@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

2022) to address the problem of data scarcity. In order to
simultaneously address the challenges of multiple category
labels within an image and limited data availability in practical scenarios, a new research task has emerged, known as
multi-label few-shot image classification, aiming to classify
multiple class labels in an image with few training samples
(Alfassy et al. 2019). However, this task is particularly challenging due to two main reasons. Firstly, there are few annotated data, leading to data scarcity. Secondly, in contrast
to single-label image classification, multi-label image classification is more complicated, which is prone to causing the
interference from irrelevant classes.
Various approaches have been proposed to address the
challenges of data scarcity and mitigate the impact of irrelevant classes in multi-label few-shot image classification.
One common strategy involves the utilization of data augmentation based techniques to tackle the data scarcity issue. For example, Alfassy et al. (2019) introduce a noteworthy approach in this realm, employing label set operation networks to obtain feature vectors corresponding to the
union, intersection and subtraction label sets of image pairs.
Although existing methods improve the model performance
through data augmentation, they only utilize the global features of the images, without fully exploiting the informative
region features, limiting the diversity of generated data. Previous works also adopt label feature based strategies to mitigate the impact of irrelevant classes. Yan et al. (2022) utilize
word embeddings as label knowledge and employ an attention mechanism dependent on label vectors to aggregate region features of support images. Sun, Hu, and Saenko (2022)
introduce a dual context optimization method based on CLIP
(Radford et al. 2021), which encodes positive and negative
contexts by incorporating class names as part of the prompts.
Li et al. (2024) sequentially learn class-shared positive and
negative text prompts to classify images. These methods can
partially alleviate the impact of irrelevant classes, but they
do not consider how to obtain more class-discriminative text
prototypes which highly match with the image features of a
specific class, thus affecting their effectiveness to some extent.
Although existing approaches have demonstrated impressive performance in multi-label image classification, they

Multi-label few-shot image classification is a crucial and
challenging task due to limited annotated data and elusive category specificity. However, research on this topic is still in the
rudimentary stage and few methods are available. Existing
methods either leverage data augmentation to alleviate data
scarcity or utilize label features as auxiliary knowledge to
eliminate the negative effect caused by irrelevant categories,
but they ignore the utilization of image region features for
data augmentation, and overlook to learn appropriate text feature to better match the image features of specific categories.
Moreover, these methods only focus on one side and do not
effectively tackle the above two issues simultaneously. In this
paper, we introduce a novel prototype-based multi-label fewshot learning framework that seamlessly integrates pairwise
feature augmentation and flexible prompt learning. Specifically, by pairwise feature augmentation, we leverage the region features of images in the support set to generate more
image features and construct image prototypes, thus alleviating the issue of data scarcity. By flexible prompt learning, we
adaptively acquire class-specific prompts to build text prototypes that highly match the image features of specific classes,
thereby mitigating the impact of irrelevant classes. Finally,
with adaptive learnable parameters, we merge image and text
prototypes to obtain the final prototypes, achieving a more
powerful classifier for multi-label few-shot image classification. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method can push the performance to a higher level.

Introduction
Accurately classifying real-world images with multiple category labels is a fundamental yet prominent problem in
the fields of computer vision and multimedia, particularly
when compared with single-label image classification (Xu
et al. 2022; Li, Zhu, and Wang 2023). Furthermore, in general settings, training an image classifier capable of making accurate predictions requires large amounts of annotated data, which is often impractical for real-world applications. Therefore, researchers have turned their attention to
few-shot image classification (Kang et al. 2021; Hiller et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5433

