The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Twofold Debiasing Enhances Fine-Grained Learning with Coarse Labels
Xin-yang Zhao1 , Jian Jin1 , Yang-yang Li1 , Yazhou Yao1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
{zhaoxy, jinj, lyylyyi599, yazhou.yao}@njust.edu.cn

Train

Abstract

Train set (coarse)

The Coarse-to-Fine Few-Shot (C2FS) task is designed to train
models using only coarse labels, then leverages a limited
number of subclass samples to achieve fine-grained recognition capabilities. This task presents two main challenges:
coarse-grained supervised pre-training suppresses the extraction of critical fine-grained features for subcategory discrimination, and models suffer from overfitting due to biased distributions caused by limited fine-grained samples. In this paper, we propose the Twofold Debiasing (TFB) method, which
addresses these challenges through detailed feature enhancement and distribution calibration. Specifically, we introduce
a multi-layer feature fusion reconstruction module and an
intermediate layer feature alignment module to combat the
model’s tendency to focus on simple predictive features directly related to coarse-grained supervision, while neglecting complex fine-grained level details. Furthermore, we mitigate the biased distributions learned by the fine-grained classifier using readily available coarse-grained sample embeddings enriched with fine-grained information. Extensive experiments conducted on five benchmark datasets demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach, achieving state-of-the-art results
that surpass competitive methods.

Dog

Bird

Flower

Test (few shot)
Support set (fine)

Query set (fine)

Spaniel

Terrier
Sparrow
Woodpecker
Rose
Water Lily

Figure 1: The Coarse-to-Fine Few-Shot (C2FS) task involves training a feature extractor using a training set with
coarse labels, then the classifier leverages a support set with
fine labels from a limited number of samples to achieve finegrained recognition capabilities during testing.

Code — https://github.com/Faithzh/TFB

coarse labels to enhance fine-grained recognition (Bukchin
et al. 2021). The C2FS framework trains models on largescale coarse-grained samples and then rapidly adapts them
to finer recognition tasks using only a few fine-grained samples. As shown in Figure 1, unlike most previous few-shot
tasks (Hariharan and Girshick 2017; Wei et al. 2019), the
new classes in the C2FS task are fine-grained subclasses of
pre-trained categories, contained within known coarse categories.
This task is challenging because coarse-grained labels
usually represent broader, more generalized categories.
Therefore, the model may learn features that lack intraclass differentiability in pre-training, making it ineffective at
distinguishing subtle differences between fine-grained categories. This mismatch in feature representation makes it
challenging for the classifier to achieve satisfactory classification performance, even when trained on fine-grained
labels. The predominant approach in C2FS effectively utilizes coarse-grained supervision to distinguish different
coarse categories, and then combines this with contrastive
self-supervised methods to learn distinctive intra-class fea-

Introduction
Fine-grained recognition is a longstanding and fundamental problem in pattern recognition, underpinned by a diverse
set of real-world applications (Wei et al. 2021; Shen et al.
2022; Xu et al. 2023b; Shen et al. 2024; Zhou et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2021b; Yao
et al. 2020). However, acquiring fine-grained labels in large
quantities is challenging. On the one hand, this difficulty
stems from the complexity of annotating with fine-grained
knowledge; on the other hand, in many practical applications, the target label set of interest is not static and may
change according to evolving needs. In contrast, coarse labels are more readily obtainable and often constitute the
majority of dataset annotations. Therefore, Coarse-to-Fine
Few-Shot (C2FS) task was proposed to exploit abundant
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22831

