The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AUTE: Peer-Alignment and Self-Unlearning Boost Adversarial Robustness for
Training Ensemble Models
Lifeng Huang1 , Tian Su2 , Chengying Gao2 , Ning Liu2 , Qiong Huang1
1

∗

College of Mathematics and Informatics, South China Agricultural University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{huanglf6, qhuang}@scau.edu.cn, {mcsgcy, liuning2}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

58.0

Abstract
Robust Accuracy

Adversarial attacks poses a significant threat to the security
of AI-based systems. To counteract these attacks, adversarial training (AT) and ensemble learning (EL) have emerged
as widely adopted methods for enhancing model robustness. However, a counter-intuitive phenomenon arises where
the simple combination of these approaches may potentially compromising adversarial robustness of ensemble models.
In this paper, we propose a novel method called Alignment
and Unlearning for Training Ensembles (AUTE), aiming to
effectively integrate AT and EL to maximize their benefits.
Specifically, AUTE incorporates two key components. Firstly, AUTE divides the ensemble into a big peer model and a
single member in a loop manner, aligning their outputs for
boosting robustness of each member. Secondly, AUTE introduces the concept of unlearning, actively forgetting specific data with over-confident properties to preserve model capacity to learn more robust features. Extensive experiments
across various datasets and networks illustrate that AUTE
achieves superior performance compared to baselines. For instance, a 5-member AUTE with ResNet-20 networks outperforms state-of-the-art method by 2.1% and 3.2% in classifying clean and adversarial data. Additionally, AUTE can easily
extend to non-adversarial training paradigm, surpassing current standard ensemble learning methods by a large margin.

55.5

TRADES

MART

STAT

AROW

MCE

AUTE (ours)

53.0
50.5
48.0

74

75

76

77

78

Clean Accuracy

79

80

81

Figure 1: The comparison results between different ensemble models. The primary axes represent clean accuracy and
adversarial robustness against the AA attack. The size of
each circle (ensemble method) indicates the robustness level
of ensemble models with 3, 5, and 8 members, ranging from
small to large. Our proposed AUTE ensembles exhibit significantly better performance compared to existing methods.

the defensive capabilities of individual models (Zhang et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2019; Rade and Moosavi-Dezfooli 2021b;
Qizhang Li 2023). In contrast, EL methods optimize multiple models on the clean data and then combine them together for joint predictions (Pang et al. 2019; Yang et al.
2020; Deng and Mu 2024; Zhuang et al. 2024; Huang et al.
2023b). In general, EL approaches exhibit desirable robustness against black-box attacks. Given the observations that
EL is benefit to constitute stronger standard trained models, a natural question arises: Can AT and EL be integrated
compatibly to further boost accuracy and robustness?
Empirically, we observe a counter-intuitive phenomenon
where the simple combination of AT and EL approaches sometimes offers marginal robustness improvements,
while at other times, it inadvertently introduces side effects
that can compromise the adversarial robustness. This phenomenon suggests that this simple combination may struggle to learn balanced features from both clean and adversarial data, which aligns the findings in related works (Xie and
Yuille 2019). In light of these results, our forthcoming objective is to answer the question: How can we maximize the
benefits from EL for further boosting AT ensembles?

Code — https://github.com/mesunhlf/AUTE

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely employed
in essential systems, including classification (He et al. 2016),
recognition (Qiao et al. 2021) and translation (Ouyang et al.
2022). Despite their excellent performance, DNNs are not
robust to adversarial examples: adding human-imperceptible
perturbations to the clean data can deceive DNNs into outputting unexpected predictions (Wu et al. 2020; Huang et al.
2020; Doan et al. 2022).
There has emerged a number of research on defenses. For
example, adversarial training (AT) and ensemble learning
(EL) are two promising methods to enhance adversarial robustness. Specially, AT trains DNNs on generated adversarial examples, while most of AT methods merely focus on
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3671

