The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Quickest Detection of Adversarial Attacks Against Correlated Equilibria
Kiarash Kazari, Aris Kanellopoulos, György Dán
Division of Network and Systems Engineering, School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
kkazari@kth.se, arisk@kth.se, gyuri@kth.se

Abstract

In a CE, coordination is facilitated by an external source
of information, also called a mediator, which helps players align their strategies. The mediator samples from a
known joint distribution over the players’ actions and privately communicates each player’s component without revealing the others’ components. If the recommendation signals come from a CE, then no player has an interest to deviate from the mediator’s suggested action, provided that the
other players adhere to the recommendation. An example for
a mediator is a map server in traffic routing, which recommends paths to the travelers (Ning and Du 2023). Another
example is recommendations issued by stock analysts for
the investors in financial markets (Leung 2007).
A fundamental assumption for the implementation of
a CE in a game is the trustworthiness of the mediator.
Nonetheless, the mediator could be compromised by an adversary, with the intention to cause damage to one or more
players through manipulating the signal. For instance, routing software that recommends paths to users can be vulnerable to cyber attacks. Under attack, the distribution of the
recommended action profiles would deviate from the original CE. From a player’s perspective, this deviation must
be detected promptly, as the assumption of following recommendations is based on the distribution being known and
stable. A change can impact the utilities of the players, and
upon detection, players may decide to adjust their strategies
accordingly. In other words, timely attack detection is crucial for ensuring situational awareness, enabling the implementation of further countermeasures after detection.
In this paper, we demonstrate the vulnerability of the mediator’s shared recommendation signal to adversarial attacks
and propose a detection scheme to counteract them. We focus on the repeated play of a a CE in a strategic-form game,
where an adversary manipulates the recommendation signals sent to the players by the mediator. Our key contributions are as follows:
• We model the interaction between the adversary and a
victim player affected by the attack as a zero-sum game;
the victim’s objective is to detect the attack promptly
while keeping the probability of false alarms low.
• We analyze the asymptotic maxmin strategies of the adversary and the defender as the cost of false alarms approaches infinity. This analysis introduces a family of
distributions that enables the adversary to achieve the op-

We consider correlated equilibria in strategic games in an adversarial environment, where an adversary can compromise
the public signal used by the players for choosing their strategies, while players aim at detecting a potential attack as soon
as possible to avoid loss of utility. We model the interaction
between the adversary and the players as a zero-sum game
and we derive the maxmin strategies for both the defender
and the attacker using the framework of quickest change detection. We define a class of adversarial strategies that achieve
the optimal trade-off between attack impact and attack detectability and show that a generalized CUSUM scheme is
asymptotically optimal for the detection of the attacks. Our
numerical results on the Sioux-Falls benchmark traffic routing game show that the proposed detection scheme can effectively limit the utility loss by a potential adversary.

Code — https://github.com/kiarashkaz/Detection-ofAdversarial-Attacks-against-CE

1

Introduction

Correlated Equilibrium (CE) proposed by (Aumann 1987) is
a solution concept in game theory that extends Nash Equilibria (NE) to correlated strategies among players. Unlike
NE, where players choose their strategies independently, a
CE represents a distribution over the space of joint actions
of all players.
Compared to NE, CE offers a more efficient and practical
framework for analyzing the strategic behaviour of players.
Firstly, CE accommodates scenarios that result in a higher
utilitarian social welfare than what can be achieved in any
NE (Duffy and Feltovich 2010; Roughgarden and Tardos
2002). Additionally, CE are computationally more tractable.
As shown by (Chen and Deng 2006; Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009), computing a NE is a PPADcomplete problem even for two-player games. In contrast, a
CE can be computed in polynomial time by solving a linear
program (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2008). Moreover,
there are efficient online learning dynamics that converge
to the set of correlated equilibria (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi
2006; Anagnostides et al. 2022), or to the set of coarse correlated equilibria (Daskalakis, Fishelson, and Golowich 2021;
Sessa et al. 2019), a related but weaker solution concept.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13961

