The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Omni-Query Active Learning for Source-Free Domain Adaptive
Cross-Modality 3D Semantic Segmentation
Jianxiang Xie1 , Yao Wu1 , Yachao Zhang1 ,
Zhongchao Shi4 , Jianping Fan4 , Yuan Xie3,* , Yanyun Qu1,2,*
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
4
Lenovo Research
jianxiangxie@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

He et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2021) have attracted the interest
of researchers to Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
methods (Wu et al. 2023, 2024a,b; Jaritz et al. 2023). These
methods use both labeled source and unlabeled target data
to tackle annotation and domain shift issues. However, due
to privacy concerns, access to source data is often restricted,
leading to Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA), where
pre-trained models are transferred to the target domain via
self-training without source data access (Liang, Hu, and
Feng 2020; Liu, Zhang, and Wang 2021; Wu et al. 2024c),
thus their performance visibly lags behind fully supervised
methods. Can we exchange a little bit of annotation cost on
the target domain for more performance improvement?
Active Learning (AL) is a label-efficient paradigm that allows a model to query the knowledge source for annotation
interactively. Deep learning methods typically require large
amounts of annotated data, but traditional AL can only provide a small portion of labeled data by the initial model at
the beginning, which conflicts with the deep learning process and faces a cold start problem (Ren et al. 2021). In the
context of SFDA, the model is pre-trained, holds some inference capability, and has access to a large amount of unlabeled target data, so AL and SFDA are naturally compatible.
Since the model receives only limited supervision from the
target domain, AL methods must ensure the quality of labels,
specifically their high information richness and diversity.
Numerous methods have been proposed to maximize the
quality of labels in active source-free domain adaptation. For
instance, in 3D segmentation, Annotator (Xie et al. 2023)
quantifies the uncertainty of a voxel by computing the entropy of the class distribution among the points it contains.
While such voxel-based (Xie et al. 2023) or similar regionbased (Wu et al. 2021) selection methods can inevitably lead
to inefficient use of label budget as low-information points
may also be selected within these base units. Moreover, with
a limited receptive field, they focus only on the neighbors
of the point. It hinders their ability to effectively interact
with points that are semantically related but spatially distant
in 3D space, failing to model the uncertainty of points adequately. Another natural dilemma impacting label quality
is timing. Querying all samples at the beginning of training
(Ning et al. 2021) ensures full supervision throughout the

Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) aims to transfer a
pre-trained source model to the unlabeled target domain without accessing the source data, thereby effectively solving labeled data dependency and domain shift problems. However,
the SFDA setting faces a bottleneck due to the absence of
supervisory information. To mitigate this problem, Active
Learning (AL) is introduced to combine with SFDA, endeavoring to actively label a small set of the most high-quality
target points so that models with satisfactory performance can
be obtained at an acceptable cost. Nevertheless, several issues
remain unresolved, namely when to query new labels during training, what kind of samples deserve labeling to ensure
rich information, and where the labels should be distributed to
guarantee diversity. Thus we elaborate OmniQuery to omnibearing address the “When, What, and Where” problems
about active points querying in source-free domain adaptation
for cross-modal 3D semantic segmentation. The method consists of three main components: Query Decider, Point Ranker,
and Budget Slicer. The Query Decider determines the optimal
timing to query new points by fitting the validation curves
during training. The Point Ranker nominates points for annotation by calculating the ambiguity of neighboring points
in the feature space. The Budget Slicer allocates the annotation quota, i.e., labeling percentage of the point cloud, to
different semantic regions by utilizing the advanced 2D semantic segmentation capabilities of the Segment Anything
Model (SAM). Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method, achieving up to 99.64% of
fully supervised performance with only 3% of labels, and
consistently outperforming comparison methods across various scenarios.

Code — https://github.com/Kylin-XJX/ActiveSFDA

Introduction
The development of robotics and autonomous vehicles has
brought increasing attention to 3D cross-modality perception (He et al. 2021). Meanwhile, the high cost of data annotation and the unrealistic assumption of independent and
identically distributed data in deep learning (Hu et al. 2024;
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8709

