The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contextual Stochastic Optimization for School Desegregation Policymaking
Hongzhao Guan1 , Nabeel Gillani2, 3 , Tyler Simko4 , Jasmine Mangat2 , Pascal Van Hentenryck1
1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
College of Arts, Media and Design, Northeastern University
3
D’Amore-McKim School of Business, Northeastern University
4
Department of Government, Harvard University
hguan7@gatech.edu, n.gillani@northeastern.edu, tsimko@g.harvard.edu, j.mangat@northeastern.edu,
pascal.vanhentenryck@isye.gatech.edu
Abstract

The practical difficulty of redrawing attendance boundaries has inspired academic research on automated redrawing methods targeting a number of goals, including integration (e.g. Gillani et al. 2023). However, changing student
assignment policies to foster diverse schools often induces
changes in how families subsequently pick schools for their
children—sometimes yielding “White flight”, or decisions
among White and affluent families to opt-out of their newlyassigned schools (Reber 2005; Bjerre-Nielsen and Gandil
2020; Macartney and Singleton 2018). Better anticipating
such responses prior to changing boundaries poses a fundamental challenge to designing policies that achieve integration goals in practice. In other words, the redrawing
task requires an interplay between two sub-tasks: choices are
first determined conditional on a possible boundary change
(“redistricting”), and then a redistricting is produced conditional on those choices. Researchers have previously developed school redistricting algorithms and subsequently estimated how families might select schools in response to
changes (Allman et al. 2022)—but their model did not factor
in school selections to inform boundary changes themselves.
This paper aims to address this challenge: it develops a
novel joint redistricting and choice modeling framework,
called redistricting with choices (RWC). The RWC framework proposes a contextual stochastic constraint program
that minimizes district-wide dissimilarity, and integrates the
rezoning constraints and a school choice model. RWC derives the school choice model using a machine learning
model, leveraging features of students, Census Blocks, and
the district schools.
RWC was evaluated on real data from a large public
US school district — the Winston-Salem/Forsyth County
Schools in North Carolina, which serves over 50,000 students (22,000 of which are enrolled in elementary schools).
The study reveals that the RWC yields an expected 23% decrease in segregation while rezoning more Census Blocks
and students than baseline choice models. This additional rezoning is likely necessary to offset a predicted tendency for
more students to opt-out of their zoned schools (and perhaps
increase segregation as a result). The study also shows that
predicting school choice is a challenging multi-class classification problem (F1 score: 0.73). Fortunately, 87% of the
time, the classifier identifies a student’s ground-truth school
among its top three most probable predictions.

Most US school districts draw geographic “attendance zones”
to assign children to schools based on their home address, a
process that can replicate existing neighborhood racial/ethnic
and socioeconomic status (SES) segregation in schools. Redrawing boundaries can reduce segregation, but estimating
expected rezoning impacts is often challenging because families can opt-out of their assigned schools. This paper seeks
to alleviate this societal problem by developing a joint redistricting and choice modeling framework, called redistricting with choices (RWC). The RWC framework is applied to
a large US public school district to estimate how redrawing elementary school boundaries might realistically impact
levels of socioeconomic segregation. The main methodological contribution of RWC is a contextual stochastic optimization model that aims to minimize district-wide segregation
by integrating rezoning constraints with a machine learningbased school choice model. The study finds that RWC yields
boundary changes that might reduce segregation by a substantial amount (23%) – but doing so might require the reassignment of a large number of students, likely to mitigate
re-segregation that choice patterns could exacerbate. The results also reveal that predicting school choice is a challenging
machine learning problem. Overall, this study offers a novel
practical framework that both academics and policymakers
might use to foster more diverse and integrated schools.

Code — https://github.com/Plural-Connections/AAAI2025-Redistricting-with-Choices
Paper with Supplementary Materials —
https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.12572

1

Introduction

Schools in the United States remain highly segregated by
race and Socio-Economic Status (SES), despite evidence
that integration reduces achievement gaps (Reardon, Kalogrides, and Shores 2018; Reardon et al. 2019; Billings, Deming, and Rockoff 2013; Johnson 2019, 2011; Wells and Crain
1994). School segregation is largely driven by high levels
of residential segregation across race and SES, as the vast
majority of public school students attend the school they are
geographically assigned to attend via the “attendance zones”
set by their local school district (Monarrez 2020).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28024

