The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Each Fake News is Fake in its Own Way: An Attribution Multi-Granularity
Benchmark for Multimodal Fake News Detection
Zhi Zeng

2,3,4

Hao Guo* 1 , Zihan Ma* 2,3,4 ,
, Minnan Luo2,3,4 , Weixin Zeng1 , Jiuyang Tang1 , Xiang Zhao†1 ,

1

Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, Nation University of Defense Technology,
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
3
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
4
Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University.
guo hao@nudt.edu.cn, mazihan880@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhizeng@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, minnluo@xjtu.edu.cn,
dexterdervish@foxmail.com, jiuyang tang@nudt.edu.cn, xiangzhao@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract
Social platforms, while facilitating access to information,
have also become saturated with a plethora of fake news, resulting in negative consequences. Automatic multimodal fake
news detection is a worthwhile pursuit. Existing multimodal
fake news datasets only provide binary labels of real or fake.
However, real news is alike, while each fake news is fake in
its own way. These datasets fail to reflect the mixed nature
of various types of multimodal fake news. To bridge the gap,
we construct an attributing multi-granularity multimodal fake
news detection dataset AMG, revealing the inherent fake pattern. Furthermore, we propose a multi-granularity clue alignment model MGCA to achieve multimodal fake news detection and attribution. Experimental results demonstrate that
AMG is a challenging dataset, and its attribution setting opens
up new avenues for future research.

Figure 1: Various types of multimodal fake news in Twitter.
”Miscaption” means that the caption of the image does not
match the text. ”Mismatch” indicates the image is related to
the text, but from previous similar event. ”Image Fabrication” indicates that the image comes from deepfake technology but is not stated.

Code and Datasets —
https://github.com/mazihan880/AMG-An-AttributingMulti-modal-Fake-News-Dataset.
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.14686

the credibility of news narratives. Regrettably, fake news
publishers have adeptly utilized this opportunity to captivate attention and enhance credibility, leading to an evolution towards multimodal formats (Cao et al. 2020). The task
of multimodal fake news detection has grown progressively
intricate, which is the focal point of our research.
In contrast to news that relies solely on textual content, multimodal fake news encompasses visual, textual, and
cross-modal correlation, allowing fabricators to craft deceptive narratives from multiple perspectives. We have observed
that real news is alike, each fake news is fake in its own way.
In popular social platforms Twitter, multimodal fake news
manifests in various distinct types1 , as depicted in Figure 1.
However, existing multimodal fake news detection methods
typically focus on only one type. First, some methods incorporate visual-textual consistency features into the basis for
detection (Zhou, Wu, and Zafarani 2020; Qi et al. 2021a),
which aim to capture the correlation between the textual and
visual content. The methods focus on detecting types like
Figure 1(a), where the key person “Kamala” does not appear
in attached image, while such methods overlook the tem-

Introduction
Fake news is false or misleading information presented as
news (Rubin et al. 2016; Molina et al. 2021). Social media platforms are inundated with fake news, exerting a significant impact on public health, governance, and societal
equilibrium (Zannettou et al. 2019; Allcott and Gentzkow
2017; Apuke and Omar 2021). In recent years, the mediarich nature of these platforms has led to a gradual shift in
the type of information shared by the public, encompassing
not only textual content but also a plethora of visual elements such as images and videos (Zeng et al. 2024). Because
of the “Multimedia Effect” (Mayer 2002), multimedia content such as images and videos exerts a heightened allure
on individuals (Jamet, Gavota, and Quaireau 2008; Mayer
2014). Furthermore, visual content is commonly utilized as
substantiating evidence within storytelling, thus augmenting

1
Disclaimer. All examples of fake news in this paper are for illustrative purposes only and do not depict real incidents or accurate
information. Any resemblance to actual persons or events is purely
coincidental.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

228

