The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-attention-based Diffusion Model for Time-series Imputation
in Partial Blackout Scenarios
Mohammad Rafid Ul Islam, Prasad Tadepalli, Alan Fern
Oregon State University
islammoh@oregonstate.edu, prasad.tadepalli@oregonstate.edu, alan.fern@oregonstate.edu

Abstract

et al. 2020), which bring additional training-stability challenges.
In recent years, score-based diffusion models have gained
prominence in domains such as image generation (Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020; Nichol and Dhariwal 2021; Song et al.
2020; Xiang et al. 2023) and audio synthesis (Kong et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2021), and have been applied to imputation and forecasting in time series data. Two such methods, CSDI (Tashiro et al. 2021) and SSSD (Alcaraz and
Strodthoff 2022), in particular, provide good quality imputations by conditioning on observed values. Another diffusion
model, Time-Grad (Rasul et al. 2021), excels in forecasting but can’t leverage future data for imputation. Bayesian
inference models like BGCF (Cui et al. 2019), (Vidotto,
Vermunt, and Van Deun 2018), and (Vidotto, Vermunt, and
Van Deun 2019) address mixed and longitudinal data. Other
methods include graph neural networks like GRIN (Cini,
Marisca, and Alippi 2021), which require high sensor homogeneity, and latent ODE networks with RNNs (Rubanova,
Chen, and Duvenaud 2019), which improve modeling of irregularly sampled time series but demand more computational resources. Another approach (Park et al. 2022) employs hyper-parameter optimization for an MLP architecture
for long-term imputation, but faces challenges in accurately
estimating end-of-gap values.
A recurring theme in many of these works is the attention
to limited types of missingness. They mostly focus on randomly missing data, missing a feature for a few consecutive
time steps (interpolation), and complete blackouts where all
features are missing for some time. In our study, we explore
a more general and common type of missingness we call
“partial blackout,” which covers situations where a variable
number of features become unavailable for some time.

Missing values in multivariate time series data can harm machine learning performance and introduce bias. These gaps
arise from sensor malfunctions, blackouts, and human error and are typically addressed by data imputation. Previous
work has tackled the imputation of missing data in random,
complete blackouts and forecasting scenarios. The current paper addresses a more general missing pattern, which we call
“partial blackout,” where a subset of features is missing for
consecutive time steps. We introduce a two-stage imputation
process using self-attention and diffusion processes to model
feature and temporal correlations. Notably, our model effectively handles missing data during training, enhancing adaptability and ensuring reliable imputation and performance,
even with incomplete datasets. Our experiments on benchmark and two real-world time series datasets demonstrate that
our model outperforms the state-of-the-art in partial blackout
scenarios and shows better scalability.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time-series data is common in many fields like
finance, meteorology, agriculture, transportation, and healthcare. The data often has missing values due to human error, equipment failure, or bad data entry (Silva et al. 2012;
Yi et al. 2016). Most machine learning algorithms perform
poorly when data are incomplete. Poor imputations can degrade task quality and introduce bias, compromising integrity of the result (Shadbahr et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021).
There have been numerous studies of time series data imputation in both statistical learning and deep learning communities. The statistical learning techniques include mean/median imputation, linear interpolation, K-nearest neighbor imputation, and more advanced iterative regressionbased models, such as MICE (van Buuren and GroothuisOudshoorn 2011). More recent deep neural network-based
models include autoregressive models, such as, GRU-D
(Che et al. 2016), BRITS (Cao et al. 2018); and selfattention-based models, such as, SAITS (Du, Côté, and Liu
2023). Generative models have also been explored, including GAN-based approaches (Luo et al. 2019, 2018; Liu et al.
2019; Miao et al. 2021) and VAE-based methods (Fortuin

Figure 1: Partial blackouts. Multiple features are missing in
consecutive time steps as shown by the empty cells.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17564

