The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LOHA: Direct Graph Spectral
Contrastive Learning Between Low-Pass and High-Pass Views
Ziyun Zou1 , Yinghui Jiang2 , Lian Shen1 , Juan Liu3 , Xiangrong Liu1,2 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Xiamen University,
National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen University,
3
Pen-Tung Sah Institute of Micro-Nano Science and Technology, Xiamen University,
{zoezzy, shenlian}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, stardjyeah@gmail.com, {cecyliu, xrliu}@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Thus, more explorations towards designing delicate Spectral Graph Neural Networks(SGNNs) are conducted (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Wang and Zhang
2022; Xu et al. 2024). Being benefited from the ability to fit
both low-pass and high-pass signals, it is determined as an
effective solution to deal with graphs with different levels of
homophily (He et al. 2021; He, Wei, and Wen 2022). When
low-pass filters amplify the low frequencies and mine feature smoothnesses, high-pass filters are considered preferable for heterophilic graphs and could capture feature differences (Bo et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2019; Ghose et al. 2023). In
supervised learning tasks, SGNNs with polynomial approximation excel in both homophilic and heterophilic settings by
adaptively fitting graph filters of arbitrary shapes (Liu et al.
2024; Guo and Wei 2023). Yet, for real-world applications,
node labels and homophily levels of graphs are mostly uncovered. It remains necessary but challenging to learn appropriate filters for different graphs without label supervision
automatically (Chen, Lei, and Wei 2024; Wan et al. 2024).

Spectral Graph Neural Networks effectively handle graphs
with different homophily levels, with low-pass filter mining feature smoothness and high-pass filter capturing differences. When these distinct filters could naturally form two
opposite views for self-supervised learning, the commonalities between the counterparts for the same node remain unexplored, leading to suboptimal performance. In this paper,
a simple yet effective self-supervised contrastive framework,
LOHA, is proposed to address this gap. LOHA optimally
leverages low-pass and high-pass views by embracing ”harmony in diversity”. Rather than solely maximizing the difference between these distinct views, which may lead to feature separation, LOHA harmonizes the diversity by treating
the propagation of graph signals from both views as a composite feature. Specifically, a novel high-dimensional feature
named spectral signal trend is proposed to serve as the basis for the composite feature, which remains relatively unaffected by changing filters and focuses solely on original
feature differences. LOHA achieves an average performance
improvement of 2.8% over runner-up models on 9 real-world
datasets with varying homophily levels. Notably, LOHA even
surpasses fully-supervised models on several datasets, which
underscores the potential of LOHA in advancing the efficacy
of spectral GNNs for diverse graph structures.

In self-supervised graph representation learning, graph
contrastive learning (GCL) has achieved significantly superior performance (Guo et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023;
You et al. 2021). GRACE (Zhu et al. 2020b) correlates
graph views by pushing closer representations of the same
node in different views and pushing apart representations
of different nodes. SPAN (Lin, Chen, and Wang 2023) constructs two views to maximize spectral changes, declaring it
as the best way to preserve structure invariance. However,
only the validations on homophilic graphs are confirmed.
Thus, researchers conduct more exploitation to fit in more
graphs. Equipping with the natural differences and specialties among low-pass and high-pass filters, recent researches
naturally construct contradictions between the views shaped
by these counterparts. Nevertheless, both PolyGCL (Chen,
Lei, and Wei 2024) and S3GCL (Wan et al. 2024) refine
the models based on backpropagation between low-pass or
high-pass views with the final views instead of the direct
contradiction between the counterparts. We concern these
approaches cannot fully exploit the characteristics of these
two sets of filters and the improvements are solely gained
through the complex combination of filters. However, if
we treat low-pass and high-pass views as mutual ’negative’
samples from the filter specialties perspective—contrary to
the traditional approach of maximizing mutual information

Introduction
Graphs have been widely used to model the relationships between entities. In homophilic graphs, connected nodes tend
to share similar features; such as in citation networks (Kipf
and Welling 2017). Conversely, in heterophilic graphs, the
opposite is true, as seen in dating networks (Lei et al. 2022).
Mining graph information has proven immensely helpful in
fields such as bioinformatics (Ruan et al. 2023; Jiang et al.
2023), link prediction (Li et al. 2024; Lu et al. 2023), recommendation systems (Jiang, Huang, and Huang 2023; Yang
et al. 2023), and traffic prediction (Wang et al. 2023). However, traditional graph neural networks(such as GCN) adopt
a low-pass filter encoder to smooth the representations of
neighboring nodes, limiting the adaptability to heterophilic
graphs (Zhu et al. 2020a; Nt and Maehara 2019).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13492

