The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Breaking Information Isolation: Accelerating MRI via Inter-sequence Mapping and
Progressive Masking
Jianwei Zheng, Xiaomin Yao, Guojiang Shen, Wei Li, and Jiawei Jiang*
Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China
jjw@zjut.edu.cn, zjw@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep unfolding network (DUN) has shed new light on multisequence MRI reconstruction, providing both high interpretability and acceptable performance. However, current approaches still suffer from the plight of information isolation,
i.e., learning features of multi-suquences individually and leaving the mask departed from model updating. In this work,
we propose a new unfolding solution, namely Informationcoupled MRI Acceleration (IMA), to address the isolation
issue. Concretely, two specific mechanisms are presented. On
the one hand, the latent connections across different sequences
are explicitly molded via two auxiliary matrices. While the
first matrix is meticulously engineered to assemble the spatial
details, the second one hammers at capturing the depth information conditioned on the enriched channels. On the other
hand, following a deep analysis on the non-uniform distribution in low- and high-frequency components of the given
mask, we elaborate a new unfolding flow using a progressive
masking scheme, featuring a dilation-contraction mechanism
during forward propagation of successive stages. Massive experiments are conducted under various sampling patterns and
acceleration rates, whose results demonstrate that, without any
sophisticated architectures, our IMA outperforms the current
cutting-edge methods both visually and numerically. Codes
are available as an attachment and will be publicly released.

Y

Y

X

YB

YA + YB

+
YA

Figure 1: Explicit mapping between reference channel Y and
target channel X, viz., X = Y A + Ỹ B. A and B denote
two transformation operators, respectively, while Ỹ is a selflearned substitution used to bridge the sequence differences.

Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a key non-invasive
and non-ionizing tool in medical diagnostics, offering superior soft tissue contrast and detailed anatomical visualization
without radiation risks (Lei et al. 2023a; Wei et al. 2023).
However, the issue of prolonged acquisition period, inherent in fully sampling the k-space, is pronounced in multisequence scans with long Echo Time (TE) and Repetition
Time (TR). Practically, this issue often causes patient discomfort, motion-induced image distortion, and care delays,
necessitating research into faster acquisition while maintaining high image quality.
In recent years, the acceleration of MRI reconstruction
from single-sequence image has been well-established (Jiang
et al. 2023b; Zhang et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2018), yet it overlooks the rich information inherent in diverse sequences. As
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10564

is known, during multi-sequence imaging, each entity characterizes distinct physical properties of the equal anatomy
structure, making different sequences highly correlated. Clinically, radiologists also lean towards acquiring multiple in
vivo images (e.g., T1, PD, T2) for a comprehensive patient
evaluation (Feng et al. 2023). Moreover, the large period
gaps in acquiring different sequences presents an opportunity to speed up the reconstruction. That is, employing fullysampled yet shorter sequences to aid in reconstructing longer
sequences offers considerable potential to improve diagnostic
efficiency and accuracy (Zhou and Zhou 2020).
In the realm of multi-sequence MRI reconstruction, most
hand-crafted priors have been conventionally employed to
inject visually authentic properties to the recovered images.
The priors concerned, including sparse representation (Wang
et al. 2023a), low rankness (Peng et al. 2022), edge sharpness (Huang et al. 2022), and non-local similarity (Wen et al.
2022), have shown commendable efficacy with solid theretical support. However, the applicability to practices of these
methods is still hindered by the lengthy running time, a tendency towards over-smoothness, and the tricky selection of
hyperparameters. Alternatively, the surge of deep neural networks (DNNs) has ushered in a new era of MRI techniques.
Early DNNs often adapted architectures from general image processing, such as Convolution Neural Network (CNN)
(Yang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2021) and Transformer (Zhou et al.
2023; Sun, Wang, and Shen 2024; Fang et al. 2022; Sun et al.
2024; Sun 2024), to this field. Yet, most treatments are dedicated to designing a standalone network that is independent
of intrinsic MRI characteristics, which often leads to suboptimal performance. Additionally, deep learning methods

