The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SpatioTemporal Learning for Human Pose Estimation in Sparsely-Labeled Videos
Yingying Jiao1,2 * , Zhigang Wang3 * † , Sifan Wu1,2 , Shaojing Fan4† ,
Zhenguang Liu5,6† , Zhuoyue Xu3 , Zheqi Wu3
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University
4
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
5
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
6
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
jiaoyy21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, wangzhigang2024@gmail.com, wusifan2021@gmail.com, fanshaojing@gmail.com,
liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com, 1069516849xzyy@gmail.com, chasewoo17@gmail.com

2

Inputs
Key Frames

Abstract

1

Challenging Scenes

Human pose estimation in videos remains a challenge, largely
due to the reliance on extensive manual annotation of large
datasets, which is expensive and labor-intensive. Furthermore, existing approaches often struggle to capture longrange temporal dependencies and overlook the complementary relationship between temporal pose heatmaps and visual
features. To address these limitations, we introduce STDPose,
a novel framework that enhances human pose estimation by
learning spatiotemporal dynamics in sparsely-labeled videos.
STDPose incorporates two key innovations: 1) A novel
Dynamic-Aware Mask to capture long-range motion context,
allowing for a nuanced understanding of pose changes. 2)
A system for encoding and aggregating spatiotemporal representations and motion dynamics to effectively model spatiotemporal relationships, improving the accuracy and robustness of pose estimation. STDPose establishes a new performance benchmark for both video pose propagation (i.e., propagating pose annotations from labeled frames to unlabeled
frames) and pose estimation tasks, across three large-scale
evaluation datasets. Additionally, utilizing pseudo-labels generated by pose propagation, STDPose achieves competitive
performance with only 26.7% labeled data.

PoseWarper

Results
DCPose

STDPose (Ours)

Camera Shake

Occlusion

Fast Motion

Occlusion

Figure 1: Our model, STDPose, consistently demonstrates
high accuracy and robustness in human pose estimation,
even in challenging video scenes with blur and occlusion,
thanks to its innovative approach to capturing spatiotemporal information and long-range motion cues. However, stateof-the-art methods like PoseWarper (Bertasius et al. 2019)
and DCPose (Liu et al. 2021a) struggle in such scenarios.
Red rectangles in our visual comparisons indicate where
these methods completely failed to detect blurred individuals, while red ellipses highlight their incorrect detections
of wrist and ankle joints caused by severe occlusion. All results are from models trained on sparsely labeled (i.e., every
7 frames) videos.

Introduction

In recent years, visual perception tasks (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020; Kirillov et al. 2023; Shuai et al. 2023) have achieved
significant research breakthroughs, largely owing to the
continuous advancement of model architectures (Vaswani
et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2022b) and the rollout of large-scale
datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Lin et al. 2014). Correspondingly, human pose estimation (Liu et al. 2021a; Sun et al.
2019), as a foundational task in computer vision (Chen et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2022), has flourished over the past few
years and is particularly valuable in a wide range of applications, including sports analytics, surveillance, augmented
reality, and human-computer interaction (Schmidtke et al.

2021; Tse et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022c; Wu
et al. 2024b; Su et al. 2021).
However, the development of multi-person video pose
estimation has plateaued, facing numerous challenges that
demand innovative solutions. First, traditional model architectures, originally designed for static images, continue
to struggle with common video issues such as pose occlusion and blur due to fast motion or camera shake. Second,
most leading methods heavily rely on large-scale benchmark
datasets that require intensive time-consuming and laborintensive pose annotations. Notably, the temporal information in video sequences often shows substantial redundancy,
and the spatial changes in pose from one frame to the next
are typically minor (Bertasius et al. 2019), resulting in substantial repetitive effort for manual annotation.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4093

