The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Manipulation for Coalitions in Knockout Tournaments
Juhi Chaudhary1 , Hendrik Molter2 , Meirav Zehavi2
2

1
School of Technology and Computer Science, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India.
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.Department of Computer Science,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
juhi.chaudhary@tifr.res.in, molterh@post.bgu.ac.il, meiravze@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

the players to the leaves of a complete binary tree. As long
as at least two players remain, every two players mapped
to leaves having the same parent in the tree play a match,
whose winner is mapped to the common parent; then, the
leaves of the tree are deleted, which means that the losers
are knocked out of the tournament. When exactly one player
remains, it is declared the winner.
Due to their competitive nature, knockout tournaments are
highly prone to various forms of manipulation. Such manipulations are frequently reported by the media (see, e.g., (MediaNews c,b,a; Manoli and Antonopoulos 2015; Hill 2010;
Feltes 2013)), and their vulnerability was shown empirically
(see, e.g., (Stanton and Williams 2013; Mattei and Walsh
2016)). The focus in almost all research on manipulation
in knockout tournaments in the literature is on constructive manipulation, where we aim to make a favorite player
win the competition. Here, the most well-studied forms of
manipulation include coalition manipulation (discussed below), and tournament fixing where, generally, the manipulation involves selecting the seeding (Gupta et al. 2018a, 2019;
Kim, Suksompong, and Williams 2017; Aziz et al. 2018; Zehavi 2023; Gupta et al. 2018b; Vu, Altman, and Shoham
2009; Williams 2010), and bribery where we can flip the
outcome of a bounded, or budget-constrained, number of
games (Konicki and Williams 2019; Mattei et al. 2015; Kim
and Williams 2015; Saarinen, Goldsmith, and Tovey 2015).
We focus on constructive coalition manipulation in
knockout tournaments. Constructive coalition manipulation
is well-studied in various forms of tournaments (including
knockout tournaments) as well as in various settings in voting theory, as discussed in Section 1. Here, generally, a given
subset of players is termed a coalition. Then, the objective is
to determine whether the coalition has a “strategy”—where
coalition players intentionally lose some of their games—so
that the favorite player will win or will be likely to win. The
simplest setting for such manipulation, considered by Russell and Walsh (Russell and Walsh 2009), is when the outcome of every potential match is deterministic and known
in advance, i.e., for every two players, we know for certain
who will win a match between them, supposing none manipulates, and when we define a strategy as the set of matches
that the coalition players should lose (when a match involves
two coalition players, we further specify who among them
should lose). Russell and Walsh (Russell and Walsh 2009)

Knockout tournaments, also known as single-elimination or
cup tournaments, are a popular form of sports competitions.
In the standard probabilistic setting, for each pairing of players, one of the players wins the game with a certain (a priori
known) probability. Due to their competitive nature, tournaments are prone to manipulation. We investigate the computational problem of determining whether, for a given tournament, a coalition has a manipulation strategy that increases
the winning probability of a designated player above a given
threshold. More precisely, in every round of the tournament,
coalition players can strategically decide which games to
throw based on the advancement of other players to the current round. We call this setting adaptive constructive coalition manipulation. To the best of our knowledge, while coalition manipulation has been studied in the literature, this is the
first work to introduce adaptiveness to this context.
We show that the above problem is hard for every complexity
class in the polynomial hierarchy. On the algorithmic side, we
show that the problem is solvable in polynomial time when
the coalition size is a constant. Furthermore, we show that
the problem is fixed-parameter tractable when parameterized
by the coalition size and the size of a minimum player set that
must include at least one player from each non-deterministic
game. Lastly, we investigate a generalized setting where the
tournament tree can be imbalanced.

1

Introduction

Knockout tournaments, also known as single-elimination or
cup tournaments, constitute a competition format in which
contestants are paired up and compete against each other in
rounds, with the losers being eliminated after each round.
The tournament continues until only one contestant remains,
the winner. This format is widely favored in sports (Chaudhary, Molter, and Zehavi 2024b; Connolly and Rendleman 2011; Groh et al. 2012; Suksompong 2021; Williams
2016) and finds applications in several other areas, such as
elections and decision-making processes (Vu, Altman, and
Shoham 2009; Laslier 1997; Brandt and Fischer 2007; Tullock 1980; Rosen 1985). More formally, a knockout tournament consists of n players, where we assume that n is a
power of two, and a bijective mapping, called a seeding, of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13700

