The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

USDRL: Unified Skeleton-Based Dense Representation Learning with
Multi-Grained Feature Decorrelation
Wanjiang Weng1,2 , Hongsong Wang1,2 * , Junbo Wang3 , Lei He4 , Guo-Sen Xie5
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast
University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China
4
School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{220232322, hongsongwang}@seu.edu.cn;jbwang@nwpu.edu.cn;helei2023@tsinghua.edu.cn;gsxiehm@gmail.com
Abstract

Memory Bank

Contrastive learning has achieved great success in skeletonbased representation learning recently. However, the prevailing methods are predominantly negative-based, necessitating
additional momentum encoder and memory bank to get negative samples, which increases the difficulty of model training.
Furthermore, these methods primarily concentrate on learning a global representation for recognition and retrieval tasks,
while overlooking the rich and detailed local representations
that are crucial for dense prediction tasks. To alleviate these
issues, we introduce a Unified Skeleton-based Dense Representation Learning framework based on feature decorrelation,
called USDRL, which employs feature decorrelation across
temporal, spatial, and instance domains in a multi-grained
manner to reduce redundancy among dimensions of the representations to maximize information extraction from features.
Additionally, we design a Dense Spatio-Temporal Encoder
(DSTE) to capture fine-grained action representations effectively, thereby enhancing the performance of dense prediction
tasks. Comprehensive experiments, conducted on the benchmarks NTU-60, NTU-120, PKU-MMD I, and PKU-MMD II,
across diverse downstream tasks including action recognition,
action retrieval, and action detection, conclusively demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms the current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches.

Decoder
...

Encoder
Aug1.

Momentum
Encoder

Aug2.

Contrastive Learning

Encoder

Encoder
Aug1.

Masked Sequence
Modeling

Aug2.

Feature
Decorrelation

Figure 1: Illustration of the feature decorrelation-based selfsupervised skeleton-based representation learning paradigm.
This approach aims to distribute samples uniformly and consistently in the representation space. Unlike Masked Sequence Modeling, it is lightweight and requires no decoder or complex masking strategies. Additionally, it simplifies Negative-based Contrastive Learning by eliminating
the need for a memory bank or an additional momentum encoder, making it more streamlined and scalable.

Code — https://github.com/wengwanjiang/USDRL

Introduction

have been invested in self-supervised representation learning, utilizing unlabeled data for human-centric tasks.
Self-supervised skeleton-based representation learning
research has mainly centered on two distinct paradigms:
Masked Sequence Modeling and Contrastive Learning.
Masked Sequence Modeling utilizes artificial supervision
signals, incorporating mask-based pretext tasks such as
skeleton reconstruction (2023), motion prediction (2023),
and skeleton colorization (2023a). By leveraging an
encoder-decoder architecture, these approaches effectively
model the spatio-temporal relationships within the skeleton sequence to enhance representation learning. Contrastive
learning-based paradigm, which is based on negative samples (Zhang et al. 2022; Tianyu et al. 2022), also achieves
success in various downstream tasks by focusing on learning

With the increasing demand from applications such as
human-computer interaction and intelligent surveillance, the
analysis of human actions from skeleton sequences has
gained substantial attention due to its robustness against
background and appearance variations, as well as its
privacy-preserving advantages compared to conventional
RGB videos. In recent years, fully-supervised learning has
achieved significant success in skeleton-based action learning (2018; 2022; 2023a; 2023; 2024). However, these methods depend heavily on a large amount of manually annotated data. To reduce this dependence, substantial efforts
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8332

