The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GarFast: Realistic and Fast Garment Transfer with a Simplified
Parser-Free Approach
Chenghu Du1 , Junyin Wang1 , Yi Rong1,2 * , Feng Yu5 , Shengwu Xiong3,4∗
1

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070
2
Sanya Science and Education Innovation Park, Wuhan University of Technology, Sanya, 572000
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, 200232
4
Interdisciplinary Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Wuhan College, Wuhan, 430212
5
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan Textile University, Wuhan, 430200
{duch, wjy199708, yrong, xiongsw}@whut.edu.cn, yufeng@wtu.edu.cn
Abstract

A good garment try-on model should learn the transfer between different types of garments while satisfying: 1) high
fidelity and 2) low inference speed. Existing methods address
either of these two issues, limited processing speed or low
generation quality. We directly use a lightweight encoderdecoder, ensuring faster speeds. To tackle the problem of
lower image quality typically generated by lighter models,
we present GarFast, a simplified, parser-free framework that
optimizes the same lightweight network through a two-stage
transformation of real data roles (from input to supervision),
thereby greatly promoting model convergence. Specifically,
first, we propose a correction strategy to prevent the difficulty of convergence caused by the lack of ground truth in
the first stage. Second, we propose a fine-grained domain
consistency to ensure that the results generated in the unsupervised first stage are highly realistic clothed human images. Finally, we propose a skin-variant refinement loss and a
skinMix regularization to amplify texture differences and enhance the realism of skin-variant regions, thereby improving
the quality of the generated skin. Extensive experiments thoroughly demonstrate that our method achieves high resolution,
near real-time performance, and superior reconstruction quality compared to state-of-the-art approaches, with processing
times of less than 0.03 seconds on an Nvidia A100.

Figure 1: Comparison of prevalent garment transfer approaches. Within the same person domain X, given a garment and an original (real) person wearing this garment: (a)
Knowledge distillation first trains a teacher network T* to
translate a person’s representation (e.g. human paring) into a
fake person wearing any garment. Then, a student network G
is trained to reverse this translation back to the original person. (b) Vanilla cycle consistency uses two networks, G1 and
G2 , to translate the person’s representation into the fake person sequentially and then from the fake person’s representation back to the original person. (c) Our proposed method
is a faster, simplified pipeline that translates the real person
to the fake person and back using only one network, G. The
top right plot is another comparison demonstrating that our
approach can achieve excellent image realism in near realtime. Loss 1 and Loss 2 are different consistency losses.

Introduction
Garment transfer tasks aim to realistically put garment items
from in-store garment images onto the person in user photos.
The widespread demand for online garment try-ons within
the apparel industry has garnered significant attention, underscoring its immense potential commercial value. Given a
target garment image and an image of a person wearing that
garment, this task requires learning to transfer any garment
using only these two images. To address this, parser-based
methods are proposed, which pre-train a human parser to
segment (remove) the garment region from the person’s image, and then inpaint (reconstruct) this region with the target garment for the rest of the person’s image through selfsupervised training (Yang et al. 2020; Ge et al. 2021a; Yang,
Yu, and Liu 2022; Xie et al. 2023).

However, it has been demonstrated that even slightly inaccurate segmentation (e.g., human parsing) can lead to
highly unrealistic garment transfer outcomes (Issenhuth,
Mary, and Calauzenes 2020; Ge et al. 2021b). Therefore,
using pseudo-labels (fake garment transfer results with arbitrary garments generated by the classic work (Yang et al.
2020; Bai et al. 2022; Yang, Yu, and Liu 2022; Li, Zhang,
and Forsyth 2023)) with minimal errors as a substitute for
human parsing has become a more effective method. To
this end, a parser-free pipeline, knowledge distillation (Issenhuth, Mary, and Calauzenes 2020; Ge et al. 2021b; He,
Song, and Xiang 2022), is proposed (see Figure 1 (a)), which
involves pre-training a teacher network to provide a student

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2771

