The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Building a Multi-modal Spatiotemporal Expert for Zero-shot Action Recognition
with CLIP
Yating Yu* , Congqi Cao* † , Yueran Zhang, Qinyi Lv, Lingtong Min, Yanning Zhang
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an Shaanxi, 710129, China
yatingyu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, congqi.cao@nwpu.edu.cn, zhangyueran3@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {lvqinyi, minlingtong,
ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

(a) Ambiguity of static appearances:
Whether holding the barbell
Base class: Deadlifting

Abstract
Zero-shot action recognition (ZSAR) requires collaborative
multi-modal spatiotemporal understanding. However, finetuning CLIP directly for ZSAR yields suboptimal performance, given its inherent constraints in capturing essential
temporal dynamics from both vision and text perspectives,
especially when encountering novel actions with fine-grained
spatiotemporal discrepancies. In this work, we propose Spatiotemporal Dynamic Duo (STDD), a novel CLIP-based
framework to comprehend multi-modal spatiotemporal dynamics synergistically. For the vision side, we propose an efficient Space-time Cross Attention, which captures spatiotemporal dynamics flexibly with simple yet effective operations
applied before and after spatial attention, without adding additional parameters or increasing computational complexity.
For the semantic side, we conduct spatiotemporal text augmentation by comprehensively constructing an Action Semantic Knowledge Graph (ASKG) to derive nuanced text
prompts. The ASKG elaborates on static and dynamic concepts and their interrelations, based on the idea of decomposing actions into spatial appearances and temporal motions.
During the training phase, the frame-level video representations are meticulously aligned with prompt-level nuanced
text representations, which are concurrently regulated by the
video representations from the frozen CLIP to enhance generalizability. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness
of our approach, which consistently surpasses state-of-the-art
approaches on popular video benchmarks (i.e., Kinetics-600,
UCF101, and HMDB51) under challenging ZSAR settings.

dissimilar

Novel class: Body Weight Squats

Novel class: Clean and Jerk

similar

dissimilar

Novel class: Snatch Weight Lifting

Figure 1: Illustration of the challenges without collaborative multi-modal spatiotemporal understanding. (a) A model
lacking static context alignment may misidentify the novel
class due to the ambiguity associated with the barbell. (b) It
might also struggle generalizing to other novel weightlifting
actions, due to the subtle dynamic differences and strong visual similarities.

would inevitably lead to an ambiguous comprehension of actions. Let’s first delve into a simple example. In Figure 1(a),
a model lacking the ability to align visual contexts with
static concepts e.g., the barbell, may confuse whether the
actor is performing Dead Lifting or just doing Body Weight
Squats. Conversely, as shown in Figure 1(b), a model might
struggle to generalize to novel actions of Clean and Jerk and
Snatch Weight Lifting, if it falters in aligning nuanced multimodal spatiotemporal dynamics of Weight Lifting, as they
exhibit significant static visual affinities.
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) has shown exceptional zero-shot inference in image-based tasks, benefiting from its strong generalization capability of the visual and linguistic alignment.
Inspired by its success, CLIP can serve as a spatial expert for aligning static visual-semantic context of actions
by processing the video frame-by-frame. However, due to
its limitations in capturing temporal dynamics effectively,
recent attempts (Wu, Sun, and Ouyang 2023; Wang, Xing,
and Liu 2021; Yang et al. 2023) have been made to adapt
CLIP for general action recognition. Despite notable advancements obtained by additional temporal modeling (Lin
et al. 2022; Tu et al. 2023; Pan et al. 2022), they compromise with less-informative class-level prompts such as “a

Code — https://github.com/Mia-YatingYu/STDD
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09895

1

similar

(b) Ambiguity of dynamic motions:
How to perform Weight Lifting

Introduction

Zero-shot action recognition (ZSAR) aims to classify video
actions from novel categories that are not present in the
training of models. A strong ZSAR learner should be endowed with collaborative multi-modal spatiotemporal understanding, where the statics and dynamics of videos and
semantics should be aligned meticulously. Otherwise, it
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9689

