The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sample Complexity of Linear Regression Models for Opinion Formation in
Networks
Haolin Liu1 * , Rajmohan Rajaraman 2 , Ravi Sundaram2 ,
Anil Vullikanti1 , Omer Wasim2 , Haifeng Xu3
1
University of Virginia
Northeastern University
3
University of Chicago
srs8rh@virginia.edu, {r.rajaraman, r.sundaram}@northeastern.edu, asv9@virginia.edu, wasim.o@northeastern.edu,
haifengxu@uchicago.edu
2

Abstract

their peers, while others may need more direct information.
This differential requirement presents both a challenge and
an opportunity: How can one distribute information to ensure the entire community is well-informed, without unnecessary redundancies or gaps in knowledge dissemination?
To answer this question, the first step is to understand
the dynamics of opinion formation within social networks.
Starting from the seminal work of DeGroot (1974), one of
the predominant models assumes that individuals shape their
own beliefs by consistently observing and averaging the
opinions of their network peers (DeGroot 1974; Friedkin
and Johnsen 1990; DeMarzo, Vayanos, and Zwiebel 2003;
Golub and Jackson 2008; Bindel, Kleinberg, and Oren 2015;
Haddadan, Xin, and Gao 2024). We will adopt this seminal
framework to model the opinion formation process among
agents. However, these works always encapsulate opinions
as single numeric values. While this provides a foundational understanding, it cannot capture the nuanced ways
in which individuals process and integrate new information
into their existing belief systems. To address this issue, our
formulation generalizes the opinions to be a model parameter learned using a machine learning-based approach, as explored in (Haghtalab, Jackson, and Procaccia 2021) to study
belief polarization. Such formulation aligns with the human decision-making procedure proposed by (Simon 2013)
based on prior experiences and available data.
Specifically, we adopt the game theoretical formulation of
this opinion dynamic process introduced by (Bindel, Kleinberg, and Oren 2015). Within this framework, an agent’s
equilibrium opinion emerges as a weighted average of everyone’s initial opinions on the network (which are learned
form their locally available data), where the weights are
unique and determined by the network structure. It is not
guaranteed, however, that a node’s equilibrium opinion
would have a small generalization error. Motivated by the
work of (Blum et al. 2021), we study the conditions under
this actually happens (i.e., each node has a model with a
small generalization error): specifically, how should samples
be distributed across the network such that at the equilibrium
of the opinion formation game, everyone has a model that is
close enough to the ground-truth, and the total number of
samples is minimized; we are also interested in understanding the network gain, i.e., how much does the collaboration

Consider public health officials aiming to spread awareness
about a new vaccine in a community interconnected by a
social network. How can they distribute information with
minimal resources, so as to avoid polarization and ensure
community-wide convergence of opinion? To tackle such
challenges, we initiate the study of sample complexity of
opinion formation in networks. Our framework is built on
the recognized opinion formation game, where we regard
each agent’s opinion as a data-derived model, unlike previous works that treat opinions as data-independent scalars. The
opinion model for every agent is initially learned from its local samples and evolves game-theoretically as all agents communicate with neighbors and revise their models towards an
equilibrium. Our focus is on the sample complexity needed to
ensure that the opinions converge to an equilibrium such that
every agent’s final model has low generalization error.
Our paper has two main technical results. First, we present
a novel polynomial time optimization framework to quantify
the total sample complexity for arbitrary networks, when the
underlying learning problem is (generalized) linear regression. Second, we leverage this optimization to study the network gain which measures the improvement of sample complexity when learning over a network compared to that in isolation. Towards this end, we derive network gain bounds for
various network classes including cliques, star graphs, and
random regular graphs. Additionally, our framework provides
a method to study sample distribution within the network,
suggesting that it is sufficient to allocate samples inversely to
the degree. Empirical results on both synthetic and real-world
networks strongly support our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

In today’s interconnected world, rapid dissemination of information plays a pivotal role in shaping public understanding and behavior, especially in areas of critical importance
like public health. People learn and form opinions through
personal investigations and interactions with neighbors. The
heterogeneity of social networks often means that not every
individual requires the same amount of information to form
an informed opinion. Some may be heavily influenced by
* Alphabetical order
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13993

