The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

NaviFormer: A Spatio-Temporal Context-Aware Transformer for Object
Navigation
Wei Xie1 , Haobo Jiang2 , Yun Zhu1 , Jianjun Qian1 , Jin Xie3, 4 *
1

PCA Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
{xie.wei, zhu.yun, csjqian}@njust.edu.cn; haobo.jiang@ntu.edu.sg; csjxie@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

Learning discriminative state representations of agents, encompassing the spatial layout and temporal pose trajectory,
is essential for effective navigation decisions. However, existing approaches often rely on simplistic plain networks for
navigation information fusion, overlooking the complex longrange dependencies across spatio-temporal cues, which leads
to suboptimal state perception and potential decision failures.
In this paper, we introduce NaviFormer, an effective encoderdecoder navigation transformer, to aggregate discriminative
spatio-temporal context information for object navigation.
Our navigation encoder not only encodes spatial layouts and
temporal agent poses but also innovatively constructs and encodes a passable frontier map, enriching the original state encoding with cues of potential exploration regions. Furthermore, our navigation decoder employs spatio-temporal selfattention and cross-attention mechanisms to model the dependencies among spatial layout encoding, temporal pose encoding, and passable frontier encoding, thereby facilitating comprehensive contextual state feature aggregation. Finally, we
leverage these learned spatio-temporal contextual state representations for PPO-based navigation decisions. Extensive experiments on the Gibson, Habitat-Matterport3D (HM3D) and
Matterport3D (MP3D) datasets demonstrate the superiority
of our approach.

step 76

step 247

step 500

g

g

g

Figure 1: The red line represents the agent trajectory in
a failure episode of CNN-based method (Chaplot et al.
2020b). The blue five-pointed star represents the position of
the target object (i. e., toilet.). Despite the agent having conducted a more extensive exploration of the environment, the
target object remains undiscovered.

Existing object navigation methods can be primarily divided into two categories: end-to-end methods and modular
methods. End-to-end methods (Dang et al. 2023; Du, Yu,
and Zheng 2020; Zhang et al. 2021) directly process egocentric RGB images to search for the target object by learning a mapping relationship between the current state and
the optimal short-range action. While effective, the learned
navigation models would inevitably stick into sub-optimal
decisions when there is a significant discrepancy between
the unknown scene layout and the prior knowledge, causing frequent collides with surrounding objects or obstacles.
By contrast, the modular methods exploit the accumulated
scene information in BEV (bird’s-eye view) maps to determine long-term goals and search for targets. For example, (Chaplot et al. 2020b; Zhang et al. 2024, 2023a; Luo
et al. 2022; Ramakrishnan et al. 2022; Yu, Kasaei, and Cao
2023c,b) employ a plain network such as CNNs to fuse the
accumulated navigation cues, encompassing the explored
spatial layouts and the temporal pose trajectory, forming
current agent state representations. Nevertheless, due to the
large spatial layouts in different scenes and the inherent local bias of CNN, trival navigation information fusion based
on CNN is likely to cause the navigation model to ignore
the long-range spatio-temporal dependencies between spatial layouts and temporal pose trajectories, leading to state
representation misperception and potential decision failures,
as demonstrated in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we propose a novel navigation trans-

Code — https://github.com/Xie-Nav/NaviFormer

Introduction
Object navigation (ObjectNav), a key branch of embodied
AI, serves as a foundational upstream task for various visual
navigation-related applications, such as image-goal navigation (Kwon, Park, and Oh 2023) and vision-language navigation (An et al. 2024). In ObjectNav, an agent learns to recognize an unknown 3D environment from egocentric RGBD images, enabling its navigation model to make informed
decisions for locating specified targets. Therefore, how to
sufficiently mine the spatio-temporal navigation cues from
both the explored spatial layouts and the temporal agent pose
trajectory to accurately guide navigation decisions has become crucial to the success of ObjectNav tasks.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14708

