The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RetouchGPT: LLM-based Interactive High-Fidelity Face Retouching via
Imperfection Prompting
Wen Xue1 * , Chun Ding1 * , Ruotao Xu2 , Si Wu1,2† , Yong Xu1 , Hau-San Wong3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Institute of Super Robotics (Huangpu)
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{csxuewen, csdingchun}@mail.scut.edu.cn, rtxu@superobots.com
{cswusi, yxu}@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract

Face retouching aims to remove facial imperfections from
image and videos while at the same time preserving face attributes. The existing methods are designed to perform noninteractive end-to-end retouching, while the ability to interact
with users is highly demanded in downstream applications.
In this paper, we propose RetouchGPT, a novel framework
that leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) to guide the
interactive retouching process. Towards this end, we design
an instruction-driven imperfection prediction module to accurately identify imperfections by integrating textual and visual
features. To learn imperfection prompts, we further incorporate a LLM-based embedding module to fuse multi-modal
conditioning information. The prompt-based feature modification is performed in each transformer block, such that the
imperfection features are suppressed and replaced with the
features of normal skin progressively. Extensive experiments
have been performed to verify effectiveness of our design
elements and demonstrate that RetouchGPT is a useful tool
for interactive face retouching and achieves superior performance over state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1: (a) Traditional face retouching frameworks that
employ a single-stage face retouching framework lack the
capability to comprehend user instructions. (b) Our RetouchGPT framework leverages Large Language Models
(LLMs) to parse and interpret user instructions, enabling
precise and interactive retouching.

Introduction

task (Shafaei, Little, and Schmidt 2021; Xie et al. 2023).
Furthermore, transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017;
Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) has also been utilized in this field
(Wen et al. 2024; Xue et al. 2024), where the imperfections
are removed by performing the cross-attention computation
between the features of imperfections and normal skin. The
existing methods are capable of single-stage retouching but
are unable to refine the retouching results according to the
user’s feedback. On the other hand, the integration of Large
Language Models (LLMs) with visual tasks has witnessed
significant advancement. LLMs have the capability of understanding user instructions even in open-world scenarios.
Models like LLaVA (Liu et al. 2024) and BLIP-2 (Li et al.
2023) attempt to bridge textual and visual modalities but
typically fall short in fine-grained control. In addition, there
are some attempts to integrate LLMs into downstream visual
models (Wu et al. 2023; Gu et al. 2024), and leverage user
instructions in fine-grained visual tasks. In this work, we facilitate face retouching by leveraging LLMs to understand
user instructions and further control the generation process.
More specifically, we propose a novel retouching framework, RetouchGPT, which is the first attempt to leverage

The rapid advancement of social media has resulted in the
generation and uploading of vast quantities of face images
(Krizhevsky 2009; Liu et al. 2015) and videos (Zhu et al.
2021; Yu et al. 2023). Face retouching has emerged as a
highly demanded visual task, to remove facial imperfections while preserving the face attributes. Normally people
have different retouching preferences for various scenarios,
such as virtual makeup try-on (Li et al. 2015), online meetings (Aseniero et al. 2020), and live streaming (Thang et al.
2014). However, the existing retouching methods perform
non-interactive image-to-image translation, and thus cannot
accommodate the specific instructions from users.
Traditional face retouching methods (Arakawa 2004;
Velusamy et al. 2020) utilize nonlinear digital filters, which
are only capable of removing minor blemishes on a small
scale. To produce realistic clean faces, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been applied to the retouching
* Joint first authors.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9059

