The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PhysAug: A Physical-guided and Frequency-based Data Augmentation for
Single-Domain Generalized Object Detection
Xiaoran Xu1,2 , Jiangang Yang2 * , Wenhui Shi2 , Siyuan Ding2 , Luqing Luo2 , Jian Liu1,2 *
1

School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
IPHAC Lab, Institute of Microelectronics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
xuxiaoran22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {yangjiangang,luoluqing,shiwenhui,dingsiyuan,liujian}@ime.ac.cn

Abstract

on different distributions of target data due to the changes
in weather, illuminations, and object appearances. Such performance degradation hinders its wide deployment in safetycritical areas.

Single-Domain Generalized Object Detection (S-DGOD)
aims to train on a single source domain for robust performance across a variety of unseen target domains by taking advantage of an object detector. Existing S-DGOD approaches
often rely on data augmentation strategies, including a composition of visual transformations, to enhance the detector’s
generalization ability. However, the absence of real-world
prior knowledge hinders data augmentation from contributing
to the diversity of training data distributions. To address this
issue, we propose PhysAug, a novel physical model-based
non-ideal imaging condition data augmentation method, to
enhance the adaptability of the S-DGOD tasks. Drawing upon
the principles of atmospheric optics, we develop a universal perturbation model that serves as the foundation for our
proposed PhysAug. Given that visual perturbations typically
arise from the interaction of light with atmospheric particles,
the image frequency spectrum is harnessed to simulate realworld variations during training. This approach fosters the detector to learn domain-invariant representations, thereby enhancing its ability to generalize across various settings. Without altering the network architecture or loss function, our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art across
various S-DGOD datasets. In particular, it achieves a substantial improvement of 7.3% and 7.2% over the baseline on
DWD and Cityscape-C, highlighting its enhanced generalizability in real-world settings.

(a)

Code — https://github.com/startracker0/PhysAug

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision
aiming to localize and recognize objects in natural images (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016; Tian et al.
2022; Zou et al. 2023). In past decades, object detection
has achieved significant progress due to the advancement
of deep learning, which assumes that the training data and
test data come from the same distribution (Zhao et al. 2019).
However, distribution shifts in various real-world applications make deep learning-based object detectors impractical.
For instance, when trained on high-quality source data, object detectors for autonomous driving tend to perform poorly

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The Physical imaging process in the atmosphere. Path1: Incident light path, Path2: Reflected light
path, Path3: Atmospheric light path. (b) The cases of image
degradation due to the different interactions between light
and atmospheric particles.

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21815

