The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MTVHunter: Smart Contracts Vulnerability Detection Based on Multi-Teacher
Knowledge Translation
Guokai Sun1 * , Yuan Zhuang1 * † , Shuo Zhang1 , Xiaoyu Feng1 , Zhenguang Liu2,3 , Liguo Zhang1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Heilongjiang, China
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security, Hangzhou, China
{sguokai, zhuangyuan, xiaoyufeng, zhangliguo}@hrbeu.edu.cn, liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com
2

Abstract

statistics (SharkTeam 2024-07-08), the cumulative amount
of losses caused by smart contracts exceeded $1.492 billion
in the first half of 2024, which has an increase of 116.23%
compared to the same period in 2023.
Existing tools of smart contract tend to consider source
code to judge security issues due to its semantic richness
and clarity. Unfortunately, smart contracts are frequently not
open-sourced and only bytecode is accessible. Therefore,
it is urgent to advance vulnerability detection on bytecode.
Current approaches on bytecode are either based on fixed
and labor-consuming expert rules (Mueller 2017) or employ
label-target neural networks (Qian et al. 2023). We scrutinized the released implementation of existing methods, and
empirically observed that they suffer from two key problems: first, they assign weights equally to all instructions
rather than distinguishing critical instructions related to the
specific vulnerability, smoothing their features in the detection process. Second, a substantial obstacle in successfully
detecting vulnerability on bytecode is the difficulty of effectively and completely exploit control-flow and data-flow dependencies, as the bytecode is inherently missing a portion
of semantics.
These problems motivate us to come up with the following three key designs: 1) We design a multi-teacher
smart contract vulnerability detection framework that contains two teachers and one student, enabling a divideand-conquer approach to these challenging problems. 2)
To overcome the interference of vulnerability-irrelevant instructions (i.e., noise), we design an Instruction Denoising
Teacher (IDT) with fine-defined abstract vulnerability patterns, which distinguish critical instructions and grant more
weights in contract embeddings. 3) On the other hand, we
propose a Semantic Complementary Teacher (SCT), which
effectively extracts rich semantic knowledge from source
code, and then maps to missing semantic features on bytecode via a simple but effective method, namely neuronal
distillation, turning the knowledge translation into a neuronal regression task. To validate and evaluate the proposed method, extensive experiments have been conducted
on a dataset of 229,178 real-world smart contracts, and results unequivocally demonstrate that MTVHunter significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches in smart
contract vulnerability detection. Notably, we harness existing prevalent distillation methods on smart contracts vul-

Smart contracts, closely intertwined with cryptocurrency
transactions, have sparked widespread concerns about considerable financial losses of security issues. To counteract
this, a variety of tools have been developed to identify vulnerability in smart contract. However, they fail to overcome
two challenges at the same time when faced with smart contract bytecode: (i) strong interference caused by enormous
non-relevant instructions; (ii) missing semantics of bytecode
due to incomplete data and control flow dependencies. In this
paper, we propose a multi-teacher based bytecode vulnerability detection method, namely Multi-Teacher Vulnerability
Hunter (MTVHunter), which delivers effective denoising
and missing semantic to bytecode under multi-teacher guidance. Specifically, we first propose an instruction denoising
teacher to eliminate noise interference by abstract vulnerability pattern and further reflect in contract embeddings. Secondly, we design a novel semantic complementary teacher
with neuron distillation, which effectively extracts necessary
semantic from source code to replenish the bytecode. Particularly, the proposed neuron distillation accelerate this semantic
filling by turning the knowledge transition into a regression
task. We conduct experiments on 229,178 real-world smart
contracts that concerns four types of common vulnerabilities. Extensive experiments show MTVHunter achieves significantly performance gains over state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
In recent years, blockchain technology has gained
widespread attention across various sectors, serving as
a decentralized and transparent ledger system (Zou et al.
2019). Smart contracts are Turing-complete programs running on top of the blockchain, such as Ethereum, controlling
a massive amount of digital assets through arbitrary rules
(Liu et al. 2021a). However, the publicly available character
of smart contracts poses serious security risks, allowing
malicious attackers to exploit vulnerabilities for substantial
gains, a typical example is DAO, which caused a loss of
$60 million ETH by Reentrancy vulnerability. In addition,
over $150 million worth of ETH was frozen due to the
Delegatecall vulnerability in 2017. According to existing
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15169

