The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EditBoard: Towards a Comprehensive Evaluation Benchmark for Text-Based
Video Editing Models
Yupeng Chen1 * , Penglin Chen2† , Xiaoyu Zhang1† , Yixian Huang1 , Qian Xie3‡
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Nanjing University
3
University of Leeds
{yupengchen, xiaoyuzhang2, yixianhuang1}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, penglinchen@smail.nju.edu.cn, Q.Xie2@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract

With the growth of innovative video editing models (Wu
et al. 2023a; Qi et al. 2023; Jeong and Ye 2023; Geyer et al.
2023), there remains a notable lack of comprehensive evaluation benchmarks that holistically assess these models’ performance across various dimensions. The automatic metrics
currently employed are limited in number and scope. For example, models like FateZero (Qi et al. 2023) and Ground-AVideo (Jeong and Ye 2023) use only two automatic metrics,
focusing on temporal consistency between edited frames
and frame-wise editing success rate. Moreover, inconsistent
naming conventions across papers hinder unified testing and
comparison. Most importantly, current evaluations overlook
the diversity of editing tasks and use scores from limited dimensions to represent overall performance.

The rapid development of diffusion models has significantly
advanced AI-generated content (AIGC), particularly in Textto-Image (T2I) and Text-to-Video (T2V) generation. Textbased video editing, leveraging these generative capabilities,
has emerged as a promising field, enabling precise modifications to video content based on textual prompts. Despite
the proliferation of innovative video editing models, there is
a conspicuous lack of comprehensive evaluation frameworks
that holistically assess these models’ performance across various dimensions. Existing metrics are limited, inconsistent,
and focused on assigning a single score per metric, failing
to reveal model’s performance on each editing task. To address this gap, we propose EditBoard, the first comprehensive evaluation benchmark for text-based video editing models. EditBoard encompasses nine automatic metrics across
four key dimensions, evaluating models on four categories
of tasks, and introduces three new metrics to assess fidelity.
This task-oriented framework facilitates objective evaluation
by breaking down model performance into details, providing insights into each model’s strengths and weaknesses. By
open-sourcing EditBoard, we aim to standardize evaluation
and advance the development of robust video editing models.

To address these gaps, we propose EditBoard (see Figure 1), the first comprehensive evaluation benchmark for
text-based video editing models. EditBoard encompasses
nine metrics across four dimensions. First, given the original
video, source prompt, and target prompt, we evaluate edited
video across three dimensions: fidelity between (1) edited
frames and original frames, (2) edited frames and unedited
parts of source prompt, execution of target prompt, and consistency between edited frames. For fidelity, we propose FFα (Frame Fidelity) and FF-β to measure motion and structural similarity between edited and original frames, as well
as a Semantic Score to assess the accuracy of object-aware
editing (the ability to identify the object to be edited and
leave other parts unchanged). For execution, we use Success Rate and CLIP Similarity (Hessel et al. 2021; Parmar
et al. 2023) to evaluate how well the edited frames match
the target prompt. For consistency, we use Subject Consistency and Background Consistency to evaluate whether
the frames remain coherent throughout the video. Furthermore, we focus on the dimension of style and assess whether
the edited video is visually appealing using Aesthetic Quality and Imaging Quality, following the naming conventions
from VBench (Huang et al. 2024), a benchmark for evaluating video generative models. Additionally, we utilize EditBoard to evaluate five state-of-the-art video editing models,
deriving valuable insights from the results. This evaluation
highlights each model’s strengths and weaknesses, offering
possible explanations for their performance. These findings
not only enhance our understanding of current models but

Code — https://github.com/Samchen2003/EditBoard

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020), which have been widely applied in the context of AI-generated content (AIGC), such as Text-to-Image
(T2I) generation (Nichol et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2023) and Text-to-Video (T2V)
generation (Chen et al. 2023a; Luo et al. 2023; Villegas et al.
2022). Harnessing the generative capabilities of these models, text-based video editing is an emerging field that aims
to edit specific parts of the video based on text prompts.
* Work done when Yupeng was a visiting student at University
of Oxford.
†
These authors contributed equally.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15975

