The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HiCM2 : Hierarchical Compact Memory Modeling for Dense Video Captioning
Minkuk Kim1 , Hyeon Bae Kim1 , Jinyoung Moon2 , Jinwoo Choi1 * , Seong Tae Kim1 *
1
Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Republic of Korea
{asdjklfgh97,hyeonbae.kim}@khu.ac.kr, jymoon@etri.re.kr, {jinwoochoi,st.kim}@khu.ac.kr
2

Abstract
With the growing demand for solutions to real-world video
challenges, interest in dense video captioning (DVC) has
been on the rise. DVC involves the automatic captioning
and localization of untrimmed videos. Several studies highlight the challenges of DVC and introduce improved methods
utilizing prior knowledge, such as pre-training and external
memory. In this research, we propose a model that leverages
the prior knowledge of human-oriented hierarchical compact
memory inspired by human memory hierarchy and cognition.
To mimic human-like memory recall, we construct a hierarchical memory and a hierarchical memory reading module.
We build an efficient hierarchical compact memory by employing clustering of memory events and summarization using large language models. Comparative experiments demonstrate that this hierarchical memory recall process improves
the performance of DVC by achieving state-of-the-art performance on YouCook2 and ViTT datasets.

1

Input Video
Recall

Stir
Chop
Pasta?
ㅑ
Cream
Mimic
Sauce
Pesto
Cook?

Human

Memory

Preparing, pour cream.Plating, finish.

Human cognition

Retrieval
Cook

Model

Chop
Pasta
Plate
Pizza
Pan

Memory

Prepare, cook on pan. Plate pasta.

Prediction

Figure 1: Conceptual figure of the proposed hierarchical
compact memory construction. Our method leverages relevant clues from hierarchical compact memory with crossmodal retrieval, effectively mimicking human memory processes for improved event localization and description.

Introduction

Dense video captioning (DVC) is a task that involves temporally localizing event boundaries in untrimmed videos
and describing each event in natural language. Compared
to video captioning(Lin et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2020; Seo
et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2017; Pei et al. 2019; Qi et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2017; Pan et al. 2016;
Rohrbach et al. 2013; Venugopalan et al. 2014, 2015; Tu
et al. 2021, 2022, 2023), which generates a single caption
for a video clip, DVC presents considerable challenges. This
task requires not only generating captions but also automatically localizing multiple important event segments within
untrimmed videos. In other words, DVC should accurately
identify event boundaries and describe each event segment
in natural language, making it a far more complex process.
Recent advancements in vision and language learning
have demonstrated remarkable outcomes in cross-modal
correlation tasks (Radford et al. 2021; Saharia et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2022). Nevertheless, linking natural language with
video remains challenging, largely due to the complexities
involved in capturing spatiotemporal information (Hayes

et al. 2022). Video and language learning demands intricate model architectures, tailored training protocols, and significant computational resources (Cheng et al. 2023). DVC
involves the additional challenge of associating untrimmed
videos with natural language to both localize and describe
events (Krishna et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2023b). To address these challenges, several studies have
been explored to leverage prior knowledge through a pretraining and fine-tuning approach (Yang et al. 2023b; Wu
et al. 2024). In addition, a study has been proposed (Kim
et al. 2024) that enhances DVC by utilizing information
stored in memory as an additional source of prior knowledge. This study is inspired by the observation that humans store and recall information hierarchically. Humans
have the ability to identify significant events and describe
them by retrieving relevant memories based on cues they
have encountered. In cognitive information processing, this
phenomenon is called cued recall (Allan and Rugg 1997;
Rugg et al. 1998). Notably, when recalling, humans tend to
first perceive abstract semantic information, then associate

* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4293

