The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Expected Hypervolume Improvement Is a Particular Hypervolume Improvement
Jingda Deng1 , Jianyong Sun1 * , Qingfu Zhang2, 3 , Hui Li1
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
3
The City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute
{jddeng, jy.sun}@xjtu.edu.cn, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk, lihui10@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

algorithm builds a probabilistic surrogate model based on
evaluated solutions, always a multi-output Gaussian process
(GP) using kernels for vector-valued functions (Rasmussen
2003; Álvarez, Rosasco, and Lawrence 2012), to approximate the unknown black-box objective functions, and then
selects candidate solutions guided by an acquisition function.
As a widely used acquisition function in BO, expected
improvement (EI) has been adapted for MOBO and one
well-known adaptation is the expected hypervolume improvement (EHVI) (Emmerich, Giannakoglou, and Naujoks
2006). EHVI combines the concepts of EI and the hypervolume indicator (HV), which is a scalar performance indicator to measure the quality of solution sets in the field
of multi-objective optimization (Zitzler and Thiele 1999).
EHVI has shown a good performance in a number of applications (Couckuyt, Deschrijver, and Dhaene 2014; Yang
et al. 2019b), and there are some effective variants such
as qEHVI for batch optimization (Daulton, Balandat, and
Bakshy 2020) and LogEHVI for high-precision optimum
search (Ament et al. 2023).
However, the application of EHVI in MOBO is limited
due to its complicated computation. The currently best algorithm for computing EHVI scales exponentially with respect
to the number of objectives (Yang et al. 2019a). As shown in
the numerical experiments, it becomes intractable when the
number of objectives m > 4 and the size of the non-inferior
set n > 50. As a result, the difficulty in the computation
makes optimizing EHVI itself not an easy task.
To address the difficulties in the computation of EHVI and
its variants, we investigate more efficient analytic expressions for them in this work. Table 1 compares the complexities of our formulations for qEHVI (q ≥ 1) and state-of-theart results.1 The contributions of this work are summarized
as follows:

Multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) aims to
optimize multiple competing objective functions in the
expensive-to-evaluate scenario. The Expected Hypervolume
Improvement (EHVI) is a commonly used acquisition function for MOBO and shows a good performance. However, the
computation of EHVI becomes challenging as the number of
objective functions grows. In this paper, we revisit the formulation of EHVI, as well as its multi-point counterpart qEHVI,
and derive much simpler analytic expressions for them. The
main contributions of this paper include: (1) first formulating
EHVI as a particular hypervolume improvement, and thus immediately obtaining a formal proof of its NP-hardness, faster
algorithms in both theory and practice, and more results on
its derivatives; (2) first obtaining the analytic expressions of
qEHVI for any q > 1 and m ≥ 2 where m is the number
of objectives; and (3) demonstrating the advantages of our
formulation over existing exact and approximation methods
for computing EHVI and qEHVI through a large number of
numerical experiments.

Introduction
In many real-world optimization problems, the objective
function evaluation requires costly or time-consuming simulations in physic or on computer. For these expensive
problems, Bayesian optimization (BO) is popular and efficient (Garnett 2023). When there are multiple expensive-toevaluate objective functions to be optimized simultaneously,
the problem may become more challenging, for example,
finding the optimal parameters in different engineering design problems (Tanabe and Ishibuchi 2020) and seeking the
optimal hyper-parameters in the neural network structure design (Binois et al. 2020). Efficient multi-objective Bayesian
optimization (MOBO) algorithms are desired to solve these
multi-objective expensive optimization problems.
In this paper, we consider the maximization of a continuous vector-valued function f (x) = (f1 (x), . . . , fm (x)) :
Rd → Rm over a feasible set X ⊂ Rd , where each of
the objective function fi (x) is expensive to evaluate with
an unknown analytic expression and gradient. To generate
promising candidate solutions to evaluate, a typical MOBO

• We prove that EHVI can be expressed as a particular hypervolume improvement (Theorem 1). As the hypervolume improvement concept has been adequately investigated in the field of multi-objective optimization, this
new formulation provides many results both in theory
and in practice (Corollary 1-3);

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

In the complexities, m and q are assumed to be constant, and
the Õ notation hides polynomials of log n.

16217

