The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Efficient Collaboration via Graph Modeling in Reinforcement Learning
Wenzhe Fan1 † , Zishun Yu1 , Chengdong Ma2 , Changye Li3 , Yaodong Yang2 , Xinhua Zhang1
1
University of Illinois Chicago
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Yuanpei College, Peking University
wfan23@uic.edu, zyu32@uic.edu, chengdong.ma@stu.pku.edu.cn, antoine031106@gmail.com,
yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn, zhangx@uic.edu
2

Abstract
In multi-agent reinforcement learning, a commonly considered paradigm is centralized training with decentralized execution. However, in this framework, decentralized execution
restricts the development of coordinated policies due to the
local observation limitation. In this paper, we consider the
cooperation among neighboring agents during execution and
formulate their interactions as a graph. Thus, we introduce a
novel encoder-decoder architecture named Factor-based MultiAgent Transformer (f -MAT) that utilizes a transformer to
enable communication between neighboring agents during
both training and execution. By dividing agents into different
overlapping groups and representing each group with a factor,
f -MAT achieves efficient message passing and parallel action
generation through factor-based attention layers. Empirical
results in networked systems such as traffic scheduling and
power control demonstrate that f -MAT achieves superior performance compared to strong baselines, thereby paving the
way for handling complex collaborative problems.

1

Introduction

The intricate nature of collaboration and the demand for
time efficiency render multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) a challenging problem. First, the joint action space
grows exponentially with the number of agents, resulting in a
complex scenario for making cooperative decisions. Second,
it requires effective information exchange throughout the
system to help agents learn the state of the environment and
other agents. For example, traffic light control at multiple intersections needs a coordination mechanism that allows each
signal to act based on traffic conditions not only at its own intersection but also at nearby neighbors, even at distant signals.
Therefore, developing an efficient collaboration approach is
crucial for decision-making in multi-agent systems.
A commonly considered paradigm in MARL is centralized
training with decentralized execution (CTDE) (Sunehag et al.
2017; Rashid et al. 2020; Son et al. 2019; Foerster et al. 2018;
Lowe et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2022), where each agent acts
independently according to its own observation.
However, these methods only focus on stabilizing training with advanced value estimation and do not finely model
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Correspondence to: Wenzhe Fan
16505

the relationship among agents during execution. As a result,
some of them may fail in the simplest cooperative tasks (Kuba
et al. 2022). Our method retains the actor-critic architecture
in the CTDE framework but extends independent action to
neighborhood-based action, capturing the interactions between agents during execution.
There are literatures (Boehmer, Kurin, and Whiteson 2020;
Li et al. 2020) modeling the relations among the agents in
multi-agent systems with graph, in which each agent is represented by a node and the agent interaction is represented by
an edge. To facilitate communication between agents, Foerster et al. (2016) and Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and Fergus (2016)
utilize the averaged encoded hidden states of other agents,
while Zhang et al. (2018) and Zhang, Yang, and Başar (2021)
seek consensus to achieve the optimal common reward. Das
et al. (2019) and Jiang and Lu (2018) implemented attention mechanisms to determine the optimal time and target
for communication. Further research employs graph neural networks (GNNs) and graph attention networks (GANs)
to enhance agent interactions (Jiang et al. 2018; Hoshen
2017; Das et al. 2019; Singh, Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2019; Niu,
Paleja, and Gombolay 2021; Kim et al. 2019). Additionally,
MARL methods capitalize on networked topologies (Chu,
Chinchali, and Katti 2020; Zhang et al. 2018; Gupta, Hazra,
and Dukkipati 2020; Guestrin, Lagoudakis, and Parr 2002;
Zhang, Aberdeen, and Vishwanathan 2007). Unfortunately,
many of these methods suffer from the time complexity of
O(n2 ) for n number of agents (Hao et al. 2023). Moreover,
agent-level communication limits the efficiency of learning
cooperative policies.
To address these challenges, we propose Factor-based
Multi-Agent Transformer (f -MAT), which enables efficient
collaboration during both training and execution through all
agents via graph modeling within the CTDE framework. First,
to enable flexible communication, we propose a hypernode
called factor. By modeling the collaboration structure as a
graph, we organize agents into different groups and represent
each of them as a factor. Serving as the intermediary, each
factor can include multiple agents and each agent can belong
to multiple factors. Therefore, we allow an agent’s observation and action to propagate and to influence other agents,
while also facilitating communication at the group level.
Second, to capture the interactions between neighboring
agents, we utilize the transformer model, which shifts the

