The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Counterfactual Identification Under Monotonicity Constraints
Aurghya Maiti, Drago Plecko, Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Columbia University
am5887@columbia.edu, dp3144@columbia.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

and Valtorta 2006; Bareinboim and Pearl 2012, 2016; Correa
and Bareinboim 2017; Lee, Correa, and Bareinboim 2019;
Correa and Bareinboim 2020; Lee and Bareinboim 2020;
Lee, Correa, and Bareinboim 2020; Correa and Bareinboim 2024). Specifically, the problem of identifying interventional queries from observational data and the causal diagram (Layer 2 from Layer 1) has been solved by the ID
algorithm from (Tian and Shpitser 2010) and from a combination of observations and experiments (Layers 1+2 to
Layer 2) (Lee, Correa, and Bareinboim 2019). Similarly, the
Ctf-ID algorithm from (Correa, Lee, and Bareinboim 2021)
solves the problem of identifying counterfactual queries
from a combination of observations and arbitrary experiments (Layer 3 from Layers 1+2). These algorithms have
been shown to be sound and complete.
In contrast, the causal inference literature in econometrics and statistics has traditionally considered effect identification under parametric assumptions. A popular and wellstudied case is effect identification in linear systems (Brito
and Pearl 2002; Tian 2004, 2005; Chen, Pearl, and Bareinboim 2016; Chen, Kumor, and Bareinboim 2017; Kumor,
Chen, and Bareinboim 2019; Kumor, Cinelli, and Bareinboim 2020; Shimizu 2014). The literature on this area has
a rich past, rooted in the study of regression (Gauss 1877;
Galton 1886) and instrumental variables (Wright 1928;
Reiersøl 1945). This setting could be seen as the opposite
of non-parametric identification, which makes no assumptions about the form of causal mechanisms, whereas the linear identification setting assumes all mechanisms (globally)
to be linear (see Fig. 1a).
Interestingly, the space between the two extremes of the
spectrum in Fig. 1a has received relatively less attention, and
yet many interesting possibilities exist for considering effect identification under other functional form assumptions.
These include examples such as additive noise models (Peters, Janzing, and Scholkopf 2011), models with local parametric assumptions (as opposed to linear models where every mechanism is assumed to be linear), shape-constrained
models (assuming monotonic or convex/concave functional
forms) (Imbens and Angrist 1994), and many others.
In this paper, we make an important step in this direction
and study the identification of counterfactuals under local
monotonicity constraints. To illustrate how such constraints
can aid identification, we begin with the following example.

Reasoning with counterfactuals is one of the hallmarks of
human cognition, involved in various tasks such as explanation, credit assignment, blame, and responsibility. Counterfactual quantities that are not identifiable in the general nonparametric case may be identified under shape constraints on
the functional mechanisms, such as monotonicity. One prominent example of such an approach is the celebrated result by
Angrist and Imbens on identifying the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE) in the instrumental variable setting. In
this paper, we study the identification problem of more general settings under monotonicity constraints. We begin by
proving the monotonicity reduction lemma, which simplifies
counterfactual queries using monotonicity assumptions and
facilitates the reduction of a larger class of these queries to
interventional quantities. We then extend the existing identification results on Probabilities of Causation (PoCs) and LATE
to a broader set of queries and graphs. Finally, we develop
an algorithm, M-ID, for identifying arbitrary counterfactual
queries from combinations of observational and experimental
data, which takes as input a causal diagram with monotonicity constraints. We show that M-ID subsumes the previously
known identification results in the literature. We demonstrate
the applicability of our results using synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

Counterfactual reasoning is essential for human cognition,
underpinning various of our abilities related to understanding, credit assignment, attribution of blame and responsibility, and regret (Pearl 2000; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018;
Starr 2019; Van Hoeck, Watson, and Barbey 2015). In a
structure known as Pearl Causal Hierarchy (PCH), counterfactual knowledge resides at Layer 3, while observational
and interventional knowledge corresponds to Layers 1 and 2
(Pearl and Mackenzie 2018; Bareinboim et al. 2022).
The question of non-parametric identification of causal
queries from one layer of the PCH using data from another layer has received a lot of attention in the literature.
Various versions of this problem have been studied extensively, from Pearl’s celebrated result known as do-calculus
to other more systematic, algorithmic approaches (Pearl
1995; Tian and Pearl 2002; Shpitser and Pearl 2007; Huang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
26841

