The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MV-VTON: Multi-View Virtual Try-On with Diffusion Models
Haoyu Wang1,2, * , Zhilu Zhang2,† Donglin Di3 , Shiliang Zhang1 , Wangmeng Zuo2
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Space AI, Li Auto
cshy2002@gmail.com, cszlzhang@outlook.com, donglin.ddl@gmail.com, slzhang.jdl@pku.edu.cn, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Previous work Clothing & Person

Abstract

View 2

View 3

View 4

View 5

Ours

The goal of image-based virtual try-on is to generate an image of the target person naturally wearing the given clothing.
However, existing methods solely focus on the frontal try-on
using the frontal clothing. When the views of the clothing and
person are significantly inconsistent, particularly when the
person’s view is non-frontal, the results are unsatisfactory. To
address this challenge, we introduce Multi-View Virtual TryON (MV-VTON), which aims to reconstruct the dressing results from multiple views using the given clothes. Given that
single-view clothes provide insufficient information for MVVTON, we instead employ two images, i.e., the frontal and
back views of the clothing, to encompass the complete view
as much as possible. Moreover, we adopt diffusion models
that have demonstrated superior abilities to perform our MVVTON. In particular, we propose a view-adaptive selection
method where hard-selection and soft-selection are applied
to the global and local clothing feature extraction, respectively. This ensures that the clothing features are roughly fit
to the person’s view. Subsequently, we suggest joint attention
blocks to align and fuse clothing features with person features. Additionally, we collect a MV-VTON dataset MVG, in
which each person has multiple photos with diverse views and
poses. Experiments show that the proposed method not only
achieves state-of-the-art results on MV-VTON task using our
MVG dataset, but also has superiority on frontal-view virtual
try-on task using VITON-HD and DressCode datasets.

View 1

Figure 1: Motivation of this work. Previous VTON methods,
e.g., StableVITON (Kim et al. 2023) can only be used for the
frontal-view person, and fail when facing the person with
multiple views. Our MV-VTON can faithfully present the
try-on results for a person with various views.

generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2020)
(GANs). They generally align the clothing to the person’s
pose, and then employ a generator to fuse the warped clothing with the person. However, it poses a challenge to ensure that the warped clothing fits the target person’s pose,
and inaccurate clothes features will easily lead to distortion
results. Recently, diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022)
have made remarkable strides in the field of image generation (Ruiz et al. 2023). Leveraging its potent generative capabilities, some researchers (Morelli et al. 2023; Kim et al.
2023) have integrated it into virtual try-on fields, building
upon previous work and achieving commendable results.
Although VTON has made great progress, most existing
methods focus on performing the frontal try-on. In practical
applications, such as online shopping for clothes, customers
may expect to obtain the dressing effect on multiple views
(e.g., side or back). In this case, the pose of the garment may
be seriously inconsistent with the person’s posture, and the

Code — https://github.com/hywang2002/MV-VTON

Introduction
Virtual Try-On (VTON) is a classic yet intriguing technology. It can be applied in the field of fashion and clothes online shopping to improve user experience. VTON aims to
render the visual effect of a person wearing a specified garment. The emphasis of this technology lies in reconstructing
a realistic image that faithfully preserves personal attributes
and accurately represents clothing shape and details.
Early VTON methods (Lee et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2023;
Bai et al. 2022; He, Song, and Xiang 2022) are based on
* This work was done while the first author was an undergradu-

ate at Harbin Institute of Technology.
†
Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7682

