The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Multi-Hop Fact Verification with Structured
Knowledge-Augmented Large Language Models
Han Cao1,2 , Lingwei Wei1 * , Wei Zhou1 , Songlin Hu1, 2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
caohan@iie.ac.cn, weilingwei@iie.ac.cn, zhouwei@iie.ac.cn, husonglin@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

Ostrowski et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2019). Unlike traditional
verification tasks involving a single inference step, the main
challenges of multi-hop verification lie in comprehensively
understanding and reasoning complex relations between related evidence pieces. This requires a deep comprehension
of the context and a strong reasoning ability for accurate verification.
Existing studies on multi-hop fact verification aim to improve both understanding and reasoning abilities (Zhang,
Zhang, and Zhou 2024; Si, Zhu, and Zhou 2023; Pan et al.
2023). Pan et al. (2023) leverage a question-answer framework to extract relevant evidence as comprehensively as
possible and enhance the model understanding capacity.
To promote the reasoning ability, Zhang, Zhang, and Zhou
(2024) and Si, Zhu, and Zhou (2023) construct graph structure and utilize graph fusion methods to model complex
relations between coarse-grained evidence debunks. However, all nodes are treated equally and construct fully connected claim graphs, overlooking the inner relations between
claims, entities, and each piece of evidence.
Despite recent advancements in multi-hop fact verification, these methods often struggle with handling the complex relationships between fine-grained knowledge for the
following two challenges. 1) The multi-source evidence
pieces and some informality or ambiguity in language aggregate the insufficient model understanding. According to
Zhang, Zhang, and Zhou (2024), recent models tend to learn
a shortcut to predict labels, instead of fully understanding
the inner logic and contextual relations. This hinders the
accurate understanding of context. Although some preliminary works leverage Large Language Models (LLMs) to
predict factual verdicts through prompt tuning (Zhang and
Gao 2023; Choi and Ferrara 2024), they usually achieve unsatisfactory performance compared to other methods based
on small models, especially in multi-hop fact verification. 2)
These methods overlook the complicated relations between
fine-grained knowledge such as entities in evidence, which
are crucial for understanding the multi-step dependencies
necessary for verification. As shown in Table 1, a one-hop
claim only needs verifying the very aspect, whereas a multihop claim requires multi-step thinking, e.g. the relation between Ford Fusion and NASCAR Sprint Cup Series, which
is crucial to capture the logic and help model better understand it accurately. These relations implicitly reveal the as-

The rapid development of social platforms exacerbates the
dissemination of misinformation, which stimulates the research in fact verification. Recent studies tend to leverage semantic features to solve this problem as a single-hop task.
However, the process of verifying a claim requires several
pieces of evidence with complicated inner logic and relations
to verify the given claim in real-world situations. Recent studies attempt to improve both understanding and reasoning abilities to enhance the performance, but they overlook the crucial relations between entities that benefit models to understand better and facilitate the prediction. To emphasize the
significance of relations, we resort to Large Language Models (LLMs) considering their excellent understanding ability.
Instead of other methods using LLMs as the predictor, we
take them as relation extractors, for they do better in understanding rather than reasoning according to the experimental results. Thus, to solve the challenges above, we propose
a novel Structured Knowledge-Augmented LLM-based Network (LLM-SKAN) for multi-hop fact verification. Specifically, we utilize an LLM-driven Knowledge Extractor to
capture fine-grained information, including entities and their
complicated relations. Besides, we leverage a KnowledgeAugmented Relation Graph Fusion module to interact with
each node and learn better claim-evidence representations
comprehensively. The experimental results on four commonused datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of
our model.

Introduction
The rapid development of social platforms facilitates the dissemination of misinformation fabricated on purpose. This
situation has necessitated the development of a fact verification task, which aims to assess the truthfulness of a
given claim with retrieved evidence automatically (Guo,
Schlichtkrull, and Vlachos 2022; Zeng, Abumansour, and
Zubiaga 2021; Wei et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2021).
Typically, verifying a claim requires several pieces of evidence that exhibit complex inner logic and relations to verify the given claim, which highly demands the capability
of multi-step reasoning. Hence, multi-hop fact verification
has become an attractive research topic (Zhu et al. 2023;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23514

