The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semi-supervised Infrared Small Target Detection with Thermodynamic-Inspired
Uneven Perturbation and Confidence Adaptation
Mingjin Zhang1 , Wenteng Shang1 , Fei Gao1 * , Qiming Zhang2 , FengQin Lu1 , Jing Zhang3
1

Xidian University, Xi’an 710126, China
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
{mjinzhang, 21011210140, fgao}@xidian.edu.cn, qzha2506@uni.sydney.edu.au, jingzhang.cv@gmail.com
2

Abstract

quire complex feature design and parameter tuning, resulting in limited accuracy. In recent years, due to the significant success of deep learning techniques (Ren et al. 2015;
Redmon and Farhadi 2018), SIRST detection has made considerable progress (Zhang et al. 2024b, 2022c; Li et al.
2023). However, existing methods primarily rely on fullysupervised learning. Their performance is heavily dependent
on the quality and quantity of labeled data. Unfortunately,
due to the expensive data collection of the SIRST task, its
development is facing great challenges such as scarce labeled data, foreground-background class imbalance, and label noise in manual annotations. To address these issues, we
propose to resort to the semi-supervised learning technique
to enhance SIRST detection performance.
Recently, semi-supervised learning methods (Berthelot
et al. 2020; Li, Socher, and Hoi 2019; Liu et al. 2020), particularly those employing consistency regularization, have
demonstrated considerable potential in the field of computer
vision. A key challenge in these methods is designing effective perturbation techniques to enhance generalization capabilities. However, existing data perturbation techniques
(Wang et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023; Ghosh and Thiery 2020)
primarily cater to normal images and are not specifically tailored for IR data. Given the differences in imaging principles between IR images and photographs, it is essential to
explore specialized data perturbation methods for IR data.
From a thermodynamic perspective, an imaging area can
be considered a local thermodynamic system in thermal
equilibrium, exhibiting stable internal energy changes. In
practice, various factors, such as uneven radiation, motion
blur, and shooting angle, may cause spatially and chromatically uneven distortion in an acquired IR image. We leverage the thermal distribution contrast between turbulent and
equilibrium states, denoted as ∆Q (Fig. 1). As the thermodynamic system approaches equilibrium, heat exchange
becomes directionless, and ∆Q diminishes. This enables
us to create uneven chromaticity augmentation by aligning
the temperature field function with the energy distribution
changes in the IR image’s microelements. To account for
factors affecting IR target positions, such as shooting angle
and motion blur, we develop a spatially uneven perturbation.
This dual-stream uneven perturbation enhances both the diversity and balance of infrared samples, ultimately benefiting the robustness of detection models.

Single-frame Infrared Small Target (SIRST) detection has
made significant advancements, but it still faces challenges
due to limited labeled data and the foreground-background
class imbalance. To address these issues, we introduce a
novel Semi-Supervised SIRST Detection (S3 D) pipeline in
this paper. First, drawing inspiration from thermodynamics,
we propose augmenting infrared images using both chromatically and spatially uneven perturbations. This dual-stream
perturbation enhances the diversity and balance of infrared
samples, contributing to the robustness of detection models. Additionally, we develop a confidence-adaptive matching method to maintain weighted consistency among perturbed unlabeled samples. Second, to tackle class imbalance
in labeled data, we compel the model to generate discriminative predictions for challenging, misclassified examples while
down-weighting well-classified examples. We achieve this by
modifying the standard cross-entropy loss to squeeze the detector and truncating the loss on well-classified examples.
Our innovative Truncated Squeeze loss focuses on learning
discriminative representations for difficult cases and prevents
over-optimization for simpler ones. To assess the effectiveness of the perturbation techniques and loss functions, we apply them to various SIRST detectors and conduct extensive
experiments on two benchmarks. Notably, our methods consistently and significantly improve accuracy. Remarkably, it
achieves over 98% performance of the state-of-the-art fullysupervised method using only 1/8 of the labeled samples.

Introduction
Single-frame infrared small target (SIRST) detection is a
critical task in infrared (IR) search and tracking. It has a
wide range of diverse applications, such as maritime search
and rescue, and agricultural yield prediction (Zhang et al.
2024a; Chen et al. 2024; Chen, Wu, and Wang 2019). SIRST
detection relies solely on spatial information from a single image, which offers advantages like easy deployment
and real-time inference. These benefits make SIRST detection highly appealing for identifying fast-moving, isolated
IR small targets. Traditional SIRST methods (Bai and Zhou
2010; Zhang and Peng 2019), including filtering-based, local contrast-based, and low-rank-based approaches, often re* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10013

