The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing SQL Query Generation with Neurosymbolic Reasoning
Henrijs Princis1 , Cristina David2 , Alan Mycroft1
1

University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0FD, UK
2
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1QU, UK
princish@cardiff.ac.uk, alan.mycroft@cl.cam.ac.uk, cristina.david@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

long-term proof planning (Saparov and He 2023; Bubeck
et al. 2023), especially in scenarios where multiple valid deduction steps exist. Even when multiple paths are considered (Yao et al. 2023), decisions are still based on the LM
self-evaluating its choices.
In this work, we propose an architecture for SQL query
generation that leverages symbolic reasoning to enable the
nonlinear exploration of the search space. Our approach
navigates a solution tree using Best-First Search (Pearl
1984), with support for backtracking. This architecture is
compatible with any pretrained LM, and we apply it to several smaller, open-source LMs, where we show that it improves their performance out-of-the-box. While our focus is
on SQL, our broader goal is to illustrate that a neurosymbolic approach provides an alternative to scaling model size.
This addresses the high computational cost of LMs, where
accuracy hinges heavily on the parameter count (Kaplan
et al. 2020).
Our architecture explores the search space guided by a
symbolic query checker, a neural query checker, and a symbolic test and repair module. When integrated with a generic
pretrained LM, these modules prune bad queries before they
have finished being generated and correct errors made by the
LM. As far as we are aware LM-based nonlinear solutionbuilding has not been investigated in the context of code
generation, where the solution space is particularly large.
One challenge when generating code is that the result can
only be checked for correctness (i.e. adherence to the original intent) once it is completely generated— here defined as
either including a semicolon or reaching an end-of-sequence
token predicted by the language model. In order to address
this, one of the innovations of our work is that the symbolic query checker is designed so that it can test incomplete
queries. The ability to exclude erroneous candidates as early
as possible is critical when exploring a vast solution space.
As an additional challenge, SQL’s flexibility in expressing
the same query in multiple ways can hinder the LM’s performance, as the model is penalised for predicting logically
equivalent but syntactically different queries. To address
this, we adapt NLP techniques (Tabassum and Patil 2020;
Chai 2023) to eliminate unnecessary information from SQL
queries before training an LM. In particular, we propose
Standardised SQL, a form of SQL that minimises stylistic
variations. Standardised SQL enhances both LM fine-tuning

We propose a neurosymbolic architecture aimed at boosting
the performance of any Language Model (LM) for SQL query
generation. This approach leverages symbolic reasoning to
guide the LM’s exploration of the search space by considering multiple paths, symbolically evaluating choices at each
decision point to choose the next step, with the added novel
ability to backtrack. A key innovation is the use of symbolic
checks on both incomplete and fully generated SQL queries,
enabling early truncation of unsuccessful search paths. Input
consists of textual requirements on the desired query, along
with optional example tuples to be selected by the query. Experiments on Xander, our open-source implementation, show
it both reduces runtime and increases accuracy of the generated SQL. A specific result is an LM using Xander outperforming a four-times-larger LM.

Code — https://github.com/henrijsprincis/Xander
Spider dataset —
https://huggingface.co/datasets/xlangai/spider
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.13888

Introduction
Language models (LMs)1 in particular large language models (LLMs) have recently been successfully applied to a
wide range of tasks including code generation (Li et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Le et al. 2022).
While initially LMs were used as black-box, monolithic entities, recently there has been a shift towards architectures
that allow some form of logical reasoning. For example, the
widely-used Chain of Thought (CoT) approach (Wei et al.
2022) enables logical reasoning by breaking down complex problems into smaller steps represented as intermediate
thoughts.
However, LMs are still predominantly constrained to linear search during inference. For example, in the case of CoT,
at each step, the LM commits to a single path, sequentially
constructing a solution while disregarding alternative candidates. This linear search strategy has been shown to impede
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this work, we use the term language model (LM) to refer to
a language model of any size.

19959

