The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Distribution-Consistency-Guided Multi-modal Hashing
Jin-Yu Liu, Xian-Ling Mao* , Tian-Yi Che, Rong-Cheng Tu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{liujinyu1229, turongcheng}@gmail.com, {maoxl, ccty}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

Zhang, Lai, and Feng 2018; Chen et al. 2020b), with multimodal hashing methods (Liu, He, and Lang 2014; Chen
et al. 2020a; Zhu et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2022) gaining widespread attention for their fast retrieval
speed and low storage requirements. Unlike uni-modal hashing (Tu et al. 2018, 2021c; Guo et al. 2022; Tu, Mao, and
Wei 2020; Tu et al. 2021b) and cross-modal hashing (Zhang,
Peng, and Yuan 2018; Tu et al. 2022, 2023a, 2021a), multimodal hashing maps data points from different modalities
into a unified Hamming space for fusion, resulting in binary hash codes that facilitate efficient multi-multi retrieval.
Compared to unsupervised methods (Song et al. 2013; Shen
et al. 2015, 2018; Zheng et al. 2020b; Wu et al. 2021a), supervised multi-modal hashing methods (Yang, Shi, and Xu
2017; Xie et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2024)
generate more discriminative hash codes and achieve more
accurate retrieval by utilizing labels as supervisory signals
and there is a hidden assumption that training sets have no
noisy labels for these supervised methods.
However, in real-world scenarios, labels may be incorrectly annotated due to manual labeling, such as an image
that should be labeled as ”tiger” being mistakenly labeled as
”cat”, which limits the applicability of existing supervised
hashing methods in noisy label scenarios. While some works
(Sun et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022) in image hashing and
cross-modal hashing have demonstrated that the presence of
noisy labels in the training set can lead to model overfitting,
resulting in indistinguishable hash codes and inaccurate retrieval, no work has yet focused on and resolved this issue in
the field of multi-modal hashing.
To effectively tackle this issue, it is crucial to filter out
noisy labels from the dataset. Existing single or cross-modal
hashing methods have demonstrated that models initially
learn effective hash mappings from clean labels but eventually overfit to noisy labels, resulting in degraded performance. This phenomenon suggests that even after a short
training period, the generated hash codes are somewhat discriminative and tend to align with their corresponding category centers (Yuan et al. 2020; Tu et al. 2023b), as indicated by higher similarity scores. Thus, the 1-0 distribution
of the category’s presence or absence, i.e., the label vector,
should be consistent with the high-low distribution of similarity scores between the hash codes and category centers.
Specifically, if an instance belongs to a category, the corre-

Multi-modal hashing methods have gained popularity due to
their fast speed and low storage requirements. Among them,
the supervised methods demonstrate better performance by
utilizing labels as supervisory signals compared with unsupervised methods. Currently, for almost all supervised multimodal hashing methods, there is a hidden assumption that
training sets have no noisy labels. However, labels are often annotated incorrectly due to manual labeling in realworld scenarios, which will greatly harm the retrieval performance. To address this issue, we first discover a significant distribution consistency pattern through experiments,
i.e., the 1-0 distribution of the presence or absence of each
category in the label is consistent with the high-low distribution of similarity scores of the hash codes relative to
category centers. Then, inspired by this pattern, we propose a novel Distribution-Consistency-Guided Multi-modal
Hashing (DCGMH), which aims to filter and reconstruct
noisy labels to enhance retrieval performance. Specifically,
the proposed method first randomly initializes several category centers, each representing the region’s centroid of its
respective category, which are used to compute the highlow distribution of similarity scores; Noisy and clean labels
are then separately filtered out via the discovered distribution consistency pattern to mitigate the impact of noisy labels; Subsequently, a correction strategy, which is indirectly
designed via the distribution consistency pattern, is applied
to the filtered noisy labels, correcting high-confidence ones
while treating low-confidence ones as unlabeled for unsupervised learning, thereby further enhancing the model’s performance. Extensive experiments on three widely used datasets
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method compared to state-of-the-art baselines in multi-modal retrieval
tasks.

Code — https://github.com/LiuJinyu1229/DCGMH

Introduction
With the rapid growth of multimedia data such as images,
text, and videos, achieving effective retrieval from massive
multi-modal data has become a significant challenge. To address this challenge, numerous information retrieval technologies have emerged (Jiang and Li 2017; Sung et al. 2018;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12174

