The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DF-MIA: A Distribution-Free Membership Inference Attack
on Fine-Tuned Large Language Models
Zhiheng Huang1,2 * , Yannan Liu2 , Daojing He1 , Yu Li1,3†
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
ByteDance, China,
3
Zhejiang Univerisity, China
huangzhiheng@stu.hit.edu.cn, liuyannan.space@bytedance.com
hedaojinghit@163.com, yu.li.sallylee@gmail.com
Abstract

However, existing studies have revealed that, despite the
powerful performance, LLMs possess substantial memory
capabilities and are susceptible to potential privacy risks
(Peris et al. 2023; Ishihara 2023; Carlini et al. 2023; Zeng
et al. 2024). A notable technique that exploits this memory capacity for privacy leakage is the Membership Inference Attack (MIA) (Mireshghallah et al. 2022b; Shokri et al.
2017). This attack specifically aims to determine whether
a particular record belongs to the training set of the target
model, thereby compromising privacy (Mattern et al. 2023).
Existing MIAs can be broadly divided into two categories:
reference-free and reference-based strategies. Referencefree methods primarily rely on the target model’s output predictions for membership inference (Song and Mittal 2021;
Yeom et al. 2018; Mattern et al. 2023). For example, the
Loss Attack method uses the loss derived from the output,
while Min-%k leverages a subset of output probabilities.
However, these methods often struggle with varying sample
difficulties. Specifically, low losses and high probabilities
nonmembers tend to be misclassified as members, resulting
in false positives (FP). Conversely, high losses and low probabilities members are often misclassified as nonmembers,
leading to false negatives (FN). To address these challenges,
reference-based methods have been developed (Mireshghallah et al. 2022b; Mattern et al. 2023). These approaches use
a reference model to assess sample difficulty and adjust the
original judgment accordingly. For precise calibration, the
reference model is typically trained on datasets with a similar distribution to the target model’s training data.
However, existing MIAs encounter significant challenges
in fine-tuned LLM scenarios where privacy concerns intensify due to the use of domain-specific confidential data
(Mireshghallah et al. 2022b; Zeng et al. 2024). These attacks either fail to meet the unique requirements of finetuned LLMs or rely on assumptions about training data distribution. For example, non-members misclassified as members may belong to the members of the pretraining dataset,
thus leading to low-loss and erroneous classifications. Furthermore, acquiring the training data distribution needed for
reference-based methods proves to be impractical (Mattern
et al. 2023; Carlini et al. 2022).
To address the challenges above, this work introduces a
distribution-free MIA framework, named DF-MIA, specif-

Membership Inference Attack (MIA) aims to determine if a
specific sample is present in the training dataset of a target
machine learning model. Previous MIAs against fine-tuned
Large Language Models (LLMs) either fail to address the
unique challenges in the fine-tuned setting or rely on strong
assumption of the training data distribution. This paper proposes a distribution-free MIA framework tailored for finetuned LLMs, named DF-MIA. We recognize that samples
await to test can serve as a valuable reference dataset for
fine-tuning reference models. By enhancing the signals of
non-member samples within this reference dataset, we can
achieve a more reliable and practical calibration of probabilities, improving the differentiation between members and
non-members. Leveraging these insights, we have developed
a two-stage framework that employs specially designed data
augmentation and perturbation techniques to prioritize the
significance of non-members and mitigate the influence of
potential members within the reference dataset. We evaluate our method on three representative LLM models ranging
from 1B to 8B on three datasets. The results demonstrate that
the DF-MIA significantly enhances the performance of MIA.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional capabilities across a variety of tasks, including code
generation (Vaithilingam, Zhang, and Glassman 2022), machine translation (Zhang, Haddow, and Birch 2023), and
news summarization (Xiao and Chen 2023). Due to the extensive datasets and significant computational resources required for their training, the pretraining-finetuning paradigm
has become the leading methodology for crafting domainspecific models (Thangarasa et al. 2023). This approach is
further facilitated by the accessibility of open-source pretrained models like GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019) and LLaMA
(Touvron et al. 2023). Notably, products such as OpenAI’s
ChatGPT (Yetiştiren et al. 2023) and GitHub Copilot (Chen
et al. 2021) are developed within this framework, highlighting its effectiveness and impact.
* Contribution during internship at ByteDance.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

343

