The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prompt-based Unifying Inference Attack on Graph Neural Networks
Yuecen Wei1,2 , Xingcheng Fu3 , Lingyun Liu3 , Qingyun Sun2 , Hao Peng2 , Chunming Hu1,2 *
1
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, China
{weiyc,sunqy,penghao,hucm}@buaa.edu.cn, fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn, 1295713045@stu.gxnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) provide important prospective insights in applications such as social behavior analysis
and financial risk analysis based on their powerful learning
capabilities on graph data. Nevertheless, GNNs’ predictive
performance relies on the quality of task-specific node labels, so it is common practice to improve the model’s generalization ability in the downstream execution of decisionmaking tasks through pre-training. Graph prompting is a prudent choice but risky without taking measures to prevent
data leakage. In other words, in high-risk decision scenarios, prompt learning can infer private information by accessing model parameters trained on private data (publishing model parameters in pre-training, i.e., without directly
leaking the raw data, is a tacitly accepted trend). However,
myriad graph inference attacks necessitate tailored module
design and processing to enhance inference capabilities due
to variations in supervision signals. In this paper, we propose a novel Prompt-based unifying Inference Attack framework on GNNs, named ProIA. Specifically, ProIA retains
the crucial topological information of the graph during pretraining, enhancing the background knowledge of the inference attack model. It then utilizes a unified prompt and introduces additional disentanglement factors in downstream attacks to adapt to task-relevant knowledge. Finally, extensive
experiments show that ProIA enhances attack capabilities and
demonstrates remarkable adaptability to various inference attacks.

Figure 1: The Venn diagram depicts the respective optimization targets for the tasks with the intersections. I(C; M ): increases training-test data disparity, I(C; A): improving data
fitting, and I(C; M ; A): weakening model generalization
and increasing model sensitivity to specific attributes.

and their representational capacity is significantly hampered
by the challenges associated with obtaining high-quality labels for specific domains (Zhang, Zhang, and Yuan 2024;
Liu et al. 2024c; Wu et al. 2022). Self-supervised learning
has consistently achieved superior performance across an
increasing range of tasks, enhancing the generalization ability of GNNs. Meanwhile, such graph learning models raise
concerns about data security due to their ability to learn and
extract knowledge. Many works in security have confirmed
that pre-train models can lead to privacy leaks because of
their inherent memory capabilities (Duan et al. 2024). For
instance, in early question-answering systems, personal information utilized for model pre-training could be acquired
through straightforward prompt-based queries (Carlini et al.
2021). Furthermore, even in modern systems equipped with
security and ethical modules, private information can still
be extracted by implementing jailbreak techniques (Li et al.
2023). Existing prompt attacks against pre-train models
have only been defined within natural language processing
(NLP) models. In contrast, attacks on graph data with nonEuclidean structures have yet to be discussed.
In the evolution of models, state-of-the-art GNNs (Zhiyao
et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2023b; Yuan et al. 2024b) typically
show positive, robust resistance and generalization capabilities when dealing with sparse and noisy data, thus effectively mitigating the issue of model overfitting. This results in privacy inference attacks that rely on model overfitting defects empirically failing to achieve satisfactory outcomes. However, even if the model avoids privacy leakage

Introduction
Real-world data benefits from the modeling of graph structures, which more effectively captures the inherent interconnected properties of the data, thereby enhancing the training
process of models for Graph Neural Network (GNN) message passing (Kipf and Welling 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2021). In practical applications, besides conventional scenarios such as social recommendation (Sharma
et al. 2024) and traffic prediction (Zhang et al. 2024), GNNs
have also demonstrated outstanding performance in highrisk scenarios such as fraud detection (Innan et al. 2024) and
disease prediction (Boll et al. 2024). Despite this, a multitude of existing GNNs rely heavily on supervised learning,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12836

