The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attack-inspired Calibration Loss for Calibrating Crack Recognition
Zhuangzhuang Chen, Qiangyu Chen, Jiahao Zhang, Zhiliang lin, Xingyu Feng, Jie Chen,
Jianqiang Li *
The National Engineering Laboratory of Big Data System Computing Technology
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
{chenzhuangzhuang2016,2021152010, 2021152005, linzhiliang2022,fengxingyu2017}@email.szu.edu.cn,
chenjie@szu.edu.cn, lijq@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have substantially achieved
high predictive accuracy in many vision tasks. However, we
find that they are poorly calibrated for crack recognition
tasks, as these DNNs tend to produce both under-confident
and over-confident predictions in such safety-critical applications, thereby limiting their practical use in real-world scenarios. To address this issue, we propose a novel attackinspired calibration loss (AICL) that explicitly regularizes
class probabilities to be better confidence estimation. Specifically, we first propose the attack-inspired correctness estimation method (ACE) that aims to estimate the correctness
degree of each sample via adversarial attacks. Then, we propose Correctness-aware Distribution Guidance, which starts
from a distribution perspective that enforces the ordinal ranking of the predicted confidence referring to the estimated correctness degree. The proposed method can be conveniently
implemented on top of any DNNs-based crack recognition
model by serving as a plug-and-play loss function. To address the limited availability of related benchmarks, we collect a fully annotated dataset, namely, Bridge2024, which
involves inconsistent cracks and noisy backgrounds in realworld bridges. Our AICL outperforms the state-of-art calibration methods on various benchmark datasets including
CRACK2019, SDNET2018, and our BRIDGE2024.

Figure 1: Reliability diagrams: crack recognition without
calibration on SDNET2018 and CRACK2019 datasets. The
diagram is expected to plot an identity function of accuracy
with respect to confidence. It is worth noting that the deviation from a perfect diagonal represents the miscalibration,
such as the gap between the blue and pink histogram.

et al. 2023). To address this, inspired by the great success of
deep learning technology in general image and audio recognition tasks (Li et al. 2022; Mi et al. 2023, 2024; Li et al.
2024b), previous works mainly try to achieve high crack
recognition accuracy by leveraging powerful Deep neural
networks (DNNs) (Nguyen et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024a; Chen
et al. 2024d). For example, (Li et al. 2023) adopt ResNet50
to achieve high accuracy in recognizing cracks. Moreover,
a new Transformer-based Road crack identification system
(Han et al. 2022) is designed to classify cracks and noncracks images.
Unlike these works, we argue that, as a safety-critical
application, crack recognition should not only care about
high accuracy but also accurate model confidence. For instance, a trustworthy crack recognition model should safely
reject predictions with low confidence, however, if it mistakenly skips reviewing an incorrect prediction (i.e., a crack
sample has been wrongly classified as the non-crack class
with high confidence), it may lead to serious deterioration
as those cracks can not be repaired in time. Hence, a highquality confidence estimate from DNNs is required for practical crack recognition applications. However, it has not been
studied in the crack recognition scenario, which gives rise to
one fundamental question: Are the current crack recognition methods well-calibrated, i.e., providing a high-quality
confidence estimation?

Datasets — https://github.com/cheny124800/AICL

Introduction
Crack recognition has proved to be the critical stage in structure health monitoring (SHM) (Chen et al. 2023, 2024c,a).
Recurring bridge collapses underline the importance of regular and thorough structural inspection (Crawford 2023). In
this regard, cracks have a significant impact on the mechanical behavior of structures and their identification can reveal
structural stress mechanisms, which is an important part of
SHM to ensure structural safety and durability (Koch et al.
2015). Moreover, recognizing and repairing cracks before
the onset of serious deterioration can ease the heavy maintenance cost. However, due to the low signal-to-noise ratios
and inconsistent shapes (Yuan et al. 2020), crack recognition remains challenging in realistic environments (Nguyen
* Corresponding Author (email: lijq@szu.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15984

