The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UN-DETR: Promoting Objectness Learning via Joint Supervision for Unknown
Object Detection
Haomiao Liu* , Hao Xu* , Chuhuai Yue* , Bo Ma† ,
Beijing Institute of Technology
{ndwxhmz, xuhao cs, chuhuaiyue, bma000}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

Reg

Reg

Unknown Object Detection (UOD) aims to identify objects
of unseen categories, differing from the traditional detection paradigm limited by the closed-world assumption. A key
component of UOD is learning a generalized representation,
i.e. objectness for both known and unknown categories to distinguish and localize objects from the background in a classagnostic manner. However, previous methods obtain supervision signals for learning objectness in isolation from either localization or classification information, leading to poor
performance for UOD. To address this issue, we propose a
transformer-based UOD framework, UN-DETR. Based on
this, we craft Instance Presence Score (IPS) to represent the
probability of an object’s presence. For the purpose of information complementarity, IPS employs a strategy of joint
supervised learning, integrating attributes representing general objectness from the positional and the categorical latent
space as supervision signals. To enhance IPS learning, we
introduce a one-to-many assignment strategy to incorporate
more supervision. Then, we propose Unbiased Query Selection to provide premium initial query vectors for the decoder.
Additionally, we propose an IPS-guided post process strategy
to filter redundant boxes and correct classification predictions
for known and unknown objects. Finally, we pretrain the entire UN-DETR in an unsupervised manner, in order to obtain
objectness prior. Our UN-DETR is comprehensively evaluated on multiple UOD and known detection benchmarks,
demonstrating its effectiveness and achieving state-of-the-art
performance.

Obj

Obj

……

Cls

Cls
(a) Localization Information Only (b) Classification Information Only
Reg
Obj

Recoupling

Cls

Foreground
Background
Unknown
Known

(c) Recoupled Positional and Categorical Lantent Space

Figure 1: Joint supervision for objectness learning

set, thereby disregarding objects outside these predefined
categories. This limitation leads to detrimental outcomes in
real-world scenarios where high precision is essential. To
advance from conventional detectors to open-world detectors, numerous outstanding works (Bendale and Boult 2016;
Zheng et al. 2022) have emerged. Among them, Liang et al.
(2023) clarified the definition of Unknown Object Detection
(UOD).
UOD can be viewed as a two-step problem: 1) Locating
all objects, both known and unknown, in a class-agnostic
manner; and 2) Assigning specific categories to these objects. The first step hinges on how to learn the generalized features of any object, i.e., objectness, to distinguish
them from the background. Difficulty arises because, under
the definition of UOD, unknown objects lack supervision,
and their objectness is mostly generalized from known categories. New methods (Wu et al. 2022a; Liang et al. 2023;
Zohar, Wang, and Yeung 2023) have been developed to learn
objectness, but they still struggle with low recall and precision, often misclassifying unknown objects for background
or vice versa.
Our core insight is to explain the deficiencies of previous
methods by their lack of considering both known category
and location information in objectness learning. Classification information represents both class-specific categorization and the class-agnostic probability of being foreground.
UnSniffer (Liang et al. 2023), only utilizes position prediction (IoU between predictions and ground truths)(Figure

Code — https://github.com/ndwxhmzz/UN-DETR

Introduction
Deep learning-based vision solutions have achieved remarkable success in the past (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; He et al. 2016; Vaswani 2017), but their generalization
performance in open scenarios still faces significant challenges. Within the closed-world assumption, conventional
object detection frameworks (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al.
2016; Carion et al. 2020) are limited to detecting objects
belonging to predefined categories present in the training
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5442

