The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

W ORLDAPI S: The World Is Worth How Many APIs?
A Thought Experiment
Jiefu Ou, Arda Uzunoğlu, Benjamin Van Durme, Daniel Khashabi
Johns Hopkins University
{jou6, auzunog1, vandurme, danielk}@jhu.edu

Abstract

Thomason, Gordon, and Bisk 2019; Puig et al. 2018; Shridhar et al. 2020; Ku et al. 2020). However, most of these existing embodied environments suffer from the limited handcrafted action spaces. Such restraint diminishes action diversity, leading to the oversaturation of a small group of basic
actions. For example, as shown in Figure 1, existing embodied simulators/environments often define a small and closed
set of actions an agent can perform. As a result, the possible
instructions it can carry out are highly constrained by the
limited action space. However, carrying out tasks in realworld scenarios across different domains requires a much
larger and more diverse action space. To bridge this gap between embodied agent learning and real-world deployment,
it is natural to ask the following questions: To build a versatile embodied agent that can carry out daily tasks in the
physical world, how many primitive actions (APIs) should
such an agent be equipped with, and what do they look like?
In this work, we make the first step towards answering
these questions by proposing W ORLDAPI S(§3), a thought
experiment that aims to approximate a realistic pool of
agent-executable primitive actions (APIs)1 , the composition
of which enables agents to accomplish diverse and realistic goals specified by high-level procedural natural language
instructions. The thought experiment assumes an embodied
agent to be deployed in a hypothetical world consisting of
objects and primitive action space with predefined properties. The agent is tasked to perform a wide variety of daily
tasks specified through natural language instructions, in the
form of wikiHow tutorials. To complete these tasks, the
agent needs to evoke and compose primitive actions (APIs)
from the action space to interact with objects. As shown in
Figure 1, in contrast to prior work, we propose to induce an
open action space from diverse and realistic wikiHow procedural instructions.
To create the action space, we propose a pipeline (§4) for
bootstrapping the API pool and corresponding agent policies as Pythonic programs that 1) iteratively generate semiexecutable agent policies as Pythonic programs via few-shot
prompting LLMs with procedural natural language tutori-

AI systems make decisions in physical environments through
primitive actions or affordances that are accessed via API
calls. While deploying AI agents in the real world involves
numerous high-level actions, existing embodied simulators
offer a limited set of domain-salient APIs. This naturally
brings up the questions: how many primitive actions (APIs)
are needed for a versatile embodied agent, and how should
they look like?
We explore this via a thought experiment: assuming that wikiHow tutorials cover a wide variety of human-written tasks,
what is the space of APIs needed to cover these instructions?
We propose a framework to iteratively induce new APIs by
grounding wikiHow instruction to situated agent policies. Inspired by recent successes in large language models (LLMs)
for embodied planning, we propose a few-shot prompting to
steer GPT-4 to generate Pythonic programs as agent policies
and bootstrap a universe of APIs by 1) reusing a seed set of
APIs; and then 2) fabricate new API calls when necessary.
The focus of this thought experiment is on defining these
APIs rather than their excitability.
We apply the proposed pipeline on instructions from wikiHow tutorials. On a small fraction (0.5%) of tutorials, we induce an action space of 300+ APIs necessary for capturing
the rich variety of tasks in the physical world. A detailed automatic and human analysis of the induction output reveals that
the proposed pipeline enables effective reuse and creation of
APIs. Moreover, a manual review revealed that existing simulators support only a small subset of the induced APIs (9
of the top 50 frequent APIs), motivating the development of
action-rich embodied environments.

1

Introduction

Developing versatile and capable AI agents that follow natural language instructions for task execution in the real world
has been an important research objective. A series of efforts
(Ahn et al. 2022; Singh et al. 2022; Song et al. 2023) have
been made towards this goal, with a notable upsurge of work
on harnessing the power of large language models (LLMs)
to generate task plans and policies for embodied agents.
The backbones of such success are benchmarks and simulations of embodied environments. (Anderson et al. 2018;

1

In this work we refer to APIs as interfaces to affordances of
agents that could be deployed in the real world. Upon calling an
API, the agent can carry out a corresponding physical primitive action. We use APIs and primitive actions and APIs interchangeably
henceforth

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24993

