The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-Explainable Graph Transformer for Link Sign Prediction
Lu Li, Jiale Liu, Xingyu Ji, Maojun Wang∗ , Zeyu Zhang*
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Hubei Hongshan Laboratory, Huazhong Agricultural University
lu123@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, 1723383466@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, erican j@webmail.hzau.edu.cn,
mjwang@mail.hzau.edu.cn, zhangzeyu@mail.hzau.edu.cn

Abstract
Signed Graph Neural Networks (SGNNs) have been shown
to be effective in analyzing complex patterns in real-world
situations where positive and negative links coexist. However, SGNN models suffer from poor explainability, which
limit their adoptions in critical scenarios that require understanding the rationale behind predictions. To the best of our
knowledge, there is currently no research work on the explainability of the SGNN models. Our goal is to address the
explainability of decision-making for the downstream task
of link sign prediction specific to signed graph neural networks. Since post-hoc explanations are not derived directly
from the models, they may be biased and misrepresent the
true explanations. Therefore, in this paper we introduce a
Self-Explainable Signed Graph transformer (SE-SGformer)
framework, which can not only outputs explainable information while ensuring high prediction accuracy. Specifically, we
propose a new Transformer architecture for signed graphs
and theoretically demonstrate that using positional encoding
based on signed random walks has greater expressive power
than current SGNN methods and other positional encoding
graph Transformer-based approaches. We construct a novel
explainable decision process by discovering the K-nearest
(farthest) positive (negative) neighbors of a node to replace
the neural network-based decoder for predicting edge signs.
These K positive (negative) neighbors represent crucial information about the formation of positive (negative) edges
between nodes and thus can serve as important explanatory
information in the decision-making process. We conducted
experiments on several real-world datasets to validate the effectiveness of SE-SGformer, which outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods by improving 2.2% prediction accuracy and
73.1% explainablity accuracy in the best-case scenario.

Figure 1: An illustration of signed graphs in real world. The
dashed lines represent the edges to be predicted, and black
and red lines represent positive and negative edges, resp.

2023b; Ni et al. 2024), no existing study on SGNNs has
addressed the issue of explainability, which hinders their
adoption in crucial domains. For example, in financial networks, being able to interpret why certain transactions are
flagged as suspicious can improve fraud detection and prevention. Therefore, understanding why certain relationships
are classified as positive or negative can help SGNNs be
more widely applied.
Research on GNN explainability falls into two main categories: post-hoc explanations (Zhang et al. 2024; Yuan
et al. 2022) and self-explainable approaches (Deng and Shen
2024; Seo, Kim, and Park 2024). Post-hoc explanation methods like GNNExplainer (Ying et al. 2019) and PGExplainer
(Luo et al. 2020) offer interpretations for trained GNN models, but these explanations may be biased and not truly reflective of the model. As a result, current research is shifting toward self-explaining methods, where models generate
explanations alongside predictions. For example, SE-GNN
(Dai and Wang 2021) uses K-nearest labeled nodes for explainable node classification, while ProtGNN (Zhang et al.
2022) integrates prototype learning to enhance interpretability. While effective, these methods are primarily designed
for unsigned graphs with graph or node classification tasks,

Code — https://github.com/liule66/SE-SGformer

Introduction
Signed Graph Neural Networks (SGNNs) are widely used
for learning representations of signed graphs, as shown in
Figure 1. Despite recent years have witnessed a growing interest in SGNNs with link sign prediction as the focal task
(Derr, Ma, and Tang 2018; Shu et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
* Corresponding authors: Zeyu Zhang and Maojun Wang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12084

