The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Safe Online Convex Optimization with Heavy-Tailed Observation Noises
Yunhao Yang1 , Bo Xue2 , Yunzhi Hao3,4 , Ying Li,5 Yuanyu Wan1,4,6,*
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
Big Graph Center & School of Computer and Computing Science, Hangzhou City University, Hangzhou, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
5
Bangsheng Technology Co., Ltd., Hangzhou, China
6
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security, Hangzhou, China
2

Abstract

as online gradient descent (OGD) (Zinkevich 2003), √
have
been proposed to achieve an optimal regret bound of O( T )
(Abernethy et al. 2008).
However, in many real-world applications, beyond the basic set X , the decisions of the player must also satisfy additional safety constraints (Balasubramanian and Ghadimi
2018; Usmanova, Krause, and Kamgarpour 2019a; Fereydounian et al. 2020). For example, in communication networks, the maximum allowable radiated power constrains
the transmission rate to ensure human safety (Luong et al.
2019). In robotics applications, the control actions must
satisfy certain safety constraints to ensure the closed-loop
stability of the system (Åström and Murray 2008; Ferraguti et al. 2022). Moreover, as in these two examples, the
safety constraints are determined by some system parameters, which are typically unknown to the player, and thus
limit the applicability of standard OCO algorithms.
Motivated by these safety requirements, Chaudhary and
Kalathil (2022) recently consider safe online convex optimization (SOCO), a variant of OCO with a set of unknown
linear safety constraints. Compared with the standard OCO,
the new challenge is that the player needs to estimate the
unknown parameters that characterize the safe set. To this
end, they propose a new algorithm called safe online projected gradient descent (SO-PGD), which divides the total T
rounds into a safe exploration phase for conservatively estimating the safe set and an exploitation phase for minimizing
the regret under the estimated safety constraints. Under the
assumption that the unknown safety constraints can be observed with sub-Gaussian noises for each chosen decision,
SO-PGD achieves a regret bound of O(T 2/3 ) while satisfying the safety constraints in all rounds with high probability. However, in many practical scenarios such as extreme
returns in financial market investments (Cont and Bouchaud
2000) and fluctuations in neural oscillations (Roberts, Boonstra, and Breakspear 2015), the observation noises are not
sub-Gaussian but heavy-tailed, which undermines the theoretical guarantees of SO-PGD.
To address this issue, we investigate SOCO under heavytailed observation noises that admit only finite (1 + ϵ)-th
moments for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1], and develop two novel algorithms that enjoy an O(T cϵ ) regret bound where cϵ =
(1 + ϵ)/(1 + 2ϵ), while satisfying the safety constraints in
all rounds with high probability. Specifically, to estimate the

We investigate safe online convex optimization (SOCO),
where each decision must satisfy a set of unknown linear constraints. Assuming that the unknown constraints can be observed with a sub-Gaussian noise for each chosen decision,
previous studies have established a high-probability regret
bound of O(T 2/3 ). However, this assumption may not hold
in many practical scenarios. To address this limitation, in this
paper, we relax the assumption to allow any noise that admits
finite (1+ϵ)-th moments for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1], and propose two
algorithms that enjoy an O(T cϵ ) regret bound with high probability, where T is the time horizon and cϵ = (1+ϵ)/(1+2ϵ).
The key idea of our two algorithms is to respectively utilize
the median-of-means and truncation techniques to achieve accurate estimation under heavy-tailed noises. To the best of our
knowledge, these are the first algorithms designed to handle
SOCO with heavy-tailed observation noises.

Introduction
Online learning (Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2012) has received
ever-increasing attention in recent years, due to its ability
to efficiently handle applications with large-scale streaming
data, such as online spam filtering, portfolio selection, and
online recommendation. It is generally formulated as a repeated game between a player and an adversary. In each
round t, the player must select a decision xt from a set
X ⊆ Rd , after which the adversary chooses a loss function
ct (·) : X 7→ R. The player will suffer a loss ct (xt ) in each
round and aims to minimize the regret over total T rounds,
which is defined as:
R(T ) =

T
X
t=1

ct (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ct (x).

(1)

t=1

To achieve this goal, online convex optimization (OCO), a
special case of online learning with convex functions and
convex decision sets, has been extensively studied over the
past decades (Zinkevich 2003; Hazan, Agarwal, and Kale
2007; Shalev-Shwartz and Singer 2007; Hazan and Kale
2012; Wan and Zhang 2021; Wan, Tu, and Zhang 2020; Wan
et al. 2024). It is well-known that several algorithms, such
* Corresponding author, wanyy@zju.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22047

