The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improved Maximin Share Approximations for Chores by Bin Packing
Jugal Garg1 , Xin Huang2 , Erel Segal-Halevi3
1

University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, USA
2
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
3
Ariel University, Ariel 40700, Israel
jugal@illinois.edu, huangxin@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp, erelsgl@gmail.com

Abstract

MMSdi (S) :=

We study fair division of indivisible chores among n agents
with additive cost functions using the popular fairness notion
of maximin share (MMS). Since MMS allocations do not always exist for more than two agents, the goal has been to
improve its approximations and identify interesting special
cases where MMS allocations exists. We show the existence
of

min
(S1 ,...,Sd )∈Πd (S)

max vi (Sj ).
j

Let us denote the MMS of an agent i by µi := MMSni (M).
In an MMS allocation, each agent’s bundle cost does not
exceed their MMS. However, for more than two agents,
MMS allocations are not guaranteed to exist (Aziz et al.
2017; Feige, Sapir, and Tauber 2021). Therefore, the focus
shifted to exploring approximations of MMS and identifying interesting special classes where MMS allocations can
be achieved. Two natural relaxations are multiplicative and
ordinal approximations.

9
• 1-out-of-⌊ 11
n⌋ MMS allocations, which improves the
state-of-the-art factor of 1-out-of-⌊ 34 n⌋.
• MMS allocations for factored instances, which resolves an
open question posed by Ebadian et al. (2021).
• 15/13-MMS allocations for personalized bivalued instances, improving the state-of-the-art factor of 13/11.

α-MMS This approach involves multiplying the MMS by
a factor α > 1 to raise each agent’s threshold. An allocation is said to be α-MMS if the cost of each agent’s
bundle is at most α times their MMS. Research has progressed to demonstrate the existence of 13/11-MMS allocations (Huang and Segal-Halevi 2023).

We achieve these results by leveraging the HFFD algorithm of Huang and Lu (2021). Our approach also provides
polynomial-time algorithms for computing an MMS allocation for factored instances and a 15/13-MMS allocation for
personalized bivalued instances.

1-out-of-d-MMS Another way to adjust the threshold is
by considering the MMS when the chores are divided into
d < n bundles. An allocation is 1-out-of-d-MMS if each
agent’s bundle cost is no more than MMSdi (M). This relaxation, initially introduced in (Budish 2011) for the case of
goods, is valued for its resilience to small perturbations in
chores costs; see (Hosseini, Searns, and Segal-Halevi 2021)
for more details. The current best-known factor for which
existence is established is 1-out-of-⌊ 43 n⌋ (Hosseini, Searns,
and Segal-Halevi 2022).

Introduction
Fair division of indivisible tasks (or chores) has garnered
significant attention recently due to its applications in various multi-agent settings; see recent surveys (Amanatidis
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024). The problem is to find a fair
partition of a set M of m indivisible chores among n agents
with preferences. We assume that each agent i has additive
preferences represented by the cost functions viP
(.) such that
the cost of a set of chores S is given by vi (S) = c∈S vi (c),
where vi (c) represents the cost of chore c for agent i.
A natural and popular fairness notion in the context of indivisible items is called maximin share (MMS), introduced
by Budish (2011). It appears to be also favored by participating agents in real-life experiments (Gates, Griffiths, and
Dragan 2020). An agent’s MMS is defined as the minimum
cost they can ensure by partitioning all the chores into n
bundles (one for each agent) and then receiving a bundle
with the highest cost. Formally, for a set S of chores and an
integer d, let Πd (S) denote the set of all partitions of S into
d bundles. Then,

Our Contributions
In this paper, we advance the state-of-the-art on all three
fronts: achieving exact MMS, and exploring both multiplicative and ordinal approximations. We show the existence of
9
n⌋ MMS allocations for all additive in• 1-out-of-⌊ 11
stances, improving the current best-known factor of 1out-of-⌊ 34 n⌋.
• MMS allocations for factored instances, where each
vi (c) ∈ {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } such that pℓ = pℓ−1 · q for
some integer q > 0 for each ℓ ∈ [k − 1]. Factored instances encompass the well-studied class of weakly lexicographic preferences (Aziz et al. 2019; Hosseini et al.
2021). This contribution also resolves an open question
posed by (Ebadian, Peters, and Shah 2021).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13881

