The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MoRe: Class Patch Attention Needs Regularization for Weakly Supervised
Semantic Segmentation
Zhiwei Yang1,2,3 , Yucong Meng2,3 , Kexue Fu4 , Shuo Wang2,3 * , Zhijian Song1,2,3 *
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Imaging Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Shanghai 200032, China
4
Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan)
{zwyang21, ycmeng21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {fukexue, shuowang, zjsong}@fudan.edu.cn
2

(a) Previous methods

Abstract

(b) Artifact issue

cls.
ViT

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) with
image-level labels typically uses Class Activation Maps
(CAM) to achieve dense predictions. Recently, Vision Transformer (ViT) has provided an alternative to generate localization maps from class-patch attention. However, due to insufficient constraints on modeling such attention, we observe that
the Localization Attention Maps (LAM) often struggle with
the artifact issue, i.e., patch regions with minimal semantic
relevance are falsely activated by class tokens. In this work,
we propose MoRe to address this issue and further explore
the potential of LAM. Our findings suggest that imposing additional regularization on class-patch attention is necessary.
To this end, we first view the attention as a novel directed
graph and propose the Graph Category Representation module to implicitly regularize the interaction among class-patch
entities. It ensures that class tokens dynamically condense the
related patch information and suppress unrelated artifacts at a
graph level. Second, motivated by the observation that CAM
from classification weights maintains smooth localization of
objects, we devise the Localization-informed Regularization
module to explicitly regularize the class-patch attention. It directly mines the token relations from CAM and further supervises the consistency between class and patch tokens in a
learnable manner. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC
and MS COCO validate that MoRe effectively addresses the
artifact issue and achieves state-of-the-art performance, surpassing recent single-stage and even multi-stage methods.

No Reg.

ptc.
(c) The proposed method MoRe

cls.
ViT

Reg.

ptc.
cls.

Class tokens

ptc.

Patch tokens

Reg. Regularization

Figure 1: Our motivation. Localization Attention Maps
(LAM) from ViT provide an alternative to CAM. (a) Since
no regularization is conducted between class-patch attention, (b) LAM particularly suffers from the artifact issue. (c)
We propose MoRe to tackle it and generate better LAM by
regularizing attention among class-patch tokens.
while challenging, as it contains the least semantic information to localize objects. In this work, we focus on the WSSS
paradigm with only image-level labels.
Typically, the pipeline of WSSS can be divided into three
steps. It first trains a classification network to generate Class
Activation Maps (CAM) (Zhou et al. 2016) with image-level
labels. Then CAM is refined as pseudo labels, which are further leveraged to provide dense supervision to retrain a segmentation model (Ahn and Kwak 2018; Yang et al. 2024b).
However, due to the limited supervision, CAM intends to
activate only the most discriminative parts of objects, which
dramatically impairs the performance of WSSS. Recently,
Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), famous for building long-range dependency, has been widely
adopted in WSSS. Benefiting from the self-attention mechanism, several studies (Caron et al. 2021; He et al. 2020) have
shown that attention maps between class and patch tokens
can reliably highlight objects, offering a promising alternative for generating precise localization maps. Inspired by it,
TS-CAM (Gao et al. 2021) directly extracts the Localization Attention Maps (LAM) from class-patch attention and
leverages it to generate pseudo labels. However, since the

Code — https://github.com/zwyang6/MoRe

Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) aims to
achieve pixel-wise predictions with cheap annotations, such
as points (Bearman et al. 2016), scribbles (Lin et al. 2016;
Vernaza and Chandraker 2017), bounding boxes (Dai, He,
and Sun 2015; Lee et al. 2021b), and image-level labels (Pinheiro and Collobert 2015; Yang et al. 2024a). It significantly
reduces the annotation cost of fully supervised segmentation methods (Tang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024b) and has
attracted increasing attention in recent years. Among all annotation forms, the image-level label is the most accessible
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9400

