The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ViPCap: Retrieval Text-Based Visual Prompts
for Lightweight Image Captioning
Taewhan Kim, Soeun Lee, Si-Woo Kim, Dong-Jin Kim*
Hanyang University, South Korea
{taewhan, soeun, boreng0817, djdkim}@hanyang.ac.kr

137

Abstract

CIDEr Score

Recent lightweight image captioning models using retrieved
data mainly focus on text prompts. However, previous works
only utilize the retrieved text as text prompts, and the visual
information relies only on the CLIP visual embedding. Because of this issue, there is a limitation that the image descriptions inherent in the prompt are not sufficiently reflected
in the visual embedding space. To tackle this issue, we propose ViPCap, a novel retrieval text-based visual prompt for
lightweight image captioning. ViPCap leverages the retrieved
text with image information as visual prompts to enhance the
ability of the model to capture relevant visual information.
By mapping text prompts into the CLIP space and generating multiple randomized Gaussian distributions, our method
leverages sampling to explore randomly augmented distributions and effectively retrieves the semantic features that
contain image information. These retrieved features are integrated into the image and designated as the visual prompt,
leading to performance improvements on the datasets such as
COCO, Flickr30k, and NoCaps. Experimental results demonstrate that ViPCap significantly outperforms prior lightweight
captioning models in efficiency and effectiveness, demonstrating the potential for a plug-and-play solution.

Models
SmallCap
BLIP
CaMEL
VinVL
I-Tuning

BLIP

OSCAR
ClipCap
RCA-NOC
ViPCap
(Ours)

VinVL

ViPCap (Ours)

123

SmallCap
120
(B)
I-Tuning
(B)

OSCAR

CaMEL RCA-NOC
(L)
(L)

(M)
ClipCap

113
1M

10M

100M
Trainable Parameters

500M

(a) Comparison of trainable parameter sizes and CIDEr scores
for each model. B, M, and L denote the Base, Medium, and
Large models, respectively.
15B

Total Parameters

ViPCap Parameters

Introduction
Vision and language (V&L) tasks, such as image captioning, have advanced with large-scale models like SimVLM
(1.4B), PaLi (3B), and REVEAL (2.1B) (Wang et al. 2022a;
Chen et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2023). However, these advanced
multimodal models require a large number of parameters, resulting in high computational and dataset construction costs.
To enhance training efficiency, recent works suggest focusing on learning a mapping network, such as MAPL and
BLIP-2 (Mañas et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a), that bridges
the modality gap between images and text or training learnable tokens like EVCap (Li et al. 2024). For example, BLIP2 introduces the Qformer, which aligns the two modalities
while keeping a V&L models frozen. Nevertheless, despite
the efficiency of this approach, BLIP-2 still requires over
1B trainable parameters. Although EVCap trains learnable
tokens with few trainable parameters, EVCap and MAPL

10B

5B

0.3B

SC-B

SC-L

ViPCap

BLIP-2

MAPL

EVCap

(b) Comparison of total parameters between ViPCap (Ours) and
other models. SC-B denotes SmallCapBase model, SC-L represents the SmallCapLarge model.

Figure 1: (a) ViPCap shows the best efficiency among the
lightweight captioning models. (b) EVCap and MAPL require large models such as EVA-CLIP (Sun et al. 2023),
Vicuna (Chiang et al. 2023), and GPT-J (Wang and Komatsuzaki 2021). With under 0.3B total parameters, ViPCap
achieves competitive performance despite its small size.

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

depend on high-performance models like EVA-CLIP (Sun
et al. 2023) and Vicuna (Chiang et al. 2023), with over 5B
4320

