The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

WaterDiffusion: Learning a Prior-involved Unrolling Diffusion for Joint
Underwater Saliency Detection and Visual Restoration
Laibin Chang1 , Yunke Wang2 , Longxiang Deng1 , Bo Du1 * , Chang Xu2 *
1
School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
Wuhan University, China.
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
{changlb666, denglx, dubo}@whu.edu.cn, {yunke.wang, c.xu}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Underwater salient object detection (USOD) plays a pivotal
role in various vision-based marine exploration tasks. However, existing USOD techniques face the dilemma of object
mislocalization and imprecise boundaries due to the complex
underwater environment. The quality degradation of raw underwater images (caused by selective absorption and medium
scattering) makes it challenging to perform instance detection directly. One conceivable approach involves initially removing visual disturbances through underwater image enhancement (UIE), followed by saliency detection. However,
this two-stage approach neglects the potential positive impact of the restoration procedure on saliency detection due
to it executes in a cascade. Based on this insight, we propose a generalized prior-involved diffusion model, called WaterDiffusion for collaborative underwater saliency detection
and visual restoration. Specifically, we first propose a revised self-attention joint diffusion, which embeds dynamic
saliency masks into the diffusive network as latent features.
By extending the underwater degradation prior into the multiscale decoder, we innovatively exploit optical transmission
maps to aid in localizing underwater salient objects. Then,
we further design a gate-guided binary indicator to select either normalized or raw channels for improving feature generalization. Finally, the Half-quadratic Splitting is introduced
into the unfolding sampling to refine saliency masks iteratively. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the superior
performance of WaterDiffusion over state-of-the-art methods
in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations.

UIE Model

USOD Model

(a) Baseline Solution

Diffusion Model

(b) Our WaterDiffusion

Figure 1: Baseline solution leverages two separate models
for UIE and USOD, while our waterDiffusion can jointly
accomplish both tasks with a collaborative diffusion.

Benefiting from the available large-scale datasets and
advanced deep network designs, many saliency detection
methods (Wang et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2019) related to the
terrestrial domains have made remarkable progress. However, USOD mainly faces three limitations: 1) Poor visibility of underwater images interferes with the localization
of scene saliency. 2) Underwater environments exhibit specific object categories (e.g., fish, corals, shipwrecks) and water patterns, presenting a unique diversity compared to that
on land. 3) Fine-grained annotation leads to existing USOD
datasets are relatively limited in scale. Several USOD methods (Islam et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2024; Shen, Zhou, and Liu
2024) have been proposed to stack multiple convolutional
sequences with limited-expression ability into a deep network to extract deep feature representations, but the results
still leave much room for improvement.
One receivable solution is to first acquire clear images using underwater image enhancement (UIE) techniques and
then perform salient object detection, as shown in Figure
1 (a). Many UIE methods have been proposed to perform
the pre-processing of degraded underwater images, ranging
from physics-based (Chang et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023a) to
deep learning-based methods (Zhao et al. 2024; Zhang et al.
2023). Despite their success, these methods only consider
enhancing the visual perception of degraded images from
a global perspective, without highlighting objects that lose
saliency caused by underwater light attenuation. In other

Introduction
Underwater Salient Object Detection (USOD) aims to
rapidly identify the visually salient objects within observed
underwater scenes, which has received increasing attention
due to various vision-based marine exploration requirements
(Hong et al. 2023). However, the raw images captured directly by underwater vehicles tend to lose visual saliency,
presenting various types of degradation such as color bias,
low contrast, and blurred details (Song et al. 2023; Jiang
et al. 2024). Degraded images with these defects often lack
visual appeal and hinder the localization of salient objects in
the forward view.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1998

