The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TRACI: A Data-centric Approach for Multi-Domain Generalization on Graphs
Yusheng Zhao1 , Changhu Wang2 , Xiao Luo3,* , Junyu Luo1 ,
Wei Ju1 , Zhiping Xiao4, * , Ming Zhang1 *

1
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, PKU-Anker LLM Lab, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
4
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
{yusheng.zhao, luojunyu}@stu.pku.edu.cn, wangch156@g.ucla.edu,
xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu, {juwei, mzhang cs}@pku.edu.cn, patxiao@uw.edu

Abstract

drug interaction (Ma and Lei 2023), recommender systems
(Liu et al. 2021), and traffic flow forecasting (Zhao et al.
2023; Ju et al. 2024b; Li et al. 2024).
Despite their immense prevalence, GNNs are data-hungry
and usually require the accessibility of target nodes. In particular, early efforts are hugely made in transductive learning
(Kipf and Welling 2017; Tang and Liu 2023), which infers
unlabeled nodes from a graph with partially labeled nodes.
Recently, graph domain adaptation (Guo et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2024b; Liu et al. 2024) has been put forward to transmit
knowledge from a label-rich graph to a label-scarce graph
and handle distribution shifts across different graphs at the
same time. These methods usually develop more advanced
GNNs for representation learning and incorporate domain
adaptation techniques to reduce the domain shift. However,
these methods require the availability of all the target nodes,
while real-world applications are always with a range of unseen target graphs in the wild. Therefore, in this paper, we
study a novel yet under-explored problem of multi-domain
generalization on graphs, which learns a powerful GNN using a set of training graphs (domains) so that it can generalize effectively on unseen test graphs.
However, designing a new multi-domain generalization
GNN framework remains challenging, which requires us to
answer the following two questions. Firstly, how to enhance
the generalization capacity during optimization? Since we
cannot acquire any target graphs, the core of multi-domain
generalization is to enhance the generalization capacity of
GNNs. Although domain generalization has been studied in
Euclidean data such as images and texts (Chen et al. 2022a;
Hsu et al. 2023; Long et al. 2024), the problem on graphs
would confront structured data, which requires us to take
the structural semantics into consideration. Secondly, how
to reduce the distribution shift across multiple domains?
Domain shifts on graphs include both structural shifts and
nodal shifts. Structural shifts refer to differences in link
construction, which could bring in various densities of the
graphs. In contrast, nodal shifts refer to distribution discrepancy in nodal attributes across graphs. Therefore, it is highly
challenging to generate domain-invariant and discriminative
node representations across various graphs.
To answer the following two questions, in this work, we
propose a new approach named Topological Adversarial

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have gained superior performance in graph-based prediction tasks with a variety of applications such as social analysis and drug discovery. Despite the
remarkable progress, their performance often degrades on test
graphs with distribution shifts. Existing domain adaptation
methods rely on unlabeled test graphs during optimization,
limiting their applicability to graphs in the wild. Towards this
end, this paper studies the problem of multi-domain generalization on graphs, which utilizes multiple source graphs to
learn a GNN with high performance on unseen target graphs.
We propose a new approach named Topological Adversarial
Learning with Prototypical Mixup (TRACI) to solve the problem. The fundamental principle behind our TRACI is to produce virtual adversarial and mixed graph samples from a
data-centric view. In particular, TRACI enhances GNN generalization by employing a gradient-ascent strategy that considers both label prediction entropy and graph topology to
craft challenging adversarial samples. Additionally, it generates domain-agnostic node representations by characterizing class-graph pair prototypes through latent distributions
and applying multi-sample prototypical Mixup for distribution alignment across graphs. We further provide theoretical analysis showing that TRACI reduces the model’s excess
risk. Extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets
demonstrate that TRACI outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, validating its effectiveness.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated promising performance in various graph machine learning problems (Kipf and Welling 2017; Ju et al. 2024a). Learning latent representations of these graph structures is beneficial
for various downstream tasks (Lu et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2022b; Huang et al. 2024). Graph neural networks usually
learn node representations using the neighborhood aggregation mechanism where each node updates the representations using its neighborhood information iteratively (Xu
et al. 2019). These informative node representations would
be incorporated into various downstream applications including social network analysis (Zhang et al. 2022b), drug* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13401

