The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multiple Mean-Payoff Optimization Under Local Stability Constraints
David Klaška, Antonı́n Kučera, Vojtěch Kůr, Vı́t Musil, Vojtěch Řehák
Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia
{david.klaska, vojtech.kur}@mail.muni.cz, {tony, musil, rehak}@fi.muni.cz

Abstract

that there are “good” and “bad” months with average daily
expenditures of $0 and $5000, respectively, where the second case is not so frequent but represents a critical cashflow
problem that may ruin the company. The mean payoff does
not reflect this difference; hence, optimizing the mean payoff (minimizing the overall long-run expenditures) may lead
to disastrous outcomes in certain situations.
The lack of local stability guarantees has motivated the
study of window mean payoff objectives, where the task is to
optimize the average payoff in a “window” of finite length
sliding along a run. The window size represents a bounded
time horizon, and the task is to construct a strategy such that
the average payoff computed for the states in the window
stays within given bounds. Thus, one can express both longrun average performance and stability constraints. For a single payoff function, some technical variants of this problem
are solvable efficiently, while others are PSPACE-hard. For
multiple window mean payoffs, intractability results have
been established for two-player games (see Related work).
The main concern of the previous works on window mean
payoffs is classifying the computational complexity of constructing an optimal strategy. The obtained algorithms are
based on reductions to other problems, and their complexity matches the established lower bounds. To the best of our
knowledge, there have been no attempts to tackle the high
complexity of strategy synthesis by designing scalable algorithms at the cost of some (unavoidable but acceptable)
compromises. This open challenge and the problem’s high
practical relevance are the primary motivations for our work.

The long-run average payoff per transition (mean payoff) is
the main tool for specifying the performance and dependability properties of discrete systems. The problem of constructing a controller (strategy) simultaneously optimizing several
mean payoffs has been deeply studied for stochastic and
game-theoretic models. One common issue of the constructed
controllers is the instability of the mean payoffs, measured by
the deviations of the average rewards per transition computed
in a finite “window” sliding along a run. Unfortunately, the
problem of simultaneously optimizing the mean payoffs under local stability constraints is computationally hard, and the
existing works do not provide a practically usable algorithm
even for non-stochastic models such as two-player games. In
this paper, we design and evaluate the first efficient and scalable solution to this problem applicable to Markov decision
processes.

Code — https://gitlab.fi.muni.cz/formela/2025-aaai-mmp
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13369

Introduction
Mean payoff, i.e., the long-run average payoff per time unit,
is the standard tool for specifying and evaluating the longrun performance of dynamic systems. The overall performance is typically characterized by a tuple of mean payoffs
computed for multiple payoff functions representing expenditures, income, resource consumption, and other relevant
aspects. The basic task of multiple mean-payoff optimization
is to design a controller (strategy) jointly optimizing these
mean payoffs. Efficient strategy synthesis algorithms have
been designed for various models, such as Markov decision
processes or two-player games (see Related work).
A fundamental problem of the standard mean payoff optimization is the lack of local stability guarantees. For example, consider a payoff function modeling the expenditures
of a company. Even if the long-run average expenditures
per day (mean payoff) are $1000, there are no guarantees
on the maximal average expenditures per day in a bounded
time horizon of, say, one month. It is possible that the company pays between $800 and $1200 per day every month,
which is fine and sustainable. However, it may also happen

Our Contribution. We design the first efficient and scalable strategy synthesis algorithm for optimizing multiple
window mean payoffs in a given Markov decision process.
We start by establishing the principal limits of our efforts
by showing that the problem is NP-hard even for simple instances where the underlying MDP is a graph. Consequently,
every efficient algorithm attempting to solve the problem
must inevitably suffer from some limitations. Our algorithm
trades efficiency for optimality guarantees, i.e., the computed solutions are not necessarily optimal. Nevertheless,
our experiments show that the algorithm can construct highquality (and sometimes quite sophisticated) strategies for
complicated instances of non-trivial size. Thus, we obtain
the first practically usable solution to the problem of multi-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26551

