The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Single-view Image to Novel-view Generation for Hand-Object Interactions
Zhongqun Zhang1 , Yihua Cheng1 , Eduardo Pérez-Pellitero2 , Yiren Zhou2 , Jiankang Deng2 ,
Hyung Jin Chang1 , Jifei Song2 *
1

University of Birmingham, UK
Huawei, Noah’s Ark Lab, UK
zxz064@student.bham.ac.uk, y.cheng.2,h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk,
e.perez.pellitero,zhouyiren,jiankangdeng,jifeisong@huawei.com
2

Abstract
Hand-object interaction modeling from a single RGB image
is a significantly challenging task. Previous works typically
reconstruct hand-object interactions as texture-less meshes,
ignoring photo-realistic image generation. In this work, we
introduce the HO123, a novel method to synthesize novel-view
hand-object interaction images from a single image. To this
end, we first train a 2D diffusion prior. Given the camera pose
in novel views, our approach transfers the camera information into explicit hand representations, including hand depth
and skeleton images. We propose a global hand embedding to
control the diffusion model based on these hand representations. We then learn a 3D Gaussian splatting for novel-view
rendering using the diffusion prior. However, occluded objects
present a persistent challenge. To address this issue, we further introduce local hand embedding, where a contact field
is defined in the 3D Gaussian Splatting. We leverage contact information to guide the rendering in the contact field.
Extensive experiments on the HO3D and DexYCB datasets
demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms stateof-the-art novel-view synthesis for hand-object interactions.

Introduction
Humans have the capability to imagine the 3D shapes and
appearances of hand-object interactions from single-view images, even if the object is partially occluded by the hand. This
ability is increasingly valuable in various practical scenarios,
including virtual/augmented reality (Wu et al. 2022; Tendulkar, Surís, and Vondrick 2023), 3D content creation (Tang
et al. 2023b,a; Fei et al. 2024), digital humans (Moreau et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2023), and robotic grasping (Jiang, Hsu,
and Zhu 2022; Zhang et al. 2021; Qin et al. 2022). However,
reconstructing hand-object interactions in real-world scenarios is challenging and inherently ambiguous due to mutual
and self-occlusion. One key insight to solve the ill-posed
nature of single-view reconstruction is that the holding hand
shape implies the unobserved handheld object shape. Following this idea, current methods (Ye, Gupta, and Tulsiani 2022;
Chen et al. 2022) typically use Signed Distance Fields (SDFs)
as the geometric representation and conditionally reconstruct
the object based on the articulation and the visual input.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10394

Although previous works (Zhang et al. 2024a,b) have advanced the reconstruction of fine hand-object meshes from
a single RGB image, they often yield texture-less meshes.
To generate photo-realistic renderings in novel view, some
methods utilize Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall
et al. 2020) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023)
to reconstruct highly detailed shapes and textures of handobject interactions (Zhang et al. 2024c; Pokhariya and Ishaan
2024) through novel view synthesis. However, these methods
rely on multi-view videos, leaving the problem of generating novel-view hand-object interaction renderings from a
single-view image unsolved.
Recently, the combination of generative models (Rombach
et al. 2022) with NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Long et al.
2022) has proven to be remarkably effective in novel-view
generation from single-view images. Firstly, diffusion-based
image generation, trained on large-scale datasets, has enabled
approaches to "imagine" unobserved parts of objects by learning to control camera viewpoints (Liu et al. 2024a, 2023,
2024b). Then, Score Distillation Sampling (SDS)(Poole et al.
2022) trains a neural radiance field (Mildenhall et al. 2020) by
distilling multi-view priors from pre-trained diffusion models
to create 3D representations from a single image. However,
existing methods (Liu et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2023a) fail in
producing accurate hand shapes and appearances due to the
complex articulated structures when applied to hand-object
interactions.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose a
novel pipeline, , that leverages 3D Gaussian Splitting with
contact and diffusion priors to generate novel-view renderings for hand-object interactions from a single-view image,
exploiting the generative capability of pre-trained diffusion
models to guide hand-object novel-view image generation,
as depicted in Figure 1. Specifically, given an input-view
hand-object interaction image, in the first stage utilize the
generative capacities of diffusion models to produce novelview images conditioned on the camera view. In this stage,
despite the remarkable generative capabilities demonstrated
by diffusion models when conditioned on images, they encounter constraints in generating desired hand visuals. To
overcome this, we introduce a global hand embedding module incorporating an additional trainable ControlNet (Zhang,
Rao, and Agrawala 2023) to provide depth and skeleton for
controlling. We also fine-tune the whole diffusion model us-

