The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CASUAL: Conditional Support Alignment for Domain Adaptation with Label Shift
Anh T Nguyen1 * , Lam Tran2 , Anh Tong3 , Tuan-Duy H. Nguyen4 , Toan Tran2
1

University of Illinois Chicago
2
VinAI Research
3
Korea University
4
National University of Singapore
anguy110@uic.edu, {lamtt12,toantm3}@vinai.io
duynht@u.nus.edu, anhtong12@korea.ac.kr
Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) refers to a domain
adaptation framework in which a learning model is trained
based on the labeled samples on the source domain and unlabelled ones in the target domain. The dominant existing
methods in the field that rely on the classical covariate shift assumption to learn domain-invariant feature representation have
yielded suboptimal performance under label distribution shift.
In this paper, we propose a novel Conditional Adversarial
SUpport ALignment (CASUAL) whose aim is to minimize
the conditional symmetric support divergence between the
source’s and target domain’s feature representation distributions, aiming at a more discriminative representation for the
classification task. We also introduce a novel theoretical target
risk bound, which justifies the merits of aligning the supports
of conditional feature distributions compared to the existing
marginal support alignment approach in the UDA settings. We
then provide a complete training process for learning in which
the objective optimization functions are precisely based on the
proposed target risk bound. Our empirical results demonstrate
that CASUAL outperforms other state-of-the-art methods on
different UDA benchmark tasks under different label shift
conditions.

Introduction
The remarkable success of modern deep learning models often relies on the assumption that training and test data are
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d), contrasting the
types of real-world problems that can be solved. The violation
of that i.i.d. assumption leads to the data distribution shift, or
out-of-distribution (OOD) issue, which negatively affects the
generalization performance of the learning models (Torralba
and Efros 2011; Li et al. 2017) and renders them impracticable. One of the most popular settings for the OOD problem
is unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; David et al. 2010) in which the training process
is based on fully labeled samples from a source domain and
completely unlabeled samples from a target domain.
While the covariate shift assumption has been extensively
studied under the UDA problem setting, with reducing the
feature distribution divergence between domains as the dominant approach (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Tzeng et al.
*Work done at VinAI Research.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19668

2017; Shen et al. 2018; Courty et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019;
Long et al. 2015, 2017, 2016, 2014), the label shift assumption (i.e., the marginal label distribution p(y) varies between
domains, while the conditional p(x|y) is unchanged) remains
vastly underexplored in comparison. Compared to the covariate shift assumption, the label shift assumption is often more
reasonable in several real-world settings, e.g., the healthcare
industry, where the distribution of diseases in medical diagnosis may change across hospitals, while the conditional
distribution of symptoms given diseases remains unchanged.
Several UDA methods that explicitly consider the label
shift assumption often rely on estimating the importance
weights of the source and target label distribution and strictly
require the conditional distributions p(x|y) or p(z|y) to be
domain-invariant (Lipton, Wang, and Smola 2018; Tachet des
Combes et al. 2020; Azizzadenesheli et al. 2019). Another
popular UDA under label shift framework is enforcing domain invariance of representation z w.r.t some relaxed divergences (Wu et al. 2019; Tong et al. 2022). Wu et al.
(2019) proposed reducing β-admissible distribution divergence to prevent cross-label mapping in conventional domaininvariant approaches. However, choosing inappropriate values for β can critically reduce the performance of this method
under extreme levels of label shift (Wu et al. 2019; Li et al.
2020).
This paper aims to develop a new theoretically sound,
namely conditional adversarial support alignment (CASUAL)
approach for UDA under the label shift. Our proposed method
is relatively related to but different from the adversarial support alignment (ASA) (Tong et al. 2022) one, which utilizes
the symmetric support divergence (SSD) to align the support
of the marginal feature distribution of the source and the
target domains. One of the critical drawbacks of the ASA
method is that indiscriminately reducing the marginal support
divergence may make the learned representation susceptible
to conditional distribution misalignment. Our proposed CASUAL alleviates that issue by considering discriminative
features when aligning the supports of two distributions. In
particular, the conditional support alignment instead of the
marginal case makes CASUAL less susceptible to misalignment of features between different classes than ASA, which
is illustrated intuitively by Figure 1.
The main contributions of our paper are summarized as
follows:

