The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dimension Reduction with Locally Adjusted Graphs
Yingfan Wang* , Yiyang Sun* , Haiyang Huang* , Cynthia Rudin
Duke University
{yingfan.wang, yiyang.sun, haiyang.huang, cynthia.rudin}@duke.edu

Abstract
Dimension reduction (DR) algorithms have proven to be
extremely useful for gaining insight into large-scale highdimensional datasets, particularly finding clusters in transcriptomic data. The initial phase of these DR methods often involves converting the original high-dimensional data into a
graph. In this graph, each edge represents the similarity or
dissimilarity between pairs of data points. However, this graph
is frequently suboptimal due to unreliable high-dimensional
distances and the limited information extracted from the highdimensional data. This problem is exacerbated as the dataset
size increases. If we reduce the size of the dataset by selecting
points for a specific sections of the embeddings, the clusters
observed through DR are more separable since the extracted
subgraphs are more reliable. In this paper, we introduce LocalMAP, a new dimensionality reduction algorithm that dynamically and locally adjusts the graph to address this challenge. By dynamically extracting subgraphs and updating the
graph on-the-fly, LocalMAP is capable of identifying and separating real clusters within the data that other DR methods
may overlook or combine. We demonstrate the benefits of
LocalMAP through a case study on biological datasets, highlighting its utility in helping users more accurately identify
clusters for real-world problems.

Code — https://github.com/williamsyy/LocalMAP
Appendix — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15426

1

Introduction

Dimension reduction (DR) is an important data visualization
strategy for understanding the structure of complicated highdimensional datasets. DR is used extensively in image, text,
and biomedical datasets, particularly -omics (Cao et al. 2019;
Becht et al. 2019; Amezquita et al. 2020; Dries et al. 2021;
Atitey, Motsinger-Reif, and Anchang 2024; Böhm, Berens,
and Kobak 2023; Mu, Bhat, and Viswanath 2017; Raunak,
Gupta, and Metze 2019). Beginning in the original highdimensional space, DR methods typically first abstract the
data into a graph, with each edge representing either similarity (positive edge) or dissimilarity (negative edge). This graph
is then used to optimize the low-dimensional embedding by
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21357

applying attractive forces along the positive edges and repulsive forces along the negative edges. Clearly, the quality of
the graph, which connects the original high-dimensional data
to the low-dimensional embedding, is critical to this process.
However, given the complex nature of high-dimensional data,
it is challenging to construct a graph that accurately represents all patterns and structures within the data, and graphs
are usually sub-optimal.
In this work, we provide two key insights as to why the
graphs could be flawed. First, we found that high-dimensional
distances become less informative due to the curse of dimensionality, where measurements of similarity and dissimilarity
determined using high-dimensional distances do not necessarily reflect similarities and dissimilarities along the data manifold. This issue is more pronounced in DR methods that select
a small group of nearest neighbors (NNs) to form positive
edges of the graph and apply strong attractive forces along
these edges. When a “false” positive edge is constructed
based on an inaccurate similarity measure between a pair of
points that are actually dissimilar, strong attractive forces will
pull them closer. If there are many such false positive edges,
the DR method will generate overlapping clusters without
clear boundaries, even if the data have distinct clusters. Since
DR methods are unsupervised, the user would not be able to
determine that distinct clusters exist – they would be blurred
together in the DR result. As we show in this work, eliminating these false positive edges can dramatically improve DR
projections.
Our second insight is that missing edges (lack of negative
“further pair” edges between far points in high-dimensional
space) also contribute to unwanted overlapping of clusters,
since such edges help to define boundaries between clusters.
However, as the scale of the dataset increases, the set of negative edges become both insufficient and less effective, as
discussed in Section 4. Some of the most important applications of DR (single cell, transcriptomics) generate large
high-dimensional datasets with many clusters, so it is important that there are enough further pair (FP) edges to separate
them.
Based on the two insights discussed above, we propose
LocalMAP, a new DR algorithm that dynamically and locally
adjusts the graph during dimension reduction to address the
aforementioned issues with graph construction. LocalMAP
detects false positive edges and removes them, using ideas

