The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Causally Invariant Feature Learning
Xianjie Guo1,2 , Kui Yu1,2 * , Lizhen Cui3 , Han Yu4 , Xiaoxiao Li4,5,6
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data of Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Software, Shandong University, China
4
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Canada
6
Vector Institute, Canada
xianjieguo@mail.hfut.edu.cn, yukui@hfut.edu.cn, clz@sdu.edu.cn, han.yu@ntu.edu.sg, xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca
Abstract

which aims to select informative features while preserving
data privacy (Banerjee, Elmroth, and Bhuyan 2021).

Federated feature selection (FFS) is a promising field for selecting informative features while preserving data privacy in
federated learning (FL) settings. Existing FFS methods focus on capturing the correlations between features and labels.
They struggle to achieve satisfactory performance in the face
of data distribution heterogeneity among FL clients, and cannot address the out-of-distribution (OOD) problem that arises
when a significant portion of clients do not actively participate in FL training. To address these limitations, we propose
Federated Causally Invariant Feature Learning (FedCIFL),
a novel approach for learning causally invariant features in
a privacy-preserving manner. We design a sample reweighting strategy to eliminate spurious correlations introduced by
selection bias and iteratively estimate the federated causal effect between each feature and the labels (with the remaining
features initially treated as confounders). By iteratively refining the confounding feature set to identify the true confounders, FedCIFL mitigates the impact of limited local
data on the accuracy of federated causal effect estimation.
Theoretical analysis proves the correctness of FedCIFL under reasonable assumptions. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of
FedCIFL against eight state-of-the-art baselines, beating the
best-performing approach by 3.19%, 9.07% and 2.65% in
terms of average test Accuracy, RMSE and F1 score, respectively. It is a first-of-its-kind FFS approach capable of
handling Non-IID and OOD data simultaneously. The source
code is available at https://github.com/Xianjie-Guo/FedCIFL.

1

Challenges Recently, the FFS problem (Banerjee, Elmroth, and Bhuyan 2021; Cassará, Gotta, and Valerio 2022;
Hu et al. 2022, 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Hermo, BolónCanedo, and Ladra 2024; Banerjee et al. 2024) has been
explored by considering scenarios where data are either
Independent and Identically Distributed (IID) (Hu et al.
2023) or Non-Independent and Identically Distributed (NonIID) (Banerjee, Elmroth, and Bhuyan 2021) across FL
clients. A more detailed treatment of related work can be
found in Appendix B.1. However, practical FL often involves a vast number of clients with diverse data distributions. Furthermore, a significant proportion of these clients
might not actively participate in the FL training process. As
a result, the discrepancy in data distributions between the
participating and non-participating (i.e., unseen) FL clients
can cause the suboptimal performance of the trained models
when applied to the unseen clients’ data, a challenge commonly referred to as the out-of-distribution (OOD) problem (Yuan et al. 2022). This issue poses a critical challenge
in FL, as the models trained on the participating clients’ data
might not generalize well to the unseen clients, thus limiting
their applicability and effectiveness.
Motivation Existing FFS methods primarily exploit the
correlation between labels and features. They cannot address
the selection bias (Huang and Wu 2024) present in the data,
resulting in the inability to learn feature subsets with strong
generalization ability. Although some works attempt to address the OOD problem (Guo et al. 2023) and domain adaptation (Sun et al. 2021) in FL settings, they focus on learning
generalizable representations in the representation space for
classification tasks. While these methods can achieve satisfactory performance, they have poor interpretability as it is
difficult to determine which original features have truly invariant relationships with the labels.

Introduction

Background In recent years, feature selection has become
an increasingly important research topic due to its ability
to improve model performance, reduce computational complexity, and enhance interpretability (Khaire and Dhanalakshmi 2022; Guo et al. 2022b; Xiao et al. 2022). Under federated learning (FL) settings (Yang et al. 2019; Yang, Fan,
and Yu 2020; Kairouz et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2021; Li et al.
2024; Ren et al. 2024; Guo et al. 2024b), data are often distributed across multiple FL clients, making it challenging to
perform feature selection across the entire dataset. This has
led to the emergence of federated feature selection (FFS),

Contributions In this paper, we focus on learning causally
invariant features in the original feature space to jointly
address the challenges of Non-IID and OOD in FL settings. By leveraging the invariant property of causal features,
we propose Federated Causally Invariant Features Learning
(FedCIFL), a method for learning causally invariant features in a privacy-preserving manner to address the complex

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16978

