The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Transformer Layers as Painters
Qi Sun* 2,3 , Marc Pickett* †1 , Aakash Kumar Nain1 , Llion Jones2
1
Emergence AI
Sakana AI, Japan
3
Institute of Science Tokyo, Japan
{mpickett,anain}@emergence.ai, {qisun, llion}@sakana.ai
2

Abstract
Despite their nearly universal adoption for large language
models, the internal workings of transformers are not well
understood. We aim to better understand the impact of removing or reorganizing information throughout the layers of
a pretrained transformer. Such an understanding could both
yield better usage of existing models as well as to make architectural improvements to produce new variants. We present a
series of empirical studies on frozen models that show that the
lower and final layers of pretrained transformers differ from
middle layers, but that middle layers have a surprising amount
of uniformity. We further show that some classes of problems
have robustness to skipping layers, running the layers in an
order different from how they were trained, or running the
layers in parallel. Our observations suggest that even frozen
pretrained models may gracefully trade accuracy for latency
by skipping layers or running layers in parallel.

Code — https://github.com/floatingbigcat/transformer_
layers_as_painters

1

Introduction

The scale of transformer-based Large Language Models
(LLMs), in the billions of parameters, makes it difficult to
directly understand the models’ behaviour after training. At
the same time, each layer of a pretrained transformer has
an identical architecture as the other layers, with the only
difference being a layer’s position in the hierarchy, and the
values of the layer’s parameters (Vaswani et al. 2017).
We find it helpful to think of the middle layers of a transformer by making an analogy to an assembly line of painters.
The canvas (input) is passed along a series of painters. Some
painters specialize in birds, while others are better at painting
wheels. Each painter receives the canvas from the painter below her, then she decides whether to add a few strokes to the
painting or just pass it along to the painter above her (using
the residual connections). In this analogy, each painter uses
the same “vocabulary” for understanding paintings, so that a
painter may receive the painting from a painter earlier in the
assembly line without catastrophe. The painters may also be
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
25219

reordered without complete catastrophe (even if parts of the
background get painted after foreground objects, occluding
them), and the painters may even all add their strokes at the
same time (in parallel).
This analogy isn’t meant to be a rigorous theory, but rather
a tool for thinking about a transformer’s layers. Inspired by
this analogy, we test how well some hypotheses hold. In this
paper we perform experiments that help address the following
questions:
1. Do layers use the same representation space? (§3.1)
2. Are all the layers necessary? (§3.2)
3. Are middle layers all doing the same function? (§3.3)
4. Does the layer order matter? (§3.4)
5. Can we run the layers in parallel? (§3.5)
6. Does order matter for some tasks more than others? (§3.6)
7. Does looping help parallelized layers? (§3.7)
8. Which variants harm performance the least? (§3.8)
To answer these questions we perform a series of experiments
on pretrained LLMs. These include experimenting with variations on the standard transformer execution strategy, and
measuring the impact of these variations on the models’ performance across a variety of benchmarks for both decoderonly (Llama) and encoder-only (BERT) models. Note that
our experiments never involve finetuning or otherwise adjusting the models’ parameters (with the caveat that the GLUE
evaluation standard procedure includes a finetuning step for
our BERT-Large model)

2

Models and Benchmarks

Our experiments are primarily on two transformer models:
Llama2 (Touvron et al. 2023), and on BERT-Large (Devlin
et al. 2019). (However, we also include results for Mistral-7B
(Jiang et al. 2023) and Pythia-6.9B (Biderman et al. 2023a) in
Appendix A.5 that support the generalization of our results.)
Llama2 is decoder-only. We focus on Llama2-7B, which has
7 billion parameters and 32 layers (each layer having 202 million parameters), but also include some scaling experiments
with the 13B (40 layers) and 70B (80 layers) models. BERT
is encoder-only with 24 layers and 340 million parameters.
We used the standard pretrained checkpoints for these models. In all our experiments the models are frozen: we never
modified the parameters of these models through fine-tuning

