The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SigStyle: Signature Style Transfer via Personalized Text-to-Image Models
Ye Wang1 , Tongyuan Bai1 , Xuping Xie2 , Zili Yi3 , Yilin Wang4 * , Rui Ma1,5 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University
4
Adobe
5
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MOE, China
{yewang22, baity23, xiexp21}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, yi@nju.edu.cn, yilwang@adobe.com, ruim@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

et al. 2004), or use convolutional neural network (CNN)
(Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Gatys et al. 2017; Kolkin,
Salavon, and Shakhnarovich 2019) or feed-forward network
(Deng et al. 2020; Huang and Belongie 2017; Liao et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2022) to achieve style transfer. With
the rapid advancement of diffusion models, diffusion-based
style transfer has significantly progressed. These methods
can be categorized into two types: tuning-based and tuningfree. A representative tuning-based method is InST (Zhang
et al. 2023b), which introduces a textual inversion-based approach that maps a given single reference style image into a
corresponding textual embedding. This textual embedding is
then used as a condition to achieve style transfer for the content image. In contrast, tuning-free methods such as StyleID
(Chung, Hyun, and Heo 2024), DiffStyle (Jeong, Kwon, and
Uh 2023), InstantStyle (Wang et al. 2024a), InstantStylePlus (Wang et al. 2024b), and FreeTuner (Xu et al. 2024)
merge style and content features extracted from the attention
layers of Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) to achieve
style transfer. These methods offer superior computational
efficiency and only require a single forward pass without the
need for additional tuning.
Despite the significant progress of the aforementioned
methods, signature style transfer remains underexplored.
Signature style refers to the unique and recognizable visual
traits that defines a particular artistic style, such as geometric and structural patterns, color palettes, and brush strokes.
For example, as illustrated in the first row of Figure 2, the
signature style of this image is defined by the structural arrangement and composition of numerous small images that
together form the figure of a person. Additionally, the signature style of the image in the second row is characterized
by geometric and structural patterns, as well as distinctive
color palettes. Although existing methods often succeed in
transferring basic color information, they fail to capture and
retain the essential artistic style from the reference images,
including small image blocks, colorful ribbon-shaped lines
and other intricate characteristics as shown in Figure 2. This
highlights a critical limitation: current methods struggle to
achieve signature style transfer.
The main reason for the aforementioned issues is that
existing methods insufficiently consider the distinct visual traits of style images. Meanwhile, personalized textto-image models such as Dreambooth (Ruiz et al. 2023a)

Style transfer enables the seamless integration of artistic
styles from a style image into a content image, resulting in
visually striking and aesthetically enriched outputs. Despite
numerous advances in this field, existing methods did not explicitly focus on the signature style, which represents the distinct and recognizable visual traits of the image such as geometric and structural patterns, color palettes and brush strokes
etc. In this paper, we introduce SigStyle, a framework that
leverages the semantic priors that embedded in a personalized
text-to-image diffusion model to capture the signature style
representation. This style capture process is powered by a hypernetwork that efficiently fine-tunes the diffusion model for
any given single style image. Style transfer then is conceptualized as the reconstruction process of content image through
learned style tokens from the personalized diffusion model.
Additionally, to ensure the content consistency throughout
the style transfer process, we introduce a time-aware attention swapping technique that incorporates content information from the original image into the early denoising steps of
target image generation. Beyond enabling high-quality signature style transfer across a wide range of styles, SigStyle
supports multiple interesting applications, such as local style
transfer, texture transfer, style fusion and style-guided textto-image generation. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations
demonstrate our approach outperforms existing style transfer
methods for recognizing and transferring the signature styles.

1

Introduction

Style transfer technology (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016),
which seamlessly incorporates stylistic elements into content images to produce visually impactful results, has gained
widespread attention in recent years due to its extensive
applications in art design, photography, fashion and other
fields. A critical aspect of style transfer is the preservation
of the original style during the transfer process. Ensuring
that these intricate details and artistic expressiveness are essential for achieving high-quality results, especially when
dealing with complex styles such as the shape and layout of
artistic elements, and the patterns of brush strokes and lines.
Early style transfer methods primarily include techniques
relying on local region matching (Zhang et al. 2013; Wang
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8051

