The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Told You That Will Not Work:
Optimal Corrections to Planning Domains Using Counter-Example Plans
Songtuan Lin1 , Alban Grastien2 , Rahul Shome1 , Pascal Bercher1
1

School of Computing, The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France
{songtuan.lin, rahul.shome, pascal.bercher}@anu.edu.au, alban.grastien@cea.fr
Abstract

The functionalities of existing tools for modeling assistance range from providing support for editing files which
describe planning problems (Magnaguagno et al. 2020;
Muise 2016; Strobel and Kirsch 2020; Vaquero et al. 2013)
to more advanced features like automatically fixing errors
in a planning domain (Gragera et al. 2023; Lin, Grastien,
and Bercher 2023; Sreedharan et al. 2020; Lin, Höller, and
Bercher 2024).
In particular, motivated by the scenario where there can
be positive plans – feasible plans that might be invalid in
a flawed domain – Lin, Grastien, and Bercher (2023) proposed an approach for correcting flaws by finding repairs to
the domain turning all positive plans into solutions. Repairs
to a domain refer to modifications to actions’ preconditions
and effects, which fully characterize a domain. While this
scenario has its applications (in particular since modeling
errors can lead to the exclusion of intended solutions, which
in an extreme case may even render problems unsolvable
(Gragera et al. 2023)), the opposite situation may also arise.
That is, due to modeling mistakes, models may allow the
generation of plans that are solutions in these (flawed) models while they are inapplicable in the real world (i.e., the
“true” model). We call such plans (counter-example) negative plans. We argue that in many scenarios, negative plans
are as vital as positive ones because they reflect real world
constraints that are not adequately modeled, causing plans to
work in the model but not the real world. In motivating applications like robotics, domain models are often used as abstractions for tasks (Dantam et al. 2018; Garrett et al. 2021)
but are flawed when compared to a true domain containing
motion planning feasibility (Kavraki and LaValle 2008), i.e.,
feasible plans in the domain might be infeasible for the robot
to execute. This paper serves as a promising step towards an
effective model repair strategy to correct flawed domains using counter-examples of both negative and positive plans.
The key contribution of the paper is an approach which
takes as input a planning domain, a set of positive as well
as negative plans, and outputs a cardinality-minimum set of
repairs to the domain which turn all positive plans into solutions and all negative ones into non-solutions. We want
to emphasize that our technique is highly general in the
sense that it supports repairing lifted domains (in contrast
to ground planning, where the similar problem is conceptually much simpler (Erol, Nau, and Subrahmanian 1995;

Hardness of modeling a planning domain is a major obstacle for making automated planning techniques accessible. We
developed a tool that helps modelers correct domains based
on available information such as the known feasibility or infeasibility of certain plans. Designing model repair strategies
that are capable of repairing flawed planning domains automatically has been explored in previous work to use positive plans (invalid in the given (flawed) domain but feasible
in the “true” domain). In this work, we highlight the importance of and study counter-example negative plans (valid in
the given (flawed) domain but infeasible in the “true” domain). Our approach automatically corrects a domain by finding an optimal repair set to the domain which turns all negative plans into non-solutions, in addition to making all positive plans solutions. Experiments indicate strong performance
in the fast-downward benchmark suite with random errors. A
handcrafted benchmark with domain flaws inspired by some
practical applications also motivates the method’s efficacy.

Code — https://github.com/Songtuan-Lin/classicaldomain-repairer
Benchmarks —
https://github.com/Songtuan-Lin/repairer-benchmarks

Introduction
Planning is concerned with finding a sequence of actions that
achieves a certain goal. Many theoretical investigations (e.g.,
see the work by Bylander (1994), by Erol, Nau, and Subrahmanian (1995), and by Erol, Hendler, and Nau (1996))
have been done and many practical approaches (e.g., see
the work by Bonet and Geffner (2001), by Hoffmann and
Nebel (2001), and by Helmert (2006)) have been developed
for planning. The applications of planning are however still
rare in practice, especially for areas outside academia. We
argue that this is because modeling a practical problem as a
planning problem is difficult and error-prone, which requires
a modeler to be an expert not only in planning but in the area
related to the problem to be modeled. As a result, tools for
providing modeling support are needed for the purpose of
making planning techniques more accessible.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26596

