The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Can Generative Models Improve Self-Supervised Representation Learning?
Sana Ayromlou1 , Vahid Reza Khazaie1 , Fereshteh Forghani2 * , Arash Afkanpour1
1

Vector Institute
York University
sana.ayromlou@vectorinstitute.ai
vahidreza.khazaie@vectorinstitute.ai
forghani@yorku.ca
arash.afkanpour@vectorinstitute.ai
2

Abstract

labels for the SSL task. These augmentations determine pixelspace changes that should result in similar embedding-space
representations. Since these transformations specify what
representations learn, a natural question is whether additional
transformations improve the generalization and robustness of
representations.
While some previous works have studied the impact of augmentations in representation learning (e.g., Chen et al. (2020),
Caron et al. (2020)), until recently, this area has remained
largely under-explored. More recently, new image transformations have been introduced in the context of self-supervised
representation learning. For example, Mansfield et al. (2023)
introduced random field transformations by applying local
affine and color transformations whose parameters are specified by Gaussian random fields (Adler, Taylor et al. 2007).
Rojas-Gomez et al. (2023) proposed style transfer as a form
of transformation for SSL. While these works show that new
transformations can improve representation learning, their
transformations remain limited to certain predefined forms.
An important feature of SSL transformations is that while
they transform an image in pixel space, they do not significantly modify its semantics. Guided by this view, we propose
the notion of a generalized transformation, which satisfies
these conditions: (1) the transformed image should be semantically similar to the original image and (2) it should
not make modifications that render the image unrealistic,
which often happens by some of the standard transformations (e.g., color jitter). The question arises: given a source
image, how can one generate transformed images that satisfy these conditions? For this task, we leverage instanceconditioned generative models. In particular, we study latent diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022) and conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Casanova
et al. 2021) that generate an output that is semantically similar to a source image. Our extensive empirical study in
in-distribution and out-of-distribution cases demonstrates
the effectiveness of our method for representation learning.
The code to reproduce our empirical study is available at
https://github.com/VectorInstitute/GenerativeSSL. The key
contributions of our work are as follows:

The rapid advancement in self-supervised representation learning has highlighted its potential to leverage unlabeled data
for learning rich visual representations. However, the existing
techniques, particularly those employing different augmentations of the same image, often rely on a limited set of simple
transformations that cannot fully capture variations in the real
world. This constrains the diversity and quality of samples,
which leads to sub-optimal representations. In this paper, we
introduce a framework that enriches the self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigm by utilizing generative models to produce
semantically consistent image augmentations. By directly conditioning generative models on a source image, our method
enables the generation of diverse augmentations while maintaining the semantics of the source image, thus offering a
richer set of data for SSL. Our extensive experimental results
on various joint-embedding SSL techniques demonstrate that
our framework significantly enhances the quality of learned
visual representations by up to 10% Top-1 accuracy in downstream tasks. This research demonstrates that incorporating
generative models into the joint-embedding SSL workflow
opens new avenues for exploring the potential of synthetic
data. This development paves the way for more robust and
versatile representation learning techniques.

Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a machine learning approach where methods leverage large amounts of unlabeled
data for representation learning. In the absence of any prior
knowledge, most SSL methods assume that each data point
is semantically different from other examples in a dataset.
While this assumption can help devise a self-supervised representation learning algorithm, it is not sufficient to guarantee
the generalization of representations to new tasks. As a result,
joint-embedding SSL methods (e.g., Chen et al. (2020); He
et al. (2020); Grill et al. (2020)) utilize augmentation techniques to generate two or more views of the same image
and map them to nearby points in the representation space.
These augmentations typically consist of a series of transformations, such as random crop, color jitter, or Gaussian
blur, as shown in Fig. 1(a), which are used to define positive

• We propose to leverage instance-conditioned generative
models for generating semantically similar augmentations
in joint-embedding SSL, advancing beyond the standard

*Work done during an internship at Vector Institute.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1800

