The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalized Debiased Semi-Supervised Hashing for Large-Scale Image Retrieval
Xingbo Liu1 , Xuening Zhang2 * , Xiushan Nie1,3 , Yang Shi4 , Yilong Yin4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong Jianzhu University, Jinan 250101, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
3
Shandong Yunhai Guochuang Cloud Computing Equipment Industry Innovation Co., Ltd, Jinan, China
4
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan 250101, China
{sclxb, shiyang}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, yukizhang0527@outlook.com, niexsh@hotmail.com, ylyin@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

high-quality hash codes when there are sufficient correctlylabeled data for training (Shen et al. 2015; Gui et al. 2018;
Sun et al. 2024b). However, this requirement can hardly be
met in practice. For one thing, due to the intensive labor of
manual labeling, the observed data set often contains plenty
of unlabeled instances (Wang et al. 2023b). For another, the
given labels can be insufficient (or even wrong) to describe
the corresponding image, especially in multi-label scenarios
(Chua et al. 2009; Xia et al. 2023), e.g., on photo-sharing
websites and apps like Flickr and Instagram. Under these circumstances, training only on labeled samples may not guarantee high accuracy.
To reduce the dependency on labeled data, semisupervised hashing approaches (Hu et al. 2019; Zhang and
Peng 2019; Wang et al. 2023a) have been proposed by exploiting both labeled and unlabeled samples to promote retrieval performance. According to how the extensive unlabeled data are used, existing methods can be categorized into
regularization-based ones (Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012;
Wu et al. 2013; Pan et al. 2015) and pseudo label-based ones
(Song et al. 2017; Zhang and Peng 2019). The former typically formulate the hash learning problem as an empirical
error minimization over labeled data, along with an unsupervised regularization over all the data (Wu et al. 2013; Kan
et al. 2014). In such a formulation, unlabeled data provide
helpful distribution information using their features, while
the more discriminative category information remains unexplored. To address this gap, pseudo label-based approaches
have been investigated (Song et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2022a). By completing categorization information behind unlabeled instances, the semi-supervised setting
is expanded into a supervised one, which supports the use
of various supervised hashing techniques. Therefore, pseudo
label-based semi-supervised hashing possesses high generality and adaptability.
However, it has been revealed lately that the pseudolabeling stage is prone to generate unreliable or even false
predictions(Chen et al. 2022; Kage et al. 2024). Simply
treating pseudo labels as ground truth can result in a biased
semi-supervised learning (Wang et al. 2022b). In order to
alleviate this, debiased learning scheme has been designed
for self-training (Chen et al. 2022) and imbalanced learning
(Wang et al. 2022b). Nonetheless, it has not received enough
attention in context of semi-supervised hashing. In fact, for

Semi-supervised hashing has shown promising efficacy
in large-scale image retrieval, which learns similaritypreserving codes from both labeled and unlabeled data. To
enable the use of advanced supervised hashing techniques,
pseudo labels are widely applied. However, existing methods
typically suffer from a biased learning issue due to pseudo
label noise, which can be further aggravated during optimization. Although such a bias can adversely affect hashing accuracy, it has not been investigated sufficiently. In view of this,
we present a comprehensive discussion on potential causes of
biases, involving processes of pseudo-labeling, hash learning
and optimization. Accordingly, a novel Generalized Debiased
Semi-supervised Hashing (GDSH) method is proposed as a
unified solution to mitigate the biases. Specifically, reliable
pseudo labels are first predicted via a robust label completion strategy. Secondly, a debiased hash learning module is
designed by combining label denoising and similarity updating. This can not only refine the supervision, but also obtain
hash codes that are semantically debiased in both category
and sample levels. Finally, a discrete semi-supervised hashing
algorithm is proposed to alleviate the bias arising from optimization. Experimental results on three single-label and three
multi-label image benchmarks demonstrate that GDSH remarkably outperforms the state-of-the-arts in different semisupervised settings.

Introduction
With the development of data acquisition technology and the
popularization of the Internet and social media, the amount
of image data has increased exponentially (Wu et al. 2024;
Zhu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022). To manage large-scale image database efficiently, hashing provides a practical solution by mapping high-dimensional visual features into compact binary codes while maintaining the original similarities. Therefore, the storage cost of massive data is substantially reduced, and the retrieval task can be accomplished
quickly and effectively. Owing to these promising properties, hashing has become a highlighted topic in the field
of image retrieval (Cui et al. 2024; Shen et al. 2024; Tang
et al. 2024). Typically, existing approaches can generate
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5631

