The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-View Multi-Label Classification via View-Label Matching Selection
Hao Wei1 , Yongjian Deng1 , Qiuru Hai1 , Yuena Lin1,2 , Zhen Yang1 , Gengyu Lyu1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
2
Idealism Beijing Technology Co., Ltd.
haowei@emails.bjut.edu.cn, yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn, haiqiuru@emails.bjut.edu.cn, yuenalin@126.com, yangzhen@bjut.edu.cn,
lyugengyu@gmail.com

Abstract
In multi-view multi-label classification (MVML), each object is described by several heterogeneous views while annotated with multiple related labels. The key to learn from
such complicate data lies in how to fuse cross-view features
and explore multi-label correlations, while accordingly obtain
correct assignments between each object and its corresponding labels. In this paper, we proposed an advanced MVML
method named VAMS, which treats each object as a bag of
views and reformulates the task of MVML as a “view-label”
matching selection problem. Specifically, we first construct
an object graph and a label graph respectively. In the object graph, nodes represent the multi-view representation of
an object, and each view node is connected to its K-nearest
neighbor within its own view. In the label graph, nodes represent the semantic representation of a label. Then, we connect
each view node with all labels to generate the unified “viewlabel” matching graph. Afterwards, a graph network block is
introduced to aggregate and update all nodes and edges on
the matching graph, and further generating a structural representation that fuses multi-view heterogeneity and multi-label
correlations for each view and label. Finally, we derive a prediction score for each view-label matching and select the optimal matching via optimizing a weighted cross-entropy loss.
Extensive results on various datasets have verified that our
proposed VAMS can achieve superior or comparable performance against state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: An application of MVML in news classification.

further provides support for subsequent tasks, such as public
opinion analysis and monitoring on social media platforms.
The key to learn from MVML data lies in how to effectively fuse these heterogeneous features while comprehensively characterizing all relevant labels. Based on different multi-view fusion strategies, existing MVML methods
can be roughly divided into two categories: Feature-fusion
strategy and Decision-fusion strategy. Feature-fusion strategy based methods (Liu et al. 2015; Zhang, Jia, and Li 2020)
usually conduct multi-view feature fusion first to obtain a
common feature representation and then they employ the
common representation to learn final multi-label classifier.
Decision-fusion strategy (Luo et al. 2015) based methods
directly learn multiple multi-label base classifiers for different views, and they make the final prediction by averaging the results of these base classifiers. Intuitively, Featurefusion strategy pays more attention to cross-view consensus
information, which tends to correspond to significant labels,
while some rare or insignificant labels may be overwhelmed.
Decision-fusion strategy focuses more on the individualview specificity information, which tends to correspond to
view-specific labels, where some labels with difficult feature representations can not be easily detected. Recently,
some MVML methods (Tan et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2019;
Lyu et al. 2022) attempt to simultaneously take both consensus and specific information into consideration, which
intend to comprehensively characterize all relevant labels.
However, most of these methods extract cross-view consensus features and individual-view specificity features in a sep-

Introduction
Multi-view multi-label classification (MVML) is a crucial
task in the field of machine learning and data mining, which
aims to extract both consensus and complementary information from multiple high-dimensional heterogeneous views
and assign multiple semantically relevant labels to the given
samples (Liu et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2024). For example, in
the task of news classification (Figure 1), multiple sources
of information (image, video, text) are integrated to provide
multiple semantically relevant labels such as disaster, wildfire, and rescue. MVML provides an effective framework to
learn a desired multi-label classifier for bridging these various information (features) to the diverse topics (labels) and
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21456

