The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Task-Agnostic Language Model Watermarking via High Entropy Passthrough
Layers
Vaden Masrani, Mohammad Akbari, David Ming Xuan Yue, Ahmad Rezaei, Yong Zhang
Huawei Technologies Canada Co. Ltd.
{mohammad.akbari, ahmad.rezaei2, yong.zhang3}@huawei.com

Abstract

Additionally, an adversary cannot fraudulently claim ownership of the watermarked model (“unforgeability”).
• Robustness: The watermark should be robust to attacks
such as finetuning, pruning, and other potentially malicious
model modifications.
• Efficiency: The watermarking procedure must be inexpensive in terms of training time and required resources in
comparison to the original pretraining time.

In the era of costly pre-training of large language models, ensuring the intellectual property rights of model owners, and
insuring that said models are responsibly deployed, is becoming increasingly important. To this end, we propose model
watermarking via passthrough layers, which are added to existing pre-trained networks and trained using a self-supervised
loss such that the model produces high-entropy output when
prompted with a unique private key, and acts normally otherwise. Unlike existing model watermarking methods, our
method is fully task-agnostic, and can be applied to both
classification and sequence-to-sequence tasks without requiring advanced access to downstream fine-tuning datasets. We
evaluate the proposed passthrough layers on a wide range of
downstream tasks, and show experimentally our watermarking
method achieves a near-perfect watermark extraction accuracy
and false-positive rate in most cases without damaging original model performance. Additionally, we show our method is
robust to both downstream fine-tuning, fine-pruning, and layer
removal attacks, and can be trained in a fraction of the time
required to train the original model.

Code — https://developer.huaweicloud.com/develop/aigaller
y/notebook/detail?id=58b799a0-5cfc-4c2e-8b9b440bb2315264

Introduction
Model Watermarking refers to the process of embedding identification information into the weights of a neural network
(Boenisch 2021; Li, Wang, and Barni 2021) to verify model
ownership, as opposed to watermarking the model output
directly (Kirchenbauer et al. 2023a,b; Fernandez et al. 2023,
2022; Liu et al. 2023; Rezaei et al. 2025; Zhao et al. 2023).
For a general watermarking method to be admissible, it must
satisfy four key requirements (Yadollahi et al. 2021; Guo and
Potkonjak 2018; Rouhani, Chen, and Koushanfar 2018):
• Fidelity: The watermarked model performance should not
by degraded significantly compared to the original model.
• Reliability: The FP (false positive) / FN (false negative)
rates should be low to prevent false claims of ownership
and to assure correct model ownership is detected reliably.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24849

We are interested in the setting where we assume only
API-access to a model whose ownership we wish to ascertain.
Thus, we focus on blackbox watermarking, which assumes
verification (i.e., watermark extraction) can only take place by
examining model output (Yadollahi et al. 2021), as opposed to
whitebox watermarking, which additionally assumes access
to the code and model weights.
Existing blackbox watermarking methods for pre-trained
language models (PLMs) are not able to handle the general
sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) language modeling tasks,
which include a wide array of applications such as machine
translation, summarization, question answering, chatbot dialogue, and code generation. These methods are typically limited to either classification tasks (Peng et al. 2023; He et al.
2022; Yadollahi et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023; Gu et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2023) or natural language generation tasks (Xiang et al. 2021), or require poisoning the model during training, making them impractical for model watermarking, as
they would necessitate retraining the model from scratch for
each new watermark(Wallace et al. 2021; Wan et al. 2023).
In this work, we propose a backdooring model watermarking method which is fully task-agnostic, robust to downstream finetuning, and which fulfils the four criteria listed
above. Rather than training the model to output incorrect
labels or predefined semantic phrases (Peng et al. 2023; He
et al. 2022; Yadollahi et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2023; Xiang et al.
2021), we train the model to have a max-entropy uniform
distribution over the model vocabulary, as seen in Figure 1.
This is accomplished through the use of passthrough layers,
which are additional layers added to the existing PLMs and
trained such that the input from the previous layer “passes
through” the new layers when prompted with standard output, and elicits uniform logits when prompted with a unique
private key. Ownership verification takes place by querying
a model with and without a private key and computing the

