The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OTIAS: OcTree Implicit Adaptive Sampling for Multispectral and Hyperspectral
Image Fusion
Shangqi Deng1,2 , Jun Ma3 , Liang-Jian Deng3,† , Ping Wei1,2,†
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract

t

igh

He

t

igh

He

Width

INR-Sample
Channel

Channel

Implicit Neural Representation (INR) methods have demonstrated great potential in arbitrary-scale super-resolution
tasks. This success is primarily due to their ability to continuously represent images using coordinates. In the task of
remote sensing image fusion, INR methods have also shown
promising applications. However, the previous INR methods
neglect channel-wise modeling, while sharing a single kernel
across all channels at each position, resulting in a lack of sensitivity to data specificity. To address these issues, we propose
the OcTree Implicit Adaptive Sampling (OTIAS) method,
which innovatively applies the octree structure to restore data
from both horizontal and vertical directions, effectively incorporating spatial and spectral information from hyperspectral
data. Additionally, we introduce a novel method to adaptively
generate interpolation kernels based on coordinates. This approach efficiently produces customized interpolation kernel
parameters for octree nodes, tailored to different spectral information. Overall, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the CAVE and Harvard datasets with 4× and 8×
scaling factors, outperforming existing approaches.

Width

(1) The previous INR-based methods
t

igh

Channel

He

Width
t

igh
He

Width

Octree-Sample

Channel

1

(2) The proposed octree-based INR method

Figure 1: (1) The previous INR-based methods (Tang, Chen,
and Zeng 2021; Zhu et al. 2023) can be viewed as utilizing
a quadtree structure for spatial sampling to enhance resolution. (2) The proposed OTIAS considers both spatial and
channel directions to subdivide the grid of the original image cube, thereby improving the quality of the fused product,
seeing in discussion section.

Code — https://github.com/shangqideng/OTIAS

Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging is an advanced imaging technique
used to acquire image data in different wavelength ranges.
Unlike common color images, hyperspectral imaging captures information not only in the three primary colors of
R, G, and B but in dozens or even hundreds of very narrow wavelength ranges, providing detailed spectral information. This means that each pixel contains data not only about
color but also about the spectral characteristics of the materials. Therefore, hyperspectral imaging finds wide applications in fields (Bedini 2017; Adam, Mutanga, and Rugege
2010; Wang et al. 2023, 2024) such as material identification, vegetation studies, mineral exploration, and more.
However, in hyperspectral imaging, physical constraints impose a trade-off between the number of spectral bands and
spatial resolution. Typically, increasing spectral resolution
results in reduced spatial resolution, and enhancing spatial

resolution leads to a decrease in spectral resolution. To address this issue, practical imaging involves capturing the
same scene with different sensors, respectively yielding a
multispectral image with a high spatial resolution (HR-MSI)
and a hyperspectral image with a low spatial resolution (LRHSI). Recently, multispectral and hyperspectral image fusion (MHIF) (Li et al. 2024, 2023b,a, 2022; Xu et al. 2024;
Ran et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2024) has become a crucial area,
since it could fuse HR-MSI and LR-HSI to obtain a hyperspectral image with high spatial resolution (HR-HSI).
Implicit Neural Representation (INR) (Mildenhall et al.
2021) is a neural network-based approach for learning
continuous representations of objects without the need
for explicit geometric information. It has shown remarkable success in various 2D tasks such as image superresolution (Tang, Chen, and Zeng 2021), thanks to its multi-

†
Corresponding authors: liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn, pingw
ei@xjtu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2708

