The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Thinking in Granularity: Dynamic Quantization for Image Super-Resolution by
Intriguing Multi-Granularity Clues
Mingshen Wang1 , Zhao Zhang1,2* , Feng Li1* , Ke Xu3 , Kang Miao1 , Meng Wang1
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
2
Yunnan Key Laboratory of Software Engineering, Yunan, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, China

Bit
Layer-wise
quantization

Abstract
Dynamic quantization has attracted rising attention in image
super-resolution (SR) as it expands the potential of heavy
SR models onto mobile devices while preserving competitive performance. Existing methods explore layer-to-bit configuration upon varying local regions, adaptively allocating
the bit to each layer and patch. Despite the benefits, they
still fall short in the trade-off of SR accuracy and quantization efficiency. Apart from this, adapting the quantization level for each layer individually can disturb the original inter-layer relationships, thus diminishing the representation capability of quantized models. In this work, we propose Granular-DQ, which capitalizes on the intrinsic characteristics of images while dispensing with the previous consideration for layer sensitivity in quantization. Granular-DQ
conducts a multi-granularity analysis of local patches with
further exploration of their information densities, achieving
a distinctive patch-wise and layer-invariant dynamic quantization paradigm. Specifically, Granular-DQ initiates by developing a granularity-bit controller (GBC) to apprehend the
coarse-to-fine granular representations of different patches,
matching their proportional contribution to the entire image
to determine the proper bit-width allocation. On this premise,
we investigate the relation between bit-width and information density, devising an entropy-to-bit (E2B) mechanism that
enables further fine-grained dynamic bit adaption of high-bit
patches. Extensive experiments validate the superiority and
generalization ability of Granular-DQ over recent state-ofthe-art methods on various SR models.

Bit

Layer

Bit
regularization
Layer

×

Average bit:5.94
PSNR: 25.68dB

(a) Existing quantization pipeline for varying patches and layers
Granularity
Bit
-bit
controller

Entropy
Entropy-based
adjustment

Patch
High bit-width

√
Patch
Average bit:5.00
PSNR: 25.74dB

(b) Our dynamic granularity-aware quantization pipeline

Figure 1: Visual comparison of (a) previous dynamic quantization pipeline (Hong et al. 2022a) that adapt the bit
allocation for layers and patches simultaneously and (b)
our Granular-DQ pipeline conducts patch-wise and layerinvariant dynamic quantization, which contains two steps:
1) granularity-aware bit allocation and 2) fine-grained bitwidth adaption based on the entropy statistics. Our method
recovers a better SR image with a lower average bit.
Lu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023) have
dominated SISR. While the SR performance continues to
achieve breakthroughs, the model complexity of later methods also increases constantly, which limits their practical applications, especially tackling large-size images (e.g. 2K and
4K). This raises interest in compressing deep SR models to
unlock their potential on resource-constrained devices.
Model quantization (Zhou et al. 2016) has emerged as a
promising technology that reduces both computational overhead and memory cost with minimal performance sacrifice,
where the effectiveness has been demonstrated in a wide
range of high-level tasks (Zhou et al. 2016; Choi et al. 2018;
Bhalgat et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2022; Luo
et al. 2023). Some prior works design SR quantizers by adjusting the quantization range (Li et al. 2020; Zhong et al.
2022) or modeling the feature distribution (Hong et al.
2022b; Qin et al. 2024) for activations, assigning a fixed bit
for diverse image regions. However, these methods overlook
that the accuracy degradation from quantization can vary for
different contents, where some are more sensitive to quantization, thus showing a worse tolerance for low bits.
To address this limitation, Hong et al. (Hong et al. 2022a)
propose content-aware dynamic quantization (CADyQ)

Code — https://github.com/MmmingS/Granular-DQ.git

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) has been a fundamental task in the computer vision community, aiming to recover
high-resolution (HR) images from corrupted low-resolution
(LR) input. Recently, from the pioneering deep learningbased method (Dong et al. 2014), convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Dong et al. 2014; Kim, Lee, and Lee 2016;
Shi et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018; Ahn, Kang, and Sohn
2018; Li et al. 2022) and transformers (Liang et al. 2021;
* Corresponding authors: Zhao Zhang (cszzhang@gmail.com)
and Feng Li (fengli@hfut.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7826

