The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training-free Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation via
Diverse Prototype Construction and Sub-region Matching
Xuanpu Zhao1,2,3 , Dianmo Sheng1,2,3 , Zhentao Tan1,2,3 , Zhiwei Zhao1,2,3
Tao Gong1,2,3 , Qi Chu1,2,3 * , Bin Liu1,2,3 , Nenghai Yu1,2,3
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security
3
the CCCD Key Lab of Ministry of Culture and Tourism
{zhaoxuanpu,dmsheng,tzt,zwzhao98}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tgong,qchu,fowice,ynh}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) aims to
segment images of arbitrary categories specified by class labels. While previous approaches relied on extensive imagetext pairs or dense semantic annotations, recent training-free
methods attempted to overcome these limitations by constructing semantic prototypes in the construction stage and
image-to-image matching (i.e., prototype matching) during
testing. However, these methods often struggle to effectively
capture the visual characteristics of categories and fail to utilize local features during prototype matching. To deal with
these problems, we propose a novel training-free framework
for OVSS that constructs diverse prototypes and performs
fine-grained sub-region matching. Specifically, our method
leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) to guide support
image generation by descriptions of different attributes of categories and employs coarse-fine clustering to obtain diverse
and robust part-level prototypes in the construction stage.
During testing, we propose a sub-region matching method,
which assigns part-level prototypes to sub-regions utilizing optimal transport, to fully utilize local image features
among part-level prototypes. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance, outperforming
previous methods across five datasets.

Car parked in
front of house.
Car abandoned
In desert.
……

LLM

A photo
of a car.

guide

Stable Diffusion

Stable Diffusion

Low Diversity

High Diversity

(a) Diverse Prototype Construction.
0.52

0.58
0.41

0.47
0.55

Sub-region
Matching
P=0.14

0.13

0.55
Image-to-image
Matching
P=0.05

(b) Sub-region Matching

Figure 1: Motivation of this work. (a) We construct diverse
prototypes with the guidance of LLM. (b) We assign different part-level prototypes to sub-regions for fine-grained
matching and utilization of complementary information.

Introduction
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) (Ghiasi
et al. 2022) classifies pixels in an image into a set of arbitrary categories that are specified by textual input. It is challenging since it requires assigning pixels to the correct semantic label from a large vocabulary. To solve this challenging task, some works (Xu et al. 2022b; Liang et al. 2023;
Xu et al. 2023b; Han et al. 2023) generate class-agnostic
mask proposals firstly and then classify the proposals using
vision language models, i.e., CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and
ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021). However, These methods require
dense semantic annotation and face issues of transferring the
image classification capabilities of vision-language models
to region classification(Zhou et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024; Jiao
et al. 2023). Other works perform contrast learning through

weak supervision from image-text pairs (Xu et al. 2022a;
Luo et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023a) to overcome this limitation. These methods require a large number of image-text
pairs but still struggle to output high-quality mask proposals
due to a lack of fine-grained supervision.
Recently, some training free manners (Karazija et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2024; Barsellotti et al. 2024) achieve
promising performance following a two-stage framework,
i.e., semantic prototypes construction in the construction
stage and similarity comparison during the test stage. To be
specific, OVDiff first proposes to construct semantic prototypes via stable diffusion model (Rombach et al. 2022)
and compare the similarity between the test image and con-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10474

