The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Relation-aware Hierarchical Prompt for Open-vocabulary Scene Graph Generation
Tao Liu1 , Rongjie Li1 , Chongyu Wang1 , Xuming He1,2 *
1

ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
liutao2023@shanghaitech.edu.cn, bugboy56@gmail.com, {wangchy, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
2

Entity- aware Text Prompt

Abstract

A female riding a ground
transport

Open-vocabulary Scene Graph Generation (OV-SGG) overcomes the limitations of the closed-set assumption by aligning
visual relationship representations with open-vocabulary textual representations. This enables the identification of novel
visual relationships, making it applicable to real-world scenarios with diverse relationships. However, existing OV-SGG
methods are constrained by fixed text representations, limiting
diversity and accuracy in image-text alignment. To address
these challenges, we propose the Relation-Aware Hierarchical Prompting (RAHP) framework, which enhances text representation by integrating subject-object and region-specific
relation information. Our approach utilizes entity clustering
to address the complexity of relation triplet categories, enabling the effective integration of subject-object information.
Additionally, we utilize a large language model (LLM) to generate detailed region-aware prompts, capturing fine-grained
visual interactions and improving alignment between visual
and textual modalities. RAHP also introduces a dynamic selection mechanism within Vision-Language Models (VLMs),
which adaptively selects relevant text prompts based on the
visual content, reducing noise from irrelevant prompts. Extensive experiments on the Visual Genome and Open Images v6
datasets demonstrate that our framework consistently achieves
state-of-the-art performance, demonstrating its effectiveness
in addressing the challenges of open-vocabulary scene graph
generation.

1

Holding the handlebars with both
hands
Posterior is seated on the saddle
Both feet are positioned on the
pedals
Region- aware Text Prompts

Visual Language Model

Visual Relation
Representations
near
riding

holding

/

Entity- aware Text
Representations

/

Region- aware Text
Representations

on

Visual- semantic Space

Figure 1: An illustration of RAHP for OV-SGG. RAHP generates entity-aware and region-aware hierarchical prompts
to enrich the text representations of the relation, thereby enhancing OV-SGG.

Introduction

2022; Zhang et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023) has emerged as an
active research area recently.
Previous studies (Yu et al. 2023; Liao et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2023) mainly leverage the image-text matching capabilities of pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (Radford et al. 2021) to achieve open-vocabulary relation detection based on the similarity scores between relation features
and text representations. However, these methods typically
rely on a single, fixed form of text representation, which
limits the diversity and accuracy of image-text matching,
particularly in predicting novel relations. To address this, a
promising strategy (Gao et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024b; Menon
and Vondrick 2022) is to use generative category descriptions
to expand the text representation space, thereby enhancing
the flexibility and precision of image-text matching. Nonetheless, generating informative relation descriptions requires
not only encoding triplet information (Li et al. 2024a), i.e.,

Scene Graph Generation (SGG) (Johnson et al. 2015; Zellers
et al. 2018) is a fundamental task in computer vision, involving the construction of a structured representation of a scene
by identifying the relations between entities depicted in an
image. It has already demonstrated promising performance
in various downstream tasks (Kamath et al. 2021; Lee et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021). Traditional SGG
methods typically operate within a closed vocabulary, and
due to the diversity of relational concepts that exceed existing data annotations, they face challenges in effectively
modeling open-set relations. To address this challenge, OpenVocabulary Scene Graph Generation (OV-SGG) (He et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5576

