The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MEPNet: Medical Entity-Balanced Prompting Network for Brain CT Report
Generation
Xiaodan Zhang1 , Yanzhao Shi1 , Junzhong Ji1 * , Chengxin Zheng1 , Liangqiong Qu2 *
1

2

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
zhangxiaodan@bjut.edu.cn, yanzhaoshi0927@outlook.com,
jjz01@bjut.edu.cn, chaunxey_zeta@emails.bjut.edu.cn, liangqqu@hku.hk
(a) Biased Learning of Medical Entities

Abstract

Entity Learning Loss Learning Status

The automatic generation of brain CT reports has gained
widespread attention, given its potential to assist radiologists in
diagnosing cranial diseases. However, brain CT scans involve
extensive medical entities, such as diverse anatomy regions
and lesions, exhibiting highly inconsistent spatial patterns in
3D volumetric space. This leads to biased learning of medical entities in existing methods, resulting in repetitiveness
and inaccuracy in generated reports. To this end, we propose
a Medical Entity-balanced Prompting Network (MEPNet),
which harnesses the large language model (LLM) to fairly interpret various entities for accurate brain CT report generation.
By introducing the visual embedding and the learning status
of medical entities as enriched clues, our method prompts the
LLM to balance the learning of diverse entities, thereby enhancing reports with comprehensive findings. First, to extract
visual embedding of entities, we propose Knowledge-driven
Joint Attention to explore and distill entity patterns using both
explicit and implicit medical knowledge. Then, a Learning
Status Scorer is designed to evaluate the learning of entity
visual embeddings, resulting in unique learning status for individual entities. Finally, these entity visual embeddings and
status are elaborately integrated into multi-modal prompts, to
guide the text generation of LLM. This process allows LLM
to self-adapt the learning process for biased-fitted entities,
thereby covering detailed findings in generated reports. We
conduct experiments on two brain CT report generation benchmarks, showing the effectiveness in clinical accuracy and text
coherence.

Thalamus

High Density

Basal Ganglia

Low Density

Thalamus

0.79

Moderate

Basal
Ganglia

1.54

Limited

High
Density

0.25

Proficient

Low
Density

3.87

Inadequate

(b) F1 of Medical Entities in Generated Reports
Models
WGAM
PGCA
WGAM-HI
Baseline
Ours
0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 1: (a) shows an example of biased entity learning,
where different medical entities in brain CT scans exhibit
distinct learning losses, indicating biased learning statuses.
(b) compares F1 scores of different MRG models for covering various medical entities in generated reports. Our method
shows the narrowest box with a higher median F1 score, indicating our effectiveness in balanced and accurate learning.

Code — https://github.com/YanzhaoShi/MEPNet.

Introduction
Radiology reports provide interpretations of detailed pathological findings from medical images, which are crucial for
patient treatments. Despite the significance, for radiologists,
hand-crafted writing practices are time-consuming and may
cause error outcomes due to subjective factors (e.g. diversion
and exhaustion) (Brady et al. 2012). The advent of automated
medical report models can produce accurate reports and offer
potential benefits for medical examinations, such as reducing
the workload shouldered by physicians and saving the limited
clinical resources in densely populated countries.
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25940

In recent years, medical report generation (MRG) (Jing,
Xie, and Xing 2018; Yang et al. 2021, 2023; Shi et al. 2023;
Li et al. 2023) has emerged as a core topic within the medical
multi-modal learning. Different from natural image captioning (Xu et al. 2015; Ji et al. 2020), MRG models focus on
reporting tiny pathological conditions from sparse and similar
visual information. This motivates MRG models to learn specific patterns associated with medical entities, encompassing
entities of anatomy regions such as “basal ganglia” and entities of lesions such as “high density” (refer to Figure 1(a)).
To achieve this, task-specific attention mechanisms (Jing,
Xie, and Xing 2018; Wang et al. 2018) are early designed to
ground medical semantics with specific visual areas. Memory
mechanism (Chen et al. 2021; Qin and Song 2022) is then
proposed to store cross-modal patterns of diseases for generating accurate content. Moreover, knowledge graph (Liu

