The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimal Bounds for Dissatisfaction in Perpetual Voting
Alexander Kozachinskiy1 , Alexander Shen2 , Tomasz Steifer34
1

Centro Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial, Santiago, Chile
2
LIRMM, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France
3
Institute of Fundamental Technological Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
4
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile
alexander.kozachinskyi@cenia.cl, alexander.shen@lirmm.fr, tsteifer@ippt.pan.pl
Abstract

to devise a voting method that would lead to “fair” results.
For instance, what would be fair in the following situation:
8 friends meet each weekend to go for dinner, but there are
just 2 places, and 5 friends want to go to a pizza place and
3 to a curry place (never changing their preferences and approving just one of the options)? It is natural to say that we
have to choose the pizza place roughly 5/8 fraction of times,
proportionally to the number of people, wanting it.
Using simple majority vote is not a good idea here, it will
choose the pizza place all the time. Lackner gives an example of the algorithm that will work better: each time, define
the weight of a person as 1/(1 + s), where s is the number
of times this person was satisfied, and choose the place with
a bigger sum of the weights of people that want it. One can
show that out of every 8 times, 5 times it will choose the
pizza place and 3 times the curry place.
More generally, Lackner introduced simple proportionality, which is fairness in the following sense: in a situation
when preferences do not change, and everybody approves
just one option, every option has to be chosen the number
of times which is proportional to the number of people, approving this option. Lackner and Maly (2023) studied simple proportionality for two classes of voting methods called
loss-based WAMs and win-based WAMs (WAM = weighted
approval method). A loss-based WAM is a voting method
where every person gets a positive weight, which is a function of the number of times this person was dissatisfied, and
then the option with the biggest total weight is chosen. A
win-base WAM is the same thing, but the weight of a person
is determined by the number of times this person was satisfied. Lackner and Maly show that there is no simply proportional loss-based WAM, and they characterize all win-based
WAMs.
Extending simple proportionality to a setting when agents
might approve more than one option, and, moreover, might
change their preferences over time, is a delicate task (Bulteau et al. 2021), and a recent work of Chandak, Goel, and
Peters (2024) gives an excellent overview of this topic. Besides proportionality, Lackner (2020) have formalized and
studied other notions of fairness like the independence of
uncontroversial decisions (rounds of voting where there is
an option, satisfying everyone, should not affect the other
rounds) and dry spells (how many times a person can be dissatisfied in a row).

In perpetual voting, multiple decisions are made at different moments in time. Taking the history of previous decisions into account allows us to satisfy properties such as proportionality over periods of time. In this paper, we consider
the following question: is there a perpetual approval voting
method that guarantees that no voter is dissatisfied too many
times? We identify a sufficient condition on voter behavior
—which we call ’bounded conflicts’ condition—under which
a sublinear growth of dissatisfaction is possible. We provide
a tight upper bound on the growth of dissatisfaction under
bounded conflicts, using techniques from Kolmogorov complexity. We also observe that the approval voting with binary
choices mimics the machine learning setting of prediction
with expert advice. This allows us to present a voting method
with sublinear guarantees on dissatisfaction under bounded
conflicts, based on the standard techniques from prediction
with expert advice.

Introduction
Imagine a group of friends who meet every week to go somewhere together. There are several options – going to the park,
going to the cinema, and so on, but different people like only
some of the options. For example, somebody says: “I don’t
want to go to the park because it is spring and I have an allergy. And I don’t want to go to the cinema because I don’t
like any of the movies that are currently showing”. Then the
other friend says: “I also don’t want to go to the cinema,
and I don’t want to go to dances, because I broke my leg”.
And so on, all friends indicate which option they approve
and which disapprove. We have to choose one option for everybody to go there. People, not approving this option, will
be dissatisfied.
This happens not once but a number of times and the preferences of friends might arbitrarily change (for instance, a
person who did not want to go to the cinema now might
want to see a new movie). When we make a decision, we
assume that the preferences of friends in the future are not
known to us – we only see what they approve this week and
what they wanted in previous weeks.
This setting has been recently introduced by Lackner
(2020) under the name perpetual voting. The goal here is
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13977

