The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ExcluIR: Exclusionary Neural Information Retrieval
Wenhao Zhang1 , Mengqi Zhang1 * , Shiguang Wu1 , Jiahuan Pei2 , Zhaochun Ren3 ,
Maarten de Rijke4 , Zhumin Chen1 * , Pengjie Ren1
1
Shandong University, Qingdao, China
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3
Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
4
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{zhangwenhao,shiguang.wu}@mail.sdu.edu.cn,
{mengqi.zhang,chenzhumin,renpengjie}@sdu.edu.cn,
jiahuan.pei@cwi.nl, z.ren@liacs.leidenuniv.nl, m.derijke@uva.nl

2

Non-exclusionary query

Abstract

What are the American sci-fi action movies
released in 2019?

Exclusion is an important and universal linguistic skill that
humans use to express what they do not want. There is little
research on exclusionary retrieval, where users express what
they do not want to be part of the results produced for their
queries. We investigate the scenario of exclusionary retrieval
in document retrieval for the first time. We present ExcluIR,
a set of resources for exclusionary retrieval, consisting of an
evaluation benchmark and a training set for helping retrieval
models to comprehend exclusionary queries. The evaluation
benchmark includes 3,452 high-quality exclusionary queries,
each of which has been manually annotated. The training set
contains 70,293 exclusionary queries, each paired with a positive document and a negative document. We conduct detailed
experiments and analyses, obtaining three main observations:
(i) existing retrieval models with different architectures struggle to comprehend exclusionary queries effectively; (ii) although integrating our training data can improve the performance of retrieval models on exclusionary retrieval, there still
exists a gap compared to human performance; and (iii) generative retrieval models have a natural advantage in handling
exclusionary queries.

1

Exclusionary query

What other sci-fi movies (besides Avengers:
Endgame) were released in 2019?

Alita: Battle Angel

Avengers: Endgame

Alita: Battle Angel is a 2019
American cyberpunk action
film
based
on
Yukito
Kishiro's manga series Battle
Angel Alita...

Avengers: Endgame is a
2019 American superhero
film based on the Marvel
Comics superhero team the
Avengers...

Figure 1: A comparison between non-exclusionary and exclusionary queries. Exclusionary queries often specify content to be excluded (e.g., “Avengers: Endgame”) to express
the user’s requirements for omitting certain information. In
this case, if the retrieval system fails to comprehend the exclusionary nature of a query (e.g., one containing the term
“besides,”) it will produce retrieval results that users do not
desire.

Introduction

Selective attention (Treisman 1964; LaBerge 1990; Cherry
2020), defined as the ability to focus on relevant information while disregarding irrelevant information, plays a crucial role in shaping user’s search behaviors. This principle,
originating from cognitive psychology, not only shapes human perception of the environment but also extends its influence to interactions with information retrieval systems.
When searching for information, users can express a desire to exclude certain information. We refer to this phenomenon as exclusionary retrieval, where users explicitly
indicate their preference to exclude specific information.
Exclusionary retrieval emphasizes a crucial need for precision and relevance in information retrieval. It shows how
users use their knowledge and expectations to find information that meets their specific needs. Therefore, the failure to

understand exclusionary queries can present a potentially serious problem. For example, as shown in Figure 1, imagine
a user searching for movies in the retrieval system. He poses
a query like “What other sci-fi movies (besides Avengers:
Endgame) were released in 2019?” If the retrieval system
cannot correctly address this exclusionary requirement, it
may return results containing content irrelevant to the user’s
interests (e.g., the movie “Avengers: Endgame”), thus reducing user satisfaction.
Research on exclusionary retrieval remains relatively
rare. Early studies mainly focus on keyword-based methods (Nakkouzi and Eastman 1990; McQuire and Eastman
1998; Harvey et al. 2003). These approaches rely on constructing boolean queries that include negation terms, which
is essentially a post-processing strategy. However, these

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13295

