The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Text-Guided Nonverbal Enhancement Based on Modality-Invariant and -Specific
Representations for Video Speaking Style Recognition
Beibei Zhang, Tongwei Ren* , Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
zhangbb@smail.nju.edu.cn, {rentw, gswu}@nju.edu.cn

Existing Unimodal Methods

Abstract

Explain ✘

V

Video speaking style recognition (VSSR) aims to classify
different types of conversations in videos, contributing significantly to understanding human interactions. A significant
challenge in VSSR is the inherent similarity among conversation videos, which makes it difficult to distinguish between
different speaking styles. Existing VSSR methods commit to
providing available multimodal information to enhance the
differentiation of conversation videos. Nevertheless, treating
each modality equally leads to a suboptimal result for these
methods due to text is inherently more aligned with conversation understanding compared to nonverbal modalities.
To address this issue, we propose a text-guided nonverbal
enhancement method, TNvE, which is composed of two core
modules: 1) a text-guided nonverbal representation selection
module employs cross-modal attention based on modalityinvariant representations, picking out critical nonverbal information via textual guide; and 2) a modality-invariant
and -specific representation decoupling module incorporates
modality-specific representations and decouples them from
modality-invariant representations, enabling a more comprehensive understanding of multimodal data. The former
module encourages multimodal representations close to each
other, while the latter module provides unique characteristics
of each modality as a supplement. Extensive experiments
are conducted on long-form video understanding datasets
to demonstrate that TNvE is highly effective for VSSR,
achieving a new state-of-the-art.

Existing Multimodal Methods
You hit him…
V = T = A
Come on,
get up!
Our TNvE
You hit him…
Come on,
get up!

Explain ✘

select
V

T

A

select

Threaten

Violence
Nonverbal Contents Selected by TNvE

Scream!

Figure 1: Comparison between existing unimodal methods,
multimodal methods and our TNvE for VSSR. Here, V,
A and T refers to visual, acoustic and textual modalities,
nonverbal contents in red boxes are critical ones selected by
TNvE.

and Gilbert 2022; Wang et al. 2023b) focus on developing sophisticated visual networks to capture robust spatiotemporal relationships within dynamic video contents to
reveal the speaking styles. However, the visual contents of
conversation videos, which are composed of consistent faceto-face talking shots, tend to be too similar to distinguish
between different speaking styles, leading to a performance
decline in VSSR (Zhang et al. 2023). As a result, multimodal methods (Sun et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2023; Argaw et al. 2023; He et al. 2024) commit to
exploring multimodal available information for VSSR as a
complement to visual representation, aiming to enhance the
differentiation of conversation videos.
Despite the progress made by multimodal methods, they
treat each modality equally, neglecting the fact that different
modalities contribute to VSSR to varying extents. Text is
inherently superior to nonverbal modalities for VSSR due
to textual dialogue contains dense semantic information
highly related to the conversation. In contrast, nonverbal
contents, typically involving face-to-face talking shots and
moderate volume and pitches, tend to remain consistent

Introduction
Video speaking style recognition aims to recognize different
categories of human conversations in videos, offering a
critical perspective to understand human interactions. It
plays a vital role in many applications, such as video content
understanding (Wu and Krahenbuhl 2021), conversation
head generation (Zhou et al. 2022) and virtual agent design (Aneja et al. 2021). As a result, VSSR has attracted
considerable attention in recent years.
As shown in Figure 1, existing VSSR methods can be
broadly categorized into two main types: unimodal and
multimodal approaches. Unimodal methods (Wu and Krahenbuhl 2021; Islam and Bertasius 2022; Fish, Weinbren,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22354

