The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Lightweight Yet Fine-Grained: A Graph Capsule Convolutional Network with
Subspace Alignment for Shared-Account Sequential Recommendation
Jinyu Zhang1 , Zhongying Zhao1 * , Chao Li1 , Yanwei Yu2
1

College of Computer Science and Engineering, Shandong University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266590, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266400, China
jinyuz1996@outlook.com, zzysuin@163.com or zyzhao@sdust.edu.cn, lichao@sdust.edu.cn, yuyanwei@ouc.edu.cn

A Shared-account

Shared-account Sequential Recommendation (SSR) aims to
provide personalized recommendations for accounts shared
by multiple users with varying sequential preferences. Previous studies on SSR struggle to capture the fine-grained
associations between interactions and different latent users
within the shared account’s hybrid sequences. Moreover,
most existing SSR methods (e.g., RNN-based or GCN-based
methods) have quadratic computational complexities, hindering the deployment of SSRs on resource-constrained devices. To this end, we propose a Lightweight Graph Capsule
Convolutional Network with subspace alignment for sharedaccount sequential recommendation, named LightGC2 N.
Specifically, we devise a lightweight graph capsule convolutional network. It facilitates the fine-grained matching between interactions and latent users by attentively propagating
messages on the capsule graphs. Besides, we present an efficient subspace alignment method. This method refines the
sequence representations and then aligns them with the finely
clustered preferences of latent users. The experimental results on four real-world datasets indicate that LightGC2 N outperforms nine state-of-the-art methods in accuracy and efficiency.

?

Latent
User 1

v2
v1

Latent
User 2

v3

v6
v4

v5

?

Hybrid Sequence

Abstract

Figure 1: An example to illustrate the shared-account sequential recommendation scenario. {v1 , v2 , . . . , v6 } are the
historical behaviors in the hybrid sequence.
sequential recommendations emerges as an appealing yet
challenging task, i.e., the Shared-account Sequential Recommendation (SSR).
In the early explorations of the SSR, researchers prefer
utilizing Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to distinguish
the user preferences from shared accounts (Wen et al. 2021).
π-Net (Ma et al. 2019) and PSJNet (Sun et al. 2023) are
two RNN-based SSR methods that leverage Gating Recurrent Unit (GRU) to cluster the preferences of latent users and
then learn the account-level sequence representations. Since
an account encompasses multiple latent users, the sharedaccount sequences tend to be longer than typical sequences.
However, RNN-based methods have catastrophic forgetting
problems in processing lengthy sequences, leading to gradient vanishing problems during model training (Guo et al.
2024). Subsequently, DA-GCN (Guo et al. 2021) and TiDAGCN (Guo et al. 2024) are proposed. These graph-based
SSR methods model the preferences of each latent user
through a multi-head self-attention mechanism and learn
account-level sequence embeddings by propagating messages on the sequential graph. Although these methods have
achieved remarkable performance in SSR, they still face the
below two challenges:
(1) Coarse-grained user representations. Since an account is shared by multiple users in SSR, the interactions
are generated by diverse latent users. Most graph-based
SSR methods directly learn the preferences of latent users
by modeling the account-level sequences on the sequential
graphs (Wen et al. 2021). They try to perform clustering
(Guo et al. 2021) or apply multi-head self-attention (Guo

Code —
https://github.com/ZZY-GraphMiningLab/LightGC2N

Introduction
Sequential Recommender systems (SRs) strive to provide
users with personalized content (Ma et al. 2024), products
(Yue et al. 2023), or services (Li et al. 2024) based on their
sequential preferences. Most SRs are under an ideal assumption that each account is merely associated with one single
user (Verstrepen and Goethals 2015). In real-world scenarios, many users prefer to share their accounts with family
members or close friends (Jiang et al. 2018). As illustrated
in Figure 1, multiple family members (i.e., latent users) utilize a shared video account. Clearly, their viewing histories reveal distinct preferences, yet they’re blended into an
account-level hybrid sequence. Distinguishing the diverse
preferences of latent users while providing account-level
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13242

