The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SparX: A Sparse Cross-Layer Connection Mechanism for
Hierarchical Vision Mamba and Transformer Networks
Meng Lou, Yunxiang Fu, Yizhou Yu*
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
loumeng@connect.hku.hk, yunxiang@connect.hku.hk, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Due to the capability of dynamic state space models (SSMs)
in capturing long-range dependencies with linear-time computational complexity, Mamba has shown notable performance in NLP tasks. This has inspired the rapid development of Mamba-based vision models, resulting in promising
results in visual recognition tasks. However, such models are
not capable of distilling features across layers through feature
aggregation, interaction, and selection. Moreover, existing
cross-layer feature aggregation methods designed for CNNs
or ViTs are not practical in Mamba-based models due to high
computational costs. Therefore, this paper aims to introduce
an efficient cross-layer feature aggregation mechanism for vision backbone networks. Inspired by the Retinal Ganglion
Cells (RGCs) in the human visual system, we propose a new
sparse cross-layer connection mechanism termed SparX to
effectively improve cross-layer feature interaction and reuse.
Specifically, we build two different types of network layers:
ganglion layers and normal layers. The former has higher
connectivity and complexity, enabling multi-layer feature aggregation and interaction in an input-dependent manner. In
contrast, the latter has lower connectivity and complexity. By
interleaving these two types of layers, we design a new family
of vision backbone networks with sparsely cross-connected
layers, achieving an excellent trade-off among model size,
computational cost, memory cost, and accuracy in comparison to its counterparts. For instance, with fewer parameters,
SparX-Mamba-T improves the top-1 accuracy of VMambaT from 82.5% to 83.5%, while SparX-Swin-T achieves a
1.3% increase in top-1 accuracy compared to Swin-T. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our new connection mechanism possesses both superior performance and
generalization capabilities on various vision tasks.

Figure 1: Performance comparison between SparX-Mamba
and other methods on various vision tasks.

et al. 2022; Ding et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2023; Ding et al.
2024) and Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al.
2021; Touvron et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2021) to possess powerful long-range modeling capability.
However, both CNNs with large convolution kernels and Vision Transformers exhibit limitations. The performance of
CNNs still lags behind advanced ViTs while the latter suffers from substantial computational costs when processing
high-resolution inputs, due to its quadratic complexity.
Empowered by dynamic State Space Models (SSMs)
capable of modeling long-range dependencies with nearlinear complexity, Mamba (Gu and Dao 2024) has demonstrated promising performance in natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Building upon this success, researchers
have proposed Mamba-based models for vision tasks (Zhu
et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024; Huang et al.
2024; Behrouz, Santacatterina, and Zabih 2024; Pei, Huang,
and Xu 2024). Such work has made successful attempts to
introduce linear-time long-range modeling capability into
vision models by leveraging SSMs, which are primarily used

Code — https://github.com/LMMMEng/SparX
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.09649

1

Introduction

Contextual modeling plays a vital role in computer vision
tasks, including image classification, object detection, and
semantic segmentation. Recent advancements have explored
large-kernel convolutions to enlarge receptive fields (Liu
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19104

