The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Grounded Multi-Hop VideoQA in Long-Form Egocentric Videos
Qirui Chen1,2 , Shangzhe Di1,2 , Weidi Xie1 *
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Coop. Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{chen qirui, dishangzhe, weidi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of Multi-Hop Video Question Answering (MH-VidQA) in long-form egocentric videos.
This task not only requires to answer visual questions, but
also to localize multiple relevant time intervals within the
video as visual evidences. We develop an automated pipeline
to create multi-hop question-answering pairs with associated temporal evidence, enabling to construct a large-scale
dataset for instruction-tuning. To monitor the progress of
this new task, we further curate a high-quality benchmark,
M ULTI H OP -E GO QA, with careful manual verification and
refinement. Experimental results reveal that existing multimodal systems exhibit inadequate multi-hop grounding and
reasoning abilities, resulting in unsatisfactory performance.
We then propose a novel architecture, termed as Grounding
Scattered Evidence with Large Language Model (GeLM),
that enhances multi-modal large language models by incorporating a grounding module to retrieve temporal evidence
from videos using flexible grounding tokens. Trained on our
visual instruction-tuning data, GeLM demonstrates improved
multi-hop grounding and reasoning capabilities, setting a
baseline for this new task. Furthermore, when trained on
third-person view videos, the same architecture also achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the single-hop VidQA benchmark, ActivityNet-RTL, demonstrating its effectiveness.

0s

Answer:

90s

135s

180s

You cut onion and potato on the cutting mat with the knife.

Evidence: 0-13s, 26-32s, 44-55s, 145-168s

Figure 1: We introduce the problem of Multi-Hop Video
Question Answering for long-form egocentric video understanding. This task requires the model to answer questions
by gathering and reasoning across scattered visual clues, necessitating the grounding of multiple relevant time spans as
supporting evidence.

can encompass various vision tasks about the ‘who’, ‘when’,
‘where’, and ‘what’ of an individual’s daily life, e.g., action
recognition, object detection, and scene understanding, thus
acting as a robust and comprehensive benchmark for video
understanding.
Recently, the introduction of Ego4D dataset (Grauman
et al. 2022) has enabled a series of research in visuallanguage understanding in egocentric videos, e.g., question
answering that focuses on summarizing entire video content (Mangalam, Akshulakov, and Malik 2023); natural language query (NLQ) that requires temporal localization based
on a given query (Ramakrishnan, Al-Halah, and Grauman
2023); grounded question answering that considers answering the query, while localizing the query-related time span
simultaneously (Bärmann and Waibel 2022). However, the
above-mentioned settings often fall into an over-simplistic
scenario, where questions are typically answerable based on
visual cues from a single time point, or only one time span is
annotated among multiple relevant spans. For instance, the
question “How many shirts did I pack in my suitcase?” is
deliberately excluded if the packing process occurs across
multiple, non-contiguous time spans, as described in the annotation process of the NLQ task in Ego4D.
As a consequence, VidQA systems built upon the abovementioned tasks can hardly be applied in multi-hop scenar-

Code — https://qirui-chen.github.io/MultiHop-EgoQA

1

45s

Question: What ingredients did I cut with the knife?

Introduction

With the rapid development of computer vision, the community has witnessed a significant interest in deploying vision
systems within embodied agents, such as AR glasses (Datta
et al. 2022) and humanoid robots (Majumdar et al. 2024).
In such scenarios, the inputs are typically long, continuous
video streams from a first-person perspective, capturing the
world through the eyes of an agent, actively interacting with
its environment. For the virtual assistants or physical robots
to be useful, the ability to perform egocentric video question answering (VidQA) is crucial, stemming from two aspects: first, VidQA leverages language as a natural interface
for human-machine interaction, thereby enhancing the usability and accessibility for the general public; second, it
* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2159

