The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Community-Aware Variational Autoencoder for Continuous Dynamic Networks
Junwei Cheng1 , Chaobo He1 * , Pengxing Feng2 , Weixiong Liu1 , Kunlin Han3,4 , Yong Tang1 *
1

2

School of Computer Science, South China Normal University
Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong
3
CMT US Holdings LLC
4
Computer Science Department, University of Southern California
{jung, hechaobo, weixiongliu, ytang}@m.scnu.edu.cn,
pengxfeng2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, kunlinha@usc.edu

Abstract

particular to the community detection, seems inherently appropriate.
Community detection, aka. graph clustering, aims to divide nodes into optimal cluster structures with dense intraedge and sparse inter-edge connections. For nodes with attributes, such as those in text-attributed networks (Cheng
et al. 2024), nodes within the same community tend to have
similar attribute information, and vice versa. To uncover the
community structure in static networks, the inference component of variational autoencoder methods typically learns
the latent representations of nodes through the messagepassing mechanism of graph convolutional networks (GCN),
while the generation component focuses on reconstructing
the network structure (Kipf and Welling 2016). Subsequent
methods build upon this approach and attempt to introduce
improvements to various components (Mrabah, Bouguessa,
and Ksantini 2024; Li, Li, and Lian 2023; Choong, Liu, and
Murata 2018).
While these methods have demonstrated promising performance, they predominantly focus on the static networks
and do not explore the continuous dynamic networks. Continuous dynamic networks primarily differ from static networks in the timeliness and causality of edges between
nodes (Khoshraftar and An 2024; Su et al. 2024). As illustrated in Figure 1(A), Tom interacts with Jim, Mia and
Ella at different times, with a lower frequency of interaction
with Ella. In the context of continuous dynamic networks,
based on the graph motif (Paranjape, Benson, and Leskovec
2017), Jim and Mia are likely to interact in the future due
to their common and close friend, Tom. Conversely, Jim and
Ella are unlikely to interact, as Ella appears to be more of
a transient visitor. However, in static networks, the absence
of edge timeliness information promotes the formation of a
connection between Jim and Ella.
Although continuous dynamic networks provide a more
realistic representation of scenarios, research on community detection within such networks remains limited.
One challenge is that existing relevant datasets often lack
node labels, making it difficult to quantify the performance of proposed methods. Additionally, current variational autoencoder-based methods are difficult to extend directly to continuous patterns. Specifically,

Variational autoencoder performs well in community detection on static networks, but it is difficult to directly extend
to continuous dynamic networks. The main reason is that
traditional methods mainly rely on adjacency structures to
complete the inference and generation processes. However,
continuous dynamic networks cannot be described by this
structure because the inherent timeliness and causality information of the network would be lost. To address this issue, we propose a novel variational autoencoder, CT-VAE,
for community detection in continuous dynamic networks,
along with its scalable variant, CT-CAVAE. By conceptualizing node interactions as event streams and adopting the
Hawkes process to capture temporal dynamics and causality,
and incorporating them into the inference process, CT-VAE
can effectively extend the traditional inference approach to
continuous dynamic networks. Additionally, in the generation phase, CT-VAE combines pseudo-labeling and compact
constraint strategies to facilitate the reconstruction process of
non-adjacent structures. For the scalable variant, CT-CAVAE,
end-to-end community detection is achieved by cleverly combining Gaussian mixture distribution. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the proposed CT-VAE and CTCAVAE achieve more favorable performance compared with
the state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Variational autoencoder is a crucial methodology within the
generative paradigm, primarily comprising three components: inference, generation and the evidence lower bound
(ELBO). The inference component is responsible for learning latent representations from data, while the generation
component reconstructs new data based on these learned
representations. ELBO functions as an optimization objective, ensuring that the learned distribution of representations
closely aligns with the actual yet unknown distribution of
data. Given that variational autoencoder provides a natural
optimization objective and has advantages in handling complex data (Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe 2017), its application to graph machine learning (Liang et al. 2023; Bhattacharya, Liu, and Maiti 2024; Liang et al. 2024), and in
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Non-adjacent structures complicate the inference process
16001

