The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Domain Generalized Medical Landmark Detection via Robust Boundary-Aware
Pre-Training
Haifan Gong1,2 , Yu Lu3,4 , Xiang Wan1 , Haofeng Li1 *
1

Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
University of California, Merced, CA, USA
4
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA
haifangong@link.cuhk.edu.cn, ylu54@ucmerced.edu, {wanxiang, lhaof}@sribd.cn
2

Abstract
In recent years, deep learning has revenue in automated medical landmark detection. Nonetheless, prevailing research in
this field predominantly addresses single-center scenarios or
domain adaptation settings. In practical environments, the acquisition of multi-center data faces privacy concerns, coupled with the time-intensive and costly nature of data collection and annotation. These challenges substantially impede
the broader application of deep learning-based medical landmark detection. To mitigate these issues, we propose a novel
domain-generalized medical landmark detection framework
that relies solely on single-center data for training. Considering the availability of numerous public medical segmentation
datasets, we design a simple yet effective method that utilizes
single-center segmentation to enhance the domain generalization capabilities of the landmark detection task. Specifically, we introduce a novel boundary-aware pre-training approach to focus the model on regions pertinent to landmarks.
To further enhance the robustness and generalization capabilities during pre-training, we have derived a mixing loss term
and proved its effectiveness in theory and practice. Extensive experiments conducted on our new domain generalization benchmark for medical landmark detection demonstrate
the superiority of our approach.

Figure 1: Illustration of medical landmark detection in 3D
MRI scans. The fetal cerebellum, highlighted by the blue
line, is the anatomical structure of interest, with landmarks
indicated by red points. This figure shows that the landmarks
are positioned on the boundary of the anatomical structure.

application is often impeded by the domain gap due to variations in medical imaging equipment. Previous works (Jin,
Che, and Chen 2023) have addressed this issue under the
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) setting, which involves training neural networks using available source domain data-label pairs and target domain data. However, due
to privacy concerns, target domain data may not be publicly
available in real-world scenarios. Furthermore, data collection can also be labor-intensive (Viswanathan, Parmar, and
Madabhushi 2024). In response, this work introduces the domain generalization (DG) setting for medical landmark detection, where only source domain data and corresponding
labels are utilized (Zhou et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024b). To the
best of our knowledge, there is no publicly available benchmark for the domain-generalized medical landmark detection task. Therefore, we contribute a benchmark encompassing data from three centers for medical landmark DG.
Existing DG approaches have predominantly focused on
tasks involving natural images (Zhao et al. 2020; Zhou
et al. 2022), addressing challenges in segmentation (Long
et al. 2024; Gu et al. 2024) and classification (Li et al.
2020; Qu et al. 2023), often employing augmentation (Peng,
Zheng, and Chen 2024) or alignment technologies (Long
et al. 2024). However, these approaches face several limitations when applied to DG medical landmark detection: 1.
Medical images typically exhibit low contrast, high noise
levels, and uncertain boundaries compared to natural images (Xu et al. 2023c), making it challenging to transfer
methodologies developed for natural images directly. 2. The

Code — https://github.com/lhaof/DGMLD

Introduction
Medical landmark detection is pivotal in disease diagnosis (Payette et al. 2021; Avisdris et al. 2022) and surgical
planning (Li et al. 2023). For instance, the detection of fetal cerebellar landmarks is crucial for monitoring fetal neurodevelopment (Garel and Garel 2004; Zhou et al. 2021;
Vahedifard et al. 2023), and accurate identification of these
landmarks is essential for assessing the fetal growth trajectory (Garel and Garel 2004; Hughes et al. 2023; Han et al.
2024; Chen et al. 2024). Given that manual labeling is laborious and subjective, numerous studies have employed deep
learning for automate medical landmark detection (Avisdris
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023; Jin, Che, and Chen 2023; Gong
et al. 2025). Despite the successes of deep-learning-based
algorithms for medical landmark detection, their widespread
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3140

