The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AE-NeRF: Augmenting Event-Based Neural Radiance Fields for Non-ideal
Conditions and Larger Scenes
Chaoran Feng1 , Wangbo Yu1,2 Xinhua Cheng1 , Zhenyu Tang1 , Junwu Zhang1 ,
Li Yuan1,2 * , Yonghong Tian1,2 *
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{chaoran.feng, wbyu, chengxinhua, zhenyutang, junwuzhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, { yuanli-ece, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Compared to frame-based methods, computational neuromorphic imaging using event cameras offers significant advantages, such as minimal motion blur, enhanced temporal
resolution, and high dynamic range. The multi-view consistency of Neural Radiance Fields combined with the unique
benefits of event cameras, has spurred recent research into
reconstructing NeRF from data captured by moving event
cameras. While showing impressive performance, existing
methods rely on ideal conditions with the availability of uniform and high-quality event sequences and accurate camera poses, and mainly focus on the object level reconstruction, thus limiting their practical applications. In this work,
we propose AE-NeRF to address the challenges of learning
event-based NeRF from non-ideal conditions, including nonuniform event sequences, noisy poses, and various scales of
scenes. Our method exploits the density of event streams and
jointly learn a pose correction module with an event-based
NeRF (e-NeRF) framework for robust 3D reconstruction
from inaccurate camera poses. To generalize to larger scenes,
we propose hierarchical event distillation with a proposal eNeRF network and a vanilla e-NeRF network to resample
and refine the reconstruction process. We further propose an
event reconstruction loss and a temporal loss to improve the
view consistency of the reconstructed scene. We established
a comprehensive benchmark that includes large-scale scenes
to simulate practical non-ideal conditions, incorporating both
synthetic and challenging real-world event datasets. The experimental results show that our method achieves a new stateof-the-art in event-based 3D reconstruction.

Training 0%
Ground-truth
Camera Poses

Training 50%
Noisy Input
Camera Poses

PSNR 16.83 dB

Training 100%
Translational
Error

PSNR 20.61 dB

(a) E2VID + NeRF
PSNR 23.79 dB

(c) Robust e-NeRF

Training
Process

(b) Ev-NeRF
PSNR 25.45 dB

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Comprison of novel view synthesis (NVS) and
pose correction using existing event-based methods. The
scene is captured by an event camera with 360-degree nonuniform motion and poses are estimated from COLMAP.
the captured images unsuitable for 3D scene reconstruction.
In contrast, neuromorphic sensors like event cameras (Gallego et al. 2020), which detect individual changes in brightness through a sequence of asynchronous events based on
polarity rather than absolute intensities, provide significant
advantages in such challenging situations due to their high
dynamic range and temporal resolution.
Unfortunately, integrating event cameras into 3D reconstruction techniques remains challenging because these
cameras capture relative brightness changes, which cannot
be directly used to reconstruct scenes in alignment with
human visual perception. Some methods combine depth
map (Li et al. 2023) or standard cameras with event cameras to reconstruct 3D scenes, sacrificing the advantages of
high temporal resolution offered by event cameras. Other approaches use stereo visual odometry (VO)(Zhou, Gallego,

Introduction
The rapid advancement of 3D reconstruction techniques has
enabled the generation of high-fidelity novel views from
camera captures of a scene, further fostering numerous
downstream applications, including robotics (Zhang et al.
2023a; Zhou et al. 2023; Kerr et al. 2022; Adamkiewicz et al.
2022), 3D games (Xia et al. 2024; Condorelli and Luigini
2024), and scene understanding (Nguyen et al. 2024; Li et al.
2024). However, in environments with suboptimal lighting
or rapid object motion, standard RGB cameras often struggle to capture enough scene information and may experience overexposure, underexposure, or motion blurr, making
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2924

