The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Fair Division
Benjamin Cookson, Soroush Ebadian, Nisarg Shah
University of Toronto
{bcookson,soroush,nisarg}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

rive over time and the principal needs to make allocations in
an online fashion in the absence of any information regarding future arrivals (Kash, Procaccia, and Shah 2014; Benadè
et al. 2024). The limits of feasible fairness guarantees have
been explored under various adversary models (Zeng and
Psomas 2020; Benadè et al. 2024).
However, in practice it is rarely the case that we have
absolutely no information about the future. Significantly
better guarantees have been established when even partial information about the future is available, either in the
form of distributional knowledge (Bogomolnaia, Moulin,
and Sandomirskiy 2022) or machine-generated predictions (Gkatzelis, Psomas, and Tan 2021; Banerjee et al.
2022, 2023). But this work has left a very basic question
wide open: How fair can we be if we had full information
about the future?
To address this, we introduce the model of temporal fair
division, where a set of agents N are allocated a set of goods
Mt on day t, over a period of days t ∈ {1, . . . , k}, and
the agents’ valuations over the whole set of goods M =
∪kt=1 Mt are available upfront. At first glance, it may seem
that this is just a traditional fair division problem where
the set of goods M needs to be divided amongst the set of
agents N . The twist, however, is that in temporal fair division, agents anticipate fairness to prevail not solely at the
end of the entire time horizon, but also at or within various interim time intervals. For example, the principal may
be confident, based on their knowledge of the future, the allocation will eventually turn out to be fair, but that may not
be assurance enough to the agents.
This leads us to seek temporal fairness notions in our temporal fair division setting. Specifically, we take prominent
fairness notions from one-shot fair division, and seek them
on three temporal scales:

We study temporal fair division, whereby a set of agents are
allocated a (possibly different) set of goods on each day for
a period of days. We study this setting, as well as a number
of its special cases formed by the restrictions to two agents,
same goods on each day, identical preferences, or combinations thereof, and chart out the landscape of achieving two
types of fairness guarantees simultaneously: fairness on each
day (per day) and fairness over time (up to each day, or the
weaker version, overall).
In the most general setting, we prove that there always exists
an allocation that is stochastically-dominant envy-free up to
one good (SD-EF1) per day and proportional up to one good
(PROP1) overall, and when all the agents have identical preferences, we show that SD-EF1 per day and SD-EF1 overall
can be guaranteed. For the case of two agents, we prove that
SD-EF1 per day and EF1 up to each day can be guaranteed
using an envy balancing technique. We provide counterexamples for other combinations that establish our results as
among the best guarantees possible, but also leave open some
tantalizing questions.

1

Introduction

How to divide a set of goods amongst a set of agents fairly
has been an enigma for centuries. There has been remarkable
progress on this question in the last decade (Amanatidis et al.
2022). In the most prominent model, there is a set of n agents
N , each having an (additive) valuation over a set of goods
M . The goal is to find an allocation A = (A1 , . . . , An )
which partitions M into pairwise-disjoint bundles, one allocated to each agent i ∈ N .
This one-shot model fails to capture numerous real-world
fair division scenarios in which goods are divided over time,
e.g., food bank deliveries (Lee et al. 2019), resource allocation in data centers (Ghodsi et al. 2013), allocation of
advertising slots (Mehta et al. 2007), nurse shift scheduling (Miller, Pierskalla, and Rath 1976), and organ transplants (Bertsimas, Farias, and Trichakis 2013). Compared
to the one-shot setting, fair division of goods over time has
received relatively little attention.
Inspired by this, there has been a flurry of recent works
that consider online fair division, where agents or goods ar-

(1) Per day: The allocation of the set of goods Mt on each
day t should be fair.
(2a) Overall: The allocation of the whole set of goods M in
the end should be fair.
(2b) Up to each day: The allocation of the set of goods
∪tr=1 Mr up to each day t should be fair.
Clearly, up to each day fairness (2b) is stronger than overall fairness (2a). Solely achieving per day fairness (1) or
overall fairness (2a) can be reduced to one-shot fair division.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13727

