The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RealisID: Scale-Robust and Fine-Controllable Identity Customization
via Local and Global Complementation
Zhaoyang Sun1,2 * , Fei Du2,3 * , Weihua Chen2,3 , Fan Wang2,3
Yaxiong Chen1 , Yi Rong1† , Shengwu Xiong4,5†
1

Wuhan University of Technology
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Hupan Laboratory
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
5
Interdisciplinary Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Wuhan College
2

Abstract

in the given reference face images and follow the controls
prompted by the input text.
Most early researches on ID customization typically finetune some specific parameters on a set of images containing the same ID so that the information associated with this
ID can be integrated into the model. Although fine-tuningbased methods (Hu et al. 2021; Ruiz et al. 2023; Gal et al.
2022) have achieved commendable results, their computational costs are often significant. Even with advanced GPUs,
fine-tuning the model parameters for every single ID can
takes several minutes, which may make these methods infeasible in practical applications. To alleviate this issue, a series
of recent works (Xiao et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024a; Zhang
et al. 2024; Guo et al. 2024) attempt to leverage ID-related
prior knowledge learned from other large-scale face datasets
to support fast inference without the need for fine-tuning.
Generally, these approaches merge the ID features encoded
from CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) or pre-trained face recognition model into the text embeddings or generative models by
introducing trainable ID adapters (Ye et al. 2023; Mou et al.
2024; Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023).
Despite the effectiveness and efficiency, all existing methods fail to simultaneously satisfy the various requirements
(as illustrated in Fig. 1) of different real-world applications:
(1) Identity Fidelity of Small Face. The faces in the generated images may need to be of different sizes. While most
previous methods are effective in generating large faces,
they often struggle with maintaining the identity details for
small ones. (2) Flexible and Fine Control. In addition to
identity information, we may also wish to finely adjust certain factors in the target images, such as face location, pose
and expression. Since these factors cannot be precisely described through text, existing approaches that rely solely on
text prompts will face challenges in appropriately controlling them. (3) Multi-person Customization. Most current
methods are limited to customization for a single individual
and lack the flexibility required for practical applications involving multiple persons. In addition, the scarcity of multiperson datasets available for model training further exacerbates the difficulty of meeting this requirement.
To this end, in this paper we propose a novel unified identity customization framework, namely RealisID, which is

Recently, the success of text-to-image synthesis has greatly
advanced the development of identity customization techniques, whose main goal is to produce realistic identityspecific photographs based on text prompts and reference
face images. However, it is difficult for existing identity customization methods to simultaneously meet the various requirements of different real-world applications, including the
identity fidelity of small face, the control of face location,
pose and expression, as well as the customization of multiple persons. To this end, we propose a scale-robust and finecontrollable method, namely RealisID, which learns different
control capabilities through the cooperation between a pair
of local and global branches. Specifically, by using cropping
and up-sampling operations to filter out face-irrelevant information, the local branch concentrates the fine control of facial
details and the scale-robust identity fidelity within the face region. Meanwhile, the global branch manages the overall harmony of the entire image. It also controls the face location by
taking the location guidance as input. As a result, RealisID
can benefit from the complementarity of these two branches.
Finally, by implementing our branches with two different
variants of ControlNet, our method can be easily extended
to handle multi-person customization, even only trained on
single-person datasets. Extensive experiments and ablation
studies indicate the effectiveness of RealisID and verify its
ability in fulfilling all the requirements mentioned above.

Introduction
The tremendous success of text-to-image synthesis techniques (Saharia et al. 2022; Nichol et al. 2021; Ramesh et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2024b) have spawned and driven a variety of customized generation tasks (Yang et al. 2023; Kim
et al. 2024b; Wei et al. 2024). In this paper, we study one of
the most prominent of these tasks, namely identity (ID) customization. It aims to adapt text-to-image synthesis models
to generate new images, which match the identities depicted
* Equal contribution. Work done during internship of Zhaoyang

Sun at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7158

