The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Proof Simulation via Round-based Strategy Extraction for QBF
Leroy Chew
TU Wien. Vienna, Austria
lchew@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

Asymmetric Tautology). A theoretical explanation for the
resilience of DRAT comes from p-simulations, a proofcentric analogue to reduction. The p-simulations (Cook,
Coullard, and Turán 1987; Kiesl, Rebola-Pardo, and Heule
2018; Krajı́ček and Pudlák 1989) were actually shown for
the proof system Extended Frege (eFrege), which is pequivalent to DRAT (Kiesl, Rebola-Pardo, and Heule 2018).
The power of Extended Frege comes in its ability to represent circuits using extension variables and cut them out with
its binary rules. In fact it was proven that any propositional
proof system can be p-simulated by Extended Frege or Extended Frege plus a polynomial-time decidable set of tautologies (Krajı́ček 1995). Extended Frege is also successful
in QBF as long as you add a reduction rule to make it complete (eFrege + ∀red (Beyersdorff et al. 2020)) and it was
already shown that eFrege + ∀red augmented with an NP oracle (Beyersdorff, Hinde, and Pich 2017) p-simulates every
QBF proof system with the property of strategy extraction
(Chew 2021). Strategy extraction is a property of proof systems that means there is an efficient way to compute circuit
strategies for a semantic two-player game from any proof.
What remains is to show unconditional eFrege + ∀red
(without NP oracles) p-simulations of proof systems that
correspond to QBF solving techniques. Here we are interested in techniques common in QBF Conflict Driven Clause
Learning (CDCL); reduction (Kleine Büning, Karpinski,
and Flögel 1995), long-distance resolution (Zhang and Malik 2002) and the relaxation of quantifier dependencies (Lonsing and Biere 2010). These concepts are all captured in the
proof system LD-Q(Drrs )-Res (Peitl, Slivovsky, and Szeider
2019b) and extracted out in the qrp format (Niemetz et al.
2012). Our main result is a p-simulation of LD-Q(Drrs )-Res
by eFrege + ∀red, thus transitively showing p-simulations
for systems weaker than LD-Q(Drrs )-Res. This is important
in practice because some solvers like Qute (Peitl, Slivovsky,
and Szeider 2019a) at it fullest capabilities can output proofs
in a LD-Q(Drrs )-Res format but not in a format which is
known previously to have eFrege + ∀red simulations.
It has already been shown that eFrege + ∀red p-simulates
the QBF proof systems IRM-calc (Beyersdorff, Chew, and
Janota 2019) and LQU+-Res (Balabanov, Widl, and Jiang
2014), using a novel strategy extraction approach (Chew and
Slivovsky 2022).
Our approach is similar, here we drop the reliance on lo-

Proof systems can be used for certification of logic problems,
and proof complexity can inform us how succinct certificates can be. In the PSPACE complete logic QBF (Quantified
Boolean Formulas) refutation proofs often contain information that reproduce the witnesses of the quantified variables.
This is known as strategy extraction. There are two known
kinds of strategy extraction for proof systems, local strategy extraction and round-based strategy extraction. Formalisation of local strategy extraction was done previously (Chew
and Slivovsky 2022), in this paper we formalise round-based
strategy extraction.
By formalising the strategy extraction into circuits we can
show new p-simulations. P-simulations are processes that allow you to transform proofs from a weaker proof system to
a stronger proof system. Thus we solve an open problem in
QBF proof complexity that Extended QBF Frege p-simulates
LD-Q(Drrs )-Resolution. LD-Q(Drrs )-Resolution is the underlying proof system for the solver Qute (Peitl, Slivovsky, and
Szeider 2019a).
This is a positive result for certification. By clarifying the hierarchy of proof systems further suggests the feasibility of
using known formats such as Extended QU-Resolution or
QRAT to certify QCDCL solvers.
The p-simulation is our main result, but we also make other
observations from the specifics of the formalisation.

Introduction
The canonical PSPACE-complete problem is the decision
problem of quantified Boolean formulas (QBF), and we have
seen increases in interest and development of QBF solving.
We should not automatically trust every new QBF solver
(Seidl 2023), and instead ensure independently that every
solving instance is correct. To do this we need a formallyverified universal QBF checking format. It should be resilient to the variety of existing QBF techniques and should
have some degree of future-proofing, as new techniques for
QBF solving are developed.
In SAT solving this has more or less been achieved already by the adoption of DRAT proofs and DRAT checkers (Wetzler, Heule, and Hunt 2014). DRAT being the name
of the universally used proof system (Deletion Resolution
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11176

