The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fast Omni-Directional Image Super-Resolution: Adapting the Implicit Image
Function with Pixel and Semantic-Wise Spherical Geometric Priors
Xuelin Shen2 * , Yitong Wang1,2 * , Silin Zheng1 , Kang Xiao2 , Wenhan Yang3 , Xu Wang1†
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy(SZ)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
shenxuelin@gml.ac.cn, ted.yitongwang@gmail.com, zhengpny@gmail.com, xiaokang2022@email.szu.edu.cn,
yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, wangxu@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
In the context of Omni-Directional Image (ODI) SuperResolution (SR), the unique challenge arises from the nonuniform oversampling characteristics caused by EquiRectangular Projection (ERP). Considerable efforts in designing
complex spherical convolutions or polyhedron reprojection
offer significant performance improvements but at the expense of cumbersome processing procedures and slower inference speeds. Under these circumstances, this paper proposes a new ODI-SR model characterized by its capacity to
perform Fast and Arbitrary-scale ODI-SR processes, denoted
as FAOR. The key innovation lies in adapting the implicit image function from the planar image domain to the ERP image
domain by incorporating spherical geometric priors at both
the latent representation and image reconstruction stages, in
a low-overhead manner. Specifically, at the latent representation stage, we adopt a pair of pixel-wise and semantic-wise
sphere-to-planar distortion maps to perform affine transformations on the latent representation, thereby incorporating
it with spherical properties. Moreover, during the image reconstruction stage, we introduce a geodesic-based resampling
strategy, aligning the implicit image function with spherical
geometrics without introducing additional parameters. As a
result, the proposed FAOR outperforms the state-of-the-art
ODI-SR models with a much faster inference speed. Extensive experimental results and ablation studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of our design.

Code — https://github.com/GingaUL/FAOR

Figure 1: (a) The proposed FAOR provides a continuous
ODI representation, enabling arbitrary-scale SR. (b) Comparisons with other state-of-the-art models regarding performance and inference speed on the ×8 SR task

Introduction
Characterized by a wide 360◦ × 180◦ field of view, OmniDirectional Images (ODIs) possess unique advantages in
providing more comprehensive scene representations and
immersive viewing experiences compared to conventional
planar images. As a result, recent days have witnessed the
blooming applications of ODIs in both machine and human
vision-oriented domains, e.g., augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), autonomous driving (Yang et al. 2021; Xu

et al. 2022), and robot navigation (Yang et al. 2020b; Kyoungkook and Sunghyun 2019). In practice, ODIs are usually stored and transmitted in Low Resolution (LR) to satisfy
the requirements of real-time machine vision-oriented applications, and subsequently undergo Super-Resolution (SR) to
achieve high perceptual quality for human vision.
As for ODI-SR, the main challenges arise from the distortion caused by sphere-to-planar projection. Specifically,
raw ODIs are typically stored in EquiRectangular Projection (ERP) format, which straightforwardly maps longitude
to equally spaced columns and latitude to equally spaced

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6833

