The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TimeDP: Learning to Generate Multi-Domain Time Series with Domain Prompts
Yu-Hao Huang1 , Chang Xu2 * , Yueying Wu3 , Wu-Jun Li1 , Jiang Bian2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, School of Computer Science, Nanjing University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Peking University
huangyh@smail.nju.edu.cn, {chanx, jiang.bian}@microsoft.com
wuyueying@stu.pku.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

contrast, cross-domain time series generation presents a significantly more complex challenge, as it requires the creation
of new data across various domains without relying on existing historical records. This stands out as a gap, underscoring
a substantial opportunity for further advancements in multidomain time series generation.
One straightforward approach to multi-domain time series
generation involves the use of predefined domain labels during the training process (Lee, Malacarne, and Aune 2023).
This method relies on the availability of domain labels to
formulate the conditional generation process. However, this
approach may struggle generalizing to large number of domains or unseen domains. Moreover, the challenge intensifies when domain labels are not explicitly available.
An alternative approach frames cross-domain time series
generation as a conditional generation task by describing the
domain using natural language (Jin et al. 2024; Jiang et al.
2024). However, the use of natural language descriptions
introduces significant challenges. Domain-specific nuances
are often difficult to articulate precisely, leading to noisy,
incomplete, or ambiguous prompts. Moreover, for entirely
new or evolving domains, crafting these domain descriptors
can be impractical. This has underscored a critical need for
a more systematic and robust way to represent and utilize
domain-specific information in time series generation.
To address these challenges, we propose a label-free, textfree method that learns time series prototypes as basic elements to construct domain prompts for generating time series with a diffusion model, named TimeDP. Through training, the prototypes learn to represent time series basis, serving as “word” with time series semantics. A prototype assignment module is applied for each training samples to construct the specific “prompt” for generating this sample. During sampling, we extract “prompt” with few-shot samples
from the target domain to construct the population of domain prompts and use the domain prompts as condition to
generate time series samples.
To summarize, the main contributions of this paper are
listed as follows:

Time series generation models are crucial for applications
like data augmentation and privacy preservation. Most existing time series generation models are typically designed to
generate data from one specified domain. While leveraging
data from other domain for better generalization is proved to
work in other application areas, this approach remains challenging for time series modeling due to the large divergence
in patterns among different real world time series categories.
In this paper, we propose a multi-domain time series diffusion
model with domain prompts, named TimeDP. In TimeDP, we
utilize a time series semantic prototype module which defines
time series prototypes to represent time series basis, each prototype vector serving as “word” representing some elementary time series feature. A prototype assignment module is applied to extract the extract domain specific prototype weights,
for learning domain prompts as generation condition. During
sampling, we extract “domain prompt” with few-shot samples
from the target domain and use the domain prompts as condition to generate time series samples. Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms baselines to provide the
state-of-the-art in-domain generation quality and strong unseen domain generation capability.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.05403

Introduction
In the landscape of large models and advanced machine
learning techniques, time series foundation models (Das
et al. 2024; Gao et al. 2024) have garnered increasing attention. These models, typically trained on extensive datasets
spanning various domains (Woo et al. 2024), have predominantly emphasized forecasting tasks rather than the generation of new data. However, the accurate and meaningful generation of time series is critical for applications such as medical record synthetic (Li, Yu, and Prı́ncipe 2023) and financial scenario simulations (Coletta et al. 2021; Huang et al.
2024), as well as for augmenting datasets where historical
records are limited or incomplete (Kollovieh et al. 2023a).
Although some research has been conducted on time series generation, most efforts have been confined to the development of generation model for single-domain data. In

• We propose TimeDP, a multi-domain time series generation model by learning a set of time series prototypes
and prototype assignment module to construct domain
prompts, where the domain prompts serve as condition
for a time series diffusion model.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17520

