The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neighbor Does Matter: Density-Aware Contrastive Learning
for Medical Semi-supervised Segmentation
Feilong Tang1 * , Zhongxing Xu1 * , Ming Hu1 , Wenxue Li1 , Peng Xia3 ,
Yiheng Zhong2 , Hanjun Wu2 , Jionglong Su2† , Zongyuan Ge1†
1

AIM Lab, Faculty of IT, Monash University
2
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
3
UNC-Chapel Hill
Feilong.Tang@monash.edu

Abstract

extremely expensive and challenging. The scarcity of annotations has become a bottleneck that limits the performance
of deep learning-based multi-organ segmentation models.
As a solution, semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Huang et al.
2024; Chi et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024; Ye et al. 2024a) enhances labeling efficiency by leveraging a limited amount
of labeled data alongside a large amount of unlabeled data.
SSL aims to extract effective training signals from unlabeled
images to enhance model generalization.
To handle unlabeled data, most existing SSL methods are
based on the common density clustering assumption (Wang
et al. 2023), i.e., samples located in the same high-density
area are likely to belong to the same class, and the decision boundary should be located in the low-density area. In
other words, by achieving inter-class separation based on
density, semi-supervised models can output highly confident predictions without the supervision of corresponding
labels. Current multi-organ segmentation methods (Wong
et al. 2024) mainly focus on separating low-density areas.
These methods make invariant predictions to perturbations
around each unlabeled data point or encourage nearby samples to make the same predictions, including performing
consistency regularization (Chen et al. 2023a) or generating
pseudo-labels (Basak and Yin 2023). Despite making some
progress, current methods mainly utilize single data samples
and ignore the rich neighborhood information for learning
more discriminative features. Therefore, these methods face
challenges with regards to data scarcity and feature sparsity.
Recent advances in manifold learning have established
two properties (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020): (1) allowing similar features to be closer to each other, while dissimilar
features move further apart; (2) providing superior manifold metrics to measure discrepancies with different statistical and geometrical properties. Based on these, we mine
effective neighborhood information from the geometry of
the feature space. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), learning that incorporates neighborhood information can effectively capture the complex shapes of various organs (e.g., large liver
and small pancreas) and produce more compact and discriminative embeddings (Fig. 1 (b)). In contrast, directly using pixel-level features in contrastive learning methods can
misidentify some organ pixels as background, particularly

In medical image analysis, multi-organ semi-supervised segmentation faces challenges such as insufficient labels and
low contrast in soft tissues. To address these issues, existing studies typically employ semi-supervised segmentation
techniques using pseudo-labeling and consistency regularization. However, these methods mainly rely on individual data
samples for training, ignoring the rich neighborhood information present in the feature space. In this work, we argue
that supervisory information can be directly extracted from
the geometry of the feature space. Inspired by the densitybased clustering hypothesis, we propose using feature density to locate sparse regions within feature clusters. Our goal
is to increase intra-class compactness by addressing sparsity
issues. To achieve this, we propose a Density-Aware Contrastive Learning (DACL) strategy, pushing anchored features in sparse regions towards cluster centers approximated
by high-density positive samples, resulting in more compact
clusters. Specifically, our method constructs density-aware
neighbor graphs using labeled and unlabeled data samples to
estimate feature density and locate sparse regions. We also
combine label-guided co-training with density-guided geometric regularization to form complementary supervision for
unlabeled data. Experiments on the Multi-Organ Segmentation Challenge dataset demonstrate that our proposed method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods, highlighting its efficacy in medical image segmentation tasks.

Introduction
Multi-organ segmentation in medical images is essential
for many clinical applications, such as computer-aided intervention (Qu et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2022; Xu et al. 2024b; Ye et al. 2022, 2024b; Chen et al.
2023b; Chen, Pan, and Xia 2023; Chen et al. 2024), surgical navigation (Zheng et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024, 2025; Tang
et al. 2024a), and radiotherapy (Mofid et al. 2024). However,
complex morphological structures of multiple organs, low
contrast of soft tissues, and blurred boundaries between adjacent organs make dense annotation of multi-organ images
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Jionglong Su; Zongyuan Ge
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7220

