The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Expand Horizon: Graph Out-of-Distribution
Generalization via Multi-Level Environment Inference
Jiaqiang Zhang1,2 , Songcan Chen 1,2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{zhangjq, s.chen}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

macro

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are widely used for node
classification tasks, but when encountering distribution shifts
due to environmental change in real-world scenarios, they
tend to learn unstable correlations between features and labels. To overcome this dilemma, a powerful class of approaches views the environment as the root cause of those
unstable correlations, thereby their key focus is to infer the
environment involved, enabling the model to avoid capturing environment-sensitive correlations. However, their inferences rely solely on the single-level information from one
low-hop ego-graph, neglecting both global information and
multi-granularity information in local ego-graphs with different hops. Although applying deeper GNNs on the high-hop
ego-graph could capture global information, it will bring the
side effect of over-smoothing node representations. To tackle
these issues, we propose a novel Multi-Level Environment Inference model named MLEI, which effectively broadens the
horizon of training GNNs under node-level distribution shifts.
Specifically, MLEI first leverages a linear graph transformer
to surpass the scope of ego-graph, efficiently enabling highlevel global environment inference. This global environment
is in turn used as an overview to assist layer-by-layer environment inference on local multi-hop ego-graphs. Finally,
we combine the environment from global and local views
and utilize the designed objective function to capture stable predictive patterns. Extensive experiments on real-world
datasets demonstrate that our model achieves satisfactory performance compared with the state-of-the-art methods under
various distribution shifts.

Global
Two-hop
One-hop

meso

Desert

micro

Multi-level environments
Grassland

Figure 1: Nodes can be analogized to the trunk in an image,
where the multi-hop neighboring information of a node corresponds to the environment at different ranges surrounding
the tree, eg. (meso (micro) vs two (one)-hop). The global information corresponds to the macro environment where the
tree is located, such as a desert or grassland.

Despite their significant advances, most existing GNN
models are built on the assumption of i.i.d., i.e., training
and testing nodes are drawn from the same distribution
(Li et al. 2022). However, in the real world, this assumption can be easily violated due to environmental changes
during the data generation (Chen et al. 2022; Fan et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2024). For instance, in the Twitch dataset,
users (nodes) and their categories (labels) are heavily influenced by their geographical locations, resulting in distribution shifts among nodes from different regions (Wu et al.
2022; Yu, Liang, and He 2023). In such cases, vanilla GNNs
are prone to capture unstable correlations between features
and labels, inevitably exhibiting degraded performance on
out-of-distribution (OOD) data.
To tackle this OOD problem, there has been a growing
interest in viewing the environment as the root cause of unstable dependencies through causal analysis. Consequently,
their focus is on inferring the environment involved to prevent the model from capturing environment-sensitive correlations (Yuan et al. 2023). The main challenge in doing so
mainly lies in the fact that, unlike image data, where datasets

Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous data structures in many fields, such
as social networks (Fan et al. 2020) and knowledge graphs
(Nickel et al. 2015). In recent years, graph neural networks
(GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for learning the
representations of graph data, in which the core operation
is message passing based on structures (Wu et al. 2020).
Owing to their exceptional performance, GNNs have been
widely applied to a range of graph analysis tasks, including
but not limited to node classification (Velickovic et al. 2018)
and traffic prediction (Wang, Cao, and Yu 2020).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13233

