The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LLM+AL: Bridging Large Language Models and Action Languages
for Complex Reasoning About Actions
Adam Ishay1 , Joohyung Lee1,2
1

Arizona State University, AZ, USA
2
Samsung Research, S. Korea
{aishay, joolee}@asu.edu

Abstract

Using LLMs to generate PDDL could help address
a broader range of action reasoning problems. However,
PDDL is primarily designed as a standard language for task
planning and is not well-suited for expressing more general
forms of knowledge about actions, such as state constraints,
indirect effects, default reasoning, and recursive definitions
(Giunchiglia et al. 2004).
This paper presents a novel method that bridges the natural language understanding capabilities of LLMs with the
symbolic reasoning strengths of action languages (Gelfond
and Lifschitz 1998; Giunchiglia et al. 2004). Our approach,
termed “LLM+AL,” leverages the LLM’s strengths in semantic parsing and commonsense knowledge generation
alongside the action language’s proficiency in automated
reasoning about actions based on encoded knowledge.
Action languages are particularly well-suited for this purpose. They have an intuitive, natural language like syntax, feature formal semantics, and are supported by efficient computational tools. Action languages are designed for
more knowledge-intensive reasoning than PDDL, encompassing not only task planning problems but also temporal
prediction problems, which involve predicting what would
happen if a sequence of actions is executed, and postdiction problems, where one infers the initial state given the
current state and a past sequence of actions. Even when focused solely on task planning problems, action languages offer greater expressivity, such as representing indirect effects
to address the ramification problem (e.g., the banana’s location is determined by the monkey’s location if the monkey is
holding it; thus, any action that moves the monkey will indirectly affect the banana’s location), and defaults (e.g., by
default, a pendulum swings back and forth unless it is being held). In particular, this paper leverages one of the latest
members in this family, the action language BC+ (Babb and
Lee 2015, 2020) due to its simplicity and expressivity, as
well as the availability of the efficient BC+ reasoner called
CPLUS 2 ASP (Babb and Lee 2013).
The LLM+AL pipeline leverages an LLM effectively
across multiple stages, each serving a different purpose.
First, given a reasoning problem in natural language, we use
an LLM to generate a program signature and extract commonsense and domain-specific knowledge. Next, the LLM
is tasked with converting this knowledge into BC+ rules,
guided by a prompt that details BC+ syntax and semantics

Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant
strides in various intelligent tasks but still struggle with
complex action reasoning tasks that require systematic
search. To address this limitation, we propose a method
that bridges the natural language understanding capabilities of LLMs with the symbolic reasoning strengths of action languages. Our approach, termed LLM+AL, leverages
the LLM’s strengths in semantic parsing and commonsense
knowledge generation alongside the action language’s proficiency in automated reasoning based on encoded knowledge.
We compare LLM+AL against state-of-the-art LLMs, including C HAT GPT-4, C LAUDE 3 O PUS, G EMINI U LTRA 1.0,
and O 1- PREVIEW, using benchmarks for complex reasoning
about actions. Our findings indicate that, although all methods exhibit errors, LLM+AL, with relatively minimal human
corrections, consistently leads to correct answers, whereas
standalone LLMs fail to improve even with human feedback.
LLM+AL also contributes to automated generation of action
languages.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant
strides in various intelligent tasks (Brohan et al. 2023; Kojima et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2022; Yao
et al. 2024; Besta et al. 2024), yet they often struggle with
complex reasoning about actions, particularly in problems
that demand systematic search. An emerging alternative is
to use an LLM as a semantic parser to convert natural language into symbolic representations, such as Python programs (Gao et al. 2023; Nye et al. 2021; Olausson et al.
2023), Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) (Liu
et al. 2023; Guan et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2023), or logic programs (Ishay, Yang, and Lee 2023). These symbolic representations are then processed by dedicated symbolic reasoners.
However, these methods have limitations. As demonstrated in this paper, for complex reasoning tasks, LLMs almost always fail to generate Python programs for searching
for solutions, except in cases where the problem is a typical
search task that LLMs may have memorized from the training corpus. Even in such instances, when small variations
are introduced, LLMs struggle to adapt to the changes.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24212

