The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Achieving Speed-Accuracy Balance in Vision-based 3D Occupancy Prediction via
Geometric-Semantic Disentanglement
Yulin He* , Wei Chen† * , Siqi Wang† , Tianci Xun, Yusong Tan
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{heyulin, chenwei, wangsiqi10c, xuntianci22, ystan}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

[CVPR'24]

Real-time

Occupancy prediction plays a pivotal role in autonomous
driving (AD) due to its capabilities of fine-grained 3D perception and general object recognition. However, existing methods often incur high computational costs, which conflict with
AD’s real-time demand. To this end, we redirect the focus
from accuracy only to both accuracy and efficiency. By conducting a head-to-head comparison of existing methods, we
find it challenging to balance accuracy and efficiency. We
identify a core issue for this challenge: the strong coupling
between geometry and semantics. Specifically, the predicted
geometric structure (e.g., depth) guides the projection of 2D
image features into 3D voxel space, which significantly affects feature discriminability and subsequent semantic learning. To address this issue, we focus on two key aspects: model
design and learning strategies. 1) For model design, we propose a dual-branch network that disentangles the representation of geometry and semantics. The voxel branch utilizes
a novel re-parameterized large-kernel 3D convolution to refine geometric structure efficiently, while the BEV branch
employs temporal fusion and BEV encoding for efficient semantic learning. 2) For learning strategies, we propose to separate geometric learning from semantic learning by the mixup
of ground-truth and predicted depths. Our method achieves
39.4% mIoU at 20 FPS on Occ3D-nuScenes, showcasing a
state-of-the-art balance between accuracy and efficiency.

[CVPR'24]
[ICASSP'24]
[ECCV'22]
[Arixv'22]

Ours

[Arixv'24]
[ICCV'23]

[ICCV'23]

[ICRA'24]

BEVFormer
BEVDetOcc

SurroundOcc
FB-OCC

PanoOcc
COTR

FlashOcc
FastOcc

BEVoxSeg
Ours

Figure 1: The inference speed (FPS) and accuracy (mIoU)
of methods on the Occ3D-nuScenes (Tian et al. 2023)
benchmark. We follow (Hou et al. 2024) to define real-time
in occupancy prediction as 10 FPS.

and high memory usage, e.g., 1 ∼ 3 FPS and > 10,000 MB
on Nvidia A100. These limitations hinder their application
in AD vehicles equipped with on-board GPUs. To this end,
we aim to redirect the focus from accuracy only to a balanced emphasis on both accuracy and efficiency. We assess
the speed and memory usage of publicly available methods
to offer a more deployment-friendly comparison.
Through this evaluation, we find it challenging to balance
accuracy and efficiency, as shown in Fig. 1. A core issue underlying this challenge is the strong coupling between geometry and semantics. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the predicted
geometric structure (e.g., depth) impacts the feature projection of 2D image features into 3D voxel space. Inaccurate
feature projection can compromise feature discriminability
and negatively affect downstream semantic learning, making geometric and semantic learning inherently tightly coupled. One straightforward and rough solution is to adopt a
heavy network, but this comes at the expense of high computational cost and significantly reduced efficiency. To address
this coupling issue effectively and efficiently, we propose
a geometric-semantic disentanglement solution that focuses
on both model design and learning strategies.

Code — https://github.com/harrylin-hyl/GSD-OCC

Introduction
Vision-based occupancy prediction (Tesla 2021) aims to utilize surround-view camera images of ego vehicle to estimate object occupancy and semantics within a 3D voxel
space (Cao and de Charette 2022; Tian et al. 2023; Li et al.
2023c). Compared to 3D object detection (Liang et al. 2022;
Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021; Lang et al. 2019), it offers
finer-grained 3D scene perception and can identify general
objects by learning object occupancy, effectively handling
out-of-vocabulary and unusual obstacles.
Despite these strengths, existing methods (Wang et al.
2024; Ma et al. 2024) often suffer from low inference speed
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3455

