The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hybrid Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
Jialiang Tang1,2,3 , Shuo Chen4 * , Chen Gong5 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, China
3
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, China
4
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan
5
Department of Automation, Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
tangjialiang@njust.edu.cn, shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp, chen.gong@sjtu.edu.cn

2

Abstract

lightweight student network. However, in practice, the training data of the teacher network is usually inaccessible due to
privacy concerns and only the pre-trained teacher network itself can be used to learn the student network. This is because
users may prefer sharing a pre-trained black box DNN rather
than disclosing their sensitive data. In such cases, vanilla KD
methods can hardly train a reliable student network owing
to the absence of original training data. To address this issue, various Data-Free Knowledge Distillation (DFKD) approaches (Binici et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2019, 2021b; Tang
et al. 2023) have been developed to enable training the student network without using any original data.
Among existing DFKD methods, collection-based approaches (Chen et al. 2021b; Tang et al. 2023) can achieve
satisfactory performance by amassing numerous real examples to train the student network. However, it is still difficult
for the collection-based methods to train a reliable student
network in practical tasks, e.g., medical image classification
because gathering sufficient training examples can be challenging. On the other hand, generation-based methods (Yin
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2019) leverage the teacher network to
guide a generative model (Creswell et al. 2018) in producing fake examples, thereby successfully training the student
network without reliance on real examples. Nevertheless, the
synthesized examples may exhibit low quality in the absence
of real data supervision, leading to suboptimal student performance, especially for many challenging recognition tasks
on ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009). The inherent constraints of
both collection-based and generation-based DFKD methods
prompt an essential question: Can we train an effective generative model only using a small number of collected examples and then learn reliable student networks with the hybrid
data comprising both collected and synthetic examples?
To answer the above question under the practical data-free
distillation scenario, we need a generative model that not
only possesses powerful generative capabilities but also has
the ability to acquire valuable knowledge from the teacher
network. Recent studies (Cui et al. 2023; Rangwani, Mopuri, and Babu 2021) suggest that the Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) (Mirza and Osindero 2014) can easily learn
from pre-trained models and then generate high-quality synthetic examples, so we employ this great approach as our
generative module. The standard GAN consists of a generator and a discriminator trained in an adversarial manner,

Data-free knowledge distillation aims to learn a compact student network from a pre-trained large teacher network without using the original training data of the teacher network.
Existing collection-based and generation-based methods train
student networks by collecting massive real examples and
generating synthetic examples, respectively. However, they
inevitably become weak in practical scenarios due to the difficulties in gathering or emulating sufficient real-world data. To
solve this problem, we propose a novel method called Hybrid
Data-Free Distillation (HiDFD), which leverages only a small
amount of collected data as well as generates sufficient examples for training student networks. Our HiDFD comprises
two primary modules, i.e., the teacher-guided generation
and student distillation. The teacher-guided generation module guides a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) by the
teacher network to produce high-quality synthetic examples
from very few real-world collected examples. Specifically,
we design a feature integration mechanism to prevent the
GAN from overfitting and facilitate the reliable representation learning from the teacher network. Meanwhile, we drive
a category frequency smoothing technique via the teacher network to balance the generative training of each category. In
the student distillation module, we explore a data inflation
strategy to properly utilize a blend of real and synthetic data
to train the student network via a classifier-sharing-based feature alignment technique. Intensive experiments across multiple benchmarks demonstrate that our HiDFD can achieve
state-of-the-art performance using 120 times less collected
data than existing methods.

Code — https://github.com/tangjialiang97/HiDFD

Introduction
The success of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (He et al.
2016; Hao et al. 2024) is usually accompanied by significant
computational and storage demands, which hinders their deployment on practical resource-limited devices. Knowledge
Distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Miles
and Mikolajczyk 2024) has served as an effective compression technology that transfers knowledge from a complex
pre-trained teacher network to improve the performance of a
* Corresponding authors: Chen Gong, Shuo Chen.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20805

