The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DeCorrNet: Enhancing Neural Decoding Performance by Eliminating
Correlations in Noise
Xianhan Tan1,2,3 , Yu Qi2,3,4,1 * , Yueming Wang1
2

1
The College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration, Zhejiang University, China
3
Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital, Zhejiang University, China
4
State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China
{txxxl, qiyu, ymingwang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

ence of correlated noise, significantly degrading the performance of neural decoding. This noise is overlooked and difficult to remove by traditional denoising methods (MorenoBote et al. 2014; Lai et al. 2023).
Existing studies have shown that functional interactions
between neurons result in rich correlations in neuronal activities (Uddin 2020; Stringer et al. 2021; Kanitscheider, CoenCagli, and Pouget 2015; Panzeri et al. 2022; Valente et al.
2021; Kafashan et al. 2021; Ito and Murray 2022). From the
perspective of neural decoding, these correlations can be divided into two parts (Figure 1a). The basic part, named signal correlations, reflects the true connectivity and interaction patterns between different neurons in response to different tasks; The noise part, named noise correlations, refers
to the correlations of fluctuating in neuronal responses under
the same task, which cause information limits in specific situations. Figure 1b illustrates the impact of noise correlations
on information encoding. When the intra-task and inter-task
neuronal responses covary in the same direction, there will
be overlap between different task responses, which leads to
task confusion (Figure 1b). As is shown in Figure 1c, we further visualize the correlation matrix of responses from five
neurons across three tasks. Given the noise correlations in
two clusters of (N1, N2) and (N3, N4, N5), neural signals
from three different tasks reveal similar dominating correlation patterns. When noise correlation patterns appear, information from signal correlations could be masked by noise
correlations. Given the full dataset and the labels of trials,
the shuffling method (Panzeri et al. 2022) can be applied
to eliminate the effect of noise correlation. Specifically, we
shuffle the trial indices independently for each neuron across
trials of the same labels. As a result, correlations that are unrelated to the tasks can be suppressed. We use the Wasserstein distance (Panaretos and Zemel 2019) to measure the
distance between the correlation matrices across three tasks
and each task. After shuffling, the distance is significantly
increased and the correlation clusters are mostly eliminated,
thereby signal correlations can be enhanced and highly improved task classification performance. Although shuffling
method can solve the problem, it needs all the information
of the dataset, which is difficult to use in practice.
Mostly denoising and decoding models (Romero, Piñol,
and Vázquez-Seisdedos 2021; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Zhang and Zhang 2019) assume that noise is independent,

Neural decoding, which transforms neural signals into motor commands, plays a key role in brain-computer interfaces
(BCIs). Existing neural decoding approaches mainly rely on
the assumption of independent noises, which could perform
poorly in case the assumption is invalid. However, correlations in noises have been commonly observed in neural signals. Specifically, noise in different neural channels can be
similar or highly related, which could degrade the performance of those neural decoders. To tackle this problem, we
propose the DeCorrNet, which explicitly removes noise correlation in neural decoding. DeCorrNet could incorporate diverse neural decoders as an ensemble module to enhance the
neural decoding performance. Experiments with benchmark
BCI datasets demonstrated the superiority of DeCorrNet and
achieved state-of-the-art results.

Introduction
Recent advances in brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), especially neural decoding (Liu et al. 2023b; Card et al. 2023;
Wilson et al. 2020; Moses et al. 2021; Qi et al. 2019,
2022), have demonstrated great potential in restoring motor or speech abilities for individuals with paralysis (Willett
et al. 2023; Metzger et al. 2023; Willett et al. 2021). Despite
this progress, achieving stable and high-performance neural
decoding in BCI systems remains a formidable challenge.
An important issue in neural decoding is dealing with
noise in neural signals. Most of the noise in neural signals is
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d). Specifically,
cortical neurons encode information in certain spike patterns. However, given the non-stationary nature of the neural
system, there are variations in the spike patterns even with
repeated trials, which can be considered as i.i.d noise. Typically, i.i.d noise can be suppressed by averaging the recordings from a large number of neurons. However, there is still
a kind of correlated noise in neural signals, that is, there are
correlation patterns across neurons. In this case, the correlation patterns cannot be removed by averaging which leaves
variability in the signal. Therefore, the amount of information in the neural population may be limited due to the pres* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14396

