The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ImagePiece: Content-aware Re-tokenization
for Efficient Image Recognition
Seungdong Yoa1 , Seungjun Lee1 , Hyeseung Cho1 , Bumsoo Kim2 † , Woohyung Lim1 †
1

LG AI Research
Chung-ang University
{seungdong.yoa, seungjun.lee, hs.cho, w.lim}@lgresearch.ai, bumsoo@cau.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved remarkable success in various computer vision tasks. However, ViTs have
a huge computational cost due to their inherent reliance on
multi-head self-attention (MHSA), prompting efforts to accelerate ViTs for practical applications. To this end, recent
works aim to reduce the number of tokens, mainly focusing on how to effectively prune or merge them. Nevertheless, since ViT tokens are generated from non-overlapping
grid patches, they usually do not convey sufficient semantics, making it incompatible with efficient ViTs. To address
this, we propose ImagePiece, a novel re-tokenization strategy
for Vision Transformers. Following the MaxMatch strategy
of NLP tokenization, ImagePiece groups semantically insufficient yet locally coherent tokens until they convey meaning.
This simple retokenization is highly compatible with previous token reduction methods, being able to drastically narrow down relevant tokens, enhancing the inference speed of
DeiT-S by 54% (nearly 1.5× faster) while achieving a 0.39%
improvement in ImageNet classification accuracy. For hyperspeed inference scenarios (with 251% acceleration), our approach surpasses other baselines by an accuracy over 8%.

Figure 1: An illustration of the ImagePiece pipeline compared to WordPiece in NLP. While text is tokenized into
meaningful tokens, image tokens from patches often contain irrelevant or non-semantic information. The retokenization in ImagePiece enables these non-semantic tokens to be
merged into meaningful tokens, particularly when they have
the potential to become meaningful after retokenization.

Introduction
“All that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are
lost.” — J.R.R. Tolkien

Tokenization involves breaking down text into smaller
units called tokens, such as words, and is a crucial preprocessing step for nearly all Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks. Modern NLP models like BERT (Devlin et al.
2018), GPT (Brown et al. 2020), and XLNet (Yang et al.
2019) tokenize text into subword units. These subword units
strike a balance between words and characters, preserving
linguistic meaning while minimizing out-of-vocabulary issues even with a relatively small vocabulary. Subword tokenizer such as wordpiece (Devlin et al. 2018) employs a
greedy longest-match-first strategy, iteratively selecting the
longest prefix of the remaining text that matches a vocabulary token, a method known as Maximum Matching or MaxMatch.

Following the pioneering success of Transformers in natural language processing, Vision Transformers (Yin et al.
2022) have showcased remarkable performance across a
broad spectrum of computer vision tasks. In the context of
images, tokenization involves splitting an image into nonoverlapping grid patches and feeding the sequence of linear
embeddings of these patches into a Transformer. Here, image patches are treated similarly to tokens (words) in NLP.
However, unlike textual tokens stemmed from subwords
where most elements contain meaning that contributes to
understanding, image patch-based tokens differ significantly
as they often 1) contain totally irrelevant semantics with the
overall meaning (e.g., roads, sky, background) or 2) require
a broader context to convey meaning (for example, in Fig 1,
the blue patch itself (a) hardly contains any semantics while
its collection with nearby patches (b) can be correctly recognized as a ‘bus’).

†Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9544

