The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Treasures in Discarded Weights for LLM Quantization
Hao Yu1,2,3 , Yang Zhou3 , Bohua Chen3 , Zelan Yang3 , Shen Li3 * , Yong Li3 , Jianxin Wu1,2 *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
3
Alibaba Cloud Computing
yuh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {xiale.zy, bohua.cbh, yangzelan.yzl, litan.ls, jiufeng.ly}@alibaba-inc.com, wujx2001@gmail.com

Abstract

typical quantization methods, i.e., post-training quantization
(PTQ) and quantization-aware training (QAT). PTQ algorithms quantify the model’s weights and activation directly.
In contrast, QAT algorithms make quantization part of the
model training process. In general, researchers will first perform PTQ algorithms for LLMs, and then further run QAT
algorithms based on PTQ models if enough computational
resources are available.
Although existing quantization methods for LLMs have
demonstrated great capacity, they also have some inherent
limitations. While QAT algorithms can significantly reduce
accuracy degradation caused by quantization and sometimes
even close to lossless, they need to retrain LLMs and require
large computational resources. In contrast, PTQ algorithms
are faster and more widely used. However, they often lead
to a noticeable decrease in model precision. Besides, previous LLM PTQ methods (Frantar et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2024)
mainly focus on adjusting weight or outlier activation layerby-layer, and only consider the activation values of an individual layer or block. Hence, they ignore global information
and may result in the accumulation of quantization errors.
Both PTQ and QAT can often achieve INT8 lossless quantization for LLMs (Frantar et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2024), but
further reducing to lower bits (such as INT4 and INT2) will
most likely result in significant accuracy loss.
To overcome these defects of existing LLM PTQ and QAT
algorithms, we propose a plug-and-play framework to improve the precision of low-bit quantization LLMs. We believe that for LLM PTQ algorithms, the discarded weights
(i.e., D = W − Wq ) still contain precious information that
has not been fully mined. Therefore, we propose a novel
strategy to excavate the hidden treasures in the discarded
weights D. In particular, based on low-rank decomposition
technique, we design various small search spaces around D.
The search spaces contain multiple weights that are divisible by the quantization scales and can be incorporated into
the original quantization weights seamlessly. Therefore, our
framework does not add an extra inference burden. To determine which weights should be merged, we apply the global
perplexity (PPL) value on the calibration set as a criterion
rather than the activation change of an individual layer.
Our framework does not rely on back-propagation but
can still capture global information, so only a small number of samples and hyperparameters are required and quan-

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have developed rapidly and revolutionized natural language processing. However, high storage overhead and computing
costs limit LLM deployment in resource-constrained environments. Quantization algorithms can effectively compress
LLMs and accelerate inference, but they lead to loss in precision, especially in low-bit scenarios. In this paper, we find
that the discarded weight values caused by quantization in
fact contain treasures to improve LLMs’ accuracy. To excavate those hidden treasures, we construct search spaces
around these discarded weights and those weights within the
search space can seamlessly be incorporated into the original quantization weights. To determine which weights should
be merged, we design a plug-and-play weight compensation framework to capture global information and keep the
weights with the highest potential benefits. Our framework
can be combined with various LLM quantization algorithms
to achieve higher precision without additional inference overhead. We validate the effectiveness of our approach on widely
used benchmark datasets for LLMs.

Introduction
In recent years, pre-trained large language models or
LLMs (Le Scao et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2022) from the transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) family have achieved exciting results in many complex natural
language processing (NLP) tasks. LLMs have captured wide
attention in both academia and industry. However, the flexibility and scalability of these models still face many limitations. Since LLMs typically have billions of parameters,
they are quite expensive in terms of both computation and
storage costs, which presents a huge challenge for their deployment and application.
Model quantization maps the full-precision (e.g., 32-bit
floating point) weights W and activation values A to lower
precision (e.g., 8-bit integer) weights Wq and activations
Aq . It effectively reduces parameter counts and speeds up
model inference without significantly affecting accuracy.
Therefore, quantization algorithms have been widely used
to deploy LLMs. Generally speaking, there are two kinds of
* S. Li and J. Wu are co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22218

