The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dehaze-RetinexGAN: Real-World Image Dehazing via Retinex-based Generative
Adversarial Network
Xinran Wang1 * , Guang Yang1 * , Tian Ye2 , Yun Liu1,3†
1

College of Artificial Intelligence, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
wowwowyahoo@gmail.com, learnforai@gmail.com, owentianye@hkust-gz.edu.cn, yunliu@swu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Deep learning based dehazing networks trained on paired
synthetic data have shown impressive performance, but they
struggle with significant degradation in generalization ability
on real-world hazy scenes. In this paper, we propose DehazeRetinexGAN, a lightweight Retinex-based Generative Adversarial Network for real-world image Dehazing using unpaired
data. Our Dehaze-RetinexGAN consists of two stages: selfsupervised pre-training and weakly-supervised fine-tuning.
During the pre-training, we reduce the image dehazing task
to an illumination-reflectance decomposition task based on
the duality correlation between Retinex and dehazing. Specifically, a decomposition network named DecomNet is constructed to obtain an illumination and a reflectance, simultaneously. Moreover, a self-supervised learning strategy is developed to construct the connection between the preliminary
dehazed result and the input hazy image, which constrains the
solution space of DecomNet and accelerates training, leading
to a more realistic dehazed result. In the fine-tuning stage,
we develop a dual DTCWT-based attention module and embed it into the U-Net architecture to further improve the quality of preliminary result in the frequency domain. In addition, the adversarial learning is employed to constrain the
relevance between the clean image and the final dehazed result in a weakly supervised manner, which can promote more
natural performance. Extensive experiments on several realworld datasets demonstrate that our proposed framework performs favorably over state-of-the-art dehazing methods in visual quality and quantitative evaluation.

Figure 1: Dehazing results on a real-world hazy image.

hazy images. However, directly employing these enhancement methods on hazy images may lead to unnatural results
due to the lack of physical mechanisms.
Relying on the atmospheric scattering model, prior-based
dehazing algorithms, such as dark channel prior (DCP) (He,
Sun, and Tang 2011), region line prior (RLP) (Ju et al. 2021),
and saturation line prior (SLP) (Ling et al. 2023), have been
proposed to estimate the transmission and further recover
the haze-free image. Unfortunately, these presented priors
are not well-suited for handling diverse real-world scenarios.
For instance, the well-known DCP fails in situations where
the scene colors are similar to the airlight.
Leveraging the feature extraction capabilities of deep
learning, MSCNN (Ren et al. 2016) and DehazeNet (Cai
et al. 2016) were proposed to estimate the transmission. Subsequently, several dehazing networks, such as AODNet (Li
et al. 2017), FFANet (Qin et al. 2020), MSBDN (Dong et al.
2020), Dehamer (Guo et al. 2022), and DEA-Net (Chen, He,
and Lu 2024), have been developed to construct the mapping relationship between hazy images and clean data. However, due to the domain shift between synthetic and real data,
these models trained solely on paired synthetic datasets suffer from limited generalization ability on real-world scenes.
To overcome the dependency on paired data, many

Introduction
The presence of haze leads to reduced visibility, decreased
contrast, blurred details, and color distortion, severely affecting the performance of real-world vision-based systems
such as autonomous driving and object detection. Therefore,
image dehazing that aims to restore scene details is an important task in low-level computer vision.
Early dehazing techniques are mainly based on enhancement strategies, such as histogram equalization (Xu, Liu,
and Chen 2009) and Retinex theory (Noori, Gholizadeh,
and Rafsanjani 2024), to improve the perceptual visibility of
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7997

