The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Latent Diffusion-Enhanced Virtual Try-On via Optimized
Pseudo-Label Generation
Chenghu Du* 1,4 , Junyin Wang* 1 , Feng Yu4† , Shengwu Xiong2,3†
1

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Interdisciplinary Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Wuhan College
4
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan Textile University
{duch, wjy199708, xiongsw}@whut.edu.cn, yufeng@wtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Efficiently applying fully supervised learning to virtual tryon tasks is challenging due to the lack of paired ground truth
in available training samples. Recent works have achieved
virtual try-ons by employing self-supervised learning-based
inpainting paradigms. However, this approach is heavily dependent on the constraints of inpainting masks. An incorrect
mask can mislead the generated results, while overly large
mask areas can lose essential original information, thereby
hindering the synthesis of high-quality results. To address
these problems, we propose a latent diffusion model-based
virtual try-on network that achieves fully supervised learning
using the concept of cycle consistency and knowledge distillation. Specifically, we divide our approach into pretext and
downstream tasks. In the pretext task, we generate a pseudolabel (pseudo-person image) to form paired training samples,
which enables the downstream task to achieve fully supervised learning. To prevent the unreliable pseudo-person image from introducing irresponsible prior knowledge, we propose a noise-covering strategy, which aims at fully optimizing the pseudo-label to eliminate the impact of the incorrect
inpainting mask as much as possible. Additionally, we propose a skin refinement loss to further enhance the generation
of details in the skin region. Extended experiments demonstrate that our proposed method is superior to state-of-the-art
methods.

Figure 1: Visualization of the shortcomings of the inpainting
paradigm based on self-supervised learning. (a) Clothingagnostic mask. (b) Clothing-agnostic person. (c) Result:
residual original information. (d) Larger clothing-agnostic
mask. (e) Result: lost structural information. (c) and (e)
display generated pseudo-person images. If an incorrect
clothing-agnostic person or an unreliable pseudo-person image is used as input for the downstream task, it can introduce
irresponsible knowledge.

a practical self-supervised inpainting approach is typically
employed (Choi et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2023;
Gou et al. 2023; Morelli et al. 2023; Du et al. 2024; Li et al.
2023; Kim et al. 2024), which involves three steps: i) Train a
parser to estimate a clothing-agnostic mask (see Figure 1 (a))
that covers the upper body region and part of the surrounding
background. ii) Use the clothing-agnostic mask to remove
the upper body of the person image (clothing-agnostic person, see Figure 1 (b)). iii) Inpaint the removed region using
generative models (generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2020) or diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020)) to synthesize the desired try-on result.
In this paradigm, the clothing-agnostic person serves as
the input, and the clothing-agnostic mask serves as the conditional input. This setup allows the generative model to
learn how to fill in missing skin and optimize the clothing
appearance on the clothing-agnostic person. However, if the
parser predicts incorrect clothing-agnostic masks, it can directly affect the try-on outcomes. For example, if the original
clothing is not fully removed, or areas such as hair or face
are mistakenly removed, this will result in either the addition
or loss of information (see Figure 1 (d)). Furthermore, due to
the excessively large size of clothing-agnostic masks, the removed regions lose all their structural details. Relying solely
on the generative model for empirical inpainting leads to a
significant loss of structural coherence (see Figure 1 (e)).

Introduction
The Virtual Try-On (VTON) task aims to realistically put
clothing items from in-store images onto the person in user
photos. When shopping for clothes online, consumers cannot inspect and try on clothing items as they would in a
physical store. This significant demand, with its potential
for practical and commercial value, has attracted widespread
attention from researchers, leading to the development of
image-based virtual try-on technology.
In this task, all available training samples (Han et al.
2018; Choi et al. 2021; Morelli et al. 2022) consist only of
paired images (clothing and the person wearing the clothing)
and do not include corresponding ground truths. Therefore,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

First corresponding author: Shengwu Xiong.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2780

