The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SM O SE: Sparse Mixture of Shallow Experts for
Interpretable Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Control Tasks
Mátyás Vincze1,2 , Laura Ferrarotti2 , Leonardo Lucio Custode1
Bruno Lepri2 , Giovanni Iacca1
1
University of Trento, Italy
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
{mvincze, ferrarotti, lepri}@fbk.eu, {leonardo.custode, giovanni.iacca}@unitn.it
2

Abstract

are frequent for instance in robot control, autonomous driving, emergency response, and public decision-making. Indeed, given that interpretable policies distilled for explanation are typically less complex than closed-box ones, they
might require adopting entirely different strategies, disrupting the link between the original behavior and its interpretation (Rudin 2019). To overcome this issue, research efforts
have been channeled towards Interpretable AI (IAI) (Rudin
2019; Akrour, Tateo, and Peters 2021). Interpretable AI focuses on systems whose decision-making process is inherently understandable to humans, without the need for distilled explanations (Arrieta et al. 2020). These models prioritize clarity and simplicity, enabling users to directly comprehend how inputs are transformed into outputs, thus facilitating transparency, trust, and validation ease (Rudin 2019).
Due to its sequential nature, Reinforcement Learning
(RL) benefits more from directly interpretable policies than
post-hoc explanations (Rudin et al. 2021). Discrepancies between a policy and its interpretable approximation can grow
over time due to state distribution drift, making local explanations less meaningful (Akrour, Tateo, and Peters 2021).
Moreover, post hoc XAI methods, when used in RL to tackle
goal misalignment problems, might mislead observers into
believing that closed-box agents select the correct actions for
the appropriate reasons, even though their decision-making
process may actually be misaligned (Chan, Kong, and Liang
2022; Delfosse et al. 2024). This paper addresses the challenge of Interpretable Reinforcement Learning (IRL) in continuous action spaces. In particular, the main advances presented in this work can be summarized as follows:

Continuous control tasks often involve high-dimensional, dynamic, and non-linear environments. State-of-the-art performance in these tasks is achieved through complex closed-box
policies that are effective, but suffer from an inherent opacity.
Interpretable policies, while generally underperforming compared to their closed-box counterparts, advantageously facilitate transparent decision-making within automated systems.
Hence, their usage is often essential for diagnosing and mitigating errors, supporting ethical and legal accountability, and
fostering trust among stakeholders. In this paper, we propose
SM O SE, a novel method to train sparsely activated interpretable controllers, based on a top-1 Mixture-of-Experts architecture. SM O SE combines a set of interpretable decisionmakers, trained to be experts in different basic skills, and
an interpretable router that assigns tasks among the experts.
The training is carried out via state-of-the-art Reinforcement
Learning algorithms, exploiting load-balancing techniques
to ensure fair expert usage. We then distill decision trees
from the weights of the router, significantly improving the
ease of interpretation. We evaluate SM O SE on six benchmark environments from MuJoCo: our method outperforms
recent interpretable baselines and narrows the gap with noninterpretable state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
Over the last decade, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has
achieved dramatic success. However, the increasing adoption of AI systems in real-world use cases has been raising concerns related to the trustworthiness of these systems
(Wexler 2017; McGough 2018; Varshney and Alemzadeh
2017; Rudin, Wang, and Coker 2019; Huang et al. 2020;
Smyth et al. 2021; He 2021). One of the most promising
paths toward trustworthy AI involves developing methods
to enhance our understanding of AI decision-making processes. In this context, eXplainable AI (XAI) introduces
AI systems enabling the generation of post-hoc explanations for their behavior (Dwivedi et al. 2023). Although
such methods do provide insights into the decision-making
processes, their post-hoc analysis explains just an approximation of the original closed-box behavior. This approximation cannot be trusted in high-stakes scenarios, which

• We propose SM O SE, a novel, high-performing method,
that exploits a sparse, interpretable Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) architecture. Our method simultaneously learns a
set of simple yet effective continuous sub-policies, and
an interpretable router. The sub-policies are sequentially
selected by the router, one per each decision step, to control the system, based on the current state.
• We showcase the capabilities of SM O SE through results
obtained on six well-known continuous control benchmarks from the MuJoCo environment (Todorov, Erez,
and Tassa 2012). For all the considered environments we
analyze performance both in training and in evaluation.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We include a full interpretation for all the trained poli20982

