The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FIDLA R: Forecast-Informed Deep Learning Architecture for Flood Mitigation
Jimeng Shi1 , Zeda Yin2 , Arturo Leon2 , Jayantha Obeysekera2 , Giri Narasimhan1
1

Knight Foundation School of Computing and Information Sciences, Florida International University
2
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Florida International University
3
Sea Level Solutions Center, Florida International University
{jshi008, zyin005, arleon, jobeysek, giri}@fiu.edu

Abstract

To mitigate flood risks, water management agencies have
built controllable hydraulic structures such as dams, gates,
pumps, and reservoirs in river systems (Kerkez et al. 2016).
However, determining the optimal control schedules of these
hydraulic structures is a challenging problem (Bowes et al.
2021). Rule-based methods (Sadler et al. 2019) formulate
control schedules based on insights gained from historically
observed data. The rules represent the collective wisdom
gathered over decades of experience in managing specific
river systems. Nevertheless, these rules may expose vulnerabilities while dealing with extremely rare events and may
not offer effective solutions for complex river systems under
such conditions (Schwanenberg, Becker, and Xu 2015).
The flood mitigation problem is usually treated as an optimization task (Karimanzira 2016), where variables such as
control schedules for hydraulic structures are optimized to
achieve the desired water levels to effectively mitigate flood
risks (Zarei et al. 2021). Random initialization followed by
soft-computing techniques such as genetic algorithm (GA)
(Leon et al. 2020) is often employed to perform the optimizations. Subsequently, physics-based simulator models
such as HEC-RAS and SWMM are used to assess generated
control schedules (Sadler et al. 2019; Leon et al. 2014; Yin
et al. 2023b). However, such methods are prohibitively slow
since they require thousands of time-consuming physicsbased simulations (Jafarzadegan et al. 2023).
Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) has become
an increasingly powerful tool in various aspects of flood
management, including flood prediction (Shi et al. 2023c),
flood detection (Tanim et al. 2022), susceptibility assessment (Saha et al. 2021), and post-flood management (Munawar et al. 2019). Despite these advances, ML-based methods have yet to be widely applied to flood mitigation tasks.
We address this gap by introducing a fully machine learningbased framework, comprising a generator to generate control schedules and a simulator to assess them. The ML-based
framework offers significantly faster response times than
compute-intensive physics-based approaches, enabling realtime flood management. Furthermore, the proposed MLbased method allows the simulator to actively guide the generator through gradient descent, thus seamlessly integrating
the generator and simulator components and leveraging the
differentiability of the learned simulator model (Jyothir et al.
2023; LeCun 2022; Bharadhwaj, Xie, and Shkurti 2020).

In coastal river systems, floods, often during major storms or
king tides, severely threaten lives and property. However, hydraulic structures such as dams, gates, pumps, and reservoirs
exist in these river systems, and these floods can be mitigated
or even prevented by strategically releasing water before extreme weather events. A standard approach used by local water management agencies is the “rule-based” method, which
specifies predetermined water prereleases based on historical human experience, but which tends to result in excessive or inadequate water release. Iterative optimization methods that rely on detailed physics-based models for prediction
are an alternative approach. Whereas, such methods tend to
be computationally intensive, requiring hours or even days
to solve the problem optimally. In this paper, we propose a
Forecast Informed Deep Learning Architecture, FIDLA R, to
achieve rapid and near-optimal flood management with precise water prereleases. FIDLA R seamlessly integrates two
neural network modules: one called the Flood Manager,
which is responsible for generating water pre-release schedules, and another called the Flood Evaluator, which
evaluates those generated schedules. The Evaluator module
is pre-trained separately, and its gradient-based feedback is
utilized to train the Manager model, ensuring near-optimal
water pre-releases. We have conducted experiments with a
flood-prone coastal area in South Florida. Results show that
FIDLA R is several orders of magnitude faster than currently
used physics-based approaches while outperforming baseline
methods with improved water pre-release schedules.

1

Introduction

Floods can result in catastrophic consequences with considerable loss of life (Jonkman and Vrijling 2008), huge
socio-economic impact (Wu et al. 2021), property damage
(Brody et al. 2007), and environmental devastation (Yin
et al. 2023a). They pose a threat to food and water security as
well as sustainable development (Kabir and Hossen 2019).
What is even more alarming is that research indicates global
climate change may lead to a drastic increase in flood risks
in terms of both frequency and scale (Wing et al. 2022), e.g.,
coastal flood risks due to sea-level rise (Sadler et al. 2020).
Thus, effective flood management is of utmost importance.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28377

