The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Reasoning for Sure Through Constructing Explainable Models
Tiansi Dong, Mateja Jamnik, Pietro Liò
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge
15 JJ Thomson Ave, Cambridge, UK
{td540, mj201, pl219}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

behaviour (Park et al. 2024), errors in abstract reasoning
(Eisape et al. 2024; Lampinen et al. 2024), and the irrationality of producing correct answers with incorrect explanations
(Creswell, Shanahan, and Higgins 2023; Zelikman et al.
2022). Neural networks, including LLMs, are still not sure
about their reasoning results. Here, we define the reasoningfor-sure property of neural networks as follows: a neural
network reasons for sure, if for consistent set-theoretic statements, it can successfully construct a model in the vector
space, within M epochs, where M is a constant number. We
shall prove M ’s existence and the value of M without using
data. This M enables neural networks to determine inconsistent statements: after M epochs, if the target model is not
constructed, the neural network will conclude that there is
no model and the conclusion is unsatisfiable.

Neural networks remain black-box systems, unsure about
their outputs, and their performance may drop unpredictably
in real applications. An open question is how to qualitatively extend neural networks, so that they are sure about
their reasoning results, or reasoning-for-sure. Here, we
introduce set-theoretic relations explicitly and seamlessly
into neural networks by extending vector embedding into
sphere embedding, so that part-whole relations can explicitly
encode set-theoretic relations through sphere boundaries
in the vector space. A reasoning-for-sure neural network
successfully constructs, within a constant number M of
epochs, a sphere configuration as its semantic model for any
consistent set-theoretic relation. We implement Hyperbolic
Sphere Neural Network (HSphNN), the first reasoning-forsure neural network for all types of Aristotelian syllogistic
reasoning. Its construction process is realised as a sequence
of neighbourhood transitions from the current towards the
target configuration. We prove M = 1 for HSphNN. In
experiments, HSphNN achieves the symbolic level rigour of
syllogistic reasoning and successfully checks both decisions
and explanations of ChatGPT (gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4o)
without errors. Through prompts, HSphNN improves the
performance of gpt-3.5-turbo from 46.875% to 58.98%, and
of gpt-4o from 82.42% to 84.76%. We show ways to extend
HSphNN for various kinds of logical and Bayesian reasoning,
and to integrate it with traditional neural networks seamlessly.

Missing reasoning-for-sure property, LLMs may make
wrong decisions in legal judgments (Deng et al. 2023), in
clinical services (Hager et al. 2024), and bring unpredictable
risks to our society (Bengio et al. 2024). The ability of
syllogistic deduction is the pre-condition for inference and
other types of rational reasoning. Legal judgments have
a syllogistic backbone, where rules of laws serve as the
major premise and a concrete case is the minor premise.
Clinical decision-making is the reverse process that tries
to infer which disease causes (deduces) the symptoms.
Determining the consistency is a pre-condition to making
correct deductions (Bucciarelli, Khemlani, and JohnsonLaird 2008; Johnson-Laird, Khemlani, and Goodwin 2015).
For example, from ‘All Greeks are human. All humans are
mortal.’, we can deduce for sure both that ‘All Greeks are
mortal’ and also that ‘Some Greeks are mortal’. However,
this is a big challenge for supervised deep learning, partly
because training data for one conclusion weakens the learning confidence of the other conclusion. The performance
of LLMs on syllogistic reasoning has been systematically
evaluated (Eisape et al. 2024; Lampinen et al. 2024):
they inevitably mimic human errors in the training data.
Cutting-edge neural research is to move from simulating
fast associative thinking (System 1) to achieving slow
logical thinking (System 2) (Kahneman 2011) for high-level
cognitive tasks (Goyal and Bengio 2022). The first step is to
develop reasoning-for-sure neural networks for Aristotelian
syllogistic statements, the microcosm of human rationality
(Khemlani and Johnson-Laird 2012; Khemlani 2021).

Code and Data — https://github.com/gnodisnait/hsphnn

Introduction
Besides being capable of human-like communication
(Biever 2023), LLMs are successful in various reasoning
tasks, such as mathematical findings (Davies et al. 2021),
predicting protein structures (Abramson et al. 2024), and
playing games (Silver et al. 2017; Schrittwieser et al. 2020).
However, being able to communicate does not necessarily
result in the ability to reason (Fedorenko, Piantadosi, and
Gibson 2024). Though breaking complex tasks into multiple steps may improve reasoning performance (Creswell,
Shanahan, and Higgins 2023; Wei et al. 2022; Lightman
et al. 2023), it remains unclear whether LLMs really reason
(Biever 2023; Mitchell 2023). They exhibit unpredictable
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11598

