The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Wavelet-Assisted Multi-Frequency Attention Network for Pansharpening
Jie Huang1 * , Rui Huang1 * , Jinghao Xu1 , Siran Peng2, 3 , Yule Duan1 , Liangjian Deng1†
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jayhuang,huang rui,2023040901014}@std.uestc.edu.cn,pengsiran2023@ia.ac.cn,
yule.duan@outlook.com,liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn
Convolution

Abstract
Pansharpening aims to combine a high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) image with a low-resolution multispectral
(LRMS) image to produce a high-resolution multispectral
(HRMS) image. Although pansharpening in the frequency
domain offers clear advantages, most existing methods either continue to operate solely in the spatial domain or fail to
fully exploit the benefits of the frequency domain. To address
this issue, we innovatively propose Multi-Frequency Fusion
Attention (MFFA), which leverages wavelet transforms to
cleanly separate frequencies and enable lossless reconstruction across different frequency domains. Then, we generate Frequency-Query, Spatial-Key, and Fusion-Value based
on the physical meanings represented by different features,
which enables a more effective capture of specific information in the frequency domain. Additionally, we focus on the
preservation of frequency features across different operations.
On a broader level, our network employs a wavelet pyramid to progressively fuse information across multiple scales.
Compared to previous frequency domain approaches, our network better prevents confusion and loss of different frequency
features during the fusion process. Quantitative and qualitative experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that our
method outperforms existing approaches and shows significant generalization capabilities for real-world scenarios.

𝑪𝒐𝒏𝒗Net

𝑪𝒐𝒏𝒗Net
(a)

(b)

Frequency

Spatial

V

Q

(c)

Data flow direction

K

Fusion
Attention

V

Attention

K

Attention

𝑭𝒆𝒂𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒆 𝑬𝒙𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒄𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏

Q

(d)

Frequeny decomposition

Figure 1: The comparison covers four methods across two
dimensions: (a) Convolutional network in the spatial domain, (b) Convolutional network in different frequency domains, (c) Attention mechanism in the spatial domain, and
(d) Our proposed method which forms the primary motivation for this paper: 1) utilizing wavelet transforms to process in different frequency domains; 2) designing an attention method with clear physical significance to leverage the
advantages of frequency domain processing.

sis (MRA) (Vivone, Restaino, and Chanussot 2018), and
Variational Optimization-based (VO) (Tian et al. 2022) techniques. In recent years, with the rapid development of deep
learning, many deep learning methods (Wang et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2023) have been proposed for pansharpening
using convolutional neural networks (CNN), as shown in
Fig. 1 (a), such as PNN (Masi et al. 2016), DiCNN (He et al.
2019), and LAGConv (Jin et al. 2022b). These methods underscore deep learning’s potential to improve pansharpening
accuracy and efficiency. However, most existing methods do
not process images in different frequency domains but instead operate in the original single spatial domain, thereby
limiting the potential for improving fusion quality.
Direct fusion in the spatial domain methods can often
result in detail loss or blurring due to the imprecise separation of frequency information. In contrast, frequencybased methods can separate different frequencies for targeted processing, which better preserves hard-to-capture
high-frequency information while effectively preventing interference between different frequencies. Consequently, pro-

Code — https://github.com/Jie-1203/WFANet

Introduction
High-resolution multispectral (HRMS) images are vital
for applications like environmental monitoring and urban planning. Due to hardware constraints, satellites typically capture low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) and
high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) images. Pansharpening
fuses these to produce HRMS, combining their strengths to
enhance spatial and spectral resolution.
To obtain high-resolution multispectral (HRMS) images,
pansharpening methods are categorized into traditional and
deep learning-based approaches. Traditional methods are divided into three groups (Meng et al. 2019): Component
Substitution (CS) (Vivone 2019), Multi-Resolution Analy* Co-first authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3662

