The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Maximizing Signal in Human-Model Preference Alignment
Kelsey Kraus, Margaret Kroll
Cisco Systems
{kekraus, makroll}@cisco.com

Abstract

are prompted to generate human-like texts, and can respond
in sophisticated, human-like, and nuanced ways. However,
even with well-intentioned inputs, if left unsupervised generative AI output is prone to hallucinations and overconfident advice, and can produce output that fails to fulfill the
goals of its human users (Huang et al. 2023; Mahaut et al.
2024; Perković, Drobnjak, and Botički 2024). Despite the
rapid technological advancement in model performance, the
field has not settled on a standardized way of evaluating
LLM outputs that consistently aligns with human feedback.
Traditional NLP evaluation methods remain popular with
researchers, such as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), ROUGE
(Lin 2004), and METEOR (Lavie and Agarwal 2007). These
methods were originally developed as reference-based metrics for machine translation and are computationally cheap
to run. However, research shows that the metrics have poor
correlation with human judgments, and limited applicability across various aspects of NLG quality assessments
(Novikova et al. 2017; Reiter 2018; Howcroft et al. 2020).
More contemporary metrics, such as BERTScore, have also
been shown in at least some applications to deviate widely
from human preferences (Zhang et al. 2019; Hanna and Bojar 2021). SOTA advancements in self-evaluation techniques
show promise in prompting LLMs to catch some of their
own inconsistencies, as seen in Chain-of-Thought reasoning
(Liu et al. 2023) and LLM-as-Judge scenarios (Zheng et al.
2020; Verga et al. 2024); however, these methods do not yet
meet the bar set by human judges, nor do they show high performance on all dimensions of analysis (Pavlovic and Poesio 2024; Baris Schlicht et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024; Raina,
Liusie, and Gales 2024; Thakur et al. 2024).
Despite the field’s push toward fast, automated metrics
and unsupervised tasks, human judgments remain integral
tools of model training and evaluation (Gabriel and Ghazavi
2021). Human labeling tasks arise when end users need to
agree with the decisions made by ML models, e.g. in toxicity detection, image classification, or abstractive summarization. There are several methodological techniques that have
been proposed for infusing human preference judgments
into ML modeling. For example, RLHF allows the modeler
to gather large-scale human preferences during model training, but is limited to a single-dimension preference paradigm
(Christiano et al. 2023). The Constitutional AI framework
forgoes directly gathering human preferences, relying on a

The emergence of powerful LLMs has led to a paradigm shift
in Natural Language Understanding and Natural Language
Generation. The properties that make LLMs so valuable for
these tasks – creativity, ability to produce fluent speech, and
ability to quickly and effectively abstract information from
large corpora – also present new challenges to evaluating their
outputs. The rush to market has led teams to fall back on
quick, cost-effective automatic evaluations which offer value,
but do not obviate the need for human judgments in model
training and evaluation. This paper argues that in cases in
which end users need to agree with the decisions made by ML
models – e.g. in toxicity detection or extraction of main points
for summarization – models should be trained and evaluated
on data that represent the preferences of those users. We support this argument by explicating the role of human feedback
in labeling and judgment tasks for model training and evaluation. First, we propose methods for disentangling noise from
signal in labeling tasks. Then we show that noise in labeling disagreement can be minimized by adhering to proven
methodological best practices, while signal can be maximized
to play an integral role in model training and evaluation tasks.
Finally, we illustrate best practices by providing a case study
in which two guardrails classifiers are evaluated using human
judgments to align final model behavior to user preferences.
We aim for this paper to provide researchers and professionals with guidelines to integrating human judgments into their
ML and generative AI evaluation toolkit, particularly when
working toward achieving accurate and unbiased features that
align with users’ needs and expectations.

Introduction
Since November 2022 with the launch of ChatGPT, the
world has seen an explosion in popularity of generative
AI content demonstrating impressive performance across a
variety of tasks. This paradigm shift in Natural Language
Generation (NLG) has changed the fields of text generation
and summarization, computer-generated art, information retrieval, search engine optimization, and workflow automation. While new applications of generative technologies are
transformative, research lags behind in effective, replicable
strategies for evaluating their content. The core challenge
of evaluating NLG systems lies in their very nature: models
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27392

