The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Supportive Negatives Spectral Augmentation for
Source-Free Cross-Domain Segmentation
Kexin Zheng1,2 , Haifeng Xia2 * , Siyu Xia1,2* , Ming Shao3 , Zhengming Ding4
1

Advanced Ocean Institute, Southeast University, Nantong, China
2
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, USA
4
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, USA
{zhengkx, hfxia, xsy}@seu.edu.cn, mshao@umassd.edu, zding1@tulane.edu
Hard
Negatives

OD
OC

Abstract
Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) aims to transfer
knowledge from the well-trained source model and optimize it to adapt target data distribution. SFDA methods are
suitable for medical image segmentation tasks due to its
data-privacy protection and achieve promising performances.
However, cross-domain distribution shift makes it difficult
for the adapted model to provide accurate decisions on several hard instances and negatively affects model generalization. To overcome this limitation, a novel method ‘supportive negatives spectral augmentation’ (SNSA) is presented in
this work. Concretely, SNSA includes the instance selection
mechanism to automatically discover a few hard samples for
which the source model produces incorrect predictions. And
an active learning strategy is adopted to re-calibrate their predictive masks. Moreover, SNSA deploys the spectral augmentation between hard instances and others to encourage the
source model to gradually capture and adapt the attributions
of the target distribution. Considerable experimental studies
demonstrate that annotating merely 4%∼5% of negative instances from the target domain significantly improves the segmentation performance over previous methods.

Few Annotation
4%-5%

Target Images

Hard Negatives Discovery

FFT

Amplitude Swap

iFFT

Labeled Images
Spectral Augmentation

Figure 1: A pipeline overview of our proposed method,
Supportive Negatives Spectral Augmentation(SNSA). In the
context of source-free domain adaptation, an active learningbased approach is proposed in this paper to select representative ’hard negative’ instances from the target domain and
utilize experts’ decisions and signal processing mechanism
(spectral augmentation) to optimize the target network.

target domain) (Xia and Ding 2020; Ju et al. 2021; Varsavsky
et al. 2020). However, these methods are unable to handle
learning tasks where source medical data is unavailable due
to data privacy and ethical considerations.
To that end, Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA)
eliminates the reliance on source data in the transfer process
(Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020; Xia, Zhao, and Ding 2021; Ding
et al. 2022). Recent efforts have extended SFDA to fundus image segmentation. One common practice is to leverage the prediction results of the source model as pseudolabels to facilitate the target model’s adaptation. However,
these strategies are susceptible to label noise, impacting
their effectiveness. To mitigate this, DPL (Denoised PseudoLabeling) (Chen et al. 2021a) introduces a denoising strategy that filters out pseudo-labels with high uncertainty and
employs pixel-level and class-level constraints for pseudolabel refinement. Meanwhile, CPR (Context-Aware Pseudolabel Refinement) (Huai et al. 2023) presents a denoising
approach that capitalizes on the contextual relationships between similar features, and CBMT (Class-Balanced Mean
Teacher) (Tang et al. 2023) develops loss calibration techniques to address the imbalance between foreground and

Introduction
Taking advantage of the rapid development of deep learning, neural network-based methods have recently achieved
promising performance in medical image segmentation, especially for the analysis of fundus images (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Milletari, Navab, and Ahmadi 2016).
However, these methods generally suffer from performance
degradation when evaluated on different sites. The main reason is that different parameter settings in data acquisition,
e.g., illumination and resolution, result in the data distribution shift. For example, when medical image segmentation
models are trained on a dataset with abundant labeled data
(source) and then applied to a different domain (target) with
limited labeled data, the performance is usually suboptimal
and low-precision.
In terms of this problem, unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) solutions shine a light by learning domain-invariant
representations from different data silos (source domain &
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10573

