The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Probabilistic Strategy Logic with Degrees of Observability
Chunyan Mu1 , Nima Motamed2 , Natasha Alechina3,2 , Brian Logan1,2
1
Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen
Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University
3
Department of Computer Science, Open University Netherlands
chunyan.mu@abdn.ac.uk, n.motamed@uu.nl, n.a.alechina@uu.nl, brian.logan@abdn.ac.uk
2

is considered to be opaque, if for every behaviour π satisfying Φ there is a behaviour π ′ violating Φ such that π and
π ′ are observationally equivalent, so that an observer can
never be sure if Φ holds or not. Opacity (and its negation,
observability) are so called hyperproperties that relate multiple execution traces. Verification of hyperproperties is an
emerging and challenging topic, see, for example, (Beutner
and Finkbeiner 2023).
In order to reason about the observability of behaviours,
we introduce Opacity Probabilistic Strategy Logic (oPSL),
an extension of Probabilistic Strategy Logic (PSL) which
allows quantitative analysis of information transparency.
oPSL enables us to specify the degree of transparency in
system behaviours to an observer under a binding of agents’
strategies, taking into account predefined observability of
behaviours for the observer. We use a very general approach
to observability which allows us to reason both about observability of state properties, and observability of actions.
Using the concept of observability allows, for example, the
identification of cases where agents observe sensitive information, disclosing potential information leakage or unauthorised access attempts.
We introduce a novel framework for systematically
analysing information transparency in stochastic multi-agent
systems. The key contributions include:

Abstract
There has been considerable work on reasoning about the
strategic ability of agents under imperfect information. However, existing logics such as Probabilistic Strategy Logic are
unable to express properties relating to information transparency. Information transparency concerns the extent to
which agents’ actions and behaviours are observable by other
agents. Reasoning about information transparency is useful
in many domains including security, privacy, and decisionmaking. In this paper, we present a formal framework for reasoning about information transparency properties in stochastic multi-agent systems. We extend Probabilistic Strategy
Logic with new observability operators that capture the degree of observability of temporal properties by agents. We
show that the model checking problem for the resulting logic
is decidable.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Systems (MASs) often involve agents that operate autonomously and interact with each other in dynamic
and sometimes adversarial ways. Understanding the transparency and observability of these interactions is crucial for
ensuring secure, efficient, and cooperative behaviour. In particular, information transparency and agent observability directly impact the security and privacy of MASs in which
agents share information and where there is a risk of unintentional data leakage. Analysing information transparency
helps identify potential sources of data leakage and design
mechanisms to prevent it. The ability to control what agents
can observe and the information they can induce is crucial for safeguarding sensitive data and preventing information leakage. In addition, the decision-making processes of
agents are influenced by the information they possess about
each other’s behaviours and intentions. Quantified analysis
of information transparency and agent observability plays a
key role in determining the accuracy and effectiveness of
decision-making within MASs.
This paper addresses the challenge of specifying, verifying and reasoning about information transparency properties
within MASs. In particular, we specify observability properties from a standpoint of information transparency within
the opacity framework (Bryans et al. 2005). A property Φ

• A definition of agent observability and information transparency concerning agent behaviours in the context of
partially observable stochastic multi-agent systems with
concurrent and probabilistic behaviours.
• The introduction of Opacity Probabilistic Strategy Logic
(oPSL) incorporating a new observability and degree of
observability operators, allowing precise representation
of observability properties that are challenging to express
in standard logics for MAS.
• Showing that the model-checking problem for oPSL
with memoryless strategies is decidable in 3EXPSPACE.
The framework facilitates formal reasoning about agent observability and information transparency analysis in MAS,
with applications in security, privacy, game theory, and AI.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows.
In Section 2 we discuss related work. In Section 3 we
formalise stochastic multi-agent systems as partially observable stochastic models. Section 4 extends Probabilis-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15092

