The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AsyncDSB: Schedule-Asynchronous Diffusion Schrödinger
Bridge for Image Inpainting
Zihao Han1 , Baoquan Zhang1 * , Lisai Zhang4 , Shanshan Feng3 , Kenghong Lin1 , Guotao Liang1 ,
Yunming Ye1 , Joeq2 , Kolaye2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen;
2
ShenZhen SiFar Co., Ltd.;
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research;
4
Shengshu AI.
{zihaohan, linkenghong}@stu.hit.edu.cn, {baoquanzhang, victor_fengss, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn, LisaiZhang@foxmail.com,
lianggt@pcl.ac.cn, {joeqxc1974, kolaygm}@gmail.com
Abstract

Toyama 2004). These methods infer the missing details in
corrupted area by using statistical information from visible
area, and achieve reasonable structure and texture for small
region or the ungraded parts with well-defined geometry.
However, these methods often struggle to recover large region
effectively due to the lack of semantic inference ability.
To address the above challenge, deep learning inpainting methods are proposed and have received wide attention
recently. These methods can be roughly divided into three categories, i.e., generative adversarial networks (GAN) -based
(Dong, Cao, and Fu 2022; Li et al. 2022b), diffusion modelsbased (Liu et al. 2024; Lugmayr et al. 2022; Xia et al. 2023),
and diffusion bridge models-based (Li et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2023) approaches. Among them, the diffusion bridge modelsbased approaches (Li et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023) have shown
remarkable success due to its realistic and robust generation
ability, especially diffusion Schrödinger bridge methods (a
typical method is I2 SB (Liu et al. 2023), which models the
translation between corrupted and target images as a diffusion
Schrödinger bridge and then learns it in a diffusion training
manner.) Although I2 SB has shown superior performance on
image inpainting, we notice that their noise schedule βt is
only roughly set as a symmetric form (see Figure 1(a)) with
experience setting for all images and pixels. However, there
is few works to analyze the working mechanism of such noise
schedule and argue the rationality of such experience setting.
To this end, in this paper, we conduct an in-depth theoretical and qualitative analysis on the noise schedule βt and find
that: 1) the noise schedule βt actually controls the restoration speed of corrupted region (see theoretical analysis of
Section ). As shown in Figure 1, during the noise schedule,
the main contents of an image are restored in few schedule
steps between t = 0.6T → 0.4T since they have a large
βt value. Instead, the other steps close to 0T and 1.0T are
only responsible for cold start and detail refinement. It is
such three-stage rough-fine restoration schedule that makes
existing I2 SB method (Liu et al. 2023) achieve superior performance on image inpainting; 2) However, the I2 SB simply
set the same schedule βt for all pixels. The assumption behind
such design is the three-stage restoration process of all pixels
are pixel-synchronous. Unfortunately, the restoration process
of pixels are not synchronous but actually asynchronous. For

Image inpainting is an important image generation task, which
aims to restore corrupted image from partial visible area. Recently, diffusion Schrödinger bridge methods effectively tackle
this task by modeling the translation between corrupted and
target images as a diffusion Schrödinger bridge process along
a noising schedule path. Although these methods have shown
superior performance, in this paper, we find that 1) existing
methods suffer from a schedule-restoration mismatching issue,
i.e., the theoretical schedule and practical restoration processes
usually exist a large discrepancy, which theoretically results
in the schedule not fully leveraged for restoring images; and
2) the key reason causing such issue is that the restoration
process of all pixels are actually asynchronous but existing
methods set a synchronous noise schedule to them, i.e., all
pixels shares the same noise schedule. To this end, we propose a schedule-Asynchronous Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge
(AsyncDSB) for image inpainting. Our insight is preferentially
scheduling pixels with high frequency (i.e., large gradients)
and then low frequency (i.e., small gradients). Based on this
insight, given a corrupted image, we first train a network to
predict its gradient map in corrupted area. Then, we regard the
predicted image gradient as prior and design a simple yet effective pixel-asynchronous noise schedule strategy to enhance
the diffusion Schrödinger bridge. Thanks to the asynchronous
schedule at pixels, the temporal interdependence of restoration
process between pixels can be fully characterized for highquality image inpainting. Experiments on real-world datasets
show that our AsyncDSB achieves superior performance, especially on FID with around 3% ∼ 14% improvement over
state-of-the-art baseline methods.

Introduction
Image inpainting, also known as image completion, is a wellestablished low-level computer vision task. Its objective is to
restore a corrupted image by leveraging information from the
visible portion. Early studies primarily focus on non-learning
inpainting methods to tackle this challenge, such as diffusion
(Ballester et al. 2001; Bertalmio et al. 2000; Zomet 2003)
and PatchMatch (Barnes et al. 2009; Bertalmio et al. 2003;
Criminisi, Perez, and Toyama 2003; Criminisi, Pérez, and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3374

