The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Unbiased Information Extraction and
Adaptation in Cross-Domain Recommendation
Yibo Wang1,2,§ , Yingchun Jian3 , Wenhao Yang1,2,§ , Shiyin Lu3 ,
Lei Shen3 , Bing Wang3 , Xiaoyi Zeng3 , Lijun Zhang1,2, *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou 310052, China
Music Domain

Movies Domain

Abstract
Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR) leverages additional
knowledge from auxiliary domains to address the longstanding data sparsity issue. However, existing methods typically acquire this knowledge by minimizing the average
loss over all domains, overlooking the fact that different domains possess different user-preference distributions. As a result, the acquired knowledge may contain biased information
from data-rich domains, leading to performance degradation
in data-scarce domains. In this paper, we propose a novel
CDR method, which takes domain distinctions into consideration to extract and adapt unbiased information. Specifically, our method consists of two key components: Unbiased Information Extraction (UIE) and Unbiased Information
Adaptation (UIA). In the UIE, inspired by distributionally robust optimization, we optimize the worst-case performance
across all domains to extract domain-invariant information,
preventing the potential bias from auxiliary domains. In the
UIA, we introduce a new user-item attention module, which
employs domain-specific information from historically interacted items to attend the adaptation of domain-invariant information. To verify the effectiveness of our method, we conduct extensive experiments on three real-world datasets, each
of which contains three extremely sparse domains. Experimental results demonstrate the considerable superiority of our
proposed method compared to baselines.

Romance

Sci-fi movie Horror

…

Horror
Romance

Books Domain

Romance

Sci-fi movie

Suspense

Suspense

War

Historical Interactions

…

War
Romance

Preference Recommendation

Figure 1: A simple illustration of Cross-Domain Recommendation over three domains: movies, books and music.

To alleviate this issue, Cross-Domain Recommendation
(CDR) has been proposed, leveraging additional knowledge
learned from auxiliary domains to enhance the recommendation performance in data-scarce domains (Zhu et al. 2021).
The underlying rationale is that users typically have similar
preferences across different domains. For example, as shown
in Figure 1, although our understanding of user preferences
in the music domain is limited, we infer that the user likely
prefers romantic music based on his common preference,
i.e., Romance, observed in the movies and books domains.
According to the number of target domains, prior research
on CDR can be generally divided into three groups: singletarget CDR (Singh and Gordon 2008; Tan et al. 2014; Lu,
Dong, and Smyth 2018), dual-target CDR (Zhu et al. 2019;
Li and Tuzhilin 2020; Liu et al. 2020; Li and Tuzhilin 2021;
Zhu et al. 2022), and multi-target CDR (Yang et al. 2017;
Krishnan et al. 2020; Li et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024).
Single-target and dual-target CDR primarily focus within
two domains, whereas multi-target CDR aims to boost performance across three or more domains simultaneously. In
multi-target CDR, a classical paradigm typically involves
two steps: extraction and adaptation (Zang et al. 2022).
Specifically, the extraction focuses on generating a global
user embedding for each user from all participating domains,
to capture the common preference. The adaptation aims to
employ domain-specific information, such as local user embedding derived solely from the target domain, to establish
linkages between the target domain and the global user embedding. Based on this paradigm, several multi-target CDR
methods have been proposed recently (Kim et al. 2019; Zhu

Introduction
Over past decades, recommendation systems have played a
significant role in a variety of applications, such as stream
media (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016), e-commerce
(Smith and Linden 2017) and social networking (Naumov
et al. 2019). Most existing studies on recommendation systems follow the classical collaborative filtering framework,
which captures user preferences based on historical useritem interactions (Sarwar et al. 2001; Linden, Smith, and
York 2003; Yi et al. 2017). However, in practical applications, it is common to suffer the data sparsity issue where
available interactions fall short of revealing underlying preferences, which in turn hampers the effectiveness of existing
methods (Ricci, Rokach, and Shapira 2015).
§
The work is completed during the internship at Alibaba Group,
Corresponding author, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*

12757

