The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ShotVL: Human-Centric Highlight Frame Retrieval via Language Queries
Wangyu Xue* 1 , Chen Qian* 1,2 , Jiayi Wu2 , Yang Zhou2 , Wentao Liu2 , Ju Ren†1 , Siming Fan‡2 ,
Yaoxue Zhang1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
SenseTime Research

#Qu Dura- #Ac- #Vi- Avg
ery tion tion deo word
AVA-2.2
Movie 80
1s
430
2
THUMOS14 Sports 20
4.3s
20 413
3
FAction
Daily 106 7.1s 106 16.7K 2
MSports
Sports 66
1.0s
4 0.8K
2
HiRest
Daily 8K 7.6s
3.4K
4
DiDeMo
Flickr 41K 8.0s
- 10.6K 7
ANet
Activity 72K 7.2s
15K 14
Charades Activity 16K 13.4s
6.7K
6
Vlog/
QVHL
10K 11.3s
- 10.2K 11
News
TH14,
12
BestShot
6K
59 628
78
FAction
frames

Abstract

Dataset

Existing research on human-centric video understanding typically focuses on analyzing specific moments or entire videos.
However, many applications require higher precision at the
frame level. In this work, we propose a novel task, BestShot,
which aims to locate highlight frames within human-centric
videos through language queries. This task requires not only
a deep semantic understanding of human actions but also precise temporal localization. To support this task, we introduce
the BestShot Benchmark. The benchmark is meticulously
constructed by combining human-annotated highlight frames,
duration labels and detailed textual descriptions. These descriptions cover three critical elements: (1) Visual content;
(2) Fine-grained actions; and (3) Human pose descriptions.
Together, these elements provide the necessary precision to
identify the exact highlight frames in videos.
To tackle this problem, we have collected two distinct
datasets: (i) ShotGPT4o Dataset, which is algorithmically
generated by GPT-4o and (ii) Image-SMPLText Dataset,
which features large-scale and accurate per-frame pose descriptions using PoseScript and existing pose estimation
datasets. Based on these datasets, we present a strong baseline model, ShotVL, fine-tuned from InternVL, specifically
for BestShot. We highlight the impressive zero-shot capabilities of our model and offer comparative analyses with existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) models. ShotVL demonstrates a
significant 64% improvement over InternVL on the BestShot
Benchmark and a notable 68% improvement on the THUMOS14 Benchmark, while maintaining SOTA performance
in general image classification and retrieval.

Domain

Table 1: Benchmark and Dataset Comparison: TH14 (THUMOS14), FAction (FineAction), MSports (MultiSports).
BestShot is only for zero-shot test.

and timestamps, such as in sports (“a player scores a goal
between 00:01:05 and 00:01:08”) or in instructional videos
(“the chef flips the pancake at exactly 00:02:03”). In moment retrieval, precise frame localization ensures that the
retrieved moments exactly match the query, particularly for
short-duration and complex actions.
Despite the importance of precise frame-level localization, existing methods face significant limitations, mainly
due to insufficient granularity and inadequate language descriptions. Many current approaches focus on broad temporal segments instead of precise frames, which limits their
effectiveness in tasks that require detailed understanding.
Furthermore, the restricted length of their language descriptions, usually ten words or fewer, hinders the retrieval of
frames with complex or nuanced descriptions. These methods also struggle to generalize across diverse scenes and
actions, reducing their reliability in real-world applications,
where content is typically more varied and unpredictable.
In this paper, we introduce a challenging benchmark,
the BestShot Benchmark. This benchmark aims to address
the limitations outlined above by offering a more granular
evaluation metric that more accurately reflects the demands
of high-precision frame understanding. The benchmark facilitates more convenient and reliable evaluation of mod-

Code — https://github.com/ShotVL/ShotVL
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12675

Introduction
Within the field of video understanding, locating highlight
frames in human-centric videos using language queries is
a crucial yet underexplored task. Many downstream tasks
heavily rely on frame-level understanding to function effectively. For stepwise video captioning, it is essential to generate accurate video captions that align with specific actions
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author, renju@tsinghua.edu.cn
Corresponding Author, gzfansiming@gmail.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

9050

