The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Language Model Can Listen While Speaking
Ziyang Ma1 , Yakun Song1 , Chenpeng Du2 , Jian Cong2 , Zhuo Chen2 ,
Yuping Wang2 , Yuxuan Wang2 , Xie Chen1 *
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, X-LANCE Lab, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
ByteDance Inc.
{zym.22, chenxie95}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

input and output and cannot interact directly with humans in
arbitrary scenarios.
Incorporating spoken and auditory interfaces into conversational AI enhances HCI convenience. Leveraging techniques from text LLMs, the speech language model (SLM)
processes speech similarly to text. This paradigm involves encoding the speech signal into discrete tokens or
continuous embeddings, modeling them with a language
model, and decoding the speech tokens or embeddings
back to the speech signal. Some studies (Lakhotia et al.
2021; Kharitonov et al. 2022; Nguyen et al. 2023) utilizes this paradigm for speech continuation, generating expressive speech and natural multi-round dialogue. Other
research employs this paradigm to task-specific applications, such as decoder-only high-fidelity TTS (Wang et al.
2023; Borsos et al. 2023; SeedSpeechTeam 2024b; Du
et al. 2024b) and decoder-only streaming ASR (Seide et al.
2024; Tsunoo et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024a,d) Moreover,
SpeechGPT (Zhang et al. 2023) and LauraGPT (Chen et al.
2023) initialize SLMs using LLMs, expanding speech tokens to the LLM vocabulary and continuing training on
speech. This empowers SLM to comprehend semantic information and equips SLM with dialogue capability. Despite
these advances, all these models are limited to turn-based
conversations and cannot handle real-time sound or interruptions, limiting their applicability in real-life scenarios.
Interaction and turn-taking are essential abilities for natural communication among humans. At the dawn of the
end-to-end speech dialogue system explosion, we focus on
investigating Full Duplex Modeling (FDM) in interactive
Speech Language Models (iSLM), a crucial topic affecting
user experience. Lin et al. (2022) proposes to process realtime audio input with a separate comprehension module.
Other works (Zhang et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024a) suggest
modifying the order in which text tokens are organized in
the LLM to tackle the duplex modeling problem. All these
models are based on text-centric LLMs that require external ASR and TTS modules for spoken dialogue. As a result,
latency remains perceivable and the paralinguistic ability is
still lacking. We believe the FDM capability should be an intrinsic capability of SLMs, enabling simultaneous listening
and speaking.
To engage FDM capability for iSLM, we propose
Listening-while-Speaking Language Model (LSLM), an

Dialogue serves as the most natural manner of humancomputer interaction (HCI). Recent advancements in speech
language models (SLM), have significantly enhanced speechbased conversational AI. However, these models are limited
to turn-based conversation, lacking the ability to interact with
humans in real-time spoken scenarios, for example, being interrupted when the generated content is not satisfactory. To
address these limitations, we explore full duplex modeling
(FDM) in interactive speech language models (iSLM), focusing on enhancing real-time interaction and, more explicitly,
exploring the quintessential ability of interruption. We introduce a novel model design, namely listening-while-speaking
language model (LSLM), an end-to-end system equipped
with both listening and speaking channels. Our LSLM employs a token-based decoder-only TTS for speech generation and a streaming self-supervised learning (SSL) encoder
for real-time audio input. LSLM fuses both channels for autoregressive generation and detects turn-taking in real time.
Three fusion strategies—early fusion, middle fusion, and late
fusion—are explored, with middle fusion achieving an optimal balance between speech generation and real-time interaction. Two experimental settings, command-based FDM
and voice-based FDM, demonstrate LSLM’s robustness to
noise and sensitivity to diverse instructions. Our results highlight LSLM’s capability to achieve duplex communication
with minimal impact on existing systems. This study aims to
advance the development of interactive speech dialogue systems, enhancing their applicability in real-world contexts.

Demo — https://ddlbojack.github.io/LSLM

1

Introduction

Dialogue is the most natural way of human-computer
interaction (HCI). With the rapid development of GPTstyle (Radford et al. 2018) large language models (LLM)
and the scaling of Transformer-style (Vaswani et al. 2017)
architectures, textual conversational AI, such as ChatGPT (Ouyang et al. 2022; Achiam et al. 2023) and
LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023a,b), have become a significant
part of daily life. However, these models are limited to text
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24831

