The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

From Understanding Genetic Drift to a Smart-Restart Mechanism for
Estimation-of-Distribution Algorithms
Weijie Zheng 1 , Benjamin Doerr 2
1

2

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
École Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Zheng and Doerr (2023).

Abstract
Estimation-of-distribution algorithms (EDAs) are optimization algorithms that learn a distribution from which good
solutions can be sampled easily. A key parameter of most
EDAs is the sample size (population size). Too small values lead to the undesired effect of genetic drift, while larger
values slow down the process.
Building on a quantitative analysis of how the population
size leads to genetic drift, we design a smart-restart mechanism for EDAs. By stopping runs when the risk for genetic
drift is high, it automatically runs the EDA in good parameter regimes.
Via a mathematical runtime analysis, we prove a general performance guarantee for this smart-restart scheme.
For many situations where the optimal parameter values
are known, this shows that the restart scheme automatically
finds these optimal values, leading to the asymptotically optimal performance.
We also conduct an extensive experimental analysis. On
four classic benchmarks, the smart-restart scheme leads to a
performance close to the one obtainable with optimal parameter values. We also conduct experiments with PBIL (crossentropy algorithm) on the max-cut problem and the bipartition problem. Again, the smart-restart mechanism finds
much better values for the population size than those suggested in the literature, leading to a much better performance.

References
Zheng, W.; and Doerr, B. 2023. From understanding genetic drift to a smart-restart mechanism for estimation-ofdistribution algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(292): 1–40.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28746

