The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Discovering Options That Minimize Average Planning Time
Alexander Ivanov1 , Akhil Bagaria2 * † , George Konidaris1†
1

Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
2
Amazon, New York, NY, USA
alexander ivanov@brown.edu, akhilbg@amazon.com, gdk@cs.brown.edu

Abstract

more formal approach where performance bounds can be derived for an explicit agent-level performance criterion (Jinnai et al. 2019a,b). In particular, Jinnai et al. (2019a) discovers options that bound worst-case planning time, which is
the maximum number of iterations required to solve a single
task. However, they do not address the case where the agent
must solve a family of tasks; so, we aim to reduce expected
planning time, where the expectation is over the agent’s task
distribution. This quantity is better suited for the multi-task
(Kaelbling 1993; Solway et al. 2014) and lifelong learning
(Brunskill and Li 2014) settings.
Consider an agent that must solve a family of goalreaching tasks, where each task is modeled as an MDP and
differs in its start-goal configuration. In such a task family,
it would be useful for the agent to have options that reduce
planning time on average over all possible tasks. As a result,
we provide an algorithm that minimizes the average distance
between all possible start-goal pairs.
Our core insight is that option discovery in the multi-goal
context is equivalent to the classical k-medians with penalties problem (k-MP) (An and Svensson 2017; Dohan, Karp,
and Matejek 2015). Using k-MPs and a result from graph
theory (Meyerson and Tagiku 2009), we find options that reduce the overall expected cost of transitioning between any
two states. This connection between option discovery and kMPs allows us to design efficient approximation algorithms
with strong theoretical guarantees.
We present Average Options, a formal option discovery
algorithm for planning in multi-goal environments; we prove
that this algorithm bounds planning time. We then present a
more scalable, approximate version of our algorithm, Fast
Average Options. We test both algorithms on six control
problems and show that they outperform other option discovery algorithms (Jinnai et al. 2019b; Machado et al. 2018)
with a strong theoretical basis.

We present an option discovery algorithm that accelerates
planning by minimizing the shortest distance between any
two states in the MDP. The proposed algorithm produces
options that approximately minimize planning time in the
multi-goal setting: it is shown to be a worst-case (4α, 2)approximation of the optimal option set, where α is the approximation ratio of the k-medians with penalties subroutine.
We then present a variation, Fast Average Options, with improved run-time and describe a general means of producing
similar algorithms based on the selection of a k-medians subroutine. We empirically evaluate our method on four discrete
and two continuous control planning domains where it outperforms other leading option discovery algorithms.

1

Introduction

Temporally extended actions, or options, can be used to
solve long-horizon decision problems (Sutton, Precup, and
Singh 1999; Barto and Mahadevan 2003). When designed
by a domain expert, these options lead to deep exploration
(Bellemare et al. 2020) and extend the planning horizon of
the agent (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999; Konidaris, Kaelbling, and Lozano-Pérez 2018). An important question in
both reinforcement learning and planning is that of option
discovery: how can agents use the data gathered in an environment to construct useful temporal abstractions?
The majority of work in this area proposes intuitive
heuristics for discovery; examples include identifying relatively novel states (Şimşek and Barto 2004), identifying
bottleneck states (Şimşek and Barto 2008), finding repeated
policy fragments (Pickett and Barto 2002), identifying well
connected regions (Ramesh, Tomar, and Ravindran 2019),
finding states that often occur on successful trajectories (McGovern and Barto 2001), and lowering the computation time
of planning (Young and Sutton 2023; Wan and Sutton 2022).
While these are sometimes effective, heuristic approaches
provide no guarantee that similar performance should be expected for a new task (Solway et al. 2014; Brunskill and
Li 2014). As a result, a few recent approaches have taken a

2

Background and Related Work

The interaction between an agent and its environment can
be modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) M =
(S, A, P, R, γ), where S is the set of states, A is the set of
actions, P is the transition function, R is the reward function, and γ is the discount factor (Sutton and Barto 2018).
When transitions are deterministic, the transition function
P : S × A × S → [0, 1] is replaced by T : S × A → S.

* Work done while at Brown University.
†

These authors advised equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17573

