The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Style Nursing with Spatial and Semantic Guidance for
Zero-Shot Traffic Scene Style Transfer
Zhen Wang1,3,4 , Zihang Lin2 , Meng Yuan2,3,4 , Yuehu Liu2,3,4 , Chi Zhang2,3,4 *
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
4
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications
wangzhen wz@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, chizhang@xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

transfer, they often necessitate tailored methods or datasets
for specific styles, limiting their generalizability to other
traffic scene style transfers.
Recent advancements in text-guided image generation
models (Rombach et al. 2022; Ruiz et al. 2023; Gal et al.
2023a; Voynov et al. 2023; Gal et al. 2023b; Kang et al.
2024) have showcased an unparalleled zero-shot style transfer capability to produce high-quality and diverse images.
However, the intrinsic challenge still lies in maintaining
the essential content of the source image while ensuring
fidelity to the target prompt. Several prior and concurrent
studies (Geng et al. 2024; Mou et al. 2024; Zhang, Rao, and
Agrawala 2023; Parmar et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024; Wei
et al. 2023) have sought to address these issues. P2P (Hertz
et al. 2023) keeps the original image content intact by
manipulating the cross-attention layers. Plug-and-Play (Tumanyan et al. 2023) presents feature injection to retain
the content of the guidance image. InstructPi2Pix (Brooks,
Holynski, and Efros 2023) achieves preserving the original
content by training a conditional diffusion model.
However, when applied to complex traffic scenes with diverse objects, layouts, and stylistic variations, current diffusion models tend to exhibit Style Neglection, failing to generate one or more style subjects from the prompt, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. To mitigate this issue and enhance style generation,
we introduce the concept of Style Nursing, drawing inspiration from (Chefer et al. 2023). Intuitively, for a style to
be present in the generated image, the model should assign
at least one image patch to the style token. Style Nursing
embodies this intuition by demanding that each style token
be dominant in some image patches, which carefully guides
the denoising process and encourages the model to focus on
style tokens by enhancing their activations.
Moreover, we propose Spatial and Semantic Guidance to
preserve the detailed content structure of the input image,
which retains both the spatial features of the input image
and self-attention maps of the corresponding semantic image throughout the diffusion process. We investigate the internal encoding of content information in a pre-trained textto-image diffusion model and delve into the spatial features
formed during the generation process. Manipulating these
features enables fine-grained control over the generated content (Tumanyan et al. 2023). In addition, our empirical analysis reveals that spatial features from different U-Net lay-

Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models have
shown an outstanding ability in zero-shot style transfer. However, existing methods often struggle to balance preserving
the semantic content of the input image and faithfully transferring the target style in line with the edit prompt. Especially
when applied to complex traffic scenes with diverse objects,
layouts, and stylistic variations, current diffusion models tend
to exhibit Style Neglection, i.e., failing to generate the required style in the prompt. To address this issue, we propose
Style Nursing, which directs the model to focus on style subject tokens in the text prompt and excites their corresponding
visual activations. Moreover, we introduce Spatial and Semantic Guidance to guide the preservation of content after
editing, which utilizes spatial features from the DDIM sampling process together with attention maps from the semantic
reconstruction. To evaluate the performance of zero-shot style
transfer methods in traffic scenes, we present STREET-6K, a
new benchmark dataset comprising 6000 images showcasing
diverse traffic scenes and style transfer variations, accompanied by comprehensive annotations and evaluation metrics.
Our approach beats state-of-the-art image translation methods in comprehensive quantitative metrics and human evaluations on traffic scene image synthesis while seamlessly
generalizing to various other types of images without training or fine-tuning. Further experiments on detection and segmentation tasks show that fine-tuning perception models on
our synthesized images improves Recall and mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) by over 10% and 3% respectively in
rarely-seen traffic scenes.

Introduction
As visual data of real-world traffic scenes tend to have
skewed data with long-tailed characteristics, acquiring image datasets depicting various traffic scene styles (e.g., extreme weather conditions and complex lighting scenarios) is
of great significance to autonomous driving testing. Several
studies (Jeon et al. 2023; Zheng, Lu, and Narasimhan 2024;
Lee et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022) used image-to-image
translation techniques to generate images containing rarelyseen traffic layouts, styles, or conditions from normal traffic images. While these methods excel in traffic scene style
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8214

