The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KGCRR: An Effective Metric-Driven Knowledge Graph Completion Framework
by Designing a Novel Upper Bound Function with Adaptive Approximation to
Reciprocal Rank
Kuan Xu1, 2 , Kuo Yang* 1, 2 , Jian Liu4 , Xiangkui Lu1, 3 , Jun Wu1, 3 , Xuezhong Zhou* 1, 2
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
4
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, 100083, China
{xukuan, kuoyang, luxkui, wuj, xzzhou}@bjtu.edu.cn, jian.liu@ustb.edu.cn
2

PCC

Abstract

1

ℒLL : 0.57

ℒmargin : 0.81

Loss value

Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) methods have achieved
great success in predicting missing links in knowledge
graphs, a task also known as Knowledge Graph Completion (KGC). Under this task, the Reciprocal Rank (RR) of
ground-truth items serve as a key indicator for evaluating
the method’s performance. However, most existing studies
have overlooked the inconsistency between the ranking metric, RR, and the optimization objective functions, resulting
in sub-optimal KGC performance. To address this issue, we
propose a KGC framework called KGCRR, which introduces
an objective function named CRR that serves as an upper
bound to RR. By introducing the parameter-pressure ρ to
adjust the sigmoid function, CRR achieves a better approximation to RR compared to existing objective functions. We
theoretically prove that by adjusting ρ, CRR can achieve a
more effective approximation to RR. By narrowing the discrepancy with RR and alleviating the gradient vanishing issue associated with the direct optimization of RR loss, CRR
demonstrates an advantage in optimizing RR. CRR serves
as a plug-and-play objective, capable of seamless integration
into various KGE methods. Through extensive experiments
conducted on FB15k-237 and WN18RR datasets, we have
obtained promising results, with an average improvement of
19.06% in MRR, indicating that CRR significantly enhances
the performance of existing methods.

ℒ푅푅 : 1.0

Score

Figure 1: Illustration of the inconsistency between the ranking metric and optimization objective, where score indicates the predicted score of ground-truth item. Lmargin : the
margin-based loss; LLL : the Log-Likelihood loss; LRR : the
Reciprocal Rank loss; PCC: Pearson correlation coefficient.
The inconsistency arises between the RR and optimization
objectives e.g., Log-Likelihood loss and margin-based loss.

other components of the triple (Tang et al. 2022; Xie and
Ge 2023). Under this task, for each missing triple, candidate entities are scored and ranked in descending order with
the top-n (e.g., 1, 10) items selected to complete the knowledge graph (Chen et al. 2024). In recent years, numurous
Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) methods (Bordes
et al. 2013; Trouillon et al. 2016; Chao et al. 2021; Ge et al.
2023) have achieved great success in KGC. Under this task,
the ranking metric Reciprocal Rank (RR) of ground-truth
items serves as a key indicator for evaluating the method’s
performance. However most existing methods overlook the
inconsistency between the ranking metric and the optimization objective functions, such as Log-Likelihood (LL) loss
and margin-based loss (Ge et al. 2024), as shown in Figure 1, resulting in a scenario where the model’s training is
not directly aligned with the desired metric for KGC. This
misalignment may lead to a sub-optimal performance, where
the model might optimize for a lower loss but fail to improve
in terms of the ranking metrics like MRR1 , which are critical

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) play a crucial role in enhancing accurate information retrieval and supporting decisionmaking processes in the real world (Rossi et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2024). However, even the most advanced KGs still suffer from incompleteness (Shen, Zhang, and Cheng 2022; Xie
and Ge 2023; Meilicke et al. 2024), which restricts practical
applications and has spurred research into Knowledge Graph
Completion (KGC), a task aimed at inferring and filling in
the most plausible missing facts to enrich KGs.
In KGs, each fact is represented by a triple in the form of
(head entity, relation, tail entity) or (h, r, t) for short. The
task of KGC involves predicting the missing h or t given the
* the Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12927

MRR is the mean value of Reciprocal Ranks

