The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ISPDiffuser: Learning RAW-to-sRGB Mappings with Texture-Aware Diffusion
Models and Histogram-Guided Color Consistency
†

†

Yang Ren1,4,* , Hai Jiang1,4,* , Menglong Yang1,2, , Wei Li1,2 , Shuaicheng Liu3,4,
2

1
School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Sichuan University
Key Laboratory of Advanced Spatial Mechanism and Intelligent Spacecraft, Sichuan University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
Megvii Technology
{renyang@stu.,jianghai@stu.,mlyang@,li.wei@}scu.edu.cn, liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
RAW-to-sRGB mapping, or the simulation of the traditional
camera image signal processor (ISP), aims to generate DSLRquality sRGB images from raw data captured by smartphone
sensors. Despite achieving comparable results to sophisticated handcrafted camera ISP solutions, existing learningbased methods still struggle with detail disparity and color
distortion. In this paper, we present ISPDiffuser, a diffusionbased decoupled framework that separates the RAW-to-sRGB
mapping into detail reconstruction in grayscale space and
color consistency mapping from grayscale to sRGB. Specifically, we propose a texture-aware diffusion model that leverages the generative ability of diffusion models to focus on
local detail recovery, in which a texture enrichment loss is
further proposed to prompt the diffusion model to generate
more intricate texture details. Subsequently, we introduce a
histogram-guided color consistency module that utilizes color
histogram as guidance to learn precise color information for
grayscale to sRGB color consistency mapping, with a color
consistency loss designed to constrain the learned color information. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed ISPDiffuser outperforms state-of-the-art competitors
both quantitatively and visually.

Code — https://github.com/RenYangSCU/ISPDiffuser

(a) RAW (visualized)

(b) FourierISP

(c) Ours

(d) GT

Figure 1: Visual comparison with the previous state-of-theart method FourierISP (He et al. 2024b). Our approach exhibits better local detail reconstruction (the red boxes show
the content difference between generated images and GT images) and global color consistency mapping capabilities.

Introduction
The image signal processor (ISP) pipeline is a fundamental
process for converting RAW data captured by camera sensors into sRGB images that are perceivable by the human
eye. Traditionally, the ISP pipeline in cameras consists of a
series of discrete processes, including demosaicing, denoising, white balance, gamma correction, and color correction,
each of which necessitates complex and extensive manual
parameter tuning (Ramanath et al. 2005).
With the rapid advancement in mobile photography,
smartphones have become the dominant photography tool
due to their convenience and portability. However, due to
limitations in aperture and sensor size, mobile devices generally produce images with lower quality than those cap-

tured by DSLR cameras. To address this disparity, there
has been growing interest in developing deep learning-based
ISP models that can convert RAW data captured by mobile
sensors into sRGB images with DSLR-like quality (Ignatov
et al. 2021a). Existing deep ISP solutions focus on either
compensating for the misalignment caused by different capture equipment of the training pairs (Zhang et al. 2021) or
treating the RAW-to-sRGB mapping solely as a color mapping task (He et al. 2024b; Ignatov, Van Gool, and Timofte
2020a; Dai et al. 2020). Despite the remarkable progress, a
notable limitation persists: most of these models are based
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which are naturally limited by their inherent locality restriction, leading to

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6722

