The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scalable Quantum-Inspired Optimization Through Dynamic Qubit Compression
Co Tran* 1 , Quoc-Bao Tran* 2 , Hy Truong Son3 , Thang N Dinh2†
1
University of Texas at Austin
Virginia Commonwealth University
3
University of Alabama at Birmingham
co.quoc.tran.2@gmail.com, tranq3@vcu.edu, thy@uab.edu, tndinh@vcu.edu
2

Abstract
Hard combinatorial optimization problems, often mapped to
Ising models, promise potential solutions with quantum advantage but are constrained by limited qubit counts in near-term
devices. We present an innovative quantum-inspired framework that dynamically compresses large Ising models to fit
available quantum hardware of different sizes. Thus, we aim
to bridge the gap between large-scale optimization and current hardware capabilities. Our method leverages a physicsinspired GNN architecture to capture complex interactions in
Ising models and accurately predict alignments among neighboring spins (aka qubits) at ground states. By progressively
merging such aligned spins, we can reduce the model size
while preserving the underlying optimization structure. It also
provides a natural trade-off between the solution quality and
size reduction, meeting different hardware constraints of quantum computing devices. Extensive numerical studies on Ising
instances of diverse topologies show that our method can reduce instance size at multiple levels with virtually no losses in
solution quality on the latest D-wave quantum annealers.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization problems are ubiquitous in various domains, including portfolio optimization (Mugel et al.
2021; Grozea et al. 2021), car manufacturing scheduling
(Yarkoni et al. 2021), and RNA folding (Fox, Branson, and
Walker 2021; Fox et al. 2022). These problems often involve
finding the optimal solution among a vast number of possibilities, making them computationally challenging. Many of
these problems can be mapped to Ising models (Lucas 2014),
which encode the optimization objective in terms of interacting spins. However, a significant number of these problems
fall into the NP-hard complexity class (Gary and Johnson
1979), meaning they are intractable for classical computers
as the problem size grows. This intractability has motivated
the exploration of alternative computing paradigms, such as
quantum annealing (Kadowaki and Nishimori 1998a; Zhou
and Zhang 2022), which leverages quantum mechanics to
potentially solve these problems more efficiently.
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advances in quantum computing, bringing us closer to the realm of ”quantum
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: tndinh@vcu.edu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11353

supremacy” (Preskill 2018), where quantum processors solve
problems intractable for classical computers. Notable milestones include Google’s Sycamore and Willow processors
demonstrating supremacy in a sampling task (Arute et al.
2019; Acharya et al. 2024). Beyond these proof-of-concept
demonstrations, there have been efforts to showcase quantum utility on more practical problems. Quantum annealing,
implemented in D-Wave’s systems (Boothby et al. 2020),
has demonstrated quantum advantages for certain types of
problems (King et al. 2021; Tasseff et al. 2022, 2024; King
et al. 2024). Gate-based algorithms such as the Quantum
Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) (Bauza and
Lidar 2024) and Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE)
(Peruzzo et al. 2014) offer alternative routes for tackling
optimization challenges. Additionally, quantum-inspired specialized hardware, including optical Ising machines (Honjo
et al. 2021), digital annealers, and FPGA-based solvers (Patel
et al. 2020), provide complementary approaches to address
complex optimization problems.
Despite the rapid progress in quantum computing, qubit
count remains a significant limiting factor for solving practical optimization problems. Current state-of-the-art quantum
annealers, such as D-Wave’s Advantage platform, offer over
5000 qubits (Boothby et al. 2020). However, many real-world
applications require even more qubits. For example, performing MIMO channel decoding with a 60Tx60R setup on a
64-QAM configuration would necessitate about 11,000 physical qubits (Tabi et al. 2021), exceeding the capabilities of
existing hardware. The challenge is further compounded by
limited qubit connectivity, which necessitates complex minor embedding techniques (Choi 2008, 2011), significantly
increasing the number of physical qubits required. These
hardware constraints substantially limit the size and complexity of problems that can be directly solved on quantum
processors with a clear advantage over classical methods.
While waiting for quantum hardware advances, a parallel challenge emerges: efficiently reducing Ising models to
fit limited qubit capacities. Current reduction techniques,
ranging from classical roof duality (Hammer, Hansen, and
Simeone 1984; Boros and Hammer 2002) and extended roof
duality (Rother et al. 2007) to recent graph-based approaches
(Thai et al. 2022), show promise but face significant limitations. These methods, constrained by the need for an exact reduction, can compress only a fraction of problem in-

