The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Projected and Incremental Pseudo-Boolean Model Counting
Suwei Yang1,2,4 , Kuldeep S. Meel3,5
1

Grabtaxi Holdings
Grab-NUS AI Lab
3
Georgia Institute of Technology
4
National University of Singapore
5
University of Toronto
2

In contrast, CNF model counting and solving (SAT
solving) are well-established fields, benefiting from many
decades of research advancements that have led to numerous feature-rich counters and solvers. The availability of
tools for CNF model counting and solving has led to an
ever-increasing number of applications across a wide range
of domains such as software design, explainable machine
learning, planning, and probabilistic reasoning (Bacchus,
Dalmao, and Pitassi 2003; Narodytska et al. 2019; Jackson
2019; Fan, Miller, and Mitra 2020). In turn, the wide range
of applications drives demand for better tools, from both
performance and feature perspectives. Subsequently, better
tools would lead to more adoption and applications. Eventually, a positive self-reinforcing loop is formed within the
CNF model counting and solving community. On the other
hand, we have yet to observe such a positive cycle in the
PB model counting community, in part due to a lack of features such as exact projected counting and incremental setting support in existing PB model counting tools.

Abstract
Model counting is a fundamental task that involves determining the number of satisfying assignments to a logical formula, typically in conjunctive normal form (CNF). While
CNF model counting has received extensive attention over recent decades, interest in Pseudo-Boolean (PB) model counting is just emerging partly due to the greater flexibility of PB
formulas. As such, we observed feature gaps in existing PB
counters such as a lack of support for projected and incremental settings, which could hinder adoption.
In this work, our main contribution is the introduction of
the PB model counter PBCount2, the first exact PB model
counter with support for projected and incremental model
counting. Our counter, PBCount2, uses our Least Occurrence Weighted Min Degree (LOW-MD) computation ordering heuristic to support projected model counting and a cache
mechanism to enable incremental model counting. In our
evaluations, PBCount2 completed at least 1.40× the number of benchmarks of competing methods for projected model
counting and at least 1.18× of competing methods in incremental model counting.

In this work, our main contribution is the PB model
counter, PBCount2, which supports projected and incremental model counting features. We focus on these two
aforementioned features due to their importance to the CNF
model counting and SAT solving community. Projected
model counting involves determining the number of partial
assignments over a given set of variables, known as the projection set, that can be extended to a satisfying assignment
over all variables of the formula. Projected model counting has been applied in areas such as planning, verification,
and reliability estimation (Aziz et al. 2015; Klebanov, Manthey, and Muise 2013; Dueñas-Osorio et al. 2017). Similarly, incremental SAT solving has led to applications such
as combinatorial testing, circuit design, and solving string
constraints (Yamada et al. 2015; Yu et al. 2017; Lotz et al.
2023). In this work, we focus on the incremental setting
whereby a given PB formula undergoes incremental modifications, more specifically addition and removal of PB constraints, while having its model count computed along each
modification step. In order to support projected PB model
counting, we introduce a new computation ordering heuristic that is compatible with the ordering requirements for projected model counting. Additionally, we introduce a new
caching mechanism that is at the core of incremental counting. PBCount2 is to the best of our knowledge both the first

Paper with appendix — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14485

1

Introduction

Pseudo-Boolean (PB) model counting involves determining
the number of satisfying assignments of a given pseudoboolean formula, which differs from typical model counting
tasks where the input is a Boolean formula in conjunctive
normal form (CNF). In recent years, there has been increasing interest from the community in PB model counting and
PB formulas in general, in part due to their succinctness and
flexibility over CNF formulas (Sinz 2005). In particular, an
arbitrary CNF clause can always be converted to a single PB
constraint, but the converse is not true (Le Berre et al. 2018).
The emerging interests take the form of new PB model
counting tools such as ApproxMCPB and PBCount (Yang
and Meel 2021, 2024) as well as the emergence of applications that include knapsack problems, neural network verification, and budgeted sensor placement (Pisinger 2005; Yang
and Meel 2021; Latour, Sen, and Meel 2023).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11399

