The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GRICP: Granular-Ball Iterative Closest Point with Multikernel Correntropy for
Point Cloud Fine Registration
Yihao1 , Limei Hu1 , Feng Chen1 * , Sen Zhao2,3 , Shukai Duan1
1

College of Artificial Intelligence, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing
3
Chongqing University of Telecommunications and Posts, Chongqing, China
{little1shaow,fengchen.uestc}@gmail.com, {hlm0903,duansk}@swu.edu.cn, zhaosen@cqupt.edu.cn
Abstract
The Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm suffers from sensitivity to outliers and tendency to local optima in point cloud
fine registration. In this paper, we introduce a global and robust ICP framework called Granular-Ball Iterative Closest
Point with MultiKernel Correntropy (GRICP). This approach
transforms the point cloud into a granular ball cloud and employs MultiKernel Correntropy (MKC) as the loss function,
which is designed to smooth out the effects of noise points
and provide global information for registration. Specifically,
we propose a coarse-grained representation of the point cloud
using the granular ball model, which adaptively captures the
coarse-grained features of the data and converts the point
cloud into a multi-granularity ball cloud. The normal points
within each granular ball help mitigate the influence of noise
points. To ensure that ICP finds the globally optimal transformation, MKC is introduced to measure the distribution of
registration errors, thereby offering global insights for ICP to
achieve the optimal solution. The transformations based on
MKC and the granular ball cloud are then derived. Extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world datasets
demonstrate that GRICP delivers superior registration performance, particularly in scenarios involving large rotation offsets, partial overlaps, and Gaussian noise.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a): the original point clouds. (b): the corresponding granular ball cloud.
the influence of noise points. These methods are based on
Gaussian kernel functions, and the choice of kernel width
greatly affects the results. To avoid the issue of kernel width
selection, a symmetric objective function for ICP was proposed in (Li et al. 2022) and (Rusinkiewicz 2019). Nevertheless, the inclusion of a symmetric objective function can
slow down the convergence of ICP. To address this, Anderson acceleration (Anderson 1965) was introduced to speed
up convergence, as discussed in (Pavlov et al. 2018) and
(Zhang, Yao, and Deng 2021). Despite this, the approach
adds extra computational burden during optimization. To address the drawback of ICP’s tendency to fall into local optima, Global ICP (Go-ICP) (Yang et al. 2015) and its variants
based on the branch-and-bound method have been proposed.
A major limitation of these methods is that they are highly time-consuming when applied to large-scale point clouds. To achieve global optimization while maintaining efficiency, neural network-based methods such as Deep Closest Point (DCP) (Wang and Solomon 2019) have been introduced. These methods utilize transformers to extract highdimensional features of points, generating high-quality initial correspondences.
In this paper, we propose a global and robust Iterative
Closest Point method for fine registration of point clouds.
By transforming the point cloud into a granular ball cloud
(Xia, Xie, and Wang 2022) and introducing MultiKernel
Correntropy (MKC) (Chen et al. 2021) as the loss function,
we achieve globally robust fine registration. Specifically, our
model mainly consists of two stages.
First, we transform the point cloud into a granular ball cloud. The majority of normal points within each granular
ball can smooth out the influence of a few noise points while

Introduction
Point cloud fine registration techniques are widely used in
3D scene reconstruction (Agarwal et al. 2011), autonomous
driving (Bresson et al. 2017), and robotics (Durrant-Whyte
and Bailey 2006). The goal of point cloud fine registration is
to accurately align two point clouds by finding a rigid transformation.
A classic work in the field is the Iterative Closest Point
(ICP) algorithm (Besl and McKay 1992), which aligns two point clouds iteratively until convergence by matching
points based on spatial proximity and then solving a leastsquares problem for the transformation. ICP is extremely
sensitive to noise and initial conditions and tends to get stuck
in suboptimal solutions. To improve the robustness of ICP
to noise, robust loss functions have been introduced in previous works (Bouaziz, Tagliasacchi, and Pauly 2013), (Wu
et al. 2019), (Liu, Pokharel, and Principe 2007) to reduce
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1710

