The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Phoneme-Level Feature Discrepancies: A Key to Detecting
Sophisticated Speech Deepfakes
Kuiyuan Zhang1 , Zhongyun Hua1 * , Rushi Lan2 , Yushu Zhang3 , Yifang Guo4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
School of Computer Science and Information Security, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, China
3
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, China
4
Alibaba Group, China
zkyhitsz@gmail.com, huazyum@gmail.com, rslan2016@163.com, yushu@nuaa.edu.cn, guoyifang@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-speech and speech conversion technologies have enabled the creation of highly convincing synthetic speech. While these innovations offer numerous practical benefits, they also cause significant security
challenges when maliciously misused. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to detect these synthetic speech signals. Phoneme
features provide a powerful speech representation for deepfake detection. However, previous phoneme-based detection
approaches typically focused on specific phonemes, overlooking temporal inconsistencies across the entire phoneme
sequence. In this paper, we develop a new mechanism for
detecting speech deepfakes by identifying the inconsistencies of phoneme-level speech features. We design an adaptive phoneme pooling technique that extracts sample-specific
phoneme-level features from frame-level speech data. By
applying this technique to features extracted by pre-trained
audio models on previously unseen deepfake datasets, we
demonstrate that deepfake samples often exhibit phonemelevel inconsistencies when compared to genuine speech. To
further enhance detection accuracy, we propose a deepfake
detector that uses a graph attention network to model the temporal dependencies of phoneme-level features. Additionally,
we introduce a random phoneme substitution augmentation
technique to increase feature diversity during training. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate the
superior performance of our method over existing state-ofthe-art detection methods.

(a) Frame-level speech features

(b) Phoneme-level speech features

Figure 1: T-SNE cluster results. We first employ a pretrained audio model, Wav2Vec2, to extract the frame-level
speech features (last hidden states) from the IT and PL subsets of the MLAAD, a multilingual deepfake speech dataset.
The phoneme-level features are generated from frame-level
features using adaptive phoneme pooling (see Fig. 2).

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12619

Introduction

Deep-learning audio synthesizers typically employ neural
networks to replicate the vocal process, often using encoderdecoder architectures to analyze input text and produce synthetic speech (Kim et al. 2023). However, authentic human speech production is influenced by complicated acoustic structures and various human bio-parameters (Blue et al.
2022). Specifically, acoustic structures, including the lungs,
larynx, and articulators, along with human bio-parameters
such as gender, health, and age, collaboratively contribute to
the complexity of human speech production. These intricate
factors present significant challenges for neural synthesizers
to replicate these parameters accurately.
While synthesizers may produce realistic-sounding
words, they cannot perfectly simulate the ingredients of

In today’s digital age, advanced machine-learning models
have made it increasingly easy to manipulate digital content, raising concerns about the reliability of speech recordings (Müller et al. 2022). Speech deepfakes are synthetic
recordings that closely mimic a person’s speech, making it
challenging to verify the authenticity of information (Tan
et al. 2024). Advancements in deep learning technologies
for generating realistic speech have made it increasingly
difficult to detect these forgeries with conventional methods (Zhang et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1066

