The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Planning in the Dark: LLM-Symbolic Planning Pipeline Without Experts
Sukai Huang1 , Nir Lipovetzky1 and Trevor Cohn1,2 *
1

The University of Melbourne
2
Google
sukaih@student.unimelb.edu.au, {nir.lipovetzky, trevor.cohn}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

Initial state desc.

Domain descriptions

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in
solving natural language-described planning tasks, but their
direct use often leads to inconsistent reasoning and hallucination. While hybrid LLM-symbolic planning pipelines have
emerged as a more robust alternative, they typically require
extensive expert intervention to refine and validate generated
action schemas. It not only limits scalability but also introduces a potential for biased interpretation, as a single expert’s interpretation of ambiguous natural language descriptions might not align with the user’s actual intent. To address
this, we propose a novel approach that constructs an action
schema library to generate multiple candidates, accounting
for the diverse possible interpretations of natural language
descriptions. We further introduce a semantic validation and
ranking module that automatically filter and rank the generated schemas and plans without expert-in-the-loop. The experiments showed our pipeline maintains superiority in planning over the direct LLM planning approach. These findings
demonstrate the feasibility of a fully automated end-to-end
LLM-symbolic planner that requires no expert intervention,
opening up the possibility for a broader audience to engage
with AI planning with less prerequisite of domain expertise.

Goal state desc.

Predicate descriptions
Action descriptions

Book 3
Book 1 Book 2

Direct LLM Planning
Plan Candidates

initial state
Large Language Model
Book 1
Book 2
Book 3

Table

goal state

Problem Spec.

Action Schema(s)

Predicate List
Symbolic Planner

2 LLM-Symbolic Planning Pipeline

Figure 1: An overview of direct plan generation vs. LLMsymbolic planning pipelines.

pipeline has emerged. As shown in Figure 1, instead of relying solely on LLMs to generate sequences of action plans
through in-context learning, this pipeline begins by leveraging LLMs to extract abstract symbolic action specifications from natural language descriptions, known as action
schemas. These schemas define the essential components
of an action in a structured format understandable by symbolic planners. Once these schemas are generated, a classical
planner can take over to search for feasible plans that fulfill
the task specifications (Liu et al. 2023; Silver et al. 2024;
Guan et al. 2023; Kambhampati et al. 2024).
Yet, this method is brittle, as a single missing or contradictory predicate in an action schema can prevent the planner from finding a valid plan. Thus, current pipelines often require multiple iterations of expert intervention to refine and validate the generated action schemas. For instance,
Guan et al. (2023) reported that the expert took 59 iterations
to fix schema errors for a single task domain. This process
demands substantial time and expertise, which significantly
hinders the scalability of the method. More critically, due to
budget constraints, often only one expert is involved in the
process. This creates a critical vulnerability: the potential for
interpretation mismatch between the expert and the user. Experts, while knowledgeable, inevitably bring their own subjective interpretations to the task descriptions, often formal-

Code — https://github.com/Sino-Huang/Official-LLMSymbolic-Planning-without-Experts
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.15922

1

1

Table

Introduction

The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has opened
new avenues for solving natural language-described planning tasks (Kojima et al. 2022). However, direct plan generation using LLMs, while seemingly straightforward, has
been criticized for inconsistent reasoning and hallucination,
which undermines their reliability in critical planning scenarios (Valmeekam et al. 2022, 2023; Huang et al. 2024).
In response, researchers have advocated for more robust approaches that combine the flexibility of LLMs with the correctness of symbolic planning to solve planning tasks (Pallagani et al. 2024; Oswald et al. 2024). To improve the soundness of generated plans, a hybrid LLM-symbolic planning
* Now at Google DeepMind
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26542

