The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Axioms for AI Alignment from Human Feedback
Evi Micha
University of Southern California
evi.micha@usc.edu

The alignment of AI models with human values is widely
recognized as a critical challenge in the development of safe
and beneficial AI systems. Ensuring that these models operate in ways that reflect and respect human preferences,
ethics, and social norms is essential for minimizing risks and
maximizing their positive impact on society. Human feedback plays a key role in achieving alignment between AI
models and human values. By incorporating input from people during training, AI systems can learn to better understand and reflect human preferences, ethical principles, and
societal norms.
One widely used approach for achieving AI alignment is
reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF), which
has been applied in various domains, including robotics and
recommendation systems, and recently, has gained significant attention as a method for fine-tuning large language
models (LLMs). The RLHF process involves training a reward model using a pre-trained LLM, which is then employed to fine-tune the existing LLM. Typically, human
feedback is provided through pairwise comparisons between
different options, and a reward function is estimated via
maximum likelihood, assuming an underlying random utility model, such as the Bradley-Terry (BT) model.
The assumption of an underlying random utility model
implies that humans share a common, unobservable ground
truth, and the observed comparisons are merely noisy estimates of this true preference. Is this the “right” way of aggregating individual preferences towards a socially desirable
reward function, however? To answer this question, we draw
on social choice theory, a field that studies collective decison making through a mathematical lens. The maximum
likelihood estimation approach is in line with a storied body
of work that assumes that different human participants have
preferences stemming from noisy estimation of a common
ground truth, and the goal is to learn this ground truth as accurately as possible. But this is not the case when it comes
to questions of AI alignment, where individuals can have legitimate differences of opinion rooted in different values or
priorities.
We argue that when preferences are truly heterogeneous,
the axiomatic approach which rose to prominence in social
choice may be more suitable. This approach analyzes the de-

sirability of aggregation methods through their satisfaction
of certain axioms that capture notions of consensus, fairness,
and economic efficiency. Specifically, we are interested in
the axiomatic properties of aggregation methods that take ordinal preferences as input and output a reward function. We
address the following two research questions: What axioms
are satisfied by aggregation methods used by existing RLHF
algorithms? And are there alternative aggregation methods
that offer stronger axiomatic guarantees?
To evaluate different aggregation methods, we adapt fundamental axioms from social choice theory. The first is
Pareto optimality (PO), which requires that if a candidate
a is ranked above candidate b in every input ranking, then
the resulting ranking should rank a above b. This is seen as
a basic requirement and is satisfied by every standard voting
method in the classical setting. The second axiom is pairwise majority consistency (PMC): If there exists a reward
function that generates a ranking where, for each pair of candidates, a majority of voters agree with the ranking, then the
resulting ranking should match that ranking. This axiom is
an extension of Condorcet consistency to rankings, and is
satisfied by some, but not all, standard voting methods in the
classical setting.
We will first focus on a significant negative result of the
BTL model, which is widely applied in practice. In particular, we will discuss that when the goal is to design a linear
reward function, the BTL model fails both PMC and PO.
This result suggests that the prevailing practice of RLHF
is flawed from an axiomatic viewpoint. We will also generalize this negative result to a family of loss-based rules
for cases where the loss function is weakly convex and nondecreasing or strictly convex.
In the light of the above negative result, we will ask
whether there are different approaches that can satisfy these
two natural axioms. We will discuss that there exists an aggregation rule that we call leximax Copeland subject to PO
which satisfies both PO and PMC. Moreover, we will show
that it also satisfies two additional ones, majority consistency
and winner monotonicity. This result indicates that while
there are methods that satisfy multiple desirable axioms, an
algorithm that is widely applied in practice fails to satisfy
any of them. Therefore, it may be time to reconsider which
algorithms are used in the presence of diverse preferences.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28722

