The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Color Transfer with Modulated Flows
Maria Larchenko, Alexander Lobashev, Dmitry Guskov, Vladimir Vladimirovich Palyulin
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow 121205, Russia
mariia.larchenko@gmail.com, lobashevalexander@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we introduce Modulated Flows (ModFlows), a
novel approach for color transfer between images based on
rectified flows. The primary goal of the color transfer is to
adjust the colors of a target image to match the color distribution of a reference image. Our technique is based on optimal transport and executes color transfer as an invertible
transformation within the RGB color space. The ModFlows
utilizes the bijective property of flows, enabling us to introduce a common intermediate color distribution and build a
dataset of rectified flows. We train an encoder on this dataset
to predict the weights of a rectified model for new images. After training on a set of optimal transport plans, our approach
can generate plans for new pairs of distributions without additional fine-tuning. We additionally show that the trained encoder provides an image embedding, associated only with its
color style. The presented method is capable of processing
4K images and achieves the state-of-the-art performance in
terms of content and style similarity.

Code — https://github.com/maria-larchenko/modflows

Introduction
Color adjustment is one of the most commonly used image editing operations. While minor corrections can often
be made quickly, achieving a precise color palette typically
requires more time and attention to details.
Classical Methods. The idea to modify an image using features of another image appeared in the early 2000s
(Jacobs et al. 2001). Soon the problem of example-based
color transfer was formulated in the following way (Reinhard et al. 2001). A pair of images known as “content” and
“style” is introduced. The aim of the transfer is to alter the
colors of the content image to fit the colors of the style image
without visible distortions and artifacts.
The pioneering works on the color transfer have already
considered it as a problem of optimal transport (Morovic and
Sun 2003). For instance, one would prefer to keep the shades
of red as close to each other as possible. Technically, one defines a distance in the color space and tries to fit the desired
color distribution with a minimal effort. This effort can be

Figure 1: A proposed scheme of training and inference.
Color transfer is a composition of a forward content and an
inverse style flows applied to the content image.

seen as a transportation cost, i.e. the problem can be formulated within the framework of optimal transport (OT) theory.
In general case, an exact solution of OT problem is hard to
obtain.Discretization of distributions allowed Morovic and
Sun (2003) to employ optimal histogram matching, but explicit calculation of the transport cost still was computationally heavy; for this reason other histogram-based approaches
dropped the optimality constraint and considered the simpler
mass preserving transport problem (Neumann and Neumann
2005; Pitie, Kokaram, and Dahyot 2005).
Pitié and Kokaram (2007) first switched to a continuous
formulation of OT problem in color transfer. Under several

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4464

