The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Times2D: Multi-Period Decomposition and Derivative Mapping for General Time
Series Forecasting
Reza Nematirad, Anil Pahwa, and Balasubramaniam Natarajan
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 66506, USA
nematirad@ksu.edu

Abstract

and even millisecond-level data in rotary machines. Lowresolution time series data were typically smoother and
exhibited fewer fluctuations, making prediction relatively
straightforward. However, shifting toward high-resolution
time steps introduces intricate temporal patterns and sharp
fluctuations, making the time series forecasting task significantly challenging. Traditional methods such as Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) and Exponential Smoothing were effective in handling well-defined seasonal patterns and trends. However, they struggle with intricate temporal and nonlinear patterns in time series data (Fu,
Wu, and Boulet 2022). Recently, due to advances in deep
learning models, the landscape of time series forecasting has
achieved promising progress. These models, by leveraging
non-linear modeling, high-dimensional pattern recognition,
and adaptive learning capabilities, have been able to capture
complex temporal variations in real-world time series(He
et al. 2022). Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) models are
designed to process sequences by handling time points successively with internal state updates that capture temporal
information. However, RNNs often struggle with long-term
dependencies due to vanishing gradients (Massart and Abrol
2022). Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models were proposed to address the vanishing gradient problem. However,
LSTMs have difficulty capturing local trends (Huang et al.
2024). Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCNs) are utilized to extract the variation information by applying convolutional neural networks. TCNs are efficient at capturing
relationships between adjacent time points but may struggle
to model long-term dependencies (Wu et al. 2022). Recently,
transformer-based models have shown superior performance
over TCN models due to their attention mechanism. However, the attention mechanism can struggle with capturing
dependencies among scattered time points (Wu et al. 2021)
and can be computationally extensive, especially for longterm forecasting (Dai et al. 2024).

Time series forecasting is an important application in various domains such as energy management, traffic planning, financial markets, meteorology, and medicine. However, realtime series data often present intricate temporal variability
and sharp fluctuations, which pose significant challenges for
time series forecasting. Previous models that rely on 1D time
series representations usually struggle with complex temporal variations. To address the limitations of 1D time series,
this study introduces the Times2D method that transforms
the 1D time series into 2D space. Times2D consists of three
main parts: first, a Periodic Decomposition Block (PDB) that
captures temporal variations within a period and between
the same periods by converting the time series into a 2D
tensor in the frequency domain. Second, the First and Second Derivative Heatmaps (FSDH) capture sharp changes and
turning points, respectively. Finally, an Aggregation Forecasting Block (AFB) integrates the output tensors from PDB and
FSDH for accurate forecasting. This 2D transformation enables the utilization of 2D convolutional operations to effectively capture long and short characteristics of the time series. Comprehensive experimental results across large-scale
data in the literature demonstrate that the proposed Times2D
model achieves state-of-the-art performance in both shortterm and long-term forecasting.

Code — https://github.com/Tims2D/Times2D

Introduction
Time series forecasting plays a critical role in several realworld applications, including electricity load demand forecasting, lifetime estimation of industrial machinery, traffic
planning, weather prediction, and the stock market. Due
to their critical relevance and wide application, there has
been considerable interest in time series forecasting in recent years. The range of data resolutions in time series has
historically been broad, from annual records such as GDP
rates to monthly indicators like unemployment rates, and
daily measurements such as stock market indices. However,
advancements in data collection technologies have significantly increased the frequency of data recording. For example, observations range from hourly metrics like electricity use, to second-by-second updates in internet traffic

It should be noted that intricate temporal variations in
real-world data often manifest as sharp fluctuations, abrupt
rises and falls, and overlapping patterns. Additionally, most
real-world datasets exhibit multi-periodicity, which further complicates the modeling process. These periods may
overlap, creating additional challenges when attempting to
model them using a 1D perspective. Motivated by the limitations of the existing deep learning models and the complex

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19651

