The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Aligning Instance Brownian Bridge with Texts for Open-Vocabulary Video
Instance Segmentation
Zesen Cheng1,3 , Kehan Li1,3 , Li Hao1,3 , Peng Jin1,3 , Xiawu Zheng5 , Chang Liu4 † , Jie Chen1,2,3 †
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
4
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Video Instance

Abstract

Projection

Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 4

Frame 3

Vision
Encoder

Temporally locating objects with arbitrary class texts is the
primary pursuit of open-vocabulary Video Instance Segmentation (VIS). Because of the insufficient vocabulary of video
data, previous methods leverage image-text pretraining model
for recognizing object instances by separately aligning each
frame with class texts. As a result, the separation breaks the
instance movement context of videos and requires a lot of inference overhead. To tackle these issues, we propose BridgeText Alignment (BTA) to link frame-level instance representations as a Brownian Bridge. On one hand, we can calculate the global descriptor of a Brownian bridge for capturing
instance dynamics, which enables extra considering temporal information rather than only static information of each
frame for aligning with texts. On the other hand, according
to the goal-conditioned property of Brownian bridge, we can
estimate the middle frame features via the start and the end
frame features so the global feature calculation of a Brownian
bridge only needs to infer a few frames, which largely reduces
inference overhead. We term our overall pipeline as BriVIS.
Following training settings of previous works, BriVIS surpasses the SOTA (OV2Seg) by a clear margin. For example, on the challenging large-vocabulary datasets (BURST,
LVVIS), BriVIS achieves 5.7 and 20.9 mAP, which exhibits
+2.2∼+6.7 mAP improvement compared to OV2Seg. Furthermore, after training via BTA, using only the head and the
tail frames for alignment improves the speed by 32% (2.77
→ 1.88 s/iter) while just decreasing the performance by 0.2
mAP (21.1 → 20.9 mAP).

VLP Model
A photo of a
{ENTITY}

Frame 5

Text
Encoder

Image-Text Joint Space

(a) Frame-text Alignment
Video Instance

Temporal
Module

Projection
Vision
Encoder

Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3

VLP Model
A photo of a
{ENTITY}

Text
Encoder

Frame 4

Brownian
Bridge
(Person)
Frame 5

Image-Text Joint Space

(b) Bridge-text Alignment

Figure 1: The mechanical difference between (a) frametext and (b) bridge-text (ours) alignment. Previous methods
recognize instances by integrating frame-text alignment results. Our method links frame-level instance features as a
Brownian bridge and aligns the bridge descriptor to class
texts, which can consider instance movement information
when recognizing video instances. Yellow circles, Green
circles, and Diamond denote frame-level instance features,
class text features, and bridge descriptor.

Introduction

2022), attracting researchers to adapt image-text VLPs for
open-vocabulary video tasks. Albeit directly constructing
video-text VLP models can also advance open-vocabulary
video tasks, it is not economical due to the expense of largescale video-text pairs collection and annotation. Therefore,
previous OVVIS models tend to leverage image-text VLP
models for achieving open-vocabulary recognition.
To fit the image-text pretraining models’ input modality,
initial efforts (Wang et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2023) of OVVIS
propose to depart video into frames and calculate instancetext alignment score frame by frame (Fig. 1a). Nevertheless,
lacking the temporal modeling ability between frames, VLP
models ignore how instance features evolve when aligning
class text and instance features in a single frame. This results in suboptimal video instance recognition because the

Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) aims to classify,
segment, and track all object instances in the input
videos (Yang, Fan, and Xu 2019). Based on the VIS
task, the Open-Vocabulary Video Instance Segmentation (OVVIS) (Wang et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2023) aims to
recognize any object categories for adapting real-world application scenarios. The development of image-text VisionLanguage Pretraining (VLP) models (Radford et al. 2021;
Jia et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022; Yuan et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022a,b; Sun et al. 2023) largely boosts image-level openvocabulary tasks (Gu et al. 2021; Huynh et al. 2022; Xu et al.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2482

