The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mitigating Bias in Machine Learning: A Comprehensive Review and Novel
Approaches
Mahdi Khalili
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
khalili.17@ osu.edu

Abstract

how the current existing generative models can be modified to take into account various fairness notions and create synthetic data that can improve fairness in downstream
tasks. Second, the talk focuses on the in-processing fair algorithms developed by my group and explain how fair learning problems can be expressed as non-convex problems and
how we can find the global optimal solution in such nonconvex problems. Third, I introduce a novel post-processing
approach for learning fair AI models that can take advantage
of SVD to identify components leading to an unfair decision.
Then, we discuss how these components can be removed
from the the model while ensuring high accuracy.
Acknowledgment: This work is supported by the U.S.
NSF under award IIS-2301599 and CMMI-2301601, and by
grants from the Ohio State University’s TDAI and College
of Engineering Strategic Research Initiative.

Machine Learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly used in
our daily lives, yet often exhibit discrimination against protected groups. In this talk, I discuss the growing concern of
bias in ML and overview existing approaches to address fairness issues. Then, I present three novel approaches developed by my research group. The first leverages generative
AI to eliminate biases in training datasets, the second tackles non-convex problems arise in fair learning, and the third
introduces a matrix decomposition-based post-processing approach to identify and eliminate unfair model components.

Summary of Talk
As machine learning algorithms are increasingly being used
in applications such as education, lending, recruitment,
healthcare, criminal justice, etc., there is a growing concern that the algorithms may exhibit discrimination against
protected population groups. Various fairness notions have
been proposed in the literature to measure and remedy the
biases in ML systems; they can be roughly classified into
two categories: 1) individual fairness focuses on equity at
the individual level and it requires similar individuals to be
treated similarly (Zuo, Khalili, and Zhang 2023; Zuo et al.
2024); 2) group fairness requires certain statistical measures
to be (approximately) equalized across different groups distinguished by some sensitive attributes (Khalili et al. 2021;
Khalili, Zhang, and Abroshan 2021; Zhang et al. 2022).
Several approaches have been developed to satisfy a given
definition of fairness; they fall under three categories: 1)
pre-processing, by modifying the original dataset, (e.g.,
(Abroshan, Elliott, and Khalili 2024)); 2) in-processing, by
imposing fairness constraints or changing objective functions during training, (e.g., (Khalili, Zhang, and Abroshan
2023)); 3) post-processing, by adjusting the output of the algorithms based on sensitive attributes, (e.g., (Khalili, Zhang,
and Abroshan 2021)).
In this talk, we review pre-processing, in-processing, and
post-processing algorithms and discuss their strengths and
weaknesses. Then, we will discuss the approaches that have
been developed by my research group. In particular, first, we
discuss how we can take advantage of generative AI to eliminate biases that exists in the training dataset. We explain

References
Abroshan, M.; Elliott, A.; and Khalili, M. M. 2024. Imposing Fairness Constraints in Synthetic Data Generation. In
Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Khalili, M. M.; Zhang, X.; and Abroshan, M. 2021. Fair
sequential selection using supervised learning models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
28144–28155.
Khalili, M. M.; Zhang, X.; and Abroshan, M. 2023. Loss
Balancing for Fair Supervised Learning. In Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning.
Khalili, M. M.; Zhang, X.; Abroshan, M.; and Sojoudi, S.
2021. Improving fairness and privacy in selection problems.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, 8092–8100.
Zhang, X.; Khalili, M. M.; Jin, K.; Naghizadeh, P.; and
Liu, M. 2022. Fairness Interventions as (Dis) Incentives for
Strategic Manipulation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 26239–26264. PMLR.
Zuo, Z.; Khalili, M. M.; and Zhang, X. 2023. Counterfactually Fair Representation. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems.
Zuo, Z.; Xie, T.; Tan, X.; Zhang, X.; and Khalili, M. M.
2024. Lookahead Counterfactual Fairness. Transactions on
Machine Learning Research.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28712

