The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FMPM-DNet: Hyperspectral Pansharpening Dynamic Network Based on Feature
Modulation and Probability Mask
Xiaozheng Wang1 * , Yong Yang1† , Shuying Huang1 * , Hangyuan Lu2 , Weiguo Wan3 , Aoqi Zhao1
1

Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
Jinhua University of Vocational Technology, Jinhua, China
3
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, Nanchang, China
xiaozhengwang95@gmail.com, greatyangy@126.com, huangshuying@tiangong.edu.cn, lhyhziee@163.com,
wanweiguo@jxufe.edu.cn, aoqizhao927@163.com
2

Abstract
Currently, most Hyperspectral(HS) pansharpening methods
have two problems, namely the lack of consideration the spatial variations of HS images and inaccurate feature reconstruction in multi-channel complex mapping relationships,
leading to spectral and spatial distortions in the fusion results. To address these issues, we propose a dynamic network based on feature modulation and probability mask
(FMPM-DNet) for HS pansharpening, including two stages
of spectral-spatial feature modulation and feature reconstruction. In the first stage, to increase the feature representation
ability of the model, a wave function is defined based on complex transformation to convert spatial features into wave-like
features. On this basis, considering the spatial variations of
HS images, a dynamic feature modulation unit (DFMU) is
constructed to achieve adaptive modulation and coarse fusion
of features by dynamically generating spectral-spatial correction matrix. In the second stage, a feature probability mask
unit (FPMU) is designed to realize global feature embedding
at different depths and local feature embedding at the same
depth to obtain refined fused features. Extensive experiments
on three widely used datasets demonstrate that the proposed
FMPM-Net achieves significant improvements in both spatial
and spectral quality metrics compared to some state-of-theart (SOTA) methods.

Figure 1: Different network structures. (a) static network, (b)
dynamic network, and (c) FMPM-DNet.
data in many practical remote sensing applications, such as
environmental monitoring, target detection, and classification (Aburaed et al. 2023), one possible approach is to reconstruct HRHS images from low spatial resolution HS (LRHS)
images and PAN images. This process is commonly referred
to as HS pansharpening.
The traditional pansharpening methods can be classified
into four categories (Li et al. 2024): component substitution (CS) methods (Aiazzi et al. 2007), multiresolution analysis (MRA) methods (Aiazzi et al. 2006), Bayesian (VO)
methods (Wei et al. 2015), and matrix decomposition-based
methods (Yokoya, Yairi, and Iwasaki 2012). Although the
traditional methods are easy to implement and physically
interpretable, they often suffer from spatial and spectral distortions due to imprecise definition of prior knowledge and
imprecise manual feature extraction (Zhang et al. 2020).
In HS pansharpening, the complex mapping relationship
between multiple channels has always been a challenging
problem that is difficult to solve. Deep learning (DL)-based
methods have been proven to be more effective in handle
these problems compared to traditional methods. According to the network architectures shown in Figure 1(a) and
(b), DL-based methods can be roughly divided into two
categories: methods based on static network and methods
based on dynamic network. The methods based on static
network (He et al. 2023) aims to directly map PAN and
LRHS images to HRHS images by learning networks with
fixed parameters. For example, Hyper-DSNet (Zhuo et al.

Code — https://github.com/EchoPhD/FMPM-DNet

Introduction
In the optical remote sensing systems, the balance among the
spatial resolution, the spectral resolution, and the signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) is a key consideration factor. Single remote sensing system cannot directly acquire high-spatialresolution hyperspectral (HRHS) images. Typically, spectroscopy imaging systems can capture hundreds of narrow
spectral bands at once, yielding hyperspectral (HS) data
with abundant spectral information, but often reduce the spatial resolution of HS data. In contrast, panchromatic (PAN)
imaging systems can provide single-band images with high
spatial resolution. To accommodate requirements for HRHS
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

861

