The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Balanced Adaptive Subspace Collaboration for Mixed
Pareto-Lexicographic Multi-Objective Problems with Priority Levels
Wenjing Hong
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
Shenzhen City Key Laboratory of Embedded System Design, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
hongwj@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

control systems (Khosravani et al. 2018), disaster management (Kovács and Moshtari 2019), industrial scheduling (Xu
et al. 2016; de C. Bissoli, Zufferey, and Amaral 2021), and
business (Zhong, Jiang, and Nielsen 2022), have been a subject of interest since as early as 1970s (Behringer 1977).
Despite the broad range of real-world demands, PL-MPLMOPs are a particularly challenging class. For many years,
there was a stagnation in academic research on this topic,
and it has only been revived in recent years (Lai et al. 2023).
The challenges arise not only because conflicts among multiple objectives at the same level lead to the absence of a
single optimal solution, and there is currently no exact analytical method for solving these problems, but also because
the presence of lexicographic priority relations among objectives adds complexity and makes optimization more difficult compared to general MOPs. Thus, Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms (MOEAs) (Zhou et al. 2011) that have
achieved widespread success in traditional MOPs fail to deliver satisfactory performance when applied to PL-MPLMOPs (Lai et al. 2021b).
The use of MOEAs still provide a good starting point because their population-based search mechanism makes them
inherently suitable for handling conflicts between multiple
objectives. More specifically, since traditional MOEAs do
not consider priority relationships, a common approach is to
post-process the solution sets found by these methods based
on priority relationships to obtain the final solution set (Lai
et al. 2021b). However, such methods often suffer from computational inefficiency due to the need to retain many additional solutions that are irrelevant or even disturbing to
decision-making during the search process. To address this
issue, a recent alternative approach is to directly incorporate priority relationships into the search process of the algorithm. However, the introduction of priorities means that
Pareto dominance no longer applies to evaluating the quality
of solutions, necessitating algorithms specifically designed
for PL-MPL-MOPs.
Although some efforts have been made to incorporate
priority relationships into the search process (Fonseca and
Fleming 1998; Tan, Lee, and Khor 1999; Tan et al. 2003; Lai
et al. 2021a, 2023), most have failed to provide stable solutions due to the use of dominance relations that violate the
transitive property for PL-MPL-MOPs. A key contribution
in this area is PL-NSGA-II (Lai et al. 2021b). PL-NSGA-II

Multi-objective Optimization Problems (MOPs) where objectives have different levels of importance in decision-making,
known as Mixed Pareto-Lexicographic MOPs with Priority
Levels (PL-MPL-MOPs), are increasingly prevalent in realworld applications. General-purpose Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms (MOEAs) that treat all objectives equally
not only increase the workload of decision-making but also
suffer from computational inefficiencies due to the necessity
of generating many additional solutions. Conversely, strictly
adhering to Priority Levels (PLs) during optimization can easily result in premature convergence within some PLs. To address this issue, we suggest an effective Balanced Adaptive
Subspace Collaboration (BASC) method in this paper. Specifically, this method decomposes the search space into subfronts based on PLs and utilizes a sampling mechanism that
operates exclusively within subspaces formed by sub-fronts
at the same PL to generate new solutions, thereby emphasizing the exploitation of individual PLs. Furthermore, a set of
parameters is employed to control the strictness of adherence
to each PL, with these parameters adaptively adjusted to balance exploration across different PLs. The two mechanisms
are then collaboratively integrated into MOEAs. Comprehensive experimental studies on benchmark problems and a set
of complex job-shop scheduling problems in semiconductor
manufacturing demonstrate the competitiveness of the proposed method over existing methods.

Code — https://github.com/hongwj-lab/pl-mpl-mo

Introduction
A class of complex optimization problems widely encountered in the real world requires the simultaneous consideration of multiple objectives, each with different importance to decision-making. When these levels of importance
are organized hierarchically, these problems are known as
Mixed Pareto-Lexicographic Multi-objective Optimization
Problems with Priority Levels (PL-MPL-MOPs) (Lai et al.
2023). That is, the objectives can be partitioned into multiple
Priority Levels (PLs), where a PL has a group of objectives
with the same importance (in the Pareto sense) to decisionmaking, while different PLs exist in lexicographic order.
These problems, prevalent in areas such as integrated vehicle
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27009

