The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PSMGD: Periodic Stochastic Multi-Gradient Descent for Fast Multi-Objective
Optimization
Mingjing Xu1 , Peizhong Ju2 , Jia Liu3 , Haibo Yang1
1

Dept. of Computing and Information Sciences Ph.D., Rochester Institute of Technology
2
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Kentucky
3
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University
{mx6835, hbycis}@rit.edu, peizhong.ju@uky.edu, liu.1736@osu.edu
Abstract

timize multiple potentially conflicting objectives simultaneously. Formally, MOO can be mathematically cast as:

Multi-objective optimization (MOO) lies at the core of many
machine learning (ML) applications that involve multiple, potentially conflicting objectives. Despite the long history of
MOO, recent years have witnessed a surge in interest within
the ML community in the development of gradient manipulation algorithms for MOO, thanks to the availability of gradient
information in many ML problems. However, existing gradient manipulation methods for MOO often suffer from long
training times, primarily due to the need for computing dynamic weights by solving an additional optimization problem
to determine a common descent direction that can decrease
all objectives simultaneously. To address this challenge, we
propose a new and efficient algorithm called Periodic Stochastic Multi-Gradient Descent (PSMGD) to accelerate MOO.
PSMGD is motivated by the key observation that dynamic
weights across objectives exhibit small changes under minor
updates over short intervals during the optimization process.
Consequently, our PSMGD algorithm is designed to periodically compute these dynamic weights and utilizes them repeatedly, thereby effectively reducing the computational overload.
Theoretically, we prove that PSMGD can achieve state-ofthe-art convergence rates for strongly-convex, general convex,
and non-convex functions. Additionally, we introduce a new
computational complexity measure, termed backpropagation
complexity, and demonstrate that PSMGD could achieve an
objective-independent backpropagation complexity. Through
extensive experiments, we verify that PSMGD can provide
comparable or superior performance to state-of-the-art MOO
algorithms while significantly reducing training time.

min F(x) := [f1 (x), · · · , fS (x)],
x∈D

Code — https://github.com/MarcuXu/PSMG
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10961

1

Introduction

Just as the human world is full of diverse and potentially
conflicting goals, many machine learning paradigms are also
multi-objective, such as multi-objective reinforcement learning (Hayes et al. 2022), multi-task learning (Caruana 1997;
Sener and Koltun 2018), and learning-to-rank (Mahapatra
et al. 2023). At the core of these machine learning paradigms
lies multi-objective optimization (MOO), which aims to opCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21770

(1)

where x ∈ D ⊆ Rd is the model parameter, and fs : Rd →
R, s ∈ [S] is the objective function.
The most common approach for handling MOO is to optimize a weighted average of the multiple objectives, also
known as linear scalarization (Kurin et al. 2022; Xin et al.
2022). This approach transforms MOO into a single-objective
problem, for which there are various off-the-shelf methods
available. The linear scalarization approach has a fast periteration runtime but suffers from slow convergence and
poor performance due to potential conflicts among objectives. To address this problem, there has been a surge of
interest in recent years in developing gradient manipulation
algorithms (Kendall, Gal, and Cipolla 2018; Chen et al. 2018;
Yu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Javaloy and Valera 2021; Liu
and Vicente 2021; Chen et al. 2024; Xiao, Ban, and Ji 2024).
The key idea is to calculate dynamic weights to avoid conflicts and find a direction d(x) that decreases all objectives
simultaneously. This common descent vector d(x) is often
determined by solving an additional optimization problem
that involves all objective gradients. Updating the model with
the common descent direction d ensures a decrease in every
objective. While these approaches show improved performance, the extra optimization process requires a substantial
amount of time. This is particularly evident when the number
of objectives is large and the model parameters are highdimensional, which could significantly prolong the MOO
training process. Existing empirical evaluations consistently
demonstrate that gradient manipulation algorithms typically
necessitate much longer training times (Kurin et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2024) (also shown in Sec 4). To this end, a natural question arises: Can we design efficient gradient manipulation
algorithms for fast MOO with theoretical guarantees?
In this paper, we present Periodic Stochastic MultiGradient Descent (PSMGD), a simple yet effective algorithm
to accelerate the MOO. Our PSMGD is motivated by the key
observation that dynamic weights across objectives exhibit
small changes under minor updates over short intervals. Thus,
it is designed to periodically compute these dynamic weights
and utilizes them repeatedly, thereby effectively reducing the

