The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

XTSFormer: Cross-Temporal-Scale Transformer for Irregular-Time
Event Prediction in Clinical Applications
Tingsong Xiao1 , Zelin Xu1 , Wenchong He1 , Zhengkun Xiao1 , Yupu Zhang1 , Zibo Liu1 ,
Shigang Chen1 , My T. Thai1 , Jiang Bian2, 3 , Parisa Rashidi4 , Zhe Jiang1 *
1

Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
2
Department of Biostatistics and Health Data Science, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA
3
Regenstrief Institute, Indianapolis, IN, USA
4
J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
{xiaotingsong, zelin.xu, whe2, xiaoz, y.zhang1, ziboliu, sgchen, mythai, parisa.rashidi, zhe.jiang}@ufl.edu,
bianji@iu.edu
Abstract

pathways, which are detailed step-by-step plans for the treatment or care of surgical patients. For instance, in multimodal
post-surgery pain management, clinical event sequences involving different types of analgesic and anesthetic medications from perioperative EHR data reveal the practical treatment plans adopted in a hospital. Encoding such sequential
patterns (care pathways) plays a crucial role in evidencebased interventions and management, improving the quality
of care, reducing variability in practice, and optimizing pain
management outcomes.
Traditionally, analyzing care pathways has been done
manually based on clinicians’ knowledge and experience.
In recent years, data-driven methods have been developed
to automatically extract de facto care pathways from EHR
data, including process mining, machine learning, stochastic models, and simulations (Manktelow et al. 2022; Aspland, Gartner, and Harper 2021). Unfortunately, these methods typically focus only on relatively simple care pathways.
This paper focuses on learning complex temporal patterns
from noisy clinical event data.
The problem presents several technical challenges. First,
the irregularity of time intervals between events makes common time series prediction methods insufficient (e.g., standard transformer models (Vaswani et al. 2017)). Second,
event sequence patterns often exhibit cycles, periodicity, and
multi-scale effects. For example, clinical operational events
such as medication administration in operating rooms occur
on a fine scale, typically within minutes. Conversely, events
that occur pre- or post-operation are on a coarser scale, often spanning hours or days. Figure 1 presents an illustrative example where the event sequence represents a patient’s
medication administration sequence. In this sequence, medication type A is taken nearly every 12 hours, while medication type B is taken approximately every two days. This
scenario exhibits the multi-scale and cyclic patterns commonly observed in healthcare event data. Accurately modeling these complex patterns, especially within extended event
sequences, can incur high computational costs.
Existing methods are generally based on the temporal
point processes (TPPs), a common framework for modeling
asynchronous event sequences in continuous time (Cox and
Isham 1980; Schoenberg, Brillinger, and Guttorp 2002). Tra-

Adverse clinical events related to unsafe care are among the
top ten causes of death in the U.S. Accurate modeling and
prediction of clinical events from electronic health records
(EHRs) play a crucial role in patient safety enhancement. An
example is modeling de facto care pathways that characterize common step-by-step plans for treatment or care. However, clinical event data pose several unique challenges, including the irregularity of time intervals between consecutive
events, the existence of cycles, periodicity, multi-scale event
interactions, and the high computational costs associated with
long event sequences. Existing neural temporal point processes (TPPs) methods do not effectively capture the multiscale nature of event interactions, which is common in many
real-world clinical applications. To address these issues, we
propose the cross-temporal-scale transformer (XTSFormer),
specifically designed for irregularly timed event data. Our
model consists of two vital components: a novel Featurebased Cycle-aware Time Positional Encoding (FCPE) that
adeptly captures the cyclical nature of time, and a hierarchical multi-scale temporal attention mechanism, where different temporal scales are determined by a bottom-up clustering approach. Extensive experiments on several real-world
EHR datasets show that our XTSFormer outperforms multiple baseline methods.

Code —
https://github.com/spatialdatasciencegroup/XTSFormer
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02258

Introduction
Adverse events related to unsafe care are among the top ten
causes of death in the US (Dingley et al. 2008; Weinger
et al. 2003). The large volume of electronic health record
(EHR) data being collected in hospitals, along with recent
advancements in machine learning and artificial intelligence,
provides unique opportunities for data-driven and evidencebased clinical decision-making systems (Sutton et al. 2020).
One specific example is the learning of de facto clinical care
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28502

