The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decoupled Policy Actor-Critic: Bridging Pessimism and Risk Awareness in
Reinforcement Learning
Michal Nauman1 , Marek Cygan1,2
1

University of Warsaw
2
Nomagic
nauman.mic@gmail.com, cygan@mimuw.edu.pl

Abstract

continuously researched theme is how a particular algorithm
handles the exploration-exploitation dilemma (Ciosek et al.
2019; Moskovitz et al. 2021).

Actor-Critic (AC) algorithms like SAC and TD3 were shown
to perform well in a variety of continuous-action tasks. However, the theoretical basis for the pessimistic objectives these
algorithms employ remains unestablished, raising questions
about the specific class of policies they are implementing. In
this work, we apply the expected utility hypothesis, a fundamental concept in economics, to illustrate that both pessimistic and non-pessimistic RL objectives can be interpreted
through expected utility maximization using an exponential
utility function. This approach reveals that pessimistic policies effectively maximize value certainty equivalent, aligning them with the optimization of risk-aware objectives. Furthermore, we propose Decoupled Policy Actor-Critic (DAC).
DAC is a model-free algorithm that features two distinct actor
networks: a pessimistic actor for temporal-difference learning and an optimistic actor for exploration. Our evaluations
of DAC across various locomotion and manipulation tasks
demonstrate improvements in sample efficiency and final performance. Remarkably, DAC, while requiring significantly
fewer computational resources, matches the performance of
leading model-based methods in the complex dog and humanoid domains.

Figure 1: We test the proposed approach (DAC) against various pessimistic and optimistic actor-critic baselines in 30
tasks listed in Table 3. Y -axis reports IQM with 95% CI calculated using 10 seeds, with 1.0 being the maximal score.
Optimism and pessimism of algorithmic agents have
been researched in multiple contexts. For instance, optimism in the face of uncertainty was shown to be an effective exploration strategy (Wang et al. 2020; Neu and PikeBurke 2020). Conversely, pessimistic Q-learning strategies
have proven beneficial in counteracting value overestimation caused by temporal difference errors (Hasselt 2010; Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018). However, there is a disconnect between these strategies and the foundational theories
of RL, particularly in how they relate to the goal of value
maximization. As a result, despite the empirical success of
pessimistic agents like TD3 (Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger
2018) or SAC (Haarnoja et al. 2018a), the specific class of
policies they implement remains ambiguous.
In this paper, we study the reinforcement learning objective aligned with the principles of decision theory. We show
that, in contrast to pure value maximization, the decisiontheoretic perspective allows for the derivation of both nonpessimistic (e.g., DDPG (Silver et al. 2014)), pessimistic
(e.g., TD3 (Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018)), and optimistic (e.g., OAC (Ciosek et al. 2019)) objectives. As such,
we demonstrate that the pessimistic updates in state-of-theart algorithms such as SAC (Haarnoja et al. 2018a), REDQ
(Chen et al. 2020), or TOP (Moskovitz et al. 2021) can be
derived from expected utility maximization under an exponential utility function (Fei, Yang, and Wang 2021). Further-

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) is still in its infancy,
with a variety of tasks unsolved (Sutton and Barto 2018;
Hafner et al. 2023) or solved within an unsatisfactory
amount of environment interactions (Zawalski et al. 2022;
Schwarzer et al. 2023). Whereas increasing the Replay Ratio (RR) (ie. the number of parameter updates per environment interactions step) is a promising general approach
for increasing sample efficiency and final performance of
RL agents (Janner et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Nikishin
et al. 2022), it is characterized by quickly diminishing gains
(D’Oro et al. 2022) combined with linearly increasing computational cost (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986;
Kingma and Ba 2014). Moreover, the limitations of robot
hardware and data acquisition frequency constrain the maximum achievable replay ratio (Smith, Kostrikov, and Levine
2022). As such, it is worthwhile to pursue techniques that
can be applied across a variety of RR configurations. One
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19633

