The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Causal Inference over Visual-Semantic-Aligned Graph for Image Classification
Lei Meng1,2 ,Xiangxian Li1,3 ,Xiaoshuo Yan1 * ,Haokai Ma1 ,Zhuang Qi1 ,Wei Wu1 , Xiangxu Meng1
1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
Shandong Research Institute of Industrial Technology, Jinan, China
3
School of Mechanical, Electrical & Information Engineering, Shandong University, Weihai, China
{lmeng, xiangxianli, mxx}@sdu.edu.cn, {yanxiaoshuo, mahaokai, z qi, wu wei}@mail.sdu.edu.cn
2

Enhanced Graph of
Visual-Semantic Elements
Intervention
𝑷 𝒀ȁ𝒅𝒐 𝑿
Visual-Semantic
Elements
Association
grass

Fine-grained
Visual-Semantic Alignment

Abstract
Incorporating tagging information to regularize the representation learning of images usually leads to improved performance in image classification by aligning the visual features with the textual ones of higher discriminative power.
Existing methods typically follow the predictive approach,
which uses tags as the semantic labels for visual input to
make predictions. However, they typically face the problem
of handling the heterogeneity between modalities. In order to
learn accurate visual-semantic mapping, this paper presents
a visual-semantic causal association modeling framework
termed VSCNet. It aligns visual regions with tags, uses a prelearned hierarchy of visual and semantic exemplars to refine
tag predictions and constructs an augmented heterogeneous
graph to perform causal intervention. Specifically, the finegrained visual-semantic alignment (FVA) module adaptively locates the semantic-intensive regions corresponding
to tags. The heterogeneous association refinement (HAR)
module associates the visual regions, semantic elements and
pre-learned visual prototypes in a heterogeneous graph to
filter the error predictions and enrich the information. The
causal inference with graphical masking (CIM) module
applies self-learned masks to discover the causal nodes and
edges in the heterogeneous graph to address the spurious association, forming robust causal representations. Experimental results from two benchmarking datasets show that VSCNet effectively builds the visual-semantic associations from
images and leads to better performance than the state-of-theart methods with enriched predictive information.

Images

dog

…
Pre-learned
Tags sky grass dog … Visual-Semantic
Relations

Feature 𝑭

sky

Image Regions

Feed-forward path

Predicted tags

Visual-Semantic relation

Predicts 𝑷
Associations
Prototypes
Causal intervention

Figure 1: The illustration of the proposed VSCNet, which
constructs fine-grained visual-semantic graphs to associate
image regions, predicted tags, and visual prototypes, and
find causal associations using graphical causal inference.

like tags, to guide the learning of visual representations since
semantic elements tend to maintain stability across different environments. However, the heterogeneity between visual and semantic modality limits the potential gains from
cross-modal enhancement (Meng et al. 2019).
To this end, recent works mainly adapt semantic tags as
privileged information (Vapnik and Vashist 2009) and form
three types of approaches to alleviate the heterogeneous
problem. The first involves implicit alignment, where tags
are treated as semantic labels, applying tagging classification as the auxiliary task of image classification (Xiao et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2019; Huo et al. 2024).
The second is explicit alignment, which focuses on constraining the similarity between image features and tagging
features (Xu, Zhu, and Clifton 2023; Li et al. 2020, 2021;
Ye et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024b). The third approach involves
fine-grained alignment methods, which locate visual regions
and map them to a cross-modal space to apply fine-grained
constraints or achieve feature fusion (Min et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024;
Wang et al. 2024a). However, existing methods face challenges in managing heterogeneity at the global level, there
are inherent inaccuracies in the mapping from fine-grained
visual regions to semantic elements, which leads to errors
that propagate from tag predictions to class predictions.

Introduction
In the field of image classification, achieving consistent representations for each class is challenging due to the diversity
of visual factors such as background and lighting conditions
in the data (Wang et al. 2021). Prior studies have primarily
focused on enhancing the representational learning capabilities of visual models by either refining the architectural design of models (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) or improving the
strategic augmentation of data (Yun et al. 2019). Despite
these efforts, a performance bar still persists for these visionbased techniques. To alleviate the problem in visual modality, recent methods have incorporated semantic information,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19449

