The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Incongruent Multimodal Federated Learning for Medical Vision and
Language-based Multi-label Disease Detection
Pramit Saha1 , Divyanshu Mishra1 , Felix Wagner1 , Konstantinos Kamnitsas1 , J. Alison Noble1
1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{pramit.saha, divyanshu.mishra, felix.wagner, konstantinos.kamnitsas, alison.noble}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) in healthcare ensures patient privacy
by allowing hospitals to collaboratively train machine learning models while keeping sensitive medical data secure and
localized. Most existing research in FL has concentrated on
unimodal scenarios, where all healthcare institutes share the
same type of data. However, in real-world healthcare situations, some clients may have access to multiple types of data
pertaining to the same disease. Multimodal Federated Learning (MMFL) utilizes multiple modalities to build a more
powerful FL model than its unimodal counterpart. However,
the impact of missing modality in different clients, called
modality incongruity, has been greatly overlooked. This paper, for the first time, analyses the impact of modality incongruity and reveals its connection with data heterogeneity
across participating clients. We particularly inspect whether
incongruent MMFL with unimodal and multimodal clients
is more beneficial than unimodal FL. Furthermore, we examine three potential routes of addressing this issue. Firstly,
we study the effectiveness of various self-attention mechanisms towards incongruity-agnostic information fusion in
MMFL. Secondly, we introduce a modality imputation network (MIN) pre-trained in a multimodal client for modality
translation in unimodal clients and investigate its potential
towards mitigating the missing modality problem. Thirdly,
we introduce several client-level and server-level regularization techniques including Modality-aware knowledge Distillation (MAD) and Leave-one-out teacher (LOOT) towards
mitigating modality incongruity effects. Experiments are conducted with Chest X-Ray and radiology reports under several
MMFL settings on two publicly available real-world datasets,
MIMIC-CXR and Open-I.

Figure 1: Problem overview. Only 1 out of 4 clients have
both modalities, i.e., CXR image and radiology report.

reliance on complete modalities, which is often scarce in
practice, particularly when dealing with numerous modalities. Real-world multimodal data often presents inherent
challenges with missing or incomplete modalities posing
significant hurdles in the learning process (Aguilar et al.
2019; Ma et al. 2021; Jaques et al. 2017; Pham et al. 2019;
Parthasarathy and Sundaram 2020). The presence of missing
modalities within the multimodal datasets introduces complexities that traditional models struggle to accommodate,
demanding specialized techniques to ensure effectiveness.
Typically, MML works focus on centralized training, requiring collection and storage of multimodal data on a server
for training the models, leading to privacy concerns. The
drawbacks of centralized learning has inspired researchers
to develop and apply Federated Learning (FL) that enables
various clients to collaboratively train models without sharing local data (Mammen 2021; Aledhari et al. 2020; Li et al.
2021; Zhu et al. 2021; Huang, Ye, and Du 2022; Wagner
et al. 2023; Hernandez-Cruz et al. 2024; Saha et al. 2024;
Wagner et al. 2024). Tackling modality incongruity is crucial in realistic Multimodal Federated Learning (MMFL) as
presence of particular modalities across clients might vary,
leading to poor performance.
Most existing MMFL works (Xiong et al. 2022; Agbley et al. 2021; Salehi et al. 2022; Qayyum et al. 2022;

Introduction
Multimodal Learning (MML) (Xu, Zhu, and Clifton 2023;
Bayoudh et al. 2021) has recently emerged as a pivotal area
in machine learning research. Different modalities represent
diverse features that are sourced from diverse domains but
describe similar subjects, offering both shared and complementary information. The essence of MML lies in combining predictive insights from these different modalities
to enhance model performance. Despite the effectiveness
of MML, many existing methods are constrained by their
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28331

