The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Anti-Diffusion: Preventing Abuse of Modifications of Diffusion-Based Models
Li Zheng1 * , Liangbin Xie1 2 * , Jiantao Zhou1† , Xintao Wang3 , Haiwei Wu1 , Jinyu Tian4
1

University of Macau
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology
3
Kuaishou Technology
4
Macau University of Science and Technology
yc27908@um.edu.mo, lb.xie@siat.ac.cn, jtzhou@um.edu.mo,
xintao.alpha@gmail.com, yc07912@um.edu.mo, jytian@must.edu.mo
2

Abstract
Although diffusion-based techniques have shown remarkable
success in image generation and editing tasks, their abuse can
lead to severe negative social impacts. Recently, some works
have been proposed to provide defense against the abuse of
diffusion-based methods. However, their protection may be
limited in specific scenarios by manually defined prompts or
the stable diffusion (SD) version. Furthermore, these methods
solely focus on tuning methods, overlooking editing methods that could also pose a significant threat. In this work, we
propose Anti-Diffusion, a privacy protection system designed
for general diffusion-based methods, applicable to both tuning and editing techniques. To mitigate the limitations of
manually defined prompts on defense performance, we introduce the prompt tuning (PT) strategy that enables precise
expression of original images. To provide defense against
both tuning and editing methods, we propose the semantic
disturbance loss (SDL) to disrupt the semantic information
of protected images. Given the limited research on the defense against editing methods, we develop a dataset named
Defense-Edit to assess the defense performance of various
methods. Experiments demonstrate that our Anti-Diffusion
achieves superior defense performance across a wide range
of diffusion-based techniques in different scenarios.

Figure 1: Our defense system, called Anti-Diffusion, can
provide defense against both tuning and editing methods.
et al. 2022)) have also been proposed. With the rapid advancement of text-to-image techniques, many industry professionals and even ordinary users could create images or
train personalized models based on their ideas.
However, technology is a double-edged sword. Individuals can easily utilize images to train personalized models (e.g., DreamBooth, LoRA) and manipulate images using editing methods such as MasaCtrl (Cao et al. 2023) and
DiffEdit (Couairon et al. 2023). Similar to DeepFake (Liu
et al. 2023; Rana et al. 2022), when these methods are
abused by malicious users to create fake news, plagiarize
artistic creations, violate personal privacy, etc., they can
have severe negative impacts on both individuals and society (Wang et al. 2023). Hence, finding ways to protect images from the potential abuse of these methods is a pressing
issue that requires immediate attention.
Anti-DreamBooth (Anti-DB) (Van Le et al. 2023) has
made attempts to address this issue. By adding subtle adversarial noise to images, Anti-DB forces the personalized model trained on them producing outputs with significant visual artifacts. However, Anti-DB demands additional substitute data and manually defined prompts, which
increases its complexity of use. Moreover, in practical scenarios, it is challenging to anticipate the prompts that malicious users might utilize, thereby limiting its defense performance. Additionally, existing methods (Truong, Dang,
and Le 2024) focus solely on defending against person-

Code — https://github.com/whulizheng/Anti-Diffusion

Introduction
The field of text-to-image synthesis (Li et al. 2023; Ramesh
et al. 2021; Gafni et al. 2022; Ding et al. 2021) has experienced significant advancements, primarily driven by diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng,
and Ermon 2020). Numerous diffusion models have demonstrated their ability to generate images of exceptional quality, such as SD (Rombach et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023),
Pixel-Art (Chen et al. 2023, 2024). Based on these diffusion
models, some controllable generation methods (ControlNet (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023), T2I-Adapter (Mou
et al. 2023)) and personalized methods (DreamBooth (Ruiz
et al. 2023), LoRA (Hu et al. 2021), Textual Inversion (Gal
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10582

