The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A New Formula for Sticker Retrieval: Reply with Stickers in Multi-Modal and
Multi-Session Conversation
Bingbing Wang1,2 * , Yiming Du3 * , Bin Liang3† , Zhixin Bai1 , Min Yang4 , Baojun Wang5 ,
Kam-Fai Wong3 , Ruifeng Xu1,2,6†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies, Shenzhen, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
5
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shenzhen, China
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{bingbing.wang, baizhixin}@stu.hit.edu.cn, ydu@se.cuhk.edu.hk, bin.liang@cuhk.edu.hk, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Stickers are widely used in online chatting, which can vividly
express someone’s intention, emotion, or attitude. Existing
conversation research typically retrieves stickers based on
a single session or the previous textual information, which
can not adapt to the multi-modal and multi-session nature of
the real-world conversation. To this end, we introduce MultiChat, a new dataset for sticker retrieval facing the multimodal and multi-session conversation, comprising 1,542 sessions, featuring 50,192 utterances and 2,182 stickers. Based
on the created dataset, we propose a novel Intent-Guided
Sticker Retrieval (IGSR) framework that retrieves stickers
for multi-modal and multi-session conversation history drawing support from intent learning. Specifically, we introduce
sticker attributes to better leverage the sticker information in
multi-modal conversation, which are incorporated with utterances to construct a memory bank. Further, we extract relevant memories for the current conversation from the memory
bank to identify the intent of the current conversation, and
then retrieve a sticker to respond guided by the intent. Extensive experiments on our MultiChat dataset reveal the robustness and effectiveness of our IGSR approach in multi-session,
multi-modal scenarios.

Figure 1: Examples of stickers used in an online multisession conversation.

Introduction
With the advent of instant messaging applications, stickers
have become popular in online chats (Zhang et al. 2024).
On the one hand, several works on stickers mainly concentrate on sentiment analysis (Liu, Zhang, and Yang 2022; Ge
et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2023). In contrast, stickers present
unique advantages in fostering a vibrant and innovative atmosphere within conversations due to their visual nature
(Nilasari, Sudipa, and Sukarini 2018; Albar 2018). Therefore, integrating automatic sticker replies based on previous
conversations into dialogue systems can make interactions
more engaging.

Recent research in sticker retrieval has focused on using
stickers to respond to text-based contexts or a single conversation session, enhancing the expression of emotions, attitudes, and opinions (Laddha et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2020; Fei
et al. 2021a; Zhang et al. 2022, 2024). However, they only
focus on the textual content of the current session when retrieving a sticker for a response, ignoring the stickers and
previous conversation sessions. Figure 1 shows a conversation with multi-modal and multi-session information in the
real-world scenario. This example illustrates two issues not
considered in existing sticker retrieval tasks: 1) Combining
information from historical sessions is necessary to understand that the current session discusses “course team formation not yet successful”; 2) Learning from the stickers in his-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25327

