The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SSC-VAE: Structured Sparse Coding Based Variational Autoencoder for Detail
Preserved Image Reconstruction
Hao Wang* 1 , Lu Wang* 2 , Zhongyu Wang1 ,
Lixin Ma1 , Ye Luo1†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
2051475@tongji.edu.cn, wang lu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, 2152197@tongji.edu.cn, 2153085@tongji.edu.cn, yeluo@tongji.edu.cn
2

Abstract

many real-world scenarios. Unsupervised learning methods
aim to address this limitation by extracting meaningful and
useful representations directly from unlabeled data.
Variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2014) offer an elegant solution for learning meaningful image representations by a continuous low dimensional latent vector
under a predefined static prior. However, traditional VAEs
often struggle to generate rich textures and tend to produce
overly smooth images. To address these limitations, Variational Autoencoder with Vectored Quantization (VQ-VAE
(van den Oord, Vinyals, and Kavukcuoglu 2017)) was introduced to generate a discrete representation that can be
decoded to reconstruct the original data. The main advantage of VQ-VAE is its ability to separate relevant information from noise, making it suitable for tasks that require robust and compact representations. VQ-VAE loses
local details when the code book is not large enough as
it uses the same quantization index to embed similar image patches. Instead of using one quantization index for
one image patch, Sparse Coding-based Variational Autoencoder (SC-VAE (Xiao, Qiu, and Sotiras 2023)) improves
VQ-VAE by considering the latent representation as sparse
linear combinations of atoms using sparse representation,
thus retaining the subtle difference among similar patches.
The activeness of multiple atoms enables to capture more
complex dependencies and greatly reduces the code book
size. However, the latent representations in both VQ-VAE
and SC-VAE are treated independently when performing the
coding and decoding, overlooking the inherent correlations
present in the images.
We have observed significant correlations in the latent
representations of individual images, both across image
patches, i.e., spatial correlation, and across different atoms
within each patch, i.e., internal dictionary atom correlation.
As depicted in Figure 1, the latent representations in the second column demonstrate a notable correlation across various
regions of both the natural and clinical ultrasound images,
evidenced by their similar intensity levels. To illustrate the
internal correlation across different dictionary atoms within
single latent representation, we visualize its thresholds when
discretized in sparse coding as a gray-level image map, considering all representations together. The thresholds, which
regulate the sparsity of the coding of the latent feature, exhibit similar structures across atoms in the coding dictionary,

Discrete latent representation techniques, such as Vector
Quantization (VQ) and Sparse Coding (SC), have demonstrated superior image reconstruction and generation quality compared to continuous representation methods in Variational Autoencoders (VAEs). However, existing approaches
often treat the latent representations of an image independently in their discrete representation space, neglecting both
the inherent structural information within each representation and the correlations among them. This oversight leads to
coarse representations and suboptimal generated results. In
this paper, we address these limitations by introducing correlations among and within the latent representations of individual images in the latent discrete space of VAEs using
sparse coding. We impose two-dimensional structural information through adaptive thresholding, enhancing local structure in image representations while suppressing noise via parsimonious representation with a learned dictionary. Empirical studies on three real benchmark datasets, including a
clinical Ultrasound dataset, BSDS500, and mini-Imagenet,
demonstrate that our proposed model preserves fine-grained
details in image reconstruction and significantly outperforms
baseline models of SC-VAE and VQ-VAE across objective
and subjective image quality metrics. Particularly noteworthy
are the substantial performance improvements observed on
the ultrasound dataset, where structure information is crucial.
Specifically, we observe significant performance improvements of 7.68 % and 17.03 % in SSIM, 3.25 dB and 6.58
dB in PSNR, 0.15 and 0.24 in LPIPS, 45.38 and 84.05 in FID
over SC-VAE and VQ-VAE, respectively, indicating the superiority of our method in terms of image reconstruction quality
and fidelity.

Code — https://github.com/rmEleven/SSC-VAE

1

Introduction

Learning rich representations without supervision is a fundamental and ongoing challenge in the field of deep learning.
While supervised learning has achieved remarkable success
by leveraging labeled data, the availability of large-scale labeled datasets is often limited, expensive, or impractical in
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7665

