The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Structure-Adaptive Multi-View Graph Clustering for Remote Sensing Data
Renxiang Guan1 , Wenxuan Tu2 , Siwei Wang3 , Jiyuan Liu4 , Dayu Hu1 ,
Chang Tang5 , Yu Feng1 , Junhong Li5 , Baili Xiao1 , Xinwang Liu1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Hainan University, Haikou, China
3
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China
4
College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
5
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China
{renxiangguan, xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

itoring, urban planning, and agricultural production (Guan
et al. 2024a, 2022; Ma et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024a,c).
Over the past few decades, advancements in multimedia
collection capabilities have significantly increased the availability of multi-view remote sensing data, which has proven
beneficial for boosting the performance by utilizing complementary knowledge from various data views (Yang, Liu,
and Liu 2022). Based on the differences in view information, existing multi-view clustering (MVC) methods for remote sensing data are primarily categorized into two types:
multi-feature-based and multi-source-based methods. Multifeature-based methods enhance the model’s ability to obtain richer information by extracting various features from
remote sensing data, such as texture features and contour
features (Chen et al. 2022). However, these views fail to
capture the intuitive and rich surface features provided by
multi-source sensors (Cai et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024).
For example, optical images, including hyperspectral (HS)
and multispectral (MS) images, capture detailed spectral information about land covers, while synthetic aperture radar
(SAR) and digital surface model (DSM) images tend to provide terrain roughness features and height information that
describes the ground elevation of different objects. Therefore, leveraging the complementarity of these data types is
beneficial for remote sensing data MVC (Shahi et al. 2022).
However, the high resolution and large scale of remote sensing data present a challenge in effectively modeling the spatial relationships that are beneficial to the clustering performance.
Fortunately, multi-view graph clustering (MVGC) methods have emerged as a powerful approach to capture complex dependencies and explore the intrinsic connectivity of
multi-view remote sensing data (Zhang et al. 2024; Liang
et al. 2024). Existing MVGC methods for remote sensing
data can be broadly categorized into classic graph-based
methods and graph neural network (GNN)-based methods.
Classic methods primarily learn the consensus graph with
different regularization terms on view-specific graphs, followed by generating clustering results through algorithms
like spectral clustering (Cai et al. 2024). To learn more
robust and discriminative representation by deep learning,
GNN-based MVGC methods have attracted increasing research enthusiasm. With the inherent ability to propagate
and aggregate information from further nodes, the latter

Multi-view clustering (MVC) for remote sensing data is a
critical and challenging task in Earth observation. Although
recent advances in graph neural network (GNN)-based MVC
have shown remarkable success, most prevalent approaches
have two major limitations: 1) heavily relying on a predefined yet fixed graph, which limits the clustering performance
because the large number of indistinguishable background
samples contained in remote sensing data would introduce
noise information and increase structure heterogeneity; 2) ignoring the effect of confusing samples on cluster structure
compactness, which leads to fluffy cluster structure and decreases feature discriminability. To address these issues, we
propose a Structure-Adaptive Multi-View Graph Clustering
method named SAMVGC on remote sensing data, which
boosts the structure homogeneity and cluster compactness by
adaptively learning the graph and cluster structures, respectively. Concretely, we use the geometric structure within the
feature embedding space to refine adjacency matrices. The
adjacency matrices are dynamically fused with the previous
ones to improve the homogeneity and stability of structure
information. Additionally, the samples are separated into two
categories, including the central ones (i.e., intra-cluster center
samples) and the confusing ones (i.e., inter-cluster boundary
samples). On this basis, to improve the cluster compactness
and consistency, we deploy the contrastive learning paradigm
on the central samples within views and the consistent learning paradigm on the confusing samples between views. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on four benchmarks
and achieve promising results, well demonstrating the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method.

Introduction
Benefiting from advancements in unsupervised techniques,
remote sensing data clustering tasks have significantly alleviated the time-consuming and labor-intensive challenges
associated with large-scale sample labeling (Zhai et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2025; Hu et al. 2024b). Mainstream clustering
methods for remote sensing data focus on learning discriminative features to group each pixel into distinct clusters without relying on labels. These techniques have been systematically applied across various fields, including land use monCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16933

