The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DearLLM: Enhancing Personalized Healthcare via Large Language
Models-Deduced Feature Correlations
Yongxin Xu1,2 * , Xinke Jiang1,2 * , Xu Chu1,2,4,5† , Rihong Qiu1,2 , Yujie Feng7 ,
Hongxin Ding1,2 , Junfeng Zhao1,2,6 , Yasha Wang2,3,5 , Bing Xie1,2 ,
1

School of Computer Science and School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
3
National Engineering Research Center For Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Peking University Information Technology Institute (Tianjin Binhai)
6
Nanhu Laboratory, Jiaxing, China
7
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong S.A.R.
{xuyx, xinkejiang}@stu.pku.edu.cn; chu xu@pku.edu.cn
Visit 1

Abstract

585.1

112
Days

Visit T

Visit 3
…

414.0

Patient EHR

…

…

…
…

Constraint
Diabetes mellitus without
Medical LLMs
mention of complication
is related to ……
Condition
250.0: Diabetes mellitus without mention of complication
815.0: Closed fracture of metacarpal bones
585.1: Chronic kidney disease, Stage I
414.0: Coronary atherosclerosis

Chronic kidney disease,
Stage I
Perplexity: 1.07

highly relevant

Coronary atherosclerosis
Perplexity: 11.87
…

1

250.0
815.0

Visit 2

…

Exploring the correlations between medical features is essential for extracting patient health patterns from electronic
health records (EHR) data, and strengthening medical predictions and decision-making. To constrain the hypothesis space
of pure data-driven deep learning in the context of limited
annotated data, a common trend is to incorporate external
knowledge, especially knowledge priors related to personalized health contexts, to optimize model training. However,
most existing methods lack flexibility and are constrained
by the uncertainties brought about by fixed feature correlation priors. In addition, in utilizing knowledge, these methods
overlook the knowledge informative for personalized healthcare. To this end, we propose DearLLM, a novel and effective framework that leverages feature correlations deduced
by large language models (LLMs) to enhance personalized
healthcare. Concretely, DearLLM captures and learns quantitative correlations between medical features by calculating the conditional perplexity of LLMs’ deduction based on
personalized patient backgrounds. Then, DearLLM enhances
healthcare predictions by emphasizing knowledge that carries unique patient information through a feature-frequencyaware graph pooling method. Extensive experiments on two
real-world benchmark datasets show significant performance
gains brought by DearLLM. Furthermore, the discovered
findings align well with medical literature, offering meaningful clinical interpretations.

27
Days

moderately relevant

Closed fracture of
metacarpal bones
Perplexity: 114.03

less relevant

Figure 1: Using conditional perplexity to detect correlation
degree between medical features. Lower perplexity indicates
a stronger correlation, as perplexity measures the likelihood
of predicting one feature based on another. In the personalized healthcare context of this patient, Diabetes mellitus
without mention of complication (250.0) is more related to
Chronic kidney disease, Stage I (585.1).

patient treatment and resource allocation through various
healthcare tasks (Choi et al. 2016; Ma et al. 2017, 2020; Xu
et al. 2024b). In these processes, extracting the correlations
between input features is highly beneficial for learning compact patient health representations and enhancing the performance of downstream tasks (Kosambi 2016; Ma et al. 2022).
However, the sparse nature of EHR data poses challenges
for these data-hungry deep learning models in learning feature correlations with limited training samples (Ren, Wang,
and Zhao 2022). To tackle this essential obstacle, there are
some research works delving into leveraging external medical knowledge as priors to narrow down the hypothesis space
for model learning (Ma et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2021; Tan et al.
2022). Particularly, extracting information relevant to the patient’s personalized health context from the entire knowledge graph has already shown potential (Ye et al. 2021a;
Yang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023a; Jiang et al. 2023, 2024a).

Introduction

With the widespread adoption and deployment of electronic
medical systems, the availability of electronic health records
(EHR) for medical services and clinical research is continuously increasing. Therefore, as a leading approach that
has achieved record-breaking achievements in various fields,
deep learning technology has been applied to extract patients’ health patterns from EHR data, and to optimize
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

941

