The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SSLFusion: Scale & Space Aligned Latent Fusion Model for Multimodal 3D
Object Detection
Bonan Ding1 , Jin Xie1 * , Jing Nie2 , Jiale Cao3,4
2

1
School of Big Data and Software Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China.
202224131052@stu.cqu.edu.cn, xiejin@cqu.edu.cn, jingnie@cqu.edu.cn, connor@tju.edu.cn
3D Feature Pipeline

Abstract
Multimodal 3D object detection based on deep neural networks has indeed made significant progress. However, it still
faces challenges due to the misalignment of scale and spatial information between features extracted from 2D images
and those derived from 3D point clouds. Existing methods usually aggregate multimodal features at a single stage.
However, leveraging multi-stage cross-modal features is crucial for detecting objects of various scales. Therefore, these
methods often struggle to integrate features across different
scales and modalities effectively, thereby restricting the accuracy of detection. Additionally, the time-consuming QueryKey-Value-based (QKV-based) cross-attention operations often utilized in existing methods aid in reasoning the location and existence of objects by capturing non-local contexts.
However, this approach tends to increase computational complexity. To address these challenges, we present SSLFusion,
a novel Scale & Space Aligned Latent Fusion Model, consisting of a scale-aligned fusion strategy (SAF), a 3D-to-2D
space alignment module (SAM), and a latent cross-modal fusion module (LFM). SAF mitigates scale misalignment between modalities by aggregating features from both images
and point clouds across multiple levels. SAM is designed
to reduce the inter-modal gap between features from images
and point clouds by incorporating 3D coordinate information
into 2D image features. Additionally, LFM captures crossmodal non-local contexts in the latent space without utilizing
the QKV-based attention operations, thus mitigating computational complexity. Experiments on the KITTI and DENSE
datasets demonstrate that our SSLFusion outperforms stateof-the-art methods. Our approach obtains an absolute gain
of 2.15% in 3D AP, compared with the state-of-art method
GraphAlign on the moderate level of the KITTI test set.

Fusion

Multi-level 2D Feature
(a)MVXNet & AutoAlign

3D Feature Pipeline

Fusion

2D Feature Pipeline
(b) LSS & BEVFusion

3D Feature Pipeline

Fusion Fusion Fusion

2D Feature Pipeline
(c) Ours

Figure 1: Comparison of our fusion strategy with other
methods. Feature-level fusion methods can be divided into
two categories: (a) Early-Fusion methods fuse multi-scale
image feature maps with the first-stage voxel features. (b)
Late-Fusion methods employ depth estimation to transform
multi-scale 2D features into 3D space or BEV space, subsequently fusing them with 3D features in those spaces at a
single stage. (c) In contrast, our approach fuses multi-stage
multi-scale 2D and 3D features in an alignment manner, as
opposed to the single-stage fusion in categories (a) and (b).

which combines LiDAR and camera data, has emerged as a
promising solution due to the complementary nature of these
sensors—point clouds providing precise geometric information and RGB images offering rich semantic context.
Existing feature-level fusion multimodal 3D object detection methods have advanced, but challenges remain. These
methods can be categorized into early-fusion, late-fusion,
and multi-stage fusion approaches. For example, earlyfusion methods like those using matrix projection calibration to combine multi-scale image features with single-scale
voxel features (Sindagi, Zhou, and Tuzel 2019; Song et al.
2023) face difficulties in effectively integrating high-level
semantic information from cameras with geometric details
from LiDAR. Additionally, this fusion strategy may cause a
loss of spatial details when features are downsampled by 3D
sparse convolutions, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), which is crucial
for detecting small objects.
Late-fusion approaches (Liu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022a)
process the modalities separately and combine the two types
of features in local Regions of Interest (RoI) or Bird’s Eye
View (BEV) space. These methods often utilize depth estimation to project 2D features into 3D space for fusion.
While these methods can leverage the semantic richness of

Code — https://github.com/TLDBN/SSLFusion

Introduction
The rapid advancement of autonomous vehicles and robotics
has driven the need for advanced perception systems capable of accurately interpreting the 3D environment. A critical
component of these systems is the ability to detect and classify objects in 3D space, which is essential for safe navigation and decision-making. Multimodal 3D object detection,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2735

