The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MaskViM: Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation with State Space Models
Jiahao Li1 , Yang Lu1, 2, 3 , Yuan Xie4, 5∗ , Yanyun Qu1, 2, 3 *
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
3
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
5
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University
2

Abstract
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS) aims
to utilize segmentation model training on known source domains to make predictions on unknown target domains. Currently, there are two kinds of network architectures: one
based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and the
other based on Visual Transformers (ViTs). However, both
CNN-based and ViT-based DGSS methods face challenges:
the former lacks a global receptive field, while the latter
requires more computational demands. Drawing inspiration
from State Space Models (SSMs), which not only possess
a global receptive field but also maintain linear complexity, we propose SSM-based method for achieving DGSS. In
this work, we first elucidate why does mask make sense in
SSM-based DGSS and propose our mask learning mechanism. Leveraging this mechanism, we present our Mask Vision Mamba network (MaskViM), a model for SSM-based
DGSS, and design our mask loss to optimize MaskViM. Our
method achieves superior performance on four diverse DGSS
setting, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: Visualization of the SSM-based DGSS both with
and without mask. ① Original image. ② Prediction without
mask. ③ Ground truth. ④ Prediction with mask. ⑤ Visualization of mask in original image.

Introduction
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS) (Ding
et al. 2023; Ahn et al. 2024) aims to perform semantic segmentation on unknown target domains via models trained
on known source domains. The essence of DGSS lies in
enhancing the model’s robustness against unknown target
domains. To this end, there are two ways: (1) enabling the
model to learn the target domain distribution (Peng et al.
2021; Yue et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022), and
(2) preventing the model from overfitting to the source domain distribution (Pan et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2021; Huang
et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2022). The former way is often infeasible as the domain generalization
paradigm restricts access to the target domain during training. Thus, adopting the latter way becomes a practical approach.
As many studies have shown (Hoyer, Dai, and Van Gool
2022; Paul and Chen 2022; Wenzel et al. 2022; Zhou et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2024, 2022, 2021), improving the receptive field can greatly prevent the model from overfitting to

the source domain. Thus, ViTs exhibit greater robustness
than CNNs in out-of-distribution generalization due to their
global receptive field. However, ViT-based methods incur
higher computational demands. Recently, State Space Models (SSMs), represented by Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023), have
achieved great success in visual fields (Gu, Goel, and Ré
2021; Liu et al. 2024). Compared with ViTs, Mamba not
only possesses a global receptive field to improve model robustness but also maintains linear complexity to boost model
efficiency. Therefore, SSM-based DGSS seems to be a more
favorable choice.
However, we observe that directly applying SSMs to
DGSS does not yield promising performance. There are two
reasons: (1) Typically, SSM-based methods are inherently
more suitable for 1-D causal data, such as text, rather than
2-D non-causal data like images (Liu et al. 2024; Zhu et al.
2024). Unlike text, where the 1-D order of words indicates
causal relationships, the 2-D spatial positioning of pixels in

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4752

