The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LEARN: Knowledge Adaptation from Large Language Model to
Recommendation for Practical Industrial Application
Jian Jia1 , Yipei Wang2 * , Yan Li1 , Honggang Chen1 , Xuehan Bai1 , Zhaocheng Liu1 , Jian Liang1 ,
Quan Chen1† , Han Li1 , Peng Jiang1 , Kun Gai1
1

Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
{jiajian, liyan26, chenhonggang, baixuehan03, liuzhaocheng, liangjian03, chenquan06, lihan08,
jiangpeng}@kaishou.com;230248984@seu.edu.cn;kun.gai@qq.com
2

Abstract
Contemporary recommendation systems predominantly rely
on ID embedding to capture latent associations among users
and items. However, this approach overlooks the wealth of
semantic information embedded within textual descriptions
of items, leading to suboptimal performance and poor generalizations. Leveraging the capability of large language models to comprehend and reason about textual content presents
a promising avenue for advancing recommendation systems.
To achieve this, we propose an Llm-driven knowlEdge Adaptive RecommeNdation (LEARN) framework that synergizes
open-world knowledge with collaborative knowledge. We address computational complexity concerns by utilizing pretrained LLMs as item encoders and freezing LLM parameters to avoid catastrophic forgetting and preserve open-world
knowledge. To bridge the gap between the open-world and
collaborative domains, we design a twin-tower structure supervised by the recommendation task and tailored for practical industrial application. Through experiments on the real
large-scale industrial dataset and online A/B tests, we demonstrate the efficacy of our approach in industry application. We
also achieve state-of-the-art performance on six Amazon Review datasets to verify the superiority of our method.

Textualize Adapt

Sequential Adapt
Collaborative Domain of RS

Open-World Domain of LLM

Figure 1: Illustration of “Rec-to-LLM” and “LLM-to-Rec”
approaches. Previous methods textualize recommendation
data to natural language conversations, which are then fed
into LLM to obtain text predictions. In contrast, our method,
LEARN, transforms item text information into LLM embedding, which is projected into the collaborative domain
to achieve alignment with industry recommendation tasks.
To alleviate the poor generalization of current RS, various
methods are proposed to utilize text information and integrate LLM with RS to generate textual predictions such as
user interests (Ren et al. 2024), next item information (Li,
Zhang, and Chen 2023), and recommend reasons (Zhang
et al. 2023b).
Previous research (Lyu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2023a; Gao et al. 2023; Sanner et al. 2023; Hou
et al. 2024) on integrating recommendation systems with
LLMs typically follows a unified strategy termed the “Recto-LLM” adaptation in this paper. This strategy involves
adapting user-item interaction data from the recommendation domain (target domain) into the textual format of the
LLM open-world domain (source domain), as depicted in
Fig. 1. Specifically, these methods (Liao et al. 2023; Bao
et al. 2023b; Yuan et al. 2023; Bao et al. 2023a; Lin et al.
2023b) design task-specific prompts to transform recommendation data to conversational formats and employ the
next token prediction loss, aligning the input organization
and target tasks with those of the LLM pre-training stage.
However, our empirical investigations reveal that the
“Rec-to-LLM” adaptation fails to yield practical benefits in
real-world industry applications. This inefficacy can be attributed to the inherent shortcomings of this approach. First,

Introduction
Inspired by the recent remarkable capabilities and rapid development of large language models (LLMs), how to introduce the rich open-world domain knowledge and great logical reasoning ability of LLMs into recommendation systems
(RS) attracts attention from academics and industry.
Current RS heavily rely on distinct ID embeddings and focus on capturing latent user-item associations based on historical interactions. This approach overlooks the semantic
information in item text descriptions and struggles to generalize to unseen data, resulting in suboptimal performance in
industrial cold-start scenarios and long-tail user recommendations. Moreover, unlike the fields of computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP), the ID-embeddingbased modeling approach in RS does not facilitate the development of a pretrained model that can perform well across
downstream tasks and subscenarios.
* Work during an internship at Kuaishou Technology.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11861

