The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

R-DTI: Drug Target Interaction Prediction Based on
Second-Order Relevance Exploration
Yang Hua1,2,3 , Tianyang Xu1,2,3 , Xiaoning Song1,2,3* , Zhenhua Feng1,2,3 , Rui Wang1,2,3 , Wenjie
Zhang1,2,3 , Xiaojun Wu1,2,3
1

School of Artifcial Intelligence and Computer Science, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, Jiangsu, P.R. China
2
Sino-UK Joint Laboratory on Artificial Intelligence, Ministry of Science and Technology, China
3
International Joint Laboratory on Artificial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, China
{7211905018; wenjie.zhang}@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn; {tianyang.xu; x.song; fengzhenhua; cs wr;
wu xiaojun}@jiangnan.edu.cn;
Abstract

2025). The recent development of textual feature extraction is rapid, particularly with the advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Elnaggar et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2019), which can generate key semantic features based on
pre-trained models. For drug structural features, many attempts (Hua et al. 2023a,b) can directly transform the Simplified Molecular-Input Line-Entry System (SMILES) equations into graph structure features by the molecular analysis
tool, Rdkit (Landrum et al. 2016). However, the complexity
of protein structures presents challenges in their representation. As shown in Figure 1 (a), Lim et al. (2019) proposed
a graph attention algorithm to predict DTI from data with
3D protein structures. However, the method only considers
a small number of samples to construct protein structural information, which lacks generalization for diverse proteins.
Wu et al. (2024) proposes a pre-trained encoder that first
addresses the inability to extract structural features without
structure data. The encoder is trained by contrastive learning based on datasets containing contact matrices of amino
acids, as shown in Figure 1 (b). However, without the 3D
properties and corresponding topology, the contact matrices
are insufficient to represent protein structural features (Hua
et al. 2024). Therefore, how to improve the quality of the
extracted protein structural features remains to be explored.
For prediction formulation, existing methods mainly rely
on the analysis of Euclidean DTI representations, including two types, drug-target joint features (first-order relevance) and drug-target relationship features (second-order
relevance). Both types suffer from typical limitations. As
shown in Figure 1, the first-order relevance prediction methods (Lee, Keum, and Nam 2019; Abbasi et al. 2020) incorporate data-driven influences that bias the classifier training
toward protein features, while suppressing the drug clues.
While the DTI methods (Chen et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2024)
based on second-order relevance prediction can effectively
address this issue, they still have two problems. 1) The relevance calculation involves matrix multiplication, which confuses the semantic information of the DTI feature if the protein and drug feature spaces are not consistently unified.
2) The second-order relevance is unstable due to its excessive information density, challenging the convergence state.
To address these issues, we propose a novel R-DTI framework based on second-order relevance exploration. For pro-

Drug Target Interaction (DTI) prediction has witnessed
promising performance boosts accompanied by advanced
multimodal feature extraction. However, existing approaches
suffer from two main difficulties. First, the complex protein structures cannot be well represented by current proteinsequence-based feature extractors. Second, the gap between
protein and drug features increases the vulnerability of the
obtained classifier thus degrading the prediction robustness.
To address these issues, we propose a novel R-DTI method
by exploring the second-order relevance in both protein structural feature extraction and DTI prediction phases. Specifically, we construct a pre-trained structural feature extractor
that mines the atomic relevance of each amino acid. Then, an
inter-feature structure-preserved Riemannian network is designed to expand the existing protein extraction patterns. To
improve the prediction robustness, we also develop a Riemannian classifier that uses the second-order protein-drug relevance with a unified feature space. Extensive experimental
results prove the merits and superiority of our R-DTI against
the state-of-the-art, achieving 1.4% and 1.9% higher AUCROC on the BindingDB and DrugBank datasets, respectively.

Code — https://github.com/JU-HuaY/R-DTI

Introduction
Drug Target Interaction (DTI) prediction is critical to
virtual drug screening and accelerating drug discovery
pipelines (Cao et al. 2012; Coelho, Arrais, and Oliveira
2016). The DTI prediction methods are mainly designed for
two tasks, classification (Jacob and Vert 2008) and regression (Tang et al. 2014), which aim to qualify and quantify
DTI, respectively. Since both tasks rely on similar backbones, deep-learning-based DTI prediction models (Öztürk,
Özgür, and Ozkirimli 2018; Lee, Keum, and Nam 2019) excel at both tasks due to their large parameter capacity. In
general, their superior performance depends on two key factors: feature extraction and prediction formulation.
For feature extraction, deep-learning-based DTI prediction models often extract protein and drug features from
the textual and structural modalities (Hua et al. 2023a,
*Xiaoning Song is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17368

