The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Layer Selection Approach to Test Time Adaptation
Sabyasachi Sahoo1,2 , Mostafa ElAraby2,3 , Jonas Ngnawe1,2 , Yann Batiste Pequignot1 ,
Frédéric Precioso4 , Christian Gagné1,2,5
1

IID, Université Laval
2
Mila
3
Université de Montréal
4
Université Cote d’Azur, CNRS, INRIA, I3S, Maasai
5
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
sabyasachi.sahoo.1@ulaval.ca
Abstract
Test Time Adaptation (TTA) addresses the problem of distribution shift by adapting a pretrained model to a new domain
during inference. When faced with challenging shifts, most
methods collapse and perform worse than the original pretrained model. In this paper, we find that not all layers are
equally receptive to the adaptation, and the layers with the
most misaligned gradients often cause performance degradation. To address this, we propose GALA, a novel layer selection criterion to identify the most beneficial updates to perform during test time adaptation. This criterion can also filter
out unreliable samples with noisy gradients. Its simplicity allows seamless integration with existing TTA loss functions,
thereby preventing degradation and focusing adaptation on
the most trainable layers. This approach also helps to regularize adaptation to preserve the pretrained features, which
are crucial for handling unseen domains. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed layer selection framework improves the performance of existing TTA
approaches across multiple datasets, domain shifts, model architectures, and TTA losses.

1

(a) Gradient alignment

(b) Helpful reset

Figure 1: Intuition for proposed approaches: (a) As the
model reaches closer to minima, the individual sample gradients start to be misaligned with gradients of previous samples (Mahsereci et al. 2017; Forouzesh and Thiran 2021;
Agarwal, D’souza, and Hooker 2022). We leverage this misalignment to identify trainable layers. (b) While effective in
moving in the direction of most aligned gradients, the introduced criterion based on angular deviation could prevent
adaptation when a direction change is needed, even if the
following updates (or gradients) are aligned. A reset of the
past horizon (i.e., gradients of previous samples) considered
in the alignment condition can help resolve such situations.

Introduction

Distribution shifts (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz 2021) present
significant challenges when deploying deep learning models in real-world scenarios. Test Time Adaptation (TTA)
(Liang, He, and Tan 2023) has emerged as a promising approach for adapting pretrained models to novel domains during inference. However, these methods often falter when
confronted with severe or diverse distributional changes. To
mitigate potential performance degradation, various regularization strategies have been proposed (Niu et al. 2022; Shin
et al. 2024). Nevertheless, these strategies might not effectively address all types of shifts or TTA losses (Burns and
Steinhardt 2021; Zhao et al. 2023a). Moreover, the selection
of layers in the existing TTA approaches typically remains
unchanged across different shifts (Wang et al. 2024), which
may not be optimal. In contrast, layer selection has demonstrated substantial improvements in related fields such as
domain generalization (Chattopadhyay, Balaji, and Hoffman 2020), fine-tuning (Lee et al. 2023), multi-task learning
(Wallingford et al. 2022), and continual learning (Zhao et al.

2023b), underscoring the importance and broad potential of
layer selection. Still, the question of optimal layer selection
remains largely unexplored in the context of TTA.
In this paper, we study layer selection for TTA and show
that not all layers of a given model are equally receptive
to adaptation. Our findings suggest that adapting the right
layer can lead to meaningful improvement, while adapting
the wrong layer can cause significant performance degradation in TTA approaches. Specifically, we find that while
adapting a certain layer may benefit one shift, it may be
detrimental to another. Additionally, we find that on a given
shift, the effect of adapting a certain layer also depends on
the loss used. Therefore, while we observe an important potential in selecting the right layer to adapt in each situation,
identifying these layers at test time can be challenging.
To address the challenges of layer selection, we propose
Gradient-Aligned Layer Adaptation, GALA, a novel criterion to identify good layers for adaptation at test time.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20237

