The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Instruction-Augmented Long-Horizon Planning: Embedding Grounding
Mechanisms in Embodied Mobile Manipulation
Fangyuan Wang1,2 , Shipeng Lyu1, 2 , Peng Zhou3 , Anqing Duan4 ,
Guodong Guo2 * , David Navarro-Alarcon1 *
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology
3
Great Bay University 4 Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
gdguo@eitech.edu.cn, dnavar@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

Enabling humanoid robots to perform long-horizon mobile
manipulation planning in real-world environments based on
embodied perception and comprehension abilities has been
a longstanding challenge. With the recent rise of large language models (LLMs), there has been a notable increase in
the development of LLM-based planners. These approaches
either utilize human-provided textual representations of the
real world or heavily depend on prompt engineering to extract
such representations, lacking the capability to quantitatively
understand the environment, such as determining the feasibility of manipulating objects. To address these limitations,
we present the Instruction-Augmented Long-Horizon Planning (IALP) system, a novel framework that employs LLMs
to generate feasible and optimal actions based on real-time
sensor feedback, including grounded knowledge of the environment, in a closed-loop interaction. Distinct from prior
works, our approach augments user instructions into PDDL
problems by leveraging both the abstract reasoning capabilities of LLMs and grounding mechanisms. By conducting various real-world long-horizon tasks, each consisting of seven
distinct manipulatory skills, our results demonstrate that the
IALP system can efficiently solve these tasks with an average success rate exceeding 80%. Our proposed method can
operate as a high-level planner, equipping robots with substantial autonomy in unstructured environments through the
utilization of multi-modal sensor inputs.

Figure 1: The IALP system leverages the reasoning capabilities of LLMs and grounding mechanisms to enrich the task
representation, enabling plan feasible and optimal actions in
the real world.

as spatial positioning and feasible grasping poses. They either rely on simulated settings or predefined contextual descriptions, with few investigations into real-world understanding and representation through the use of LLMs. This
deficiency in grounded understanding impedes robots from
properly interacting with complex objects/structures, thus,
impairing their application in unknown environments. Given
these challenges, an imperative question arises: Can we effectively extract and utilize environmental representations,
both abstract and grounded, to empower humanoid robots to
plan long-horizon tasks in real-world environments?
An approach to providing robots with embodied intelligence involves utilizing off-the-shelf foundation models
such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al. 2023), CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), and SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023), thus enabling them
to do long-horizon planning. Classical methods (Wake et al.
2023; Lin et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Ahn et al. 2024)
typically operate within simulation environments or assume
the availability of textual descriptions of the environment,
heavily relying on the reasoning capabilities of visual language models (VLMs) through prompt engineering. However, these methods face significant limitations in real-world

Website — https://nicehiro.github.io/IALP

Introduction
Embodied decision-making has been regarded as a critical
role for humanoid robots tasked with executing long-horizon
mobile manipulation tasks, which require prolonged navigation of the environment and interaction with objects. The
recent advancement of large language models (LLMs) has
significantly enhanced their ability to perceive, comprehend,
and plan actions with their surroundings, thus promoting
the successful completion of long-horizon mobile manipulation tasks. However, most of the existing research lacks the
grounding knowledge of the real-world environment, such
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14690

