The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MuMA-ToM: Multi-modal Multi-Agent Theory of Mind
Haojun Shi1* , Suyu Ye1* , Xinyu Fang1 , Chuanyang Jin1 , Leyla Isik1 , Yen-Ling Kuo2 ,
Tianmin Shu1
1 Johns Hopkins University,
2 University of Virginia

{hshi33, sye10, xfang21, cjin33, lisik, tianmin.shu}@jhu.edu, ylkuo@virginia.edu

Hamlin, Wynn, and Bloom 2007). Crucially, understanding
social interactions goes beyond action recognition. We often
need to reason about why people interact with one another in
a certain manner. We can achieve this by inferring people’s
mental states as well as how they reason about one another’s
mental states, i.e., multi-agent Theory of Mind (ToM) reasoning. For instance, if Alice puts away a book on Bob’s
desk, she may be trying to clean up or hide the book, depending on both her social goal (helping or hindering) and
where she believes Bob wants the book (belief of other’s
goal). As an observer, it may be difficult to disambiguate
between these scenarios. However, if we had heard Bob asking Alice where the book was before, we would confidently
infer that Alice wanted to hinder Bob. Such multi-modal,
multi-agent Theory of Mind abilities are not only crucial for
humans but also for AI systems that are deployed in human
living environments, such as assistive robots. Without a robust understanding of people’s mental states in complex social interactions, AI systems may cause detrimental errors in
their interactions with people.
Despite the recent advances in evaluating and engineering machine Theory of Mind, prior works have not adequately addressed the challenge of Theory of Mind reasoning in multi-modal social interactions. First, common Theory of Mind benchmarks (Gordon 2016; Gandhi et al. 2021;
Shu et al. 2021; Kosinski 2023; Jin et al. 2024) have only focused on individuals’ mental states. However, there are other
important aspects of multi-agent mental reasoning, including social goals (e.g., helping, hindering) and beliefs about
others’ goals. Second, there has not been a multi-modal social interaction dataset designed for systematic Theory of
Mind reasoning evaluation. The only prior multi-modal Theory of Mind dataset is MMToM-QA, which solely focuses
on single-agent activities. Text-only benchmarks such as HiTOM (Wu et al. 2023) feature multi-agent events, but lack
visual inputs. Thus, it remains unclear how we can evaluate the multi-modal multi-agent Theory of Mind capacity in
machine learning models.
To address these challenges, we introduce a new Theory of Mind benchmark, MuMA-ToM (Multi-modal MultiAgent Theory of Mind benchmark). MuMA-ToM includes
a large set of question-answering trials. As summarized in
Figure 1, questions in MuMA-ToM are organized into three
categories: (1) belief inference, (2) social goal inference, and

Abstract
Understanding people’s social interactions in complex realworld scenarios often relies on intricate mental reasoning. To
truly understand how and why people interact with one another, we must infer the underlying mental states that give
rise to the social interactions, i.e., Theory of Mind reasoning in multi-agent interactions. Additionally, social interactions are often multi-modal – we can watch people’s actions, hear their conversations, and/or read about their past
behaviors. For AI systems to successfully and safely interact with people in real-world environments, they also need
to understand people’s mental states as well as their inferences about each other’s mental states based on multi-modal
information about their interactions. For this, we introduce
MuMA-ToM, a Multi-modal Multi-Agent Theory of Mind
benchmark. MuMA-ToM is the first multi-modal Theory of
Mind benchmark that evaluates mental reasoning in embodied multi-agent interactions. In MuMA-ToM, we provide
video and text descriptions of people’s multi-modal behavior
in realistic household environments. Based on the context, we
then ask questions about people’s goals, beliefs, and beliefs
about others’ goals. We validated MuMA-ToM in a human
experiment and provided a human baseline. We also proposed
a novel multi-modal, multi-agent ToM model, LIMP (Language model-based Inverse Multi-agent Planning). Our experimental results show that LIMP significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods, including large multi-modal models (e.g., GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5 Pro) and a recent multi-modal
ToM model, BIP-ALM.

Code and data —
https://scai.cs.jhu.edu/projects/MuMA-ToM/

Introduction
Humans live in a social world; we not only engage in social interactions ourselves but can also understand other people’s social interactions. Studies in Developmental Psychology have indicated that the ability to understand different
kinds of social interactions develops early and is one of the
bases for more sophisticated social skills developed later in
life (Denham et al. 2003; Wellman, Cross, and Watson 2001;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution.

1510

