The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CDE-Learning: Camera Deviation Elimination Learning for Unsupervised Person
Re-identification
Jinjia Peng1 , Songyu Zhang1, * , Huibing Wang2, *
1

School of Cyber Security and Computer, Hebei University, Hebei, China
Hebei Machine Vision Engineering Research Center, China
2
College of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University
pengjinjia@hbu.edu.cn, zhangsongyu@stumail.hbu.edu.cn, huibing.wang@dlmu.edu.cn
Abstract
Unsupervised Person Re-identification (Re-ID) aims to identify the same person shot from non-overlapping cameras
without any annotated data. In this task, attributes such as
contrast, saturation, and resolution of the camera cause the
deviation in the target features. Since the camera label is readily available, they are employed to achieve the constraints
across cameras and smooth the deviations during the model
training phase. However, features from the same camera are
prone to generating false positives due to the identical camera properties, which induce camera deviations on pseudolabel assignment. To address this problem, this paper proposes a novel camera-unbiased method named Camera Deviation Elimination Learning (CDE-Learning). In the method,
the Camera Deviation Compensation (CDC) module is designed to align data distributions from disparate cameras.
This alignment decouples camera information from identity
information during the pseudo-label allocation. Our Camera
Deviation Balancing (CDB) module integrates different camera constraints in a united loss and adjusts camera constraints
by constructing contrastive pairs between intra-camera and
inter-camera. After explicit constraints, the Camera Attribution Auxiliary (CAA) task predicts whether a pair of images
originate from the same camera to implicitly enhance the capacity to distinguish the camera deviation. We demonstrated
the superior performance of the proposed CDE-Learning on
benchmark datasets.

Figure 1: Comparison of feature distributions before (a,c)
and after (b,d) alignment. The camera deviation leads to
more concentrated features under the same camera. After
alignment, the feature distribution becomes more uniform
and thus can avoid the false positive samples influenced by
the camera deviation.

glect the significant appearance variations within the camera
complexity. Taking into account this issue, different from existing clustering methods(Yao et al. 2024; Peng et al. 2024),
some works (Xuan and Zhang 2021; Wu, Zheng, and Lai
2019; Wang et al. 2022, 2024, 2020) increase the number
of intra-camera contrast pairs to explore varied appearance
features in the same camera. They separate inter-camera and
intra-camera learning as camera constraints, which unfortunately need to be modulated by hyper-parameter tuning.
On the other hand, these approaches ignore the effect of
camera deviation on pseudo-label allocation during clustering. The features for clustering inevitably contain deviation noise induced by cameras. Consequently, features in the
same camera may lead to false positive samples, affecting
the quality of pseudo-labels and accumulating wrong prior
knowledge. In addition, the hyperparameter setting to balance camera constraints requires manual parameter tuning
to achieve optimal performance in different scenarios, reducing their flexibility and applicability.

Code — https://github.com/zsszyx/CDE-Learning

Introduction
Unsupervised person re-identification (Re-ID) (Fu et al.
2022; Ge et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021) aims to match
individuals across non-overlapping camera views. The primary challenge is the appearance variations caused by diverse camera perspectives, known as irrelevant camera deviation. To address this issue, some approaches (Wang et al.
2021; Lee et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023) attempt to incorporate camera labels to establish camera agents and then create
cross-camera contrast pairs to mitigate the impact of intercamera perspective variations. However, these methods neCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author

6452

