The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Label Noise Correction via Fuzzy Learning Machine
Jiye Liang* , Yixiao Li, Junbiao Cui
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of
Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006, Shanxi, China
ljy@sxu.edu.cn, 1095766055@qq.com, cjb@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract

ually become the mainstream method for obtaining largescale labels. However, these low-cost labeling methods inevitably produce erroneous labels, known as label noise
(Breve, Zhao, and Quiles 2015).
The quality of a data set can usually be characterized by
two information sources: (1) attributes, and (2) class labels.
Depending on the data mining, data noise for supervised
learning is mainly categorized into two types: attribute noise
and class noise (Zhu and Wu 2004). Attribute noise refers to
data where the observed features are in error from the true
features, and class noise refers to data where the observed instance markings are inconsistent with the true markings, e.g.
in medical diagnosis problems, the inconsistency in expert
labeling can lead to erroneous labeling of case data (Khoshgoftaar and Van Hulse 2005). Both attribute noise and class
noise affect the generalization performance of the model, but
it has been shown that class noise has a more severe impact
compared to attribute noise due to the uniqueness of the labels (Frénay and Verleysen 2013). Therefore, filtering and
handling label noise is crucial for building efficient and accurate machine learning models. Properly managing label
noise not only improves data quality but also enhances models’ accuracy, ensuring the reliability and robustness of the
model in practical applications.
The issue of label noise in classification tasks can be
addressed from both the model level and the data level.
At the model level, solutions typically involve constructing robust loss functions (Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry 2017)
and introducing regularization (Tanno, Saeedi et al. 2019)
to reduce the impact of label noise. However, robust models cannot achieve complete robustness. Data level processing is mainly to improve data quality by labeling noise filtering. Existing noise filtering methods based on raw features primarily focus on noise filtering and struggle to adaptively learn task-relevant features, making them ineffective
for managing noise in large-scale datasets. Deep neural networks, while powerful in feature extraction, display a low
tolerance for label noise, leading to susceptibility to disruptions. This study focuses on correcting label noise, aiming to
refine labels post noise filtering, thus enhancing data quality
and elevating model generalization capabilities.
Fuzzy Learning Machine (FLM) (Cui and Liang 2022)
integrates the advantages of deep neural networks in feature
extraction and the advantages of fuzzy set theory in han-

The ubiquitous and unavoidable label noise brings great challenges to the generalization performance of learning methods.
Label noise correction aims to detect and correct label noise
in the data, which is one of the most potential methods to address this challenge. Current methods for label noise filtering
that utilize primitive features primarily concentrate on identifying noise, which often limits their capacity to adaptively
learn features crucial for specific tasks, thereby resulting in
a higher rate of noise identification within the noise recognition process. On the other hand, deep neural networks, endowed with robust feature extraction capabilities, typically
exhibit lower noise identification, as they are prone to fitting
noise patterns during the recognition process, potentially undermining their overall efficacy. Moreover, Fuzzy Learning
Machine (FLM) excels not only in feature extraction but also
in noise tolerance, adeptly navigating data uncertainties. FLM
enhances the accuracy of the labels by calculating the membership degrees of samples across categories and determining their fuzzy memberships. The introduction of a two-stage
FLM-based framework, which employs a secondary learning mechanism for precise noise filtering and correction, has
shown substantial improvements in noise correction across
various large-scale noisy datasets, thereby significantly enhancing samples’ quality and boosting the generalization capabilities of classifiers.

Introduction
Classification is one of the most critical issues in the field
of machine learning. Numerous studies have shown that
the generalization performance of training classifiers heavily depends on the quality of labels in the training samples
(Bi and Jeske 2010), and that high-quality labels represent
accurate and meaningful annotations, which helps to create
robust and reliable models. With the rapid development of
AI technology, there is a growing demand for high-quality
labelled data in many application domains, such as medical imaging, autonomous driving, and security surveillance
(Esteva et al. 2017; Kermany, Goldbaum et al. 2018; Grigorescu, Trasnea et al. 2020). However, in the real world, data
is growing explosively in terms of variety and quantity, using automated tools and ‘crowdsourcing’ labeling has grad* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18676

