The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

mRNA2vec: mRNA Embedding with Language Model in the 5′ UTR-CDS for
mRNA Design
Honggen Zhang1 , Xiangrui Gao2 , June Zhang1 , Lipeng Lai2 *
1

University of Hawaii at Manoa
2
XtalPi Inc
{honggen,zjz}@hawaii.edu, {xiangrui.gao, lipeng.lai}@xtalpi.com

Abstract

Cao et al. (2021); Li et al. (2023). Studies have demonstrated that UTR can regulate mRNA translation (Akiyama
and Sakakibara 2022), with extensive exploration of the 5′
UTR, which precedes the coding sequences (Chu et al. 2024;
Wieder et al. 2024). The CDS region contains codons that
are translated into amino acids, so codon optimization directly impacts mRNA translation.
Technological advancements using machine learning
(particularly language models) with biology have enabled
new methods to decode mRNA sequences (Diez et al. 2022;
Cao et al. 2021). Ribosomes read sequences from left to
right, similar to text sequences, suggesting that mRNA sequences could be modeled using language models and selfsupervised learning techniques. Mapping mRNA to a highdimensional representation space has the potential to enhance our understanding of its functions. However, significant differences exist between mRNA and natural text. For
example, mRNA is composed of only four nucleotides, and
there are only 64 codons. Therefore it is important to account for these differences when adapting language models
for mRNA embedding.
In this paper, we propose an mRNA embedding method:
mRNA2vec. Unlike previous research that analyzed the 5′
UTR and CDS separately, we treat them as a single sequence input. The junction between the tail of the 5′ UTR
and the head of the CDS plays a significant role in regulating mRNA translation (Nieuwkoop et al. 2023). Utilizing
information from both sides will enhance mRNA sequence
representation. Instead of employing a single masked token
prediction-based language model, we perform our model on
a contextual level, such as data2vec(Baevski et al. 2022),
which considers both masked and unmasked sequences, providing richer sequence information for downstream tasks as
it reflects the unmasked nature of sequence prediction.
In addition to the unifying 5′ UTR and CDS and contextual representation learning, we fully utilize the properties
of the mRNA modality: 1) We specify a probabilistic hardmasking strategy that focuses more on the tail region of the
5′ UTR and head of the CDS, increasing the likelihood of
these regions being masked. 2) We incorporate additional
modalities, such as Minimum Free Energy (MFE) and Secondary Structure (SS), to design better pretraining tasks to
enhance the process.
To evaluate mRNA2vec, we consider translation expres-

Messenger RNA (mRNA)-based vaccines are accelerating the
discovery of new drugs and revolutionizing the pharmaceutical industry. However, selecting particular mRNA sequences
for vaccines and therapeutics from extensive mRNA libraries
is costly. Effective mRNA therapeutics require carefully designed sequences with optimized expression levels and stability. This paper proposes a novel contextual language model
(LM)-based embedding method: mRNA2vec. In contrast to
existing mRNA embedding approaches, our method is based
on the self-supervised teacher-student learning framework of
data2vec. We jointly use the 5′ untranslated region (UTR)
and coding sequence (CDS) region as the input sequences.
We adapt our LM-based approach specifically to mRNA by
1) considering the importance of location on the mRNA sequence with probabilistic masking, 2) using Minimum Free
Energy (MFE) prediction and Secondary Structure (SS) classification as additional pretext tasks. mRNA2vec demonstrates significant improvements in translation efficiency (TE)
and expression level (EL) prediction tasks in UTR compared
to SOTA methods such as UTR-LM. It also gives a competitive performance in mRNA stability and protein production
level tasks in CDS such as CodonBERT.

Introduction
Messenger RNA (mRNA)-based gene therapeutics and vaccines have emerged as pivotal tools for developing a new
class of drugs, as they do not present the safety concerns
associated with genomic integration (To and Cho 2021). Recently, mRNA vaccines have been utilized in treating several diseases, including COVID-19 (Jackson et al. 2020) and
cancer (Zeraati et al. 2017). mRNA therapeutics facilitate
the production of missing or defective proteins, providing
essential supplements to cure genetic diseases (Kwon et al.
2018). To advance mRNA-based treatments further, understanding and designing the appropriate mRNA sequences is
crucial. Factors such as expression level and stability significantly impact the practical application of mRNA-based
therapies.
Researchers have primarily focused on the untranslated
region (UTR) and the coding sequence (CDS) region to understand the mechanisms of mRNA in protein translation
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1057

