The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

COMMIT: Certifying Robustness of Multi-Sensor Fusion Systems Against Semantic
Attacks
Zijian Huang1 * , Wenda Chu2 , Linyi Li3 , Chejian Xu4 , Bo Li4
1

University of Michigan
California Institute of Technology
3
Simon Fraser University
4
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
zijianh@umich.edu, wchu@caltech.edu, linyi li@sfu.ca, chejian2@illinois.edu, lbo@illinois.edu
2

Abstract
Camera

Multi-sensor fusion systems (MSFs) play a vital role as the
perception module in modern autonomous vehicles (AVs).
Therefore, ensuring their robustness against common and realistic adversarial semantic transformations, such as rotation
and shifting in the physical world, is crucial for the safety of
AVs. While empirical evidence suggests that MSFs exhibit
improved robustness compared to single-modal models, they
are still vulnerable to adversarial semantic transformations.
In addition, although many empirical defenses have been proposed, several works show that these defenses can be further
attacked by new adaptive attacks. So far, there is no certified
defense proposed for MSFs. In this work, we propose the first
robustness certification framework COMMIT to certify the
robustness of multi-sensor fusion systems against semantic
attacks. In particular, we propose a practical anisotropic noise
mechanism that leverages randomized smoothing on multimodal data and performs a grid-based splitting method to
characterize complex semantic transformations. We also propose efficient algorithms to compute the certification in terms
of object detection accuracy and IoU for large-scale MSF
models. Empirically, we evaluate the efficacy of COMMIT in
different settings and provide a comprehensive benchmark
of certified robustness for different MSF models using the
CARLA simulation platform. We show that the certification
for MSF models is at most 48.39% higher than that of singlemodal models, which validates the advantages of MSF models. We believe our certification framework and benchmark
will contribute an important step towards certifiably robust
AVs in practice.

1

Rotation

CameraLiDAR
Fusion Model

The car is not detected.
Bounding box IoU <
0.5

LiDAR
Multi-Sensor
Fusion Specific
Smoothing
Strategy

COMMIT
Smoothed
Multi-Sensor
Fusion Model
Certification Framework

COMMIT
Certification

Guarantee:
For any rotation with
10°,
the car is detected and
bounding box IoU >
0.5

Figure 1: Overview of COMMIT, the first framework that provides
certified robustness for multi-sensor fusion systems against semantic transformations.

sion systems (MSFs) as the perception module (Pang, Morris, and Radha 2020; Chen et al. 2022).
Along with the wide deployment of AD systems, the
safety of AD systems in the physical world has raised serious concerns (Hendrycks et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2021). A
rich body of research has shown that both adversarial perturbations and natural semantic transformations can mislead
the DNN-based perception modules in AD systems with a
high success rate (Pei et al. 2017; Hosseini and Poovendran 2018; Xiao et al. 2018; Guo, Kurup, and Shah 2019;
Hendrycks and Dietterich 2018; Engstrom et al. 2019), so
that the AD system may ignore the pedestrians, the traffic
signs, or other vehicles with high confidence when the object is slightly rotated or shifted, which can lead to severe
consequences such as fatal traffic accidents (McCausland
2019). Moreover, even though the multi-sensor fusion systems may be intuitively more robust, assuming that the input
transformations/perturbations are not adversarial to multiple
input modalities at the same time, existing work (Cao et al.
2021; Hallyburton et al. 2022) has falsified such intuition by
proposing feasible and highly efficient attacks against multisensor fusion systems (Cao et al. 2021). In other words, serious robustness issues still exist in existing MSFs, resulting
in practical safety vulnerabilities in AD.
To mitigate such safety threats, several empirical defenses
have been proposed for both single-modal models (Madry
et al. 2018) and multi-sensor fusion systems (Zhong et al.
2022). However, certified defenses exist only for singlemodal models (Wong and Kolter 2018; Cohen, Rosenfeld,
and Kolter 2019; Li et al. 2021; Chu, Li, and Li 2022). Recent works have shown that the empirical defenses for MSFs

Introduction

Autonomous driving (AD) has achieved significant advances
in recent years (Redmon et al. 2016; Law and Deng 2018;
Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla 2017; Zhao et al.
2018; Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Luo, Yang, and Urtasun 2018;
Qi et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2017), and deep neural networks (DNNs) have been largely deployed as the perception
module for AD to process inputs from multiple sources (e.g.,
camera and LiDAR) to detect objects such as road signs, vehicles, and pedestrians. To make full use of multi-modal inputs, modern AD systems usually adopt the multi-sensor fu* This work is done during study in UIUC.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17528

