The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Markov Balance Satisfaction Improves Performance
in Strictly Batch Offline Imitation Learning
Rishabh Agrawal1 , Nathan Dahlin2 , Rahul Jain1 , Ashutosh Nayyar1
1

University of Southern California
2
University at Albany, SUNY
rishabha@usc.edu, ndahlin@albany.edu, {rahul.jain, ashutosn}@usc.edu

Abstract

(Ziebart et al. 2008) that first estimates a reward function
from demonstration data and then uses it with RL algorithms
to find near-optimal policies. Unfortunately, this has two
limitations: First, the reward function estimation problem is
ill-posed (Baheri 2023) and any additional criterion introduce estimation errors. Second, the demonstrator (e.g., a human subject) may not be optimizing with respect to any reward function at all! Additionally, IRL algorithms are computationally intensive, particularly in high-dimensional state
spaces, limiting their scalability (Barnes et al. 2024). Thus,
there is a need to develop Imitation Learning (IL) algorithms
that don’t depend on reward estimation as a first step.
Behavioral Cloning (BC) is one such classical IL method
(Pomerleau 1988). It is inspired by supervised learning and
learns a map from states to actions from trajectory data. Unfortunately, it does not account for the fact that such trajectory data often satisfies a Markov balance equation (MBE).
In fact, this MBE is the only mathematical structure that ties
the trajectory data together. And if we don’t use it, we can
expect we will not do as well as possible. Thus, it is not unexpected that the BC method is known to be vulnerable to error propagation and covariate shift issues, thus constraining
its generalization capabilities (Ross and Bagnell 2010). This
is typically sought to be addressed by allowing for additional
online interactions with the environment or the demonstrator, or using supplementary data (Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011; Piot, Geist, and Pietquin 2016). Unfortunately,
in many practical situations, this is simply not a possibility
such as in autonomous vehicles and healthcare, where engaging directly with the environment is often infeasible due
to safety concerns or high costs. Therefore, we must learn
from the offline data we already have. A premise of ours
is that just like in training of LLMs, a combination of supervised fine-tuning and RL with human feedback improves
LLM performance, in the same way, an imitation learning
method that combines behavior cloning policy with accounting for Markovian dynamics will perform better as well.
At the core of imitation learning is distribution matching,
which treats state-action pairs from expert demonstrations as
samples drawn from a target distribution. The objective is to
develop a policy that minimizes the divergence between this
target distribution and the distribution induced by the imitator’s policy. Adversarial Imitation Learning (AIL) methods use this principle (Ho and Ermon 2016; Fu, Luo, and

Imitation learning (IL) is notably effective for robotic tasks
where directly programming behaviors or defining optimal
control costs is challenging. In this work, we address a scenario where the imitator relies solely on observed behavior
and cannot make environmental interactions during learning.
It does not have additional supplementary datasets beyond the
expert’s dataset nor any information about the transition dynamics. Unlike state-of-the-art (SOTA) IL methods, this approach tackles the limitations of conventional IL by operating in a more constrained and realistic setting. Our method
uses the Markov balance equation and introduces a novel conditional density estimation-based imitation learning framework. It employs conditional normalizing flows for transition dynamics estimation and aims at satisfying a balance
equation for the environment. Through a series of numerical
experiments on Classic Control and MuJoCo environments,
we demonstrate consistently superior empirical performance
compared to many SOTA IL algorithms.

Extended version —
https://github.com/rishabh-1086/MBIL

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has provided us with some
very notable achievements over the past decade from mastering complex games (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016;
Vinyals et al. 2019) to advancing protein structure prediction
systems (Jumper et al. 2021), and now proficiency at coding and high school-level mathematics. And yet, all of these
achievements are built on a fundamental hypothesis that the
“reward is enough” (Silver et al. 2021). But in the real world,
when only data is available, there is no natural reward model
available. Countless hours are spent on reward engineering.
In fact, lately, there has been tremendous progress in building reward models for language and multi-modal generative
AI systems. And yet, they have led to their own set of challenges, namely reward hacking and over-optimization, lack
of diversity and robustness in learned policies.
Classically, in imitation learning, this was sought to be
addressed via inverse RL methods (Abbeel and Ng 2004;
Ng and Russell 2000), e.g., the MaxEntropy-IRL algorithm
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15311

