The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ICM-Assistant: Instruction-tuning Multimodal Large Language Models for
Rule-based Explainable Image Content Moderation
Mengyang Wu1,2,* † , Yuzhi Zhao2, * ‡ , Jialun Cao3 , Mingjie Xu4 , Zhongming Jiang4 , Xuehui Wang5 ,
Qinbin Li6 , Guangneng Hu7 , Shengchao Qin8,9 , Chi-Wing Fu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Huawei Hong Kong Research Center
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Huawei 2012 Laboratories
5
Artificial Intelligence Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
7
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
8
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University
9
ICTT and ISN Laboratory, Xidian University
mywu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk; yzzhao2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

protection (e.g., sexy, horrifying) (Facebook 2024; Search
2024; TikTok 2024) or on cultural regulations (De Gregorio and Stremlau 2023). Therefore, rule-based image content
moderation has become increasingly significant.
Today, image content moderation faces three main challenges. First, moderation rules vary with cultures and ages.
Different moderation strategies are needed for individual
cultural regulations or child protection (see Fig. 1 (a), different combinations of culture and age have different moderation results on the same image). Second, transparency and
openness receive increasing attention (Juneja, Rama Subramanian, and Mitra 2020). So, for the disclosure of review results, we need to provide reasons based on moderation rules,
which increase the moderation complexity. Third, we need
an in-depth understanding of the image contents to ensure
accurate moderation results. Summarizing the challenges,
there is a pressing need for flexible, explainable and accurate image content moderation (ICM) systems.
Traditional ICM systems (Son et al. 2023; Lees et al.
2022; Akyon and Temizel 2023; Momo et al. 2023) and
datasets (Karavarsamis et al. 2013; Connie, Al-Shabi, and
Goh 2017; NudeNet 2024; Phan et al. 2022) typically formulate ICM as a classification task. However, the image violation clues are often obscure and not identifiable solely
by specific patterns or scenes. Therefore, traditional methods often obtain low classification accuracy. Moreover, their
moderation processes are not explainable and the datasets
are not flexible to different rules.
Recent multimodal large language models (MLLMs) (Liu
et al. 2024; Bai et al. 2023; Team et al. 2023; Achiam et al.
2023; Markov et al. 2023) also perform ICM, by providing a general ability in describing and reasoning image contents. After practice, we find that existing MLLMs are not
aligned with any specific moderation rules, resulting in two
main inconsistencies with human moderators following various rules. (1) Classification inconsistency: the classification

Controversial contents largely inundate the Internet, infringing various cultural norms and child protection standards.
Traditional Image Content Moderation (ICM) models fall
short in producing precise moderation decisions for diverse
standards, while recent multimodal large language models
(MLLMs), when adopted to general rule-based ICM, often
produce classification and explanation results that are inconsistent with human moderators. Aiming at flexible, explainable, and accurate ICM, we design a novel rule-based dataset
generation pipeline, decomposing concise human-defined
rules and leveraging well-designed multi-stage prompts to
enrich short explicit image annotations. Our ICM-Instruct
dataset includes detailed moderation explanation and moderation Q-A pairs. Built upon it, we create our ICM-Assistant
model in the framework of rule-based ICM, making it readily
applicable in real practice. Our ICM-Assistant model demonstrates exceptional performance and flexibility. Specifically,
it significantly outperforms existing approaches on various
sources, improving both the moderation classification (36.8%
on average) and moderation explanation quality (26.6% on
average) consistently over existing MLLMs.
Caution: Content includes offensive language or images.

Code — https://github.com/zhaoyuzhi/ICM-Assistant

Introduction
In recent years, user-generated and AI-generated image contents (e.g., by DALL-E (Ramesh et al. 2021) or stable diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022)) keep multiplying on online platforms. Yet, some contents are against platform rules on child
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Internship with Huawei Hong Kong Research Center.
Corresponding Author and Project Lead.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

8413

