The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Autoregressive Sequence Modeling for 3D Medical Image Representation
Siwen Wang* 3 , Churan Wang* 2 , Fei Gao2 , Lixian Su3 , Fandong Zhang3 ,
Yizhou Wang2 4 , Yizhou Yu†1
1

School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science,
Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology, Peking University
3
Deepwise AI Lab
4
State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
wangsiwendut@gmail.com, churanwang@pku.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org
2

Abstract

heterogeneity across different organs, the variability in diagnostic tasks, and the diversity of imaging modalities further
complicate the comprehensive representation of these images (Zhou et al. 2023a).
In the data-driven paradigm of deep learning, leveraging
large-scale well-annotated data can lead to effective representation learning (Ye et al. 2023; Tian et al. 2024). However, for medical image analysis, obtaining labeled data is
particularly challenging, due to the intrusive nature of certain imaging modalities and the laborious process of annotation (Tajbakhsh et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2023). Therefore, we
consider learning a general and effective representation from
large-scale unlabeled data first. This allows our models to
adapt to various downstream tasks with only a small amount
of labeled data, significantly reducing the dependency on
large-scale annotated data.
Moreover, recent advances in self-supervised learning
(SSL) have shown promising results in visual representation learning for certain tasks (Oquab et al. 2023). These
methods capitalize on the idea of reconstructing masked input data or contrastive learning to learn robust feature representations without the need for explicit labels. However,
3D medical images offer depth and volume, and are often
sparse, posing new challenges when applying these methods
to 3D medical image representations. As most existing selfsupervised methods consider each image as a whole (Zhou
et al. 2023b; El-Nouby et al. 2024; Gao et al. 2024), often overlooking inner and inter-correlations of 3D medical
images, e.g., complex relationships among patches, modalities, and semantics. This limitation highlights the need for
a more holistic and interconnected representation learning
framework.
In this work, we address this challenge by introducing
a novel self-supervised method to learn generalizable 3D
medical image representations. We design a set of rules to
transform diverse 3D medical images into coherent patch
sequences. Every patch sequence is composed of several
patches cropped from one or multiple original images according to spatial, semantic, or contrast correlation within
3D medical data. Every patch in a patch sequence is further divided into several visual tokens. All tokens from the
patches in a patch sequence are concatenated to form a

Three-dimensional (3D) medical images, such as Computed
Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI),
are essential for clinical applications. However, the need
for diverse and comprehensive representations is particularly
pronounced when considering the variability across different
organs, diagnostic tasks, and imaging modalities. How to effectively interpret the intricate contextual information and extract meaningful insights from these images remains an open
challenge to the community. While current self-supervised
learning methods have shown potential, they often consider
an image as a whole thereby overlooking the extensive, complex relationships among local regions from one or multiple
images. In this work, we introduce a pioneering method for
learning 3D medical image representations through an autoregressive pre-training framework. Our approach sequences
various 3D medical images based on spatial, contrast, and semantic correlations, treating them as interconnected visual tokens within a token sequence. By employing an autoregressive sequence modeling task, we predict the next visual token in the sequence, which allows our model to deeply understand and integrate the contextual information inherent in
3D medical images. Additionally, we implement a random
startup strategy to avoid overestimating token relationships
and to enhance the robustness of learning. The effectiveness
of our approach is demonstrated by the superior performance
over others on nine downstream tasks in public datasets.

Introduction
The realm of medical imaging has witnessed significant evolution with the advent of advanced modalities such as Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) (Najjar 2023). These three-dimensional (3D)
medical images serve as a cornerstone for clinical diagnosis and treatment planning, providing physicians with
a detailed glimpse into the inner workings of the human
body (Panayides et al. 2020). Despite their widespread impact, the complexity and richness of 3D medical images
present unique challenges in interpretation and analysis. The
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7871

