The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MIA-Tuner: Adapting Large Language Models as Pre-training Text Detector
Wenjie Fu1 , Huandong Wang* 2 , Chen Gao2 , Guanghua Liu1 , Yong Li2 , Tao Jiang1
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Tsinghua University
wjfu99@outlook.com

Abstract

been used in training the GPT model, several studies show
that considerable private data can be extracted from LLMs
through a black-box access (Carlini et al. 2021, 2023). Furthermore, Oren et al. (2023) demonstrate that the benchmark data could be included during the pre-training, leading
to an overestimation of the model performance. Therefore,
in this paper, we aim to investigate a problem of significant
importance: detecting pre-training data of the LLM.

The increasing parameters and expansive dataset of large language models (LLMs) highlight the urgent demand for a
technical solution to audit the underlying privacy risks and
copyright issues associated with LLMs. Existing studies have
partially addressed this need through an exploration of the
pre-training data detection problem, which is an instance
of a membership inference attack (MIA). This problem involves determining whether a given piece of text has been
used during the pre-training phase of the target LLM. Although existing methods have designed various sophisticated
MIA score functions to achieve considerable detection performance in pre-trained LLMs, how to achieve high-confidence
detection and how to perform MIA on aligned LLMs remain
challenging. In this paper, we propose MIA-Tuner, a novel
instruction-based MIA method, which instructs LLMs themselves to serve as a more precise pre-training data detector
internally, rather than design an external MIA score function.
Furthermore, we design two instruction-based safeguards to
respectively mitigate the privacy risks brought by the existing methods and MIA-Tuner. To comprehensively evaluate
the most recent state-of-the-art LLMs, we collect a more upto-date MIA benchmark dataset, named WIKIMIA-24, to replace the widely adopted benchmark WIKIMIA. We conduct
extensive experiments across various aligned and unaligned
LLMs over the two benchmark datasets. The results demonstrate that MIA-Tuner increases the AUC of MIAs from 0.7
to a incredibly high level of 0.9.

1

Pre-training data detection refers to determining whether
a given pending text is included in the pre-training corpus of the target LLM, which can be considered as an instance of membership inference attack (MIA) (Shokri et al.
2017). Previous research on MIAs against LLMs has primarily focused on small-scale language models or finetuned LLMs. This is due to the unique characteristics of
LLM pre-training, such as larger-scale corpora, fewer training epochs, and less knowledge of the training data distribution (Shi et al. 2023; Duan et al. 2024). For example,
several studies employed reference-free attacks that identify training samples based on statistical scores evaluated on
the fine-tuned model, such as perplexity (PPL) (Yeom et al.
2018). Furthermore, other studies achieve higher precision
through reference-based attacks, which calibrate the score
with a specific “referenced score”. Existing research has explored comparing the sample PPL to the entropy of zlib
compression (Carlini et al. 2021), the PPL of the lowercased
sample (Carlini et al. 2021), and the PPL of neighboring
samples (Mattern et al. 2023). Some studies also examine
comparing the sample PPL against a reference model, such
as the pre-trained model before fine-tuning (Mireshghallah
et al. 2022a), or a smaller model with the same architecture (Carlini et al. 2021). Fu et al. (2024) fine-tune a reference model based on the output of the target model, and
achieve an inspiring detection performance over fine-tuned
LLMs. Recently, a benchmark dataset (Shi et al. 2023) and
two reference-free methods (Shi et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2024) are proposed to dedicate on detecting pre-training
data, which focus on token-level rather than the sentencelevel likelihood.

Introduction

Benefiting from the exponential growth of pre-training corpora and model parameters, large language models (LLMs)
have achieved tremendous success in many complex application scenarios across multiple domains, including but
not limited to code copilot (Barke, James, and Polikarpova
2023), clinical diagnosis (Rao et al. 2023), and market prediction (Wu et al. 2023).
However, as the scale of datasets increases, data transparency is gradually declining. It has an increasing tendency
for pre-training data to be treated as private and confidential
rather than publicly disclosed, even for some open-source
LLMs (Touvron et al. 2023b; Mesnard et al. 2024). This
lack of transparency can lead to ethical concerns and pose
challenges in model evaluation, if copyrighted, private or
evaluation data is exposed to the target model during the
pretraining phase. For instance, prior studies have found
that ChatGPT has memorized a significant amount of copyrighted material (Chang et al. 2023), which is likely to have

However, despite the previous study has achieved considerable achievements in detecting pre-training data, there
still exists the following limitations in the research of
this problem: First, the widely adopted benchmark dataset,
WIKIMIA, can only evaluate LLMs released or pre-trained
before January 2023 (Shi et al. 2023). Over the past year,
massive new state-of-the-art LLMs like LLaMA-2 (Touvron
et al. 2023b), Gemma (Mesnard et al. 2024) have emerged,
making WIKIMIA somewhat outdated for assessing the vulnerabilities of these models to MIA. Second, with the devel-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27295

