The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Computation Modules: Granular Conditional Computation
for Efficient Inference
Bartosz Wójcik1, 2 , Alessio Devoto3 , Karol Pustelnik4 , Pasquale Minervini5, 6 , Simone Scardapane3
1

IDEAS NCBR
Jagiellonian University
3
Sapienza University of Rome
4
University of Warsaw
5
University of Edinburgh
6
Miniml.AI
2

Abstract
Patch projection

While transformer models have been highly successful, they
are computationally inefficient. We observe that for each
layer, the full width of the layer may be needed only for
a small subset of tokens inside a batch and that the “effective” width needed to process a token can vary from layer to
layer. Motivated by this observation, we introduce the Adaptive Computation Module (ACM), a generic module that dynamically adapts its computational load to match the estimated difficulty of the input on a per-token basis. An ACM
consists of a sequence of learners that progressively refine
the output of their preceding counterparts. An additional gating mechanism determines the optimal number of learners to
execute for each token. We also propose a distillation technique to replace any pre-trained model with an “ACMized”
variant. Our evaluation of transformer models in computer
vision and speech recognition demonstrates that substituting
layers with ACMs significantly reduces inference costs without degrading the downstream accuracy for a wide interval of
user-defined budgets.

...

...

Tokens
Learners

(a) High-level overview of the Adaptive Computation Module

(b) Example images with computation spatial load maps

Figure 1: ACMs adapt their computational load for each input on a per-token basis by selecting the number of learners
to execute via a trainable gate. In the example on the top, a
background token (green) is allocated fewer learners than a
content-rich token (orange). This results in a spatially varying computational load, as shown on the bottom.

Introduction
Driven by their constantly improving capabilities, state-ofthe-art neural networks have been experiencing a continued
growth in size in the last decade (Pugliese, Regondi, and
Marini 2021). This progress was made possible by algorithmic and model design improvements (in particular with the
introduction of transformer models) and the increasing computational power of modern GPUs. Scaling up the model architecture frequently results in improved performance (Devlin et al. 2018; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016), causing
the size and computational costs of state-of-the-art models
to keep increasing steadily. These escalating costs limit applications in latency-sensitive and energy-constrained scenarios and contribute to higher carbon emissions, exacerbating environmental concerns (Schwartz et al. 2020; Patterson
et al. 2022).
Several approaches from the literature aim to mitigate this
problem. For example, quantization reduces inference time
by quantizing the weights and activations into low-precision
floating-point (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2014) or integer values (Wu et al. 2020; Dettmers et al. 2022). Knowl-

edge distillation methods (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Aguilar et al. 2020) can transfer knowledge from an ensemble or single larger model into a smaller network. Finally,
sparsification methods (LeCun, Denker, and Solla 1989;
Han et al. 2015; Hoefler et al. 2021) yield either sparse
weight or sparse activation tensors.
While they incur a slight decrease in downstream model
performance, such methods show that some neural modules
can often be replaced with computationally cheaper alternatives. Based on this observation, we argue that in transformer models (Vaswani et al. 2017), the representational
capacity of a whole layer is not needed for every input token.
In other words, we hypothesize that the same transformation could be achieved in a more computationally efficient
manner. To explore this hypothesis, we introduce Adaptive
Computation Modules (ACMs), a neural network module
that adapts its computational burden to match the difficulty
of the current input token. An ACM consists of a sequence

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21510

