The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep-Union Completion
Siddharth Baskar1 * , Karan Vikyath Veeranna Rupashree1 * , Daniel L Pimentel-Alarcón1,2
1
2

Wisconsin Institute for Discovery
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Large amounts of missing data are becoming increasingly ubiquitous in modern high-dimensional datasets. Unfortunately,
classical completion methods like low-rank, high-rank, or deep
matrix completion (LRMC/HRMC/DMC) are often unable
to handle real data that does not fall under their respective
models. Here we propose a novel completion strategy that
generalizes all these models. The main idea is to find a Union
of Subspaces (UoS) that can fit a non-linear embedding of the
original data, and complete the data according to this latent
UoS. This embedding is obtained through a novel pseudocompletion layer in a deep architecture, and the UoS structure
is identified in closed-form through an intermediate clustering
layer. Our design reduces the exponential memory requirements that are typically induced by uneven patterns of missing
data. We give exact details of our architecture, model, loss
functions, and training strategy. Our experiments on over 10
real datasets show that our method consistently outperforms
the state-of-the-art accuracy by more than a staggering 40%.

GitHub Repository —
https://github.com/KaranVikyath/DUC

Introduction
Motivation: missing data. Missing data is a widespread
challenge across various fields, including epidemiology, social sciences, finance, clinical research, computer vision and
many more (Enders 2022; Baraldi and Enders 2010; BeaulieuJones et al. 2018; Gelman and Loken 2016; Little and Rubin
2019; Garcia-Laencina, Sancho-Gómez, and Figueiras-Vidal
2010). For example, missing data is observed in epidemiology due to participant attrition and incomplete responses
during health assessments (Beaulieu-Jones et al. 2018), while
in social science research, non-response bias in survey-based
studies compromises representativeness (Gelman and Loken
2016). Clinical trials also face missing data due to participant dropout (Little and Rubin 2019). In finance and economic analysis, missing data occurs frequently, particularly
in time-series data where gaps may arise due to reporting
lags, data collection constraints, or economic events affecting data availability (Garcia-Laencina, Sancho-Gómez, and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15507

Figueiras-Vidal 2010). Additionally, computer vision encounters missing data when input image files are corrupted.
Prior work and limitations. Over the years, various methods have been developed to address missing data, but each
has limitations (Woods et al. 2021). For instance, (1) single
imputation methods (Zhang 2016) can reduce the variability
of the data and introduce bias due to the assumption that one
value can adequately replace the missing ones. (2) Deletion
methods (Baraldi and Enders 2010; Enders 2022) can lead to
significant data loss and potential bias if the missing data are
not missing completely at random. (3) Model-based methods
(Enders 2022; Ma and Chen 2018), (4) deep methods (Zheng
and Charoenphakdee 2023; Khan, Wang, and Liu 2022), and
(5) machine learning methods (Khosravi et al. 2020; Hong
and Hao 2023) are computationally intensive and rely on
the assumed underlying statistical model, which can lead
to biased estimates and misleading conclusions. (6) Multiple imputation methods (Schafer 1999; White, Royston, and
Wood 2011) require complex statistical expertise to implement and interpret results correctly. (7) Hybrid methods that
include combinations of the aforementioned methods can
be difficult to analyze and implement, potentially requiring
careful tuning to balance the strengths and weaknesses of
combined approaches, and some combinations can probably
yield incorrect solutions (Elhamifar 2016). Moreover, none of
these methods can handle the large amounts of missing data
that are present in modern datasets and that are informationtheoretically feasible (Pimentel-Alarcon and Nowak 2016).
To summarize, existing methods that address missing data
come with significant limitations that can impact the accuracy
and reliability of their results. Also, none of these methods
are fully capable of handling the large amounts of missing
data typical in modern datasets, highlighting the ongoing
challenges and the need for more robust approaches. More
details about these and other completion methods are discussed at length in Appendix A.
This paper introduces a new, more general completion
paradigm that we call Deep Union Completion (DUC). The
main idea is to find a non-linear embedding of the data where
its latent representation lies in a union of subspaces (UoS).
The goal is to fill the missing values according to this latent
UoS. Besides completing the missing values, our model also
allows us to cluster the samples according to the latent UoS.
To achieve this dual goal (completing and clustering), we

