The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motif-aware Graph Neural Networks for Networked Time Series Imputation
Nourhan Ahmed 1, 2 , Vijaya Krishna Yalavarthi 1 , Lars Schmidt-Thieme 1, 2
1

Information Systems and Machine Learning Lab (ISMLL), University of Hildesheim, Germany
2
VWFS Data Analytics Research Center
{ahmed, yalavarthi, schmidt-thieme}@ismll.uni-hildesheim.de

Abstract
Networked time series are time series on a graph, one for each
node, with applications in traffic and weather monitoring.
Graph neural networks are natural candidates for networked
time series imputation and have recently outperformed existing alternatives such as recurrent and generative models
for time series imputation as they utilize a relational inductive bias for imputation. However, existing GNN-based approaches fail to capture the higher-order topological structure
between sensors, which are shaped by recurring substructures in the graph, referred to as temporal motifs. In addition, it remains uncertain which motifs are the most pivotal
motifs guiding the imputation task in networked time series.
In this paper, we fill in this gap by proposing a graph neural network designed to leverage motif structures within the
network by employing weighted motif adjacency matrices to
capture higher-order neighborhood information. In particular, (1) we design a motif-wise multi-view attention module
that explicitly captures various higher-order structures along
with an attention mechanism that automatically assigns high
weights to informative ones in order to maximize the use
of higher-order information. (2) We introduce a gated fusion
module by merging gated recurrent networks and graph convolutional networks to capture the spatial and temporal dependency in order to reflect the intricate impacts of temporal
and spatial influence. Experimental results demonstrate that
when compared to state-of-the-art models for time-series imputation tasks, our proposed model can reduce the error by
around 19%.

Figure 1: Demonstration using node classification task using
YELP dataset (Dou et al. 2020). (a) Using only a node’s direct neighbors might lead to incorrect predictions. (b) Considering groups of three connected nodes (triangles) can improve accuracy. (c) However, using less informative groups
like cycles might not help.

2018; Luo et al. 2018, 2019). These approaches have been
the workhorse of time series imputation. These approaches,
however, do not account for the higher-order topological
structures among sensors, which correspond to small, recurring subgraphs.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently gained
prominence as a powerful alternative, particularly with the
introduction of the concept of networked time series (Zhu
et al. 2021). This concept refers to a set of time series data
that are interconnected or interdependent through an underlying network structure which was introduced for the first
time in the context of time imputation by Cini, Marisca, and
Alippi (2022). GNNs are particularly suitable for this task
because they better capture the relational interdependence of
networked time series. While these GNN-based approaches
have shown promising results, they are still in their early
phases. Two significant issues remain open and need to be
addressed.
The first issue is about structural diversity. Current graphbased imputation approaches either employ edge-defined
one-hop neighborhoods to propagate information (Lee et al.
2019; Cini, Marisca, and Alippi 2022) or depend on random
walks and their variants (Wang et al. 2023a). These methods are effective for capturing the lower-order graph structure, such as first-order and second-order neighbors, and for

Introduction
Multivariate time series data are ubiquitous in real life, including medical logs, meteorological records, and traffic
data (Che et al. 2018). In complex linked systems, missing values occur due to sensor failures, poor data collection processes, and human errors. Accordingly, missing values can cause major issues in time series analysis, and suitable values must be used to impute the missing values (Cini,
Marisca, and Alippi 2022). Recent breakthroughs in deep
learning have allowed new ways to deal with missing data,
including Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Che et al.
2018; Cao et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019) and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Yoon, Jordon, and Schaar
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11409

