The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Goal-Driven Reasoning in DatalogMTL with Magic Sets
Shaoyu Wang1 * , Kaiyue Zhao1 * , Dongliang Wei1 * ,
Przemysław Andrzej Wałȩga2,3 , Dingmin Wang2 , Hongming Cai1 , Pan Hu1†
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
3
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, UK
{royalrasins, Horizon52183, weidongliang9, hmcai, pan.hu}@sjtu.edu.cn, {przemyslaw.walega, dingmin.wang}@cs.ox.ac.uk
a program-dataset pair (Π, D) logically entails a given
temporal fact. This task was shown to be E XP S PACEcomplete in combined complexity (Brandt et al. 2018) and
PS PACE-complete in data complexity (Wałȩga et al. 2019).
To decrease computational complexity, various syntactical (Wałȩga et al. 2020b) and semantic (Wałȩga et al. 2020a)
modifications of DatalogMTL have been introduced. DatalogMTL was also extended with stratified negation (Tena
Cucala et al. 2021), non-stratified negation (Wałȩga et al.
2021, 2024), and with temporal aggregation (Bellomarini,
Nissl, and Sallinger 2021).
A sound and complete reasoning approach for DatalogMTL can be obtained using an automata-based construction (Wałȩga et al. 2019). Another approach for reasoning
is to apply materialisation, that is, successively apply to the
initial dataset D rules in a given program Π, to derive all
the facts entailed by a program-dataset pair (Π, D). It is
implemented, for example, within Vadalog reasoner (Bellomarini et al. 2022). Materialisation, however, does not
guarantee termination since DatalogMTL programs can express (infinite) recursion over time. To marry completeness
and efficiency of reasoning, a combination of automata- and
materialisation-based approaches was introduced in the MeTeoR system (Wang et al. 2022). Materialisation-based approach typically outperforms the automata-based approach,
so cases in which materialisation-based reasoning is sufficient were studied (Wałȩga, Zawidzki, and Cuenca Grau
2021, 2023). More recently, a very efficient reasoning approach was introduced, which combines materialisation with
detection of repeating periods (Wałȩga et al. 2023b).
Despite recent advancement in the area, the currently
available reasoning methods for DatalogMTL (Wang et al.
2022; Wałȩga et al. 2023b; Bellomarini et al. 2022) can suffer from deriving huge amounts of temporal facts which are
irrelevant for a particular query. This, in turn, can make the
set of derived facts too large to store in memory or even in
a secondary storage. For example, if the input dataset mentions millions of users, together with interactions between
them and their participation in posts’ circulation, application of Rule (1) may result in a huge set of derived facts.
However, if we only want to check whether the user Arthur
participated on post’s circulation on September 10th, 2023,
most of the derived facts are irrelevant. Note that determining which exactly facts are relevant is not easy, especially

Abstract
DatalogMTL is a powerful rule-based language for temporal reasoning. Due to its high expressive power and flexible
modeling capabilities, it is suitable for a wide range of applications, including tasks from industrial and financial sectors.
However, due its high computational complexity, practical
reasoning in DatalogMTL is highly challenging. To address
this difficulty, we introduce a new reasoning method for DatalogMTL which exploits the magic sets technique—a rewriting approach developed for (non-temporal) Datalog to simulate top-down evaluation with bottom-up reasoning. We have
implemented this approach and evaluated it on publicly available benchmarks, showing that the proposed approach significantly and consistently outperformed state-of-the-art reasoning techniques.

Introduction
DatalogMTL (Brandt et al. 2018) extends the well-known
declarative logic programming language Datalog (Ceri, Gottlob, and Tanca 1989) with operators from metric temporal
logic (MTL) (Koymans 1990), allowing for complex temporal reasoning. It has a number of applications, including ontology-based query answering (Brandt et al. 2018;
Güzel Kalayci et al. 2018), stream reasoning (Wałȩga et al.
2023a; Wałȩga, Kaminski, and Cuenca Grau 2019), and reasoning for the financial sector (Colombo et al. 2023; Nissl
and Sallinger 2022; Mori et al. 2022), among others.
To illustrate capabilities of DatalogMTL, consider a scenario in which we want to reason about social media interactions. The following DatalogMTL rule describes participation of users in the circulation of a viral social media post:
⊞[0,2] P (x) ←
Ð I(x, y) ∧ P (y),

(1)

namely, it states that if at a time point t a user x interacted
with a user y over the post (expressed as I(x, y)), and y
participated in the post’s circulation (expressed as P (y)),
then in the time interval [t, t+2], user x will be continuously
participating in the post’s circulation (⊞[0,2] P (x)).
One of the main reasoning tasks considered in DatalogMTL is fact entailment, which involves checking whether
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15203

