The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Non-Rigid Structure-from-Motion Revisited:
Canonicalization and Sequence Modeling
Hui Deng1 , Jiawei Shi1 , Zhen Qin2 , Yiran Zhong3 , Yuchao Dai1 *
1

School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
TapTap,
3
OpenNLPLab
{denghui986, sjw2018}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {zhenqin950102, zhongyiran}@gmail.com, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

tain advantages over traditional methods in terms of computational accuracy, inference speed, and handling of shape
ambiguity. However, they also encountered the same problem as traditional methods, namely motion ambiguity, where
ambiguity interferes with the direction of convergence of the
network, which in turn leads to poor estimation results. To
cope with this problem, C3dpo(Novotny et al. 2019) proposes the concept of transversal property and designs the
canonicalization network to suppress the ambiguity throughout the data set. On the other hand, PRN(Park, Lee, and
Kwak 2020) represents a sequential regularization method
based on Procrustean Analysis(PA) and an elegant training
method that eliminates the need for the network to perform
complex PA during inference. However, the implementation
and computational complexity of this network in training are
relatively high. At the same time, the backbone network of
these methods(Novotny et al. 2019; Park, Lee, and Kwak
2020; Sidhu et al. 2020; Zeng et al. 2021) only performs
lifting on 2D observations and lacks modeling of continuous 2D observation sequences.
Recently, Deng et al. (Deng et al. 2022)(denoted as
Seq2Seq) designs sequence a reconstructing module by
referring to the traditional mathematical modeling of sequences, and has achieved promising results. However, instead of tackling canonicalization in a sequential manner,
this method follows (Novotny et al. 2019) and deals with
the problem throughout the dataset. In addition, this method
models the sequence with little consideration of the positional information in the sequence structure, and only an absolute positional encoding bias is used to inject temporal information into the sequence reconstruction process.
In this paper, we propose to revisit the deep NRSfM
problem. We argue that dealing with shape ambiguity in a
sequence-by-sequence manner is more effective than over
the entire dataset, reducing the effect of ambiguity on the
estimation results. We propose a sequential canonicalization
based on General Procrustean Analysis(GPA). This method
focuses on a parameter-free GPA layer, which avoids high
training overhead and eliminates the need for complex GPA
operations during inference. In conjunction with the canonicalization for sequences, we design a sequence modeling
method that can utilize sequence temporal more effectively.
We argue that using temporal bias alone to introduce temporal information for sequence reconstruction is insufficient,

Non-Rigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM) is a classic 3D
vision problem, where a 2D sequence is taken as input to estimate the corresponding 3D sequence. Recently, deep neural
networks have greatly advanced the task of NRSfM. However, existing deep NRSfM methods still have limitations in
handling the inherent sequence property and motion ambiguity associated with the NRSfM problem. In this paper, we
revisit deep NRSfM from two perspectives to address the
limitations of current deep NRSfM methods: (1) canonicalization and (2) sequence modeling. We propose an easy-toimplement per-sequence canonicalization method as opposed
to the previous per-dataset canonicalization approaches. With
this in mind, we propose a sequence modeling method that
combines temporal information and subspace constraints. As
a result, we have achieved a more optimal NRSfM reconstruction pipeline compared to previous efforts. The effectiveness of our method is verified by testing the sequenceto-sequence deep NRSfM pipeline with corresponding regularization modules on several commonly used datasets.

Introduction
Non-Rigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM) is one of the
classical tasks in 3D computer vision, which aims at recovering the 3D deforming shape sequences from 2D observation
sequences. There has been a lot of work trying to construct
a reasonable model for this task. Various traditional mathematical methods (Akhter et al. 2008; Akhter, Sheikh, and
Khan 2009; Dai, Li, and He 2014; Zhu et al. 2014) based
on the factorization framework(Tomasi and Kanade 1992),
represented by Bregler et al. (Bregler, Hertzmann, and Biermann 2000), have produced remarkable results in modeling
the deformation sequences.
Along with the rise of machine learning techniques and
the advantages shown by neural network models in terms
of inference speed and computational accuracy, more people have started to combine deep learning with non-rigid 3D
reconstruction (Novotny et al. 2019; Kong and Lucey 2021;
Wang, Lin, and Lucey 2020; Zeng et al. 2022; Wang and
Lucey 2021; Zeng et al. 2021; Park, Lee, and Kwak 2020),
and some progress has been made. These methods have cer* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2681

