The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hybrid Reasoning About Relative Position and Orientation of
Objects and Navigating Agents Using Answer Set Programming
Yusuf Izmirlioglu
University of Roehampton, Computer Science Department, London, UK
New Mexico State University, Computer Science Department, Las Cruces, USA
yusuf.izmirlioglu@roehampton.ac.uk

Abstract
We study reasoning about relative position, orientation and
distance of moving objects in 2D space. We first construct
a new hybrid calculus HOPA by augmenting qualitative distance and quantitative constraints into Oriented Point Relation Algebra (OPRA ). Then we develop a framework for
consistency checking and reasoning with HOPA using Answer Set Programming. This framework can also explain the
source of inconsistency, infer new knowledge and generate a
layout of objects and their orientation in the discrete space.
The framework is capable of reasoning with (un)certain, partial and presumed information. We evaluate efficiency and
scalability of our method by computational experiments, and
illustrate its applications with sample scenarios from robotic
perception and marine navigation.

Figure 1: Robotic sensing and motion planning scenario

and fleet management. Such relative location and distance
information can be quantitative (e.g. the tanker robot is located at 12 m distance and 53o angle of robot 2) as well
as qualitative or coarse (e.g. robot 5 is to the left-back and
near to robot 7, ship 3 is at starboard of ship 4). The latter
is relevant in contexts with human presence or data obtained
from sensors is imprecise or exact location of an extended
object is hard to determine. In marine exploration, metric
data about location and heading can be obtained from GPS
and measurement devices, but additional complex calculations are necessary to determine the relative location of the
agent with respect to the port and other agents. In these situations, marine people often use simple view or deck sight
to locate themselves, e.g. “we are near and southwest of
Patara marina”, or “the yacht is starboard and behind us”.
Besides such qualitative direct information is beneficial for
verification of sensor data, in case of fault or calibration. Until now, robotic and marine navigation literature mostly focused on collision and motion planning (Maaref and Barret
2002; Frommberger 2008; Miguel-Tomé 2021), rather than
reasoning about knowledge.
In this paper, we study reasoning about relative position, orientation and distance of point objects in 2D space.
We start with Oriented Point Relation Algebra (OPRA ) of
Moratz, Dylla, and Frommberger (2005) which describes
qualitative position of oriented points on the plane. We construct a new calculus HOPA (Hybrid Oriented Point Algebra) by augmenting qualitative direction and quantitative location, distance, orientation information to OPRA . Then we
develop a framework for reasoning with this hybrid formalism using Answer Set Programming. The framework can
check consistency of a set of qualitative and quantitative
constraints, explain the source of inconsistency, handle uncertain and presumed information, infer new knowledge and
generate a configuration of objects. We evaluate efficiency

Introduction
Reasoning about position and distance is vital for cognitive
robotics, land/marine navigation and surveying applications.
Motion planning and collecting survey knowledge requires
identifying relative position and orientation of static objects
as well as navigating agents in the environment. In marine
navigation, vessels need to position themselves with respect
to other agents and the port, for example vessel 4 reports
vessel 2 is on its starboard 147o , vessel 3 states vessel 6 is at
its behind and near to the port, vessel 6 observes 7 on clock
angle 9. As another example, in the robotic sensing and motion planning problem of Moratz, Dylla, and Frommberger
(2005), Dylla and Moratz (2004), Moratz and Ragni (2008),
the human user instructs the robot “to navigate to the red
cube behind the blue cube” (Figure 1). To achieve this goal,
the robot needs to identify which red cube is behind the blue
cube (C). In a similar vein, oriented objects and relative position are also prevalent in surveying, localization/mapping
and street networks, as in the statements “The cafeteria is in
the front-left of the library and very near to it”, “when you
go down the Kingston road and reach the junction, Wimbledon avenue will be on your left”.
In these contexts, moving agents have some bearing and
pivot objects may have some intrinsic orientation. Navigating robots and vessels need to know relative position of
other agents for collision avoidance, motion/task planning
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14997

