The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

M3Net: Multimodal Multi-task Learning for 3D Detection, Segmentation, and
Occupancy Prediction in Autonomous Driving
Xuesong Chen1 , Shaoshuai Shi1 * Tao Ma1 ,
Jingqiu Zhou1 , Simon See2 , Ka Chun Cheung2 , Hongsheng Li1, 3
1

MMLab, The Chinese University of HongKong
2
NVIDIA AI Technology Center
3
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
{chenxuesong@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, shaoshuaics@gmail.com
Abstract

models to obtain full-perception results. This practice poses
notable challenges: 1) It overlooks task similarities, leading
to redundant computations, and 2) it impedes the mutual enhancement between the multiple sub-tasks. Therefore, a unified model that can simultaneously tackle multiple perception sub-tasks holds significant promise.
However, integrating multiple tasks on a fully shared
backbone often results in low performance. This is because
the feature representations required by different tasks vary,
leading to gradient conflicts when training the network. Various approaches have been developed to tackle the conflicts
in multi-task learning, including shared feature representations (He et al. 2017; Borsa, Graepel, and Shawe-Taylor
2016), task-specific layers (Wallingford et al. 2022), and attention mechanisms (Goncalves et al. 2023; Liu, Johns, and
Davison 2019), etc. Shared feature representations involve
sharing a backbone to utilize shared knowledge. Some methods (Li et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2023a) utilize the query as a
unified representation across tasks to get multi-task results.
Task-specific layers equipped with attention mechanisms facilitate task-specific learning and enable the model to handle
task-relevant information. Although these strategies perform
well in 2D perception tasks, challenges arise in the context
of 3D tasks in autonomous driving.
Specifically, tasks of object detection and map segmentation can be effectively tackled using Bird’s Eye View
(BEV) features, whereas 3D occupancy estimation requires
computational-intensive 3D features for achieving dense 3D
prediction. Most previous methods use BEV features to
unify the representation of multiple tasks. However, they
have difficulties in effectively tackling occupancy prediction
and semantic conflicts from the compression of the height
dimension in the BEV space. For example, a vehicle may
share features with both the trees above it and the road below it. Consequently, the network struggles to learn features
to handle multiple classes simultaneously. In response to this
challenge, Univision (Hong et al. 2024) maintains both 3D
and BEV features and successfully handles detection and
occupancy prediction tasks simultaneously, but it comes at
the cost of efficiency. Other methods, such as MetaBEV (Ge
et al. 2023) and BEVFusion (Liu et al. 2023b), try to handle multi-task learning in one model but overlook the important 3D occupancy prediction task. They only focus on
BEV-related tasks, including detection and map segmenta-

The perception system for autonomous driving generally requires to handle multiple diverse sub-tasks. However, current algorithms typically tackle individual sub-tasks separately, which leads to low efficiency when aiming at obtaining full-perception results. Some multi-task learning methods try to unify multiple tasks with one model, but do
not solve the conflicts in multi-task learning. In this paper, we introduce M3Net, a novel multimodal and multitask network that simultaneously tackles detection, segmentation, and 3D occupancy prediction for autonomous driving
and achieves superior performance than single task model.
M3Net takes multimodal data as input and multiple tasks
via query-token interactions. To enhance the integration of
multi-modal features for multi-task learning, we first propose
the Modality-Adaptive Feature Integration (MAFI) module,
which enables single-modality features to predict channelwise attention weights for their high-performing tasks, respectively. Based on integrated features, we then develop
task-specific query initialization strategies to accommodate
the needs of detection/segmentation and 3D occupancy prediction. Leveraging the properly initialized queries, a shared
decoder transforms queries and BEV features layer-wise,
facilitating multi-task learning. Furthermore, we propose a
Task-oriented Channel Scaling (TCS) module in the decoder to mitigate conflicts between optimizing for different
tasks. Additionally, our proposed multi-task querying and
TCS module support both Transformer-based decoder and
Mamba-based decoder, demonstrating its flexibility to different architectures. M3Net achieves state-of-the-art multi-task
learning performance on the nuScenes benchmarks.

Code — https://github.com/Cedarch/M3Net

Introduction
The perception module is important for autonomous driving
system, which aims to accurately perceive the environment
around the self-driving vehicle. To ensure reliable driving,
the perception task is divided into different sub-tasks, including detection, map segmentation, occupancy prediction,
etc. However, current algorithms generally tackle individual
sub-tasks and thus require deploying multiple independent
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2275

