The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reinforcement Learning Platform for Adversarial Black-box Attacks with Custom
Distortion Filters
Soumyendu Sarkar1*†, Ashwin Ramesh Babu1†, Sajad Mousavi1†, Vineet Gundecha1, Sahand
Ghorbanpour1, Avisek Naug1, Ricardo Luna Gutiérrez1 , Antonio Guillen1, Desik Rengarajan12
1Hewlett Packard Enterprise
2Amazon

{soumyendu.sarkar, ashwin.ramesh-babu, sajad.mousavi, vineet.gundecha, sahand.ghorbanpour,
avisek.naug, rluna, antonio.guillen, desik.rengarajan}@hpe.com
Abstract
We present a Reinforcement Learning Platform for Adversarial Black-box untargeted and targeted attacks, RLAB, that
allows users to select from various distortion filters to create adversarial examples. The platform uses a Reinforcement
Learning agent to add minimum distortion to input images
while still causing misclassification by the target model. The
agent uses a novel dual-action method to explore the input
image at each step to identify sensitive regions for adding
distortions while removing noises that have less impact on
the target model. This dual action leads to faster and more
efficient convergence of the attack. The platform can also be
used to measure the robustness of image classification models
against specific distortion types. Also, retraining the model
with adversarial samples significantly improved robustness
when evaluated on benchmark datasets. The proposed platform outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of the average number of queries required to cause misclassification.
This advances trustworthiness with a positive social impact.

Introduction

Figure 1: RLAB achieves the lowest average number of
queries among untargeted black-box L2-attacks on ImageNet across three CNN models with a Gaussian noise filter.

Despite deep learning models demonstrating impressive performance in various tasks, they remain highly susceptible to
input data corruption. This susceptibility is particularly concerning in safety-critical applications such as self-driving
cars, facial recognition systems, and image-based authentication. The possibility of natural and domain-specific distortions at deployment poses a significant challenge for these
models. Therefore, measuring the robustness of deep learning models against distortions becomes essential to uncover
vulnerabilities and limitations of poorly trained models.
In the field of adversarial attacks, white-box attacks have
been widely explored (Szegedy et al. 2013)(Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) (Chakraborty et al. 2018) (Su,
Vargas, and Sakurai 2019). These attacks require complete
knowledge of the target model, including its architecture
and parameters, to assess its vulnerability against distortions. However, access to such detailed information about

the model is often restricted in real-world scenarios due to
intellectual property concerns and support issues. This limitation makes white-box attacks less practical for evaluating
models in many applications.
In contrast, black-box attacks do not require complete visibility into the target model. These attacks operate with limited information and exploit vulnerabilities by interacting
with the model through input queries. However, black-box
attacks suffer from inefficiency, often necessitating a large
number of queries to create adversarial samples that can
effectively compromise the evaluated model. Furthermore,
many state-of-the-art black-box attack approaches rely on
specific unnatural distortions based on hand-crafted heuristics, limiting their applicability and effectiveness.
In this work, we propose a Reinforcement Learning agent
for a Platform (RLAB) that can learn a policy to make an adversarial attack with fewer queries and a high success rate.
This RL agent is versatile enough to allow the user to plug

*Corresponding Author

†These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27628

