The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PBECount: Prompt-Before-Extract Paradigm for Class-Agnostic Counting
Canchen Yang1 , Tianyu Geng1 * , Jian Peng1 , Chun Xu2
1

2

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China
Information Construction and Management Office, Sichuan University, 610065, China
volcano.ycc@gmail.com, {tygeng, jianpeng, xchun}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
In the field of class-agnostic counting (CAC), counting only
objects of interest that are similar to exemplars in multi-class
scenarios has been a challenging task. To address this challenge, recent research has proposed the extract-and-match
paradigm based on the vision transformer (ViT) architecture.
However, although this paradigm can improve the accuracy of
exemplar-similar object identification, it overly emphasizes
the role of the ViT structure. To address this shortcoming, this
work introduces a more generalized prompt-before-extract
paradigm on top of the extract-and-match paradigm and designs a pure convolutional neural network (CNN) model
named PBECount. In addition, an innovative loss function,
a post-processing strategy, and a dynamic threshold method
are proposed to enhance the detection performance of the proposed model when the probability maps are used as ground
truth during model training. The experimental results on the
FSC-147 and CARPK datasets demonstrate that the proposed
PBECount can identify whether unknown class objects are
similar to exemplars and outperform the state-of-the-art CAC
methods in terms of accuracy and generalization.

Figure 1: Comparison of the detection process and counting
results of the models based on the extract-then-match and
prompt-before-extract paradigms: (a) the detection process
based on the extract-then-match paradigm; (b) the detection
process based on the prompt-before-extract paradigm, and
the dashed arrows represent the detection process based on
the extract-and-match paradigm, which is a specific case of
the prompt-before-extract paradigm; (c) the detection results
of the models based on the extract-then-match paradigm;
(d) the detection results of the models based on the promptbefore-extract paradigm.

Introduction
The main goal of the class-agnostic counting (CAC) (Gong
et al. 2022) is to count objects of interest in images containing arbitrary unknown class objects based on a small number of exemplars. Compared to the class-specific counting
(CSC) (Wei et al. 2024; Tyagi et al. 2023), which focuses
on counting specific class objects, the CAC has broader application scenarios and greater potential value, making it a
subject of increased research attention in recent years.
The CAC, which was first introduced in (Lu, Xie, and Zisserman 2019), is based on the extract-then-match paradigm.
This paradigm first extracts features from both a query image and exemplars and then matches their feature similarity, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Previous CAC studies have
mostly followed the extract-then-match paradigm. However,
the existing extract-then-match methods tend to count all objects in a query image without effectively assessing whether
the objects are truly similar to the exemplars or not, as presented in Figure 1(c).

Recently, an innovative extract-and-match CAC paradigm
based on the vision transformer (ViT) has been proposed
(Wang et al. 2024) . In this paradigm, exemplars and a query
image are first cropped and concatenated and then together
fed to the ViT. The first two self-attention layers of the ViT
structure are used to extract features from both the query
image and exemplars, whereas the subsequent two crossattention layers perform the matching operation between the
query image and exemplars. The experimental results in Figure 1(d) demonstrate that the CACViT, based on the extractand-match paradigm, can filter out objects dissimilar to exemplars. However, this paradigm overly emphasizes the role
of the ViT structure and cannot reveal the essence of the
CACViT model to assess the similarity between the exemplars and objects.
This work reveals that the main reason the extractand-match paradigm can help models recognize exemplarsimilar objects does not lay in decoupling the ViT structure into feature extraction and feature matching modules
but rather refers to the detection process of simultaneously

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9139

