The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Protecting Model Adaptation from Trojans in the Unlabeled Data
Lijun Sheng1,2 , Jian Liang2,3 * , Ran He2,3 , Zilei Wang1 , Tieniu Tan4,2,3
1
University of Science and Technology of China
NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Nanjing University
slj0728@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liangjian92@gmail.com, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn, {rhe, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Security problems in model adaptation are always ignored, only two recent works (Sheng et al. 2023; Ahmed
et al. 2023) reveal its vulnerability to the neural trojans (also
known as backdoors) (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017;
Chen et al. 2017) embedded in the source model. A distillation framework (Sheng et al. 2023) and a model compression scheme (Ahmed et al. 2023) are proposed to eliminate threats from suspicious source providers, respectively.
In this paper, we raise a similar question: Can we trust the
unlabeled target data? Different from the source model, injecting trojans through unlabeled data faces several significant challenges. It is difficult for unsupervised algorithms
to directly establish a strong connection between the trigger and the target class through poisoning unlabeled data.
Nevertheless, we find that well-poisoned unlabeled datasets
still achieve successful backdoor attacks on adaptation algorithms, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
We decompose unsupervised backdoor injection into two
parts: trigger design and poisoning strategy. First, a nonoptimization-based trigger and an optimization-based trigger are introduced. We adopt the Hello Kitty trigger in
Blended (Chen et al. 2017) as the non-optimization-based
trigger. The optimization-based one is an adversarial perturbation (Poursaeed et al. 2018) calculated with a surrogate
model. As for the poisoning sample selection, we provide
two strategies for different prior knowledge owned by attackers. In cases where the attackers have ground truth labels, samples belonging to the target class are directly selected. When labels cannot be accessed, samples to be poisoned are selected by querying the open-source CLIP model
(Radford et al. 2021). Please note that after the poisoning
stage, attackers release the unlabeled version of the dataset
for downstream adaptation users. Experimental results have
shown that the collaboration of designed triggers and poisoning strategies achieves successful backdoor attacks.
To defend model adaptation against the backdoor threat,
we propose a plug-and-play method called D IFF A DAPT.
D IFF A DAPT eliminates the mapping between the backdoor
trigger and the target class by neglecting potentially poisoning target samples during optimization. First, we train a potential risk target model with unlabeled data following the
common model adaptation algorithms (e.g., SHOT (Liang,
Hu, and Feng 2020), NRC (Yang et al. 2021)). Since poisoning samples have both semantic features and backdoor

Model adaptation tackles the distribution shift problem with
a pre-trained model instead of raw data, which has become a
popular paradigm due to its great privacy protection. Existing
methods always assume adapting to a clean target domain,
overlooking the security risks of unlabeled samples. This paper for the first time explores the potential trojan attacks on
model adaptation launched by well-designed poisoning target data. Concretely, we provide two trigger patterns with
two poisoning strategies for different prior knowledge owned
by attackers. These attacks achieve a high success rate while
maintaining the normal performance on clean samples in the
test stage. To defend against such backdoor injection, we propose a plug-and-play method named D IFF A DAPT, which can
be seamlessly integrated with existing adaptation algorithms.
Experiments across commonly used benchmarks and adaptation methods demonstrate the effectiveness of D IFF A DAPT.
We hope this work will shed light on the safety of transfer
learning with unlabeled data.

Code — https://github.com/TomSheng21/DiffAdapt

Introduction
Over recent years, deep neural networks (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021) have gained substantial research interest and
demonstrated remarkable capabilities across various tasks.
However, distribution shift (Saenko et al. 2010) between the
training set and deployment environment inevitably arises,
leading to a significant drop in performance. To solve this
issue, researchers propose domain adaptation (Ben-David
et al. 2010; Ganin et al. 2016; Long et al. 2018) to improve
the performance on unlabeled target domains by utilizing
labeled source data. As privacy awareness grows, source
providers restrict user’s access to raw data. Instead, model
adaptation (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020), a novel paradigm
only accessing pre-trained source models, has gained popularity (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020; Li et al. 2020). Since
its proposal, model adaptation has been extensively investigated across various visual tasks, including semantic segmentation (Fleuret et al. 2021; Liu, Zhang, and Wang 2021)
and object detection (Li et al. 2021a; Huang et al. 2021).
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20427

