The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LTLf Synthesis on First-Order Agent Programs in Nondeterministic Environments
Till Hofmann1 , Jens Claßen2
1

Department of Computer Science, RWTH Aachen University
2
Institute for People and Technology, Roskilde University
till.hofmann@cs.rwth-aachen.de, classen@ruc.dk

Abstract

perform an arbitrary number of actions before the agent can
respond. Additionally, existing solutions often generate arbitrary plans or policies without incorporating user-specified
partial strategies unless explicitly encoded in the specification.
On the other hand, G OLOG (Levesque et al. 1997), a
well-established agent programming language, offers significant flexibility. Based on the situation calculus (McCarthy
and Hayes 1969; Reiter 2001a), G OLOG supports first-order
reasoning over arbitrarily large or even infinite domains
and accommodates incomplete information about the initial
state. It also allows for the specification of partial strategies through nondeterministic programs. Given such a program, program realization is the task of resolving program
nondeterminism to produce a successful program execution,
e.g., by means of search, or in an online incremental fashion (De Giacomo et al. 2009). However, it is typically assumed that the agent is in complete control, even if it only
has incomplete knowledge (Reiter 2001b; Claßen and Neuss
2016) or its actions are stochastic (Boutilier et al. 2000). Recently, the situation calculus has been extended with nondeterministic actions (De Giacomo and Lespérance 2021;
Claßen and Delgrande 2021) similar to FOND planning,
where the environment chooses an outcome. However, this
still assumes that agent and environment act in turns.
To address these limitations, we propose an extension to
G OLOG that partitions actions into agent actions and environment actions. In this framework, the agent selects among
currently applicable agent actions, guided by the program
and the basic action theory, but cannot constrain the environment. The environment may select any applicable environment action or any action chosen by the agent. This allows for arbitrary sequences of environment actions, similar
to the supervisory control paradigm (Ramadge and Wonham
1989). We also propose to describe the agent’s goal as a temporal formula, which allows for formulating trajectory constraints such as safety and reachability on the program.
In this setting, program realization becomes a synthesis
task. Given a G OLOG program and a temporal goal, the task
is to synthesize a policy that executes the program while satisfying the temporal goal, independent of and reacting to all
possible environment behaviors. In this paper, we focus on
the decidable fragment of G OLOG with acyclic basic action
theories restricted to C2 (Zarrieß and Claßen 2016) and tem-

We investigate the synthesis of policies for high-level agent
programs expressed in Golog, a language based on situation calculus that incorporates nondeterministic programming constructs. Unlike traditional approaches for program
realization that assume full agent control or rely on incremental search, we address scenarios where environmental nondeterminism significantly influences program outcomes. Our
synthesis problem involves deriving a policy that successfully
realizes a given Golog program while ensuring the satisfaction of a temporal specification, expressed in Linear Temporal
Logic on finite traces (LTLf), across all possible environmental behaviors. By leveraging an expressive class of first-order
action theories, we construct a finite game arena that encapsulates program executions and tracks the satisfaction of the
temporal goal. A game-theoretic approach is employed to derive such a policy. Experimental results demonstrate this approach’s feasibility in domains with unbounded objects and
non-local effects. This work bridges agent programming and
temporal logic synthesis, providing a framework for robust
agent behavior in nondeterministic environments.

1

Introduction

Agents operating in dynamic environments often need to
react to changes beyond their control. For example, a service robot may be tasked with serving coffee to customers,
who may place an order at any time. Also, some actions
may have unexpected outcomes, e.g., while attempting to
fulfill the task, the robot might accidentally drop the coffee. Such scenarios can be modeled as fully observable nondeterministic (FOND) planning tasks (Geffner and Bonet
2013; Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2016) where actions have
multiple possible outcomes, or as reactive synthesis problem (e.g., based on LTL on finite traces (LTLf ) (De Giacomo and Vardi 2015)), where certain propositions are controlled by the agent while others are governed by the environment. However, these approaches have some limitations.
They assume a fixed, finite set of propositions, effectively
imposing a closed-world assumption and requiring a completely known initial state. Furthermore, they rely on alternating actions between the agent and the environment,
which fails to capture scenarios where the environment may
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14976

