The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Track the Answer: Extending TextVQA from Image to Video with
Spatio-Temporal Clues
Yan Zhang1,3 * , Gangyan Zeng4 * , Huawen Shen1,3 , Daiqing Wu1,3 , Yu Zhou2† , Can Ma1,3†
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{zhangyan2022,shenhuawen,wudaiqing,macan}@iie.ac.cn, yzhou@nankai.edu.cn, gyzeng@njust.edu.cn
2

Explicit Spatial Same Instance Across
Relationships
Multiple Frames

Abstract
Video text-based visual question answering (Video
TextVQA) is a practical task that aims to answer questions
by jointly reasoning textual and visual information in a
given video. Inspired by the development of TextVQA
in image domain, existing Video TextVQA approaches
leverage a language model (e.g. T5) to process text-rich
multiple frames and generate answers auto-regressively.
Nevertheless, the spatio-temporal relationships among visual
entities (including scene text and objects) will be disrupted
and models are susceptible to interference from unrelated
information, resulting in irrational reasoning and inaccurate
answering. To tackle these challenges, we propose the TEA
(stands for “Track thE Answer”) method that better extends
the generative TextVQA framework from image to video.
TEA recovers the spatio-temporal relationships in a complementary way and incorporates OCR-aware clues to enhance
the quality of reasoning questions. Extensive experiments
on several public Video TextVQA datasets validate the
effectiveness and generalization of our framework. TEA
outperforms existing TextVQA methods, video-language
pretraining methods and video large language models by
great margins.

Spatio-temporal Recovery
for Visual Entities

Unrelated Frame

Time
Scene Text Aware
Clues Aggregation

(a) Spatial Recovery (b) Temporal Recovery (c) Scene Text Clues
Question: What is written on the white sign at the back of the journey?
Answer: SPEED LIMIT 45

Figure 1: An example to illustrate the challenges in Video
TextVQA and the overview of our proposed method. For
this given question, the Video TextVQA model requires to
first analyze the spatial relationships to locate the answer
instance, and then capture the temporal correspondence to
track and recognize the answer content. Besides, unrelated
frames may interfere with model reasoning. To tackle these
challenges, we propose to recover the spatio and temporal
information respectively, and aggregate the scene text aware
clues for reasonable guidance.

Code — https://github.com/zhangyan-ucas/TEA

Introduction
Understanding scene text in images and videos plays an important role in interpreting the physical world, and also is
the key to solving many practical applications, such as selfdriving vehicles, automatic news reporting and scene text
editing (Zeng et al. 2024b; Li et al. 2024). As a representative scene text understanding task (Zeng et al. 2024a), textbased visual question answering (TextVQA) has attracted
much interest from the communities and witnessed tremendous progress (Singh et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2021; Fang
et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2023b; Zhang et al. 2024). A majority of work focuses on TextVQA in image domain (i.e. Image TextVQA), which aims at answering questions related

to the text in a given image. Traditional methods (Hu et al.
2019; Zhu et al. 2021) adopt a discriminative framework,
which predicts answers from Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) tokens (Qin et al. 2023) or vocabulary words. Benefiting from the powerful representation of pretrained language model T5 (Raffel et al. 2019), recent works (Biten
et al. 2021; Zeng et al. 2023a) address this task in a generative way, thus significantly boosting the accuracy and generalizability.
In this context, a new task - Video TextVQA goes one
step further, which requires reading and reasoning scene
text throughout a video. Compared to Image TextVQA, this
task is more challenging as the answer can appear anywhere in any frame of the video. To tackle it, an intuitive
solution is to adapt the most competitive method for Image

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors: Yu Zhou and Can Ma.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10275

