The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Storynizor: Consistent Story Generation via Inter-Frame Synchronized and
Shuffled ID Injection
Yuhang Ma1 * , Wenting Xu1 * , Chaoyi Zhao1 * , Keqiang Sun2 , Qinfeng Jin1 , Xiaoda Yang3 ,
Zeng Zhao1† , Changjie Fan1 , Zhipeng Hu1
1
Fuxi AI Lab, Netease Inc.
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
{mayuhang, xuwenting01, zhaochaoyi, jinqinfeng, hzzhaozeng, hzliubai, fanchangjie, zphu}@corp.netease.com
2

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models have
spurred significant interest in continuous story image generation. In this paper, we introduce Storynizor, a model capable
of generating coherent stories with strong inter-frame character consistency, effective foreground-background separation,
and diverse pose variation. The core innovation of Storynizor
lies in its key modules: ID-Synchronizer and ID-Injector.
The ID-Synchronizer employs an auto-mask self-attention
module and a mask perceptual loss across inter-frame images
to improve the consistency of character generation, vividly
representing their postures and backgrounds. The ID-Injector
utilize a Shuffling Reference Strategy (SRS) to integrate ID
features into specific locations, enhancing ID-based consistent character generation. Additionally, to facilitate the training of Storynizor, we have curated a novel dataset called StoryDB comprising 100, 000 images. This dataset contains single and multiple-character sets in diverse environments, layouts, and gestures with detailed descriptions. Experimental
results indicate that Storynizor demonstrates superior coherent story generation with high-fidelity character consistency,
flexible postures, and vivid backgrounds compared to other
character-specific methods.

Figure 1: Comparison of Storynizor with existing methods.
Storynizor shows superior performance when implemented
in the original SD-base checkpoint in text-image alignment
and inter-frame consistency.
Other approaches, such as Mix-of-Show (Gu et al. 2024)
and OMG (Kong et al. 2024), focus on multi-character generation by utilizing attention maps to position characters
within a frame. These methods successfully achieve varied poses and maintain character consistency but lack interframe coherence, as they operate on a frame-by-frame basis
without ensuring consistency across the sequence.
To achieve narrative coherence, methods like ConsiStory (Tewel et al. 2024) and StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al.
2024) have attempted to fuse character features across
frames to enhance inter-frame consistency. However, the
absence of an identity injection mechanism in these approaches results in inaccurate alignment with reference images. Moreover, when considering a pre-trained diffusion
model like the original checkpoint of SD1.5, their trainingfree nature often leads to semantic degradation, and collapsible cross-frame results, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
As shown in Tab. 1, prior works have focused on specific
aspects of generating continuous story images, but none of
them has comprehensively addressed all key challenges.
In this paper, we introduce Storynizor, the first model
capable of generating multicharacter stories with high

Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-image diffusion models has
sparked considerable interest in generating continuous story
images. Maintaining consistency between frames, ensuring
natural and flexible character poses, and achieving a clear
separation of foreground and background are critical challenges in this domain.
Many prior works have paid attention to ensuring character consistency. For instance, IP-Adapter (Ye et al. 2023),
Arc2Face (Papantoniou et al. 2024), and InstantID (Wang
et al. 2024) extract identity features from a reference image
and inject them into the diffusion model. While effective
in single-character scenarios, these methods often struggle
with stiff postures and are limited in handling more complex
multicharacter interactions.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6027

