The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sensing Surface Patches in Volume Rendering for Inferring Signed Distance
Functions
Sijia Jiang, Tong Wu, Jing Hua * , Zhizhong Han
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA
sijiajiang@wayne.edu, tongwu@wayne.edu, jinghua@wayne.edu, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract

ground truth pixel color. Although these methods obtained
smooth and complete reconstructions, severe artifacts may
appear in the empty space, the reconstructed surfaces may
drift away from the GT surface, and few details can be revealed on the surface, due to the unawareness of the surface.
Hence, how to sense the surface and further impose more effective surface constraints along with the volume rendering
is the key to improve the learning of SDF.
To resolve this problem, we propose to infer an SDF from
multi-view images through volume rendering with a better
sense of surface. Our novelty lies in the way of establishing a surface patch around an estimated ray-surface intersection, which enables to explicitly impose more effective
constraints on surface patches, along with the volume rendering. Specifically, using the predicted signed distances and
gradients, we randomly sample queries near an estimated intersection, and pull them onto the zero level set, which produces a surface patch. With the sensed surface patch, we are
able to explicitly impose surface constraints such as multiview photo consistency and supervision from depth or normal priors, to improve the SDF inference through volume
rendering. We justify the effectiveness of our modules, and
report superiority performance over the latest methods in
terms of numerical and visual comparisons on widely used
benchmarks. Our contributions are listed below.

It is vital to recover 3D geometry from multi-view RGB images in many 3D computer vision tasks. The latest methods
infer the geometry represented as a signed distance field by
minimizing the rendering error on the field through volume
rendering. However, it is still challenging to explicitly impose constraints on surfaces for inferring more geometry details due to the limited ability of sensing surfaces in volume
rendering. To resolve this problem, we introduce a method to
infer signed distance functions (SDFs) with a better sense of
surfaces through volume rendering. Using the gradients and
signed distances, we establish a small surface patch centered
at the estimated intersection along a ray by pulling points
randomly sampled nearby. Hence, we are able to explicitly
impose surface constraints on the sensed surface patch, such
as multi-view photo consistency and supervision from depth
or normal priors, through volume rendering. We evaluate our
method by numerical and visual comparisons on scene benchmarks. Our superiority over the latest methods justifies our
effectiveness.

Introduction
3D reconstruction from multi-view images is an important
task in 3D computer vision. Classic methods like structure
from motion and multi-view stereo (Schönberger and Frahm
2016; Schönberger et al. 2016) estimate 3D point clouds per
the multi-view photo consistency. With deep learning models (Yao et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2022), we are able to learn
depth priors from a large scale dataset, which can be further
generalized to infer depth maps from unseen images. Although these methods can estimate a coarse geometry from
depth predictions, it is still a challenge to recover continuous
and complete surfaces with details from multi-view images.
The latest methods (Fu et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2022) infer signed distance functions
(SDFs) from multi-view images through volume rendering,
and then run the marching cubes (Lorensen and Cline 1987)
to reconstruct the surface. To supervise signed distances,
they transform the predicted signed distances into radiance
to render a pixel color by integrating colors along a ray,
which can be optimized by minimizing the difference to the

• We introduce a method for SDF inference that can get
constrained not only through volume rendering but also
by constraints that can be explicitly imposed on surfaces.
It significantly improves the accuracy of inferred SDFs.
• We propose to use predicted signed distances and gradients to sense a surface patch near the estimated intersection of a ray and the zero level set in volume rendering.
• We justify the feasibility of our approach and report the
state-of-the-art performance on the widely used benchmarks.

Related Work
Mult-view 3D Reconstruction. 3D shape reconstruction from multiple images has been extensively studied (Schönberger and Frahm 2016; Schönberger et al. 2016;
Mildenhall et al. 2020; Vicini, Speierer, and Jakob 2022).
Given multiple RGB images, classic multi-view stereo
(MVS) (Schönberger and Frahm 2016; Schönberger et al.

* Corresponding author: Jing Hua
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4066

