The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CareBot: A Pioneering Full-Process Open-Source Medical Language Model
Lulu Zhao1 * , Weihao Zeng2 , Xiaofeng Shi1 , Hua Zhou1
1

2

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
llzhao@baai.ac.cn

Abstract

still perform well in specialized domains, considering the
risk of data privacy, it is not convenient to use such APIs
to handle domain-specific issues. In the open-source community, a lack of domain-specific knowledge often limits
the performance of open-source models in specialized areas, such as medical (Yang et al. 2023a; Xiong et al. 2023;
Labrak et al. 2024). The complexity and depth of medical
knowledge present significant challenges for developing accurate and secure medical LLMs. Nonetheless, we believe
that medical LLMs hold immense potential and can significantly contribute to diagnostic assistance, consultation, drug
recommendation, and more. Thus, developing a fully opensource LLM tailored for the medical domain is of paramount
importance.
Currently, there are several medical LLMs available in
this domain . However, most of these models rely solely
SFT (Zhang et al. 2023, 2024a; Han et al. 2023). As is wellknown, pre-training is a critical phase for learning domainspecific knowledge, and depending exclusively on SFT results in models that can only produce answers in a fixed
format. Another approach attempts to integrate pre-training
with SFT by converting pre-training data in specific domains into a unified format similar to SFT data, such as (instruction, output) pairs using GPT-3.5 (Chen et al. 2023).
This method of synthesizing large amounts of data can lead
to the inclusion of significant amounts of incorrect knowledge that aligns with GPT-4 but diverges from human expertise, as well as high data synthesis costs. Furthermore, Yang
et al. (2023b) introduce Zhongjing for Chinese medicine,
which employs to implement the pipeline training from pretraining, SFT, to RLHF. However, this approach involves
two phases of transformation for the base model, which may
lead to issues such as catastrophic forgetting or model degradation (Cheng, Huang, and Wei 2024). Additionally, previous efforts have predominantly focused on data construction
during the SFT stage (Li et al. 2023a; Zhang et al. 2024b),
while neglecting the importance of data construction during
the CPT stage. Yet, a well-designed CPT data strategy is also
crucial for inserting medical expertise into the model.
To address these challenges, we propose CareBot, a bilingual medical LLM based on LLaMA3-8B, designed to effectively assist doctors with diagnosis, provide personalized treatment plans, and support medical education. Our
approach also implements the entire process from CPT,

Recently, both closed-source and open-source LLMs have
made significant strides, outperforming humans in various
general domains. However, their performance in specific professional domains such as medicine, especially within the
open-source community, remains suboptimal due to the complexity of medical knowledge. In this paper, we propose CareBot, a bilingual medical LLM, which leverages a comprehensive approach integrating continuous pre-training (CPT), supervised fine-tuning (SFT), and reinforcement learning with
human feedback (RLHF). Our novel two-stage CPT method,
comprising Stable CPT and Boost CPT, effectively bridges
the gap between general and domain-specific data, facilitating a smooth transition from pre-training to fine-tuning and
enhancing domain knowledge progressively. We also introduce DataRater, a model designed to assess data quality during CPT, ensuring that the training data is both accurate and
relevant. For SFT, we develope a large and diverse bilingual
dataset, along with ConFilter, a metric to enhance multi-turn
dialogue quality, which is crucial to improving the model’s
ability to handle more complex dialogues. The combination
of high-quality data sources and innovative techniques significantly improves CareBot’s performance across a range of
medical applications. Our rigorous evaluations on Chinese
and English benchmarks confirm CareBot’s effectiveness in
medical consultation and education. These advancements not
only address current limitations in medical LLMs but also
set a new standard for developing effective and reliable opensource models in the medical domain.

Code — https://github.com/FlagOpen/CareBot

Introduction
Recently, the advent of generative large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT (Brown et al. 2020) and
LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023a,b) has revolutionized humancomputer interaction. These models excel at basic text understanding and complex problem-solving tasks, demonstrating capabilities akin to human understanding and reasoning. However, in industrial applications, the professionalism and cost-effectiveness of LLMs are more concerned.
Although a series of closed-source models such as GPT-4
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26039

