The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SeeDiff: Off-the-Shelf Seeded Mask Generation from Diffusion Models
Joon Hyun Park1 , Kumju Jo1 , Sungyong Baik1, 2†
1

Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University, South Korea
2
Dept. of Data Science, Hanyang University, South Korea
{pjay258, juice0630, dsybaik}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Entrusted with the goal of pixel-level object classification, the
semantic segmentation networks entail the laborious preparation of pixel-level annotation masks. To obtain pixel-level
annotation masks for a given class without human efforts, recent few works have proposed to generate pairs of images and
annotation masks by employing image and text relationships
modeled by text-to-image generative models, especially Stable Diffusion. However, these works do not fully exploit the
capability of text-guided Diffusion models and thus require a
pre-trained segmentation network, careful text prompt tuning,
or the training of a segmentation network to generate final annotation masks. In this work, we take a closer look at attention
mechanisms of Stable Diffusion, from which we draw connections with classical seeded segmentation approaches. In
particular, we show that cross-attention alone provides very
coarse object localization, which however can provide initial
seeds. Then, akin to region expansion in seeded segmentation, we utilize the semantic-correspondence-modeling capability of self-attention to iteratively spread the attention to the
whole class from the seeds using multi-scale self-attention
maps. We also observe that a simple-text-guided synthetic
image often has a uniform background, which is easier to
find correspondences, compared to complex-structured objects. Thus, we further refine a mask using a more accurate
background mask. Our proposed method, dubbed SeeDiff,
generates high-quality masks off-the-shelf from Stable Diffusion, without additional training procedure, prompt tuning,
or a pre-trained segmentation network.

Figure 1: Comparisons against our baseline, DiffuMask (Wu
et al. 2023b) on the quality of a generated mask. To better
visualize the quality and accuracy of a generated mask, we
visualize a soft mask before discretization. We can see that
our proposed method SeeDiff produces more accurate masks
with sharp boundaries, compared to our baseline.

of fine-grained pixel-level annotation and even more so for
segmentation foundation models (1.1 billion masks across
11 million images). Such data-hunger nature can make the
training of segmentation networks laborious, thereby limiting its practicability.
To reduce the annotation cost, several works have employed weakly supervised learning frameworks, where only
coarse labels (e.g., bounding boxes (Hsu et al. 2019), lines
or points (Lin et al. 2016), or image-level class labels (Ahn,
Cho, and Kwak 2019), etc.) are available. However, relying on such weak labels has led to task-specific complex designs (Khoreva et al. 2016) and relatively low performance.
Alternatively, there has been efforts on generating synthetic segmentation dataset consisting of image-mask pairs,
in order to remove human efforts for annotation. Early
works (Zhang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022) have employed
the features of generative adversarial networks (GANs) to
generate synthetic data. However, these methods introduce
ad-hoc decoders that still require a few pixel-level annotations for training.
Following the advances in generative models (Ho, Jain,

Code — https://github.com/BAIKLAB/SeeDiff.git

Introduction
As one of fundamental tasks in computer vision, semantic
segmentation has a broad range of applications from medical imaging (Dolz, Desrosiers, and Ayed 2018; Oktay et al.
2018) to tracking (Yang et al. 2023). The applicability and
practicability of semantic segmentation have increased with
the emergence of neural networks for segmentation (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Ronneberger, Fischer, and
Brox 2015). However, the training of semantic segmentation
networks is data-hungry in nature, entailing a large amount
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6406

