The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting Test Performance with Importance Sampling–a Subpopulation Perspective
Hongyu Shen, Zhizhen Zhao
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, 61820, U.S.A.
{hongyu2, zhizhenz}@illinois.edu

w/ Subpopulation Shift

Abstract
Despite empirical risk minimization (ERM) is widely applied
in the machine learning community, its performance is limited on data with spurious correlation or subpopulation that is
introduced by hidden attributes. Existing literature proposed
techniques to maximize group-balanced or worst-group accuracy when such correlation presents, yet, at the cost of lower
average accuracy. In addition, many existing works conduct
surveys on different subpopulation methods without revealing
the inherent connection between these methods, which could
hinder the technology advancement in this area. In this paper,
we identify important sampling as a simple yet powerful tool
for solving the subpopulation problem. On the theory side, we
provide a new systematic formulation of the subpopulation
problem and explicitly identify the assumptions that are not
clearly stated in the existing works. This helps to uncover the
cause of the dropped average accuracy. We provide the first
theoretical discussion on the connections of existing methods, revealing the core components that make them different.
On the application side, we demonstrate a single estimator is
enough to solve the subpopulation problem. In particular, we
introduce the estimator in both attribute-known and -unknown
scenarios in the subpopulation setup, offering flexibility in
practical use cases. And empirically, we achieve state-of-theart performance on commonly used benchmark datasets.

Figure 1: An image example on subpopulation shift. The left
panel contains images where digits and colors are correlated,
whereas the right panel does not exhibit such correlation.

Code — https://github.com/skyve2012/DBA
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13003

1

w/o Subpopulation Shift

Introduction

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) often struggles with
distribution shifts that manifest when the training and test
distributions differ (Bickel, Brückner, and Scheffer 2007;
Quionero-Candela et al. 2009; Shimodaira 2000). One ubiquitous type of distribution shift is subpopulation shift, which
describes a scenario where the portion of the subpopulations
may vary between training and testing sets. See Figure 1
for an example. This consequently leads to degraded performance when a trained model is applied to production/testing
environments (Yang et al. 2023). Ensuring that machine learning models are robust against these distribution shifts hence
is crucial for their reliability and safe real-world application.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20371

Existing works proposed different methods in the forms
of auxiliary losses (Li et al. 2018; Arjovsky et al. 2019; Alshammari et al. 2022), data augmentations (Zhang et al. 2018;
Yao et al. 2022; Han et al. 2022), modeling objectives (Liu
et al. 2021; Sagawa et al. 2020; Japkowicz 2000; Wu et al.
2023; Nam et al. 2020; Asgari et al. 2022; Rudner et al. 2024;
Han and Zou 2024; Hong et al. 2023; Tsirigotis et al. 2024;
Menon et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2017) and data sampling techniques (LaBonte, Muthukumar, and Kumar 2024; Izmailov
et al. 2022; Japkowicz 2000). They all exhibit superior performance on worst group accuracy while maintaining high
accuracy in the overall set. However, two recent works experimentally observed that most models experience a drop in
average accuracy performance compared to the ERM setup
despite the high worst group accuracy (Tsirigotis et al. 2024;
Yang et al. 2023). Nonetheless, none of the papers is able to
provide rigorous explanations on the answer to why. The lack
of clarity in understanding can impede the development of
appropriate models and methods, potentially stalling progress
in the field.
In this work, we propose a systematic dataset bias analysis (DBA) framework that is rooted in importance sampling.
With this framework, we reveal the cause of the lower-thanERM average accuracy is the mismatch between the learning
objective and the testing dataset. Moreover, we identify the
flexibility of this framework in interpreting the formulation of
some of the existing works that focus primarily on statistical
heuristics and do not specify the underlying assumptions of

