The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging First and Zeroth-Order Gradient to Address Imbalanced Black-Box
Prompt Tuning via Minimax Optimization
†

Haozhen Zhang1 * , Zhaogeng Liu1 * , Bin Gu1 , Yi Chang1 2 3

†

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China
International Center of Future Science, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MOE, Changchun, Jilin, China
{haozhen23, zgliu20}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, jsgubin@gmail.com, yichang@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Black-box prompt tuning has become a prevalent parameterefficient paradigm that leverages the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) for customized applications in specific
downstream tasks. In practical scenarios, downstream tasks
frequently involve data distributions that are heavily imbalanced. Such imbalances tend to impair performance, causing
severe performance collapse in minority classes. Conducting
effective imbalanced black-box prompt tuning to mitigate the
adverse effects of imbalanced data distribution on prompt
performance remains a significant challenge. In this paper,
we propose black-box prompt tuning with first and zeroth order gradient (BPT-FZG) for handling the imbalanced data.
Specifically, BPT-FZG introduces AUC maximization as the
objective for prompt tuning and equivalently formulates it
as a nonconvex-concave saddle point problem to avoid the
construction of sample pairs from opposite classes. Indeed,
BPT-FZG optimizes the latent representation of the continuous prompt in the low-dimensional subspace with AUC loss
and leverages the first and zeroth order gradients alternately
to update the parameters. Furthermore, we establish the theoretical convergence guarantee for BPT-FZG under common
assumptions, showing that our method can find a stationary
point of the objective function. Our experiments on RoBERTalarge, GPT2-XL, and Llama3 show that BPT-FZG achieves
improvement on various imbalanced datasets, emphasizing the
effectiveness of our methods.

Code — https://github.com/ZHZ-JLU/zo-sppt

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance across a wide range of downstream tasks
in the past few years (Devlin et al. 2018; Brown et al. 2020;
Lewis et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021). These models are trained
on a massive text corpus to learn contextual relationships,
language structures, and other aspects of human knowledge,
demonstrating remarkable generalization in text understanding and generation (Hadi et al. 2023). By leveraging this
acquired comprehensive language knowledge, LLMs can be
* These authors contributed equally as co-first authors and are

listed in random order.
†
Co-corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22407

tuned with specific knowledge about downstream tasks for
customized applications. Meanwhile, researchers have proposed numerous methods for developing customized LLM
applications based on fine-tuning. However, these methods
are challenged by the increasing size of parameters and can
only be applied in the white-box setting where the model is
open-sourced (Yang et al. 2020; Varia et al. 2022; Iyer, Chen,
and Birch 2023).
Recently, most LLMs like ChatGPT-4, which have enormous parameter sizes, offer only online API services. This
prevents users from directly accessing the model’s parameters, resulting in an inevitable black-box setting. Therefore,
numerous studies have shifted towards black-box prompt
tuning, which is a parameter-efficient paradigm for adapting
LLMs to specific natural language processing (NLP) tasks
(Diao et al. 2022; Deng et al. 2022; Zhao, Wang, and Yang
2023). Moreover, this method is well-suited to the emerging Language-Model-as-a-Service (LMaaS) scenario, where
users are limited to interacting with LLMs solely through
APIs (Sun et al. 2022a,b).
Many NLP tasks inherently exhibit imbalance, with certain target categories occurring much more frequently than
others in real-world scenarios (Henning et al. 2022; Waseem
and Hovy 2016; Gao et al. 2021). Such imbalanced data
tends to cause LLMs to overfit the majority classes while
neglecting the minority classes due to the excessive number
of training samples for the former. Similarly, prompt tuning
in the presence of imbalanced data also encounters this issue
(Dong et al. 2022). For instance, cross-entropy loss is typically employed as the surrogate for classification error rate
in text classification downstream tasks. However, when the
data distribution is imbalanced, relying on cross-entropy loss
becomes inappropriate. It exacerbates the aforementioned
issues, leading to the performance collapse for the minority
classes (Liu et al. 2019a).
Some recent works in black-box prompt tuning have concentrated on identifying the optimal continuous prompts (Sun
et al. 2022b,a; Zheng et al. 2024). These methods use a lowrank matrix to project the high-dimensional prompt space
into a low-dimensional subspace and optimize the latent representation of the continuous prompt within that subspace.
This paves the way for the application of black-box optimization algorithms. Moreover, these methods significantly
reduce computational costs, thereby narrowing the gap be-

