The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Low-Rank Adaptation with Recoverability-Based
Reinforcement Pruning for Object Counting
Haojie Guo1 , Junyu Gao1,2 , Yuan Yuan1 *
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
guohaojie@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, junyugao@nwpu.edu.cn, y.yuan.ieee@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Object counting is crucial for understanding the distribution of objects in different scenarios. Recently, many object counting networks have been designed to be more complex to achieve marginal improvements, leading to excessive
time spent on model design. With the development of large
models (LMs), various visual tasks can be accomplished by
transferring pre-trained weights from LMs and fine-tuning
them. However, tens of millions of training data make the
pre-training parameters of LMs not entirely necessary. Moreover, if unnecessary parameters in the large model are not
removed, it may lead to decreased performance on the tasks
to be transferred. Motivated by this, this paper proposes an
Enhancing low-Rank adaptation with Recoverability-based
Reinforcement Pruning (E3RP) method to balance the complexity of large model and the accuracy of counting tasks.
Firstly, we design a new reward mechanism based on the feature similarity of large model before and after globally unstructured pruning of specific parameters. Additionally, we
design a Patch Query Flip Attention (PQFA) mechanism to
align multi-scale features through bidirectional interaction of
features. Finally, the parameters of large model are pruned
utilizing the pruning rate autonomously determined by the
reinforcement learning network, and the large model is finetuned to counting tasks by a simple decoding head. Extensive
experiments on four cross-scenario datasets demonstrate that
the proposed method can remove redundant network parameters while ensuring network performance, with a maximum
reduction of up to 63%.

Figure 1: The illustration of the proposed reinforcement
pruning method (E3RP). The redundant parameters of SAM
are adaptively pruned in E3RP and then transferred to downstream tasks by fine-tuning the decoder.

are emerging as potential solutions to the protracted network design process. Consequently, many researchers aim
to leverage the rich prior knowledge in LMs as pre-trained
weights and transfer them to various downstream tasks such
as object counting (Wan et al. 2025; Wan, Wu, and Chan
2023). Nevertheless, large models exhibit highly generalized
multi-category feature extraction capabilities, resulting in a
considerable redundancy of weights for counting tasks.
In this situation, fine-tuning all weights of LMs for downstream tasks demands substantial computational resources,
which is inconvenient and time-consuming. To expedite the
transfer of LMs, the Low-Rank Adapter (LoRA) method
(Hu et al. 2022) is proposed to fine-tune the entire large language model with reduced learning costs. LoRA trains additional parameters on top of the original pre-trained weights
to serve as supplementary information, achieving weight
fine-tuning and transfer with little cost. Fine-tuning redundant parameters in large models does not enhance their
adaptability to downstream tasks. Additionally, significant
differences exist in target distributions across scenarios, and
simply using the prior knowledge of large models is insufficient to ensure generalization capability.
Building on the previous discussion, transferring priors
from LMs to counting tasks faces two main challenges:
(1) the parameter redundancy inherent in large models,
and (2) the distribution gap between different scenarios. To
tackle these issues, this paper introduces the Enhancing low-

Introduction
Object counting aims to analyze the quantity of objects in
various scenarios and achieve image-level density estimation (Gao et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2020). Recent advances
in deep neural networks and Transformers (Zhang, Gao,
and Yuan 2024a,b; Chi et al. 2024) have led to a proliferation of algorithms for object counting (Yuan, Guo, and Gao
2025). However, the diminishing returns in counting accuracy brought by the complexity of networks have become
more apparent. Moreover, due to critical challenges like
variations in object sizes, the time needed for network design
has extended. Meanwhile, open-source large models (LMs)
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3238

