The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AAKR: Adversarial Attack-based Knowledge Retention for Continual Semantic
Segmentation
Zhidong Yu1,2 , Xiaoman Liu1,3 , Jiajun Hu1,3 , Zhenbo Shi1,2,3,4,* , Wei Yang1,2,3,*
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Hefei National Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
3
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou, China
4
Laboratory for Advanced Computing and Intelligence Engineering, Wuxi, China
zbshi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qubit@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

In the context of Continual Semantic Segmentation (CSS),
replay-based methods tend to achieve better performance
than knowledge distillation-based ones, as the former utilizes additional data to transfer old knowledge. However,
this advantage is at the cost of necessitating additional space
for storing the generative model and extra time for continual training. To address this predicament, we propose
a novel CSS framework, namely Adversarial Attack-based
Knowledge Retention (AAKR). The AKKR framework generates specific adversarial samples by adding images, and
uses them to retain old knowledge. Specifically, we leverage
adversarial attacks to generate adversarial images for incremental samples. By imposing additional constraints within
these attacks, we enhance the transfer of old knowledge,
thereby reinforcing the understanding of previously learned
information. Furthermore, we design an attack probability
module that adjusts adversarial attack directions based on
training feedback. This module effectively encourages the
new model to learn old knowledge from poorly protected
classes, significantly improving knowledge transfer effectiveness. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of AAKR, and showcase that AAKR surpasses state-ofthe-art competitors on benchmark datasets.

horse
cow bird

person
80

chair

IoU(%)

60
40
20
0

ss O

1.

E

ccu
rren
ces

26 -4
E
-4

0.
1
0. 62
00 11
7. 1 0
74 5

Cla

4
108
0.5

0.4

0. 0

0.2

a
gic

Lo

s

lue

a
lV

Figure 1: Relationship between performance decay and the
proportions of class occurrences and logical values of added
images.

Cha et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022) aims to distill knowledge
from the old model into a new one. In contrast, the latter
(Maracani et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2023) relies on retaining
past data or generating relevant data to prevent forgetting.
The latter tends to yield better results, especially in longer
learning steps. However, additional space is required to save
the generative model as well as additional time to learn the
generated and added images together.
To circumvent these limitations, we conduct an in-depth
study. As shown in Fig. 1, during incremental training, the
performance decay of each old class correlates with both the
frequency of its pseudo-label appearances in the added samples and its predicted values from the old model trained by
PLOP (Douillard et al. 2021). The old class appearing more
frequently in the added samples exhibits improved knowledge transfer. Therefore, we can enhance their knowledge
transfer by boosting the predictions of old models on old
classes with much degraded performance. Based on this,
we introduce a new CSS method: Adversarial Attack-based
Knowledge Retention (AAKR). AAKR employs adversarial
attacks to perturb added samples in a finite number of steps,
enhancing old classes that are prone to forgetting. This targeted knowledge retention at a minimal cost leads to signif-

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer
vision. With the continuous advancement of deep learning, sophisticated models have exhibited exceptional proficiency in this task. However, these deep learning models
face a significant challenge known as catastrophic forgetting within the realm of Continual Semantic Segmentation
(CSS) (Michieli and Zanuttigh 2019). Catastrophic forgetting refers to the susceptibility of neural networks to rapidly
overwrite their prior knowledge when learning new classes.
As the model accommodates new categories, the risk of erasing previously learned ones increases, which adversely affects the overall performance.
Existing approaches usually use two strategies to solve
catastrophic forgetting: knowledge distillation-based and
replay-based. The former (Cermelli et al. 2020; Douillard
et al. 2021; Phan et al. 2022; Michieli and Zanuttigh 2021;
*Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22245

