The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

B RAIN G UARD: Privacy-Preserving Multisubject
Image Reconstructions from Brain Activities
Zhibo Tian1 , Ruijie Quan2 , Fan Ma3 , Kun Zhan1 * , Yi Yang3
2

1
School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
kzhan@lzu.edu.cn

Abstract

1

Reconstructing perceived images from human brain activity
forms a crucial link between human and machine learning
through Brain-Computer Interfaces. Early methods primarily
focused on training separate models for each individual to
account for individual variability in brain activity, overlooking
valuable cross-subject commonalities. Recent advancements
have explored multisubject methods, but these approaches
face significant challenges, particularly in data privacy and
effectively managing individual variability. To overcome these
challenges, we introduce B RAIN G UARD, a privacy-preserving
collaborative training framework designed to enhance image
reconstruction from multisubject fMRI data while safeguarding individual privacy. B RAIN G UARD employs a collaborative
global-local architecture where individual models are trained
on each subject’s local data and operate in conjunction with a
shared global model that captures and leverages cross-subject
patterns. This architecture eliminates the need to aggregate
fMRI data across subjects, thereby ensuring privacy preservation. To tackle the complexity of fMRI data, B RAIN G UARD
integrates a hybrid synchronization strategy, enabling individual models to dynamically incorporate parameters from the
global model. By establishing a secure and collaborative training environment, B RAIN G UARD not only protects sensitive
brain data but also improves the image reconstructions accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that B RAIN G UARD
sets a new benchmark in both high-level and low-level metrics,
advancing the state-of-the-art in brain decoding through its
innovative design.

1

S

1

S

Figure 1: (a) Early subject-specific methods require separate
training for each individual using their respective fMRI, overlooking intersubject commonalities. (b) Recent multisubject
methods that combine all subjects’ fMRI for training pose
substantial privacy concerns. (c) B RAIN G UARD captures intersubject commonalities while preserving data privacy.

Introduction

Deciphering brain activities and recovering encoded information represents a fundamental objective in the field of cognitive neuroscience (Chen et al. 2023; Bullmore and Sporns
2009; Parthasarathy et al. 2017; Beliy et al. 2019). Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data (Kwong
et al. 1992) is commonly used to recover visual information and plays a crucial role in delineating brain activity by
observing fluctuations in blood oxygenation level. Initially,
methods for interpreting brain activity from fMRI mainly
involved image classification (Kamitani and Tong 2005; Cox
and Savoy 2003). With the integration of deep generative
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14414

models, the focus has shifted towards more sophisticated
fMRI-to-Image (f2I) reconstruction approaches (Shen et al.
2019; Beliy et al. 2019). However, the inherent variability in
fMRI across individuals presents significant challenges, as individuals exhibit unique brain activation patterns in response
to the same visual stimulus (Chen et al. 2023).
Earlier f2I reconstruction methods employed a subjectspecific approach, where distinct models are developed for
each individual’s fMRI to address the significant variance
in brain activity across different subjects (Fig. 1(a)) (Lin,
Sprague, and Singh 2022; Scotti et al. 2023; Gu et al. 2023;
Chen et al. 2023; Takagi and Nishimoto 2023). However, this
approach is inherently limited by its focus on individual differences, which results in the neglect of valuable insights that
could be obtained from commonalities across multisubject
fMRI. Recent advancements increasingly focus on multisubject or cross-subject methods (Fig. 1(b)) (Quan et al. 2024;
Scotti et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024), which aims to train a unified model capable of reconstructing images from the fMRI
of multiple individuals. These methods incorporate simple

