The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

In Search of Trees:
Decision-Tree Policy Synthesis for Black-Box Systems via Search
Emir Demirović1 , Christian Schilling2 , Anna Lukina1
1

Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
2
Aalborg University, Denmark
e.demirovic@tudelft.nl, christianms@cs.aau.dk, a.lukina@tudelft.nl

Abstract
θ ≥ c1

Decision trees, owing to their interpretability, are attractive as
control policies for (dynamical) systems. Unfortunately, constructing, or synthesising, such policies is a challenging task.
Previous approaches do so by imitating a neural-network policy, approximating a tabular policy obtained via formal synthesis, employing reinforcement learning, or modelling the
problem as a mixed-integer linear program. However, these
works may require access to a hard-to-obtain accurate policy
or a formal model of the environment (within reach of formal synthesis), and may not provide guarantees on the quality or size of the final tree policy. In contrast, we present an
approach to synthesise optimal decision-tree policies given a
deterministic black-box environment and specification, a discretisation of the tree predicates, and an initial set of states,
where optimality is defined with respect to the number of
steps to achieve the goal. Our approach is a specialised search
algorithm which systematically explores the (exponentially
large) space of decision trees under the given discretisation.
The key component is a novel trace-based pruning mechanism that significantly reduces the search space. Our approach represents a conceptually novel way of synthesising
small decision-tree policies with optimality guarantees even
for black-box environments with black-box specifications.

a1

a1

50 60 t

θ
0

50

t

θ
y
a ∈ {−1, 1}

a2
50

t

Figure 1: Problem illustration. For the pendulum environment E (right), each tree (left) with predicates θ ≥ ci , i =
1, 2, 3, coupled with the black-boxed E, produces a trace for
θ plotted along the time axis (middle) together with its evaluation with respect to the black-box specification (reaching
θ = 0). The middle trace is deemed best since it reaches the
goal faster (t = 50 < 60). The bottom trace is inferior.

Code — https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14601859
Extended version —
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2409.03260

1

θ
0

a2

θ ≥ c3

x

E

a2

θ ≥ c2
a1

θ
0

Introduction

There are diverse approaches to synthesising, or learning,
decision-tree policies. Stratego (David et al. 2015) employs
reinforcement learning dedicated to decision trees. Modifying the reinforcement learning process to produce decision
trees has also been proposed (Topin et al. 2021). An alternative is to apply imitation learning to distil a neural-network
policy into a decision tree (Bastani, Pu, and Solar-Lezama
2018). After using formal synthesis to construct a policy in
tabular form, decision trees may be induced via specialised
algorithms akin to algorithms used for solving standard classification problems (Ashok et al. 2021).
While previous approaches have their strengths, none
of the discussed methods provide guarantees in terms of
decision-tree policy performance or size and/or require an
existing expert policy or effective reinforcement learning algorithm. Policy synthesis may be posed as a mixed-integer

Designing controllers for complex systems with the guarantee of specified behaviour remains an important challenge. Classical control synthesis can provide such guarantees given a (precise) model of the system (Belta and Sadraddini 2019). This requirement may in some cases be infeasible, which gave rise to black-box and approximate approaches, e.g., based on machine learning. As systems grow
larger, interpretability is an increasingly desired specification for machine-learned policies to achieve alignment with
human specifications (Rudin 2019). With the success of decision trees as interpretable machine-learning models, policies represented as decision trees have gained considerable
traction (Du, Liu, and Hu 2020; Glanois et al. 2024).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27250

