The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TinySAM: Pushing the Envelope for Efficient Segment Anything Model
Han Shu1,2 , Wenshuo Li2 , Yehui Tang2 , Yiman Zhang2 ,
Yihao Chen2 , Houqiang Li1 , Yunhe Wang2∗ , Xinghao Chen2 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{han.shu, xinghao.chen, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract

and categories, SAM has become a foundation framework
for many downstream tasks such as object tracking (Cheng
et al. 2023), image inpainting (Yu et al. 2023) and 3D vision (Cen et al. 2023) etc. Moreover, the powerful zero-shot
segmentation ability of SAM has benefited research area
with less data like medical imaging (Ma and Wang 2023).
Although SAM has achieved impressive performance on
downstream vision tasks, complicated architecture and huge
computational cost make SAM difficult to be deployed on
resource constrained devices. The inference time of SAM
model for a 1024×1024 image could take up to 2 seconds
on a modern GPU (Zhao et al. 2023). Some recent attempts
have tried to obtain a more computation efficient segment
anything model. For example, MobileSAM (Zhang et al.
2023) tries to replace the heavy component of image encoder with a lightweight architecture of TinyViT (Wu et al.
2022). However, it only accesses the image encoder network
with a decoupled knowledge distillation strategy by training
the compact image encoder network with the supervision of
image embeddings from the teacher network. This partial
training strategy inevitably causes performance decay without the supervision of final mask prediction. FastSAM (Zhao
et al. 2023) transfers the segment anything task to an instance segmentation task with only one foreground category
with YOLOv8 (Jocher, Chaurasia, and Qiu 2023). To fulfill the function of prompt-based segmentation, FastSAM
applies a post-process strategy together with the instance
segmentation network. However, this reformulated framework could not achieve comparable performance as SAM
on downstream zero-shot tasks.
To further push the envelope for efficient segment anything model, in this paper we propose a full framework
to obtain TinySAM that greatly reduces the computational
cost while maintaining the zero-shot segmentation ability
to maximum extent. Specifically, we propose a hard mining full-stage knowledge distillation method to improve the
capability of the compact student network. The student network is distilled in an end-to-end manner with the supervision of teacher network from different network stages.
A mask-weighted distillation loss is proposed to efficiently
transfer the information from teacher to student through
massive various SA-1B masks. Besides, an online hard
prompt sampling strategy is proposed to make the distillation process attend more to hard examples and thus im-

Recently segment anything model (SAM) has shown powerful segmentation capability and has drawn great attention
in computer vision fields. Massive following works have developed various applications based on the pre-trained SAM
and achieved impressive performance on downstream vision
tasks. However, SAM consists of heavy architectures and requires massive computational capacity, which hinders the further application of SAM on computation constrained edge
devices. To this end, in this paper we propose a framework
to obtain a tiny segment anything model (TinySAM) while
maintaining the strong zero-shot performance. We first propose a full-stage knowledge distillation method with hard
prompt sampling and hard mask weighting strategy to distill
a lightweight student model. We also adapt the post-training
quantization to the prompt-based segmentation task and further reduce the computational cost. Moreover, a hierarchical segmenting everything strategy is proposed to accelerate the everything inference by 2× with almost no performance degradation. With all these proposed methods, our
TinySAM leads to orders of magnitude computational reduction and pushes the envelope for efficient segment anything task. Extensive experiments on various zero-shot transfer tasks demonstrate the significantly advantageous performance of our TinySAM against counterpart methods.

Code — https://github.com/xinghaochen/TinySAM

Introduction
Object segmentation is an important and foundational task
in computer vision fields. Extensive visual applications such
as object localization and verification rely on accurate and
fast object segmentation. Tremendous prior works have focused on segmentation tasks which include semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Strudel et al.
2021), instance segmentation (Bolya et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2018) and panoptic segmentation (Cheng et al. 2022; Kirillov et al. 2019). Recently, Kirillov et al. (Kirillov et al.
2023) introduce a powerful segment anything model (SAM),
together with a massive segmentation dataset SA-1B that
contains over 1 billion masks on 11 million images. With the
strong capability to segment objects with arbitrary shapes
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20470

