The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-View Empowered Structural Graph Wordification
for Language Models
Zipeng Liu1,2 * , Likang Wu1,2 * , Ming He3 , Zhong Guan1,2 , Hongke Zhao1,2† , Nan Feng1,2
1

2

College of Management and Economics, Tianjin University
Laboratory of Computation and Analytics of Complex Management Systems (CACMS), Tianjin University
3
AI Lab, Lenovo Research

Abstract
Significant efforts have been dedicated to integrating the powerful Large Language Models (LLMs) with diverse modalities, particularly focusing on the fusion of language, vision
and audio data. However, the graph-structured data, which
is inherently rich in structural and domain-specific knowledge, has not yet been gracefully adapted to LLMs. Existing methods either describe the graph with raw text, suffering the loss of graph structural information, or feed Graph
Neural Network (GNN) embeddings into LLMs at the cost
of losing explainable prompt semantics. To bridge this gap,
we introduce an end-to-end modality-aligning framework
for LLM-graph alignment: Dual-Residual Vector QuantizedVariational AutoEncoder, namely Dr.E. Our approach is purposefully designed to facilitate token-level alignment with
LLMs, enabling an effective translation of the intrinsic ‘language’ of graphs into comprehensible natural language. We
also manage to enhance LLMs’ more robust structural understanding of graphs by incorporating multiple views of the
central nodes based on their surrounding nodes at various distances. Our experimental evaluations on standard graph tasks
demonstrate competitive performance against other state-ofthe-art (SOTA) approaches. Additionally, our framework ensures certain visual interpretability, efficiency, and robustness, marking the promising successful endeavor to achieve
token-level alignment between LLMs and GNNs.

Figure 1: A demonstration of our proposed framework,
Dr.E, which serves effectively as a seamless interpreter,
translating graphs (depicted on the left) into comprehensible natural language (as displayed on the right).

poukelli et al. 2021), which have successfully integrated linguistic, visual, and audio modalities. These studies demonstrate that a diverse and high-quality dataset greatly enhances the performance of LLMs. Despite these achievements, the integration of graph-structured data into LLMs
has not seen comparable breakthroughs.
Graph data (Kipf and Welling 2016a), characterized by
its domain-specific nature and diverse forms of features, is
ubiquitous across various domains (Zhou et al. 2020; Wu
et al. 2020, 2023b,a; Zhao et al. 2023b,a, 2024b). For instance, in citation networks (McCallum et al. 2000; Wu et al.
2024a), it is used to predict the category of a given paper or
the citation relationship between two papers. In recommendation systems (Zhao et al. 2023c, 2024c,a), graph nodes
represent items and users, and the system recommends items
to users by mining the underlying relationships among them.
Graph data usually lacks textual attributes, which poses
challenges to constructing a uniform input representation for
LLMs. Traditional graph-based methods (Spitzer 2001; Wu
et al. 2020), have struggled to create a unified embedding
space that aligns well with LLMs. Current methods (Ye et al.
2023; Wu et al. 2024b) that integrate LLMs with graph data
mostly employ one of two lines: it either directly leverages
textual description of node information and graph structure,
or it feeds the embeddings derived from GNNs into LLMs.
Language serves as a natural medium to describe graphs,
since LLMs are pre-trained on massive textual datasets.
Non-linguistic features often elude interpretation through

Code — https://github.com/Timothy914/Dr.E

1

Introduction

Until recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown
et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2023; Achiam et al. 2023) were
primarily regarded as text-centric, limited to communication
through dialogue and exhibiting inferior performance with
visual inputs. However, since the emergence of ChatGPT4o in mid-2024, multimodal, end-to-end pre-trained LLMs
have taken center stage. These advanced models possess the
capability to process visual and auditory inputs, enabling
them to engage with humans in a more natural and fluid
manner. This advancement is supported by significant research efforts (Radford et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022; Tsim* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24714

