The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Class Semantic Attribute Perception Guided Zero-Shot Learning
Qin Yue, Junbiao Cui, Jianqing Liang* , Liang Bai*
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of
Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006, Shanxi, China
993203718@qq.com,{cjb, liangjq, bailiang}@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract

attributes, shared between seen and unseen classes, enable
ZSL methods to leverage the knowledge acquired from seen
classes to effectively recognize unseen classes.
In zero-shot image classification, image embeddings
are typically extracted by convolutional neural networks
such as VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015), GoogleNet
(Szegedy et al. 2015), ResNet (He et al. 2016), etc. Meanwhile, class semantic attributes are derived from expert annotations or language models (Xian et al. 2019a; Welinder
et al. 2010; Patterson and Hays 2012). These image embeddings are then aligned with their corresponding class semantic attributes. However, due to the significant differences between visual images and class semantic attributes, the primary challenge in zero-shot image classification is effectively aligning images with class semantic attributes.
According to how to achieve alignment between images
and class semantic attributes, the existing zero-shot image
classification methods can be roughly categorized into two
types, i.e., overall embedding-based alignment methods (see
Fig. 1a) and part embedding-based alignment methods (see
Fig. 1b).

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in supervised
image classification tasks, which relies on a large number of
labeled samples for each class. Recently, zero-shot learning
has garnered significant attention, which aims to recognize
unseen classes using only training samples from seen classes.
To bridge the gap between images and classes, class semantic
attributes are introduced, making the alignment between image and class semantic attributes critical to zero-shot learning. However, existing methods often struggle to accurately
focus on the image regions corresponding to individual class
semantic attributes and tend to overlook the relations between
different regions of an image, leading to poor alignment. To
address these challenges, we propose a class semantic attribute perception guided zero-shot learning method. Specifically, we achieve coarse-grained perception of class semantic
attributes across the entire image through contrastive semantic learning. Additionally, we attain fine-grained perception
of individual class semantic attributes within image regions
via region partitioning-based attribute alignment, which fully
considers the relations between different regions of an image.
By integrating these two processes into a unified network,
we achieve multi-grained class semantic attribute perception,
thereby enhancing the alignment between images and class
semantic attributes. We validate the effectiveness of the proposed method on zero-shot learning benchmark data sets.

Yellow-headed blackbird

(a)

Introduction
Deep learning has made remarkable progress in fully supervised image classification tasks (Russakovsky et al. 2015;
He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; He et al. 2022). However, labeling samples for every class is impractical, especially as new classes continually emerge. In response, zeroshot learning (ZSL) (Xian et al. 2019a; Xu et al. 2022a; Tang
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2022c; Xu et al.
2022b; Narayan et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021a) has recently
gained significant attention. The goal of ZSL (Larochelle,
Erhan, and Bengio 2008) is to recognize unseen classes for
which no training samples are available. To achieve this,
class semantic attributes (Frome et al. 2013; Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Reed et al. 2016) are typically
introduced as a bridge between images and classes. These

They are considered to be
relatively large blackbirds
with large, yellow heads
……

Yellow-headed blackbird

(b)

…

They are considered to be
relatively large blackbirds
with large, yellow heads
……

Yellow-headed blackbird

(c)

They are considered to be
relatively large blackbirds
with large, yellow heads
……

Figure 1: An illustration of different alignment methods. (a) Overall embedding-based alignment method. (b)
Part embedding-based alignment method. (c) The proposed
method.

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22281

