The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GLIC: General Format Learned Image Compression
MingSheng Zhou, MingMing Kong*
School of Computer and Software Engineering, XiHua University, ChengDu, SiChuan, China, 610039
mingshengzhou@foxmail.com, kongming000@126.com

Abstract
Learned image lossy compression techniques have surpassed
traditional methods in both subjective vision and quantitative evaluation. However, current models are only applicable
to three-channel image formats, limiting their practical application due to the diversity and complexity of image formats. We propose a high-performance learned image compression model for general image formats. We first introduce
a transfer method to unify any-channel image formats, enhancing the applicability of neural networks. This method’s
effectiveness is demonstrated through image information entropy and image homomorphism theory. Then, we introduce
an adaptive attention residual block into the entropy model to
give it better generalization ability. Meanwhile, we propose
an evenly grouped cross-channel context module for progressive preview image decoding. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) in the
field of learned image compression in terms of PSNR and
MS-SSIM. This work extends the applicability of learned image compression techniques to more practical production environments.

Figure 1: Improvement in RD performance by the onechannel and AARB schemes compared to the baseline
model (He et al. 2022).

Introduction

tomography images. Expanding the model’s applicability to
general image format compression and progressive decoding is necessary for the practical application of learned image compression techniques.
Significant advancements have occurred in learned image compression, particularly regarding encoding and decoding performance. For example, (He et al. 2021) introduced a novel context encoding scheme based on a checkerboard, which enabled parallel computation in autoregressive context encoding and significantly enhanced encoding efficiency. (Minnen and Singh 2020) proposed a channel context coding scheme with even grouping, substantially improving the decoding process’s efficiency. (He et al.
2022) presented an unevenly grouped channel context encoding scheme, further improving decoding efficiency and
introducing a new preview image decoding scheme. Despite
these advancements, extending the learned image compression technique to a general image format for better RD performance remains challenging. Our research is driven by the
need to use this technique to process any image format and
improve RD performance without compromising en/decode
speed.

In recent years, image compression technology has advanced rapidly. Subjective visual and quantified indicators such as PSNR (Gonzales and Wintz 1987) and MSSSIM (Wang, Simoncelli, and Bovik 2003) have surpassed
existing hand-crafted algorithms like JPEG (Pennebaker
and Mitchell 1992) and VTM (Wien and Bross 2020),
etc. Learned image compression also outperforms these
algorithms in terms of rate-distortion (RD) performance
at the same decoding quality. On one hand, traditional
hand-crafted image compression algorithms typically support three-channel (RGB), one-channel (grayscale), or fourchannel (RGBA) images, etc. On the other hand, existing learned image compression methods (Ballé et al. 2018;
Cheng et al. 2020; He et al. 2021, 2022; Gao et al. 2022;
Xu et al. 2022; Lieberman et al. 2023; Lee, Jeong, and Kim
2022; Ali et al. 2024) only model quantization for threechannel images and cannot be extended to multi-channel images in general format, such as grayscale images or medical
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10815

