The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mental-Perceiver: Audio-Textual Multi-Modal Learning for Estimating Mental
Disorders
Jinghui Qin1 , Changsong Liu2,3 , Tianchi Tang2 , Dahuang Liu2 ,
Minghao Wang2 , Qianying Huang2 , Rumin Zhang2,4 *
1
Guangdong University of Technology
Guangdong Shuye Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd.
3
University of Toronto
4
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
{scape1989, liucs.oise}@gmail.com, {tangtc, liudh, wangmh, huangqy}@gdshuyeit.com, rzhang01@idt.eitech.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Mental disorders, such as anxiety and depression, have become a global concern that affects people of all ages. Early
detection and treatment are crucial to mitigate the negative
effects these disorders can have on daily life. Although AIbased detection methods show promise, progress is hindered
by the lack of publicly available large-scale datasets. To address this, we introduce the Multi-Modal Psychological assessment corpus (MMPsy), a large-scale dataset containing
audio recordings and transcripts from Mandarin-speaking adolescents undergoing automated anxiety/depression assessment
interviews. MMPsy also includes self-reported anxiety/depression evaluations using standardized psychological questionnaires. Leveraging this dataset, we propose Mental-Perceiver,
a deep learning model for estimating mental disorders from
audio and textual data. Extensive experiments on MMPsy
and the DAIC-WOZ dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of
Mental-Perceiver in anxiety and depression detection.

Datasets — https://github.com/shuyeit/mmpsy-data

Introduction
Anxiety and depression are prevalent mental disorders that
can have a significant and detrimental impact on an individual’s life. If left untreated, these disorders can disrupt work,
study, and social interactions. Symptoms include persistent
negative emotions, behavioral changes, and physiological
disturbances (Cowen, Harrison, and Burns 2012). However,
misdiagnosis is common due to the overlap of symptoms
with other physical and physiological conditions. The World
Health Organization (WHO) 2019 report (de la Santé 2019)
indicates that more than 301 million people, including 58
million children and adolescents, suffer from anxiety disorders. In addition, more than 280 million people, including 23
million children and adolescents, are affected by depression.
Despite the prevalence of these conditions, the treatment rate
for both anxiety and depression remains notably low due to
the substantial time and financial commitments required for
diagnosis and treatment (Kessler 2012). Furthermore, individuals, particularly children and adolescents, can conceal
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25029

their true mental state during assessments and interviews,
preventing an accurate diagnosis.
To address this challenging issue, automatic detection of
anxiety and depression offers a potential solution. The development of a suitable psychological assessment corpus
related to anxiety and depression and the construction of an
automated anxiety and depression detection system are essential. This will allow individuals to assess their anxious or
depressive states privately and increase their willingness to
consult with psychologists after conducting self-assessments.
Furthermore, such a psychological assessment corpus and automated detection system would greatly assist psychologists
in diagnosing anxiety and depression disorders, even when
patients conceal their true mental states.
A significant challenge facing current research in automatic anxiety and depression detection is the absence of
extensive datasets to train and evaluate machine learning
models. Existing methodologies frequently depend on the
judgment of expert psychologists (e.g., during clinical interviews) for data collection, making the creation of large-scale
annotated datasets costly. Publicly accessible datasets, such
as DAIC-WOZ (Gratch et al. 2014) and AViD-Corpus (Valstar et al. 2014), are restricted in scale and scope. Although
initiatives like EATD-Corpus (Shen, Yang, and Lin 2022)
have been undertaken using self-reported mental health questionnaires, challenges persist regarding data size and validation.
In this work, our goal is to address the challenges in facilitating automatic detection of anxiety and depression and to
extend the research boundaries to a more real world setting.
First, we introduce a large-scale Multi-Modal Psychological
assessment corpus (MMPsy) about anxiety and depression
in Mandarin-speaking adolescents. The MMPsy comprises
audio and extracted transcripts of responses from anxious/depressed and non-anxious/non-depressed adolescent volunteers. After data pre-processing and cleaning, 7,736 cleaned
interview data are available for anxiety detection and 4,247
for depression detection. To our knowledge, MMPsy is the
first publicly available adolescent psychological assessment
corpus capable of simultaneously detecting anxiety and depression, and containing both audio and text data in Chinese.
Subsequently, we propose a deep learning model, termed
Mental-Perceiver, to automatically detect anxious/depres-

