The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Image Conductor: Precision Control for Interactive Video Synthesis
Yaowei Li1,3 , Xintao Wang2 , Zhaoyang Zhang 2‡ , Zhouxia Wang4 ,
Ziyang Yuan5 , Liangbin Xie6,7 , Ying Shan2 , Yuexian Zou1,3 *
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG, Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
6
University of Macau, Macao SAR
7
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Shenzhen, China
Abstract

leverages the powerful generative capabilities of diffusion
models to generate video clip assets. Despite these advancements, generating dynamic video assets allowing creators
precisely express their ideas remains unusable, for: (1) Lacking of efficient generating control interface. (2) Lacking of
fine-grained and accurate control over camera transitions
and object movements.
Although several works have attempted to introduce motion control signals to guide the video generation process (Yin et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023, 2024; Wu et al.
2024), none of the existing methods support accurate and
fine-grained control over both camera transitions and object
movements (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 4).
In fact, data available on the internet often mixes both
camera transitions and object movements, leading to ambiguities between the two types of motion. Although MotionCtrl (Wang et al. 2023) uses a data-driven approach
to decouple camera transitions from object motion, it still
lacks precision and effectiveness. Camera parameters are
neither intuitive nor straightforward to obtain for cinematographic variations. For object movements, MotionCtrl uses
ParticleSfM (Zhao et al. 2022), a motion segmentation network based on optical flow estimation, which introduces
significant errors. Additionally, ground truth videos annotated based on motion segmentation networks still contain
camera transitions, causing generated videos to exhibit unintended cinematographic variations. Decoupling cinematographic variations from object movements through data curation is inherently challenging. Obtaining video data from a
fixed camera viewpoint, i.e., videos with only object movements, is difficult. Optical flow-based motion segmentation
methods (Teed and Deng 2020; Xu et al. 2022; Zhao et al.
2022; Yin et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023) struggle to accurately track moving objects without errors and fail to eliminate intrinsic camera transitions in realistic videos. Overall, existing methods are either not fine-grained or not sufficiently accurate and effective.
In this paper, we propose Image Conductor, an interactive
method for fine-grained object motion and camera control to
generate accurate video assets from a single image. Effective
fine-grained motion control requires robust motion representation. Trajectories, being intuitive and user-friendly, allow

Filmmaking and animation production often require sophisticated techniques for coordinating camera transitions and
object movements, typically involving labor-intensive realworld capturing. Despite advancements in generative AI for
video creation, achieving precise control over motion for interactive video asset generation remains challenging. To this
end, we propose Image Conductor, a method for precise control of camera transitions and object movements to generate
video assets from a single image. A well-cultivated training
strategy is proposed to separate distinct camera and object
motion by camera LoRA weights and object LoRA weights.
To further eliminate motion ambiguity from ill-posed trajectories, we introduce a camera-free guidance technique during inference process, enhancing object movements while
eliminating camera transitions. Additionally, we develop a
trajectory-oriented video motion data curation pipeline for
training. Quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate our method’s precision and fine-grained control in generating motion-controllable videos from images, advancing
the practical application of interactive video synthesis.

Project Page —
https://liyaowei-stu.github.io/project/ImageConductor/

Introduction
Filmmaking and animation production are essential forms
of visual art. During the creative process of video media,
professional directors often require advanced cinematography techniques to meticulously plan and coordinate camera
transitions and object movements, ensuring storyline coherence and refined visual effects. To achieve precise creative
expression, the current workflow for video media orchestration and production heavily relies on real-world capturing
and 3D scan modeling, which are labor-intensive and costly.
Recent work (Ho et al. 2022; Blattmann et al. 2023b;
Girdhar et al. 2023; Xing et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023;
Blattmann et al. 2023a; Bar-Tal et al. 2024; Brooks et al.
2024) explores an AIGC-based filmmaking pipeline that
* ‡Project lead. *Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5031

