The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Disentangling Long-Short Term State Under Unknown Interventions for Online
Time Series Forecasting
Ruichu Cai1, 2 , Haiqin Huang1 , Zhifan Jiang1 , Zijian Li3 * , Changze Zhou1 ,
Yuequn Liu1 , Yuming Liu1 , Zhifeng Hao4
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
4
Shantou University
Abstract

tion shifts (Wang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024b), existing methods (Wu et al. 2021; Nie et al. 2022; Lopez-Paz and Ranzato
2017) that heavily rely on the mini-batch training paradigm
can hardly adapt to these changing distributions, leading to
suboptimal prediction results in the online scenario.
To solve this problem, several recent methodologies (Cai
et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2024; Mejri, Amarnath, and Chatterjee
2024; Lin 1992) are proposed to adapt the short-term nonstationarity and long-term dependencies. FSNet (Pham et al.
2022) leverages the partial derivative to characterize the
short-term information and an associative memory to preserve the long-term dependencies. To better combine longterm and short-term historical information, OneNet (Wen
et al. 2024) uses a reinforcement learning-based to dynamically adjust the combination of temporal correlation and
cross-variable dependency models. Recently, Zhang et al.
(Zhang et al. 2024) propose the Concept Drift Detection and
Adaptation framework (D3 A), which first detects the temporal distribution shift and then employs an aggressive manner
to update the model. In summary, these methods aim to address online time series forecasting via two steps: 1) disentangling long/short-term states; and 2) adapting short-term
states and reusing long-term states for forecasting. Please
refer to Appendix A for further discussion about online time
series forecasting and causal representation learning.
Although current methods achieve non-trivial contributions on how to update short-term states or how to efficiently
combine the long/short-term states, they implicitly assume
that the long/short-term states have been well-disentangled
from nonstationary time series data. However, this assumption is hard to meet, and without disentanglement of the
long/short-term states, existing methods can hardly adapt to
the nonstationary environments. Figure 1 provides a finance
example, where the monetary exchange rate is influenced by
the short-term variables (e.g. customs duties) and the longterm variables (e.g., financial revenue). Nonstationarity occurs due to unknown customs tariff policies. As shown in
Figure 1 (a), when the long-term and short-term latent variables are not disentangled, the financial revenues are entangled with the customs duties. As a result, existing methods
can be hard to effectively adapt to the changes in financial
revenues and may obtain an inaccurate forecasting performance even if they use a masterly strategy to update the

Current methods for time series forecasting struggle in the
online scenario, since it is difficult to preserve long-term dependency while adapting short-term changes when data are
arriving sequentially. Although some recent methods solve
this problem by controlling the updates of latent states, they
cannot disentangle the long/short-term states, leading to the
inability to effectively adapt to nonstationary. To tackle this
challenge, we propose a general framework to disentangle
long/short-term states for online time series forecasting. Our
idea is inspired by the observations where short-term changes
can be led by unknown interventions like abrupt policies in
the stock market. Based on this insight, we formalize a data
generation process with unknown interventions on short-term
states. Under mild assumptions, we further leverage the independence of short-term states led by unknown interventions
to establish the identification theory to achieve the disentanglement of long/short-term states. Built on this theory, we develop a Long Short-Term Disentanglement model (LSTD)
to extract the long/short-term states with long/short term encoders, respectively. Furthermore, the LSTD model incorporates a smooth constraint to preserve the long-term dependencies and an interrupted dependency constraint to enforce
the forgetting of short-term dependencies, together boosting
the disentanglement of long/short-term states. Experimental
results on several benchmark datasets show that our LSTD
model outperforms existing methods for online time series
forecasting, validating its efficacy in real-world applications.

Code — https://github.com/DMIRLAB-Group/LSTD

Introduction
As one of the most fundamental tasks in time series analysis (Hamilton 2020; Liu et al. 2023), time series forecasting (Zhou et al. 2021; Zeng et al. 2023; Kitaev, Kaiser,
and Levskaya 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2021) plays a critical role in various fields such as finance (Clements, Franses, and Swanson 2004; Cao, Li, and
Li 2019), and traffic (Lippi, Bertini, and Frasconi 2013).
However, in the industry, since time series data often arrives sequentially and is accompanied by temporal distribu* corresponding author: Zijian Li (leizigin@gmail.com)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15641

