The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Online Learning of Coalition Structures by Selfish Agents
Saar Cohen, Noa Agmon
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Israel
saar30@gmail.com, agmon@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

the agents’ utilities solely depend on the coalition they are
part of, without caring about the structure of other coalitions, i.e., externalities are ignored. The outcome of such
games is a set of disjoint coalitions (hereafter, partition).
The desirability of partitions is often measured by the common criterion of stability (Aziz and Savani 2016; Bullinger
and Romen 2024), capturing the prospect of agents maintaining their coalitions. The hedonic games literature on stability typically concerns only the final outcome of coalition formation, ignoring the process of reaching stable partitions. Specifically, in most existing works it is implicitly
assumed that a central authority can obtain the agents’ preferences, find a stable partition and enforce it on the agents.
On the contrary, recent studies consider a dynamic process
where, starting from a given partition, agents deliberately
move between coalitions based on their individual preferences (Boehmer, Bullinger, and Kerkmann 2023; Brandt,
Bullinger, and Tappe 2022).
However, in many realistic scenarios as our study groups
example, agents’ preferences toward others are initially unknown prior to interactions (see, e.g., (Cohen and Agmon
2023a)). Thus, each agent must make decisions individually
and perform online learning of her own preferences from repeated feedback by iteratively joining coalitions. To reflect
such settings, Cohen and Agmon (2024b) study online learning in hedonic games, aiming to maximize social welfare.
In contrast, in this paper we present and study a new
model for online learning in coalition formation under a
non-cooperative perspective, evaluating partitions by means
of Nash stability, where no agent can improve her utility
by unilaterally deviating (e.g., no student can improve in
her studies by changing groups unilaterally). This stability
notion is well-suited to our context as it captures the selfish incentives of single agents to perform improving deviations. We exhibit our results for additively separable hedonic
games (ASHGs) with symmetric preferences (Bogomolnaia
and Jackson 2002), where an agent’s utility for a coalition
is the sum of her utilities from other coalition members. The
existence of a Nash stable outcome in those games is guaranteed (Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002), but computing such
partitions is PLS-complete (Gairing and Savani 2019).
In many realistic scenarios, agents interact in a shared environment, as in our study groups example. This prompts
us to explore how online learning algorithms are affected

Coalition formation concerns autonomous agents that strategically interact to form self-organized coalitions. When
agents lack initial sufficient information to evaluate their preferences before interacting with others, they learn them online
through repeated feedback while iteratively forming coalitions. In this work, we introduce online learning in coalition
formation from a non-cooperative perspective, studying the
impact of collective data utilization where selfish agents aim
to accelerate their learning by leveraging a shared data platform. Thus, the efficiency and dynamics of the learning process are affected by each agent’s local feedbacks, motivating us to explore the tension between semi-bandit and bandit feedback, which differ in the granularity of utility information observed by each agent. Under our non-cooperative
viewpoint, we evaluate the system by means of Nash stability, where no agent can improve her utility by unilaterally deviating. Our main result is a sample-efficient algorithm for selfish agents that aims to minimize their Nash regret under both semi-bandit and bandit feedback, implying
approximately Nash stable outcomes. Under both feedback
settings, our algorithm enjoys Nash regret and sample complexity bounds that are optimal up to logarithmic factors.

1

Introduction

A set of students begins their Bachelor’s degree, driven by
their individual desires to enhance their academic successes
via forming study groups during the semester. Students initially lack clarity on their own preferences about group size,
study methods, or topics. By joining study sessions based on
their self-interest and interacting with others, students learn
about their preferences via feedback on productivity and satisfaction with group dynamics. This adaptive process allows
them to selfishly optimize their own studying experiences,
making informed decisions to join study groups aligned with
their individual working styles and academic goals. Such
cases and many other real-world scenarios noticed in our social, economic, and politic life, fall within the phenomenon
of coalition formation, where agents perform activities in
coalitions rather than on their own.
A prominent framework for studying coalition formation
is that of hedonic games (Dreze and Greenberg 1980), where
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13709

