The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Lifting Scheme-Based Implicit Disentanglement of
Emotion-Related Facial Dynamics in the Wild
Xingjian Wang, Li Chai*
The State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University
{xingjianwang, chaili}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

and laboratory-controlled DFER, in-the-wild DFER remains
challenging. As revealed in prior works(Li et al. 2022; Tao
et al. 2023), videos of in-the-wild DFER contain limited dynamic expression-related frames along with numerous neutral or noisy frames. That is, the emotion-related frames are
temporally diluted by non-expression frames.
Previous DFER methods tend to model tightly coupled
spatiotemporal representations. They utilize the whole representation for recognition, which may be vulnerable to excessive non-expression frames in non-neutral emotion classification tasks. Specifically, a large part of previous methods(Jiang et al. 2020; Ma, Sun, and Li 2022; Sun et al.
2023) directly apply the entire hidden features or global tokens from 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) or vision transformer (ViT) for DFER. Besides, there are some
methods(Zhao and Liu 2021; Wang et al. 2022b; Li et al.
2023) that utilize separable spatiotemporal architecture, i.e.,
2D CNN + GRU/LSTM/Transformer, to extract spatial and
temporal representation in a cascaded manner. Their spatial representations are tangled with temporal ones in the
end. Thus, the above two kinds of methods accord with
the mentioned issue. Their expression representation may
contain numerous emotion-irrelevant features such as facial shapes and identity-specific characteristics, leading to
emotion-irrelevant context bias and information redundancy.
In light of this, we endeavor to disentangle emotion-related
dynamic features from global context features for more
compact and effective representation of dynamic expression.
Recently, several DFER studies(Li et al. 2022; Tao
et al. 2023) have responded to this challenge and focused
on the significant dynamic information. NR-DFERNet(Li
et al. 2022) directly differential operation between adjacent
frames, thereby paying more attention to the key dynamic
frames. Freq-HD(Tao et al. 2023) utilizes Discrete Fourier
Transform-based (DFT) frequency analysis sliding across
frames to strengthen high-dynamics affective clips. However, their introduced explicit guidance to extract dynamics
will be vulnerable to background motion and head movements, especially for in-the-wild complex scenarios. Instead,
we distill emotion-related dynamics from higher-level latent
features via expanding wavelet lifting scheme (Sweldens
1998) to a more implicit and adaptive framework.
Given the aforementioned concerns, we propose Implicit
Facial Dynamics Disentanglement (IFDD) compatible with

In-the-wild dynamic facial expression recognition (DFER)
encounters a significant challenge in recognizing emotionrelated expressions, which are often temporally and spatially
diluted by emotion-irrelevant expressions and global context.
Most prior DFER methods directly utilize coupled spatiotemporal representations that may incorporate weakly relevant
features with emotion-irrelevant context bias. Several DFER
methods highlight dynamic information for DFER, but following explicit guidance that may be vulnerable to irrelevant motion. In this paper, we propose a novel Implicit Facial Dynamics Disentanglement framework (IFDD). Through
expanding wavelet lifting scheme to fully learnable framework, IFDD disentangles emotion-related dynamic information from emotion-irrelevant global context in an implicit
manner, i.e., without exploit operations and external guidance. The disentanglement process contains two stages. The
first is Inter-frame Static-dynamic Splitting Module (ISSM)
for rough disentanglement estimation, which explores interframe correlation to generate content-aware splitting indexes
on-the-fly. We utilize these indexes to split frame features
into two groups, one with greater global similarity, and
the other with more unique dynamic features. The second
stage is Lifting-based Aggregation-Disentanglement Module (LADM) for further refinement. LADM first aggregates
two groups of features from ISSM to obtain fine-grained
global context features by an updater, and then disentangles emotion-related facial dynamic features from the global
context by a predictor. Extensive experiments on in-the-wild
datasets have demonstrated that IFDD outperforms prior supervised DFER methods with higher recognition accuracy
and comparable efficiency.

Code — https://github.com/CyberPegasus/IFDD
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13168

Introduction
Dynamic facial expression recognition (DFER) for in-thewild scenarios holds significant importance for understanding human mental state, and facilitate various relevant
applications(Cowen et al. 2021). Despite the impressive
progress both in static facial expression recognition (SFER)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7970

