The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Even-if Explanations: Formal Foundations, Priorities and Complexity
Gianvincenzo Alfano, Sergio Greco, Domenico Mandaglio,
Francesco Parisi, Reza Shahbazian, Irina Trubitsyna
Department of Informatics, Modeling, Electronics and System Engineering, University of Calabria, Italy
{g.alfano, greco, d.mandaglio, fparisi, i.trubitsyna}@dimes.unical.it reza.shahbazian@unical.it

Abstract
Explainable AI has received significant attention in recent
years. Machine learning models often operate as black boxes,
lacking explainability and transparency while supporting
decision-making processes. Local post-hoc explainability
queries attempt to answer why individual inputs are classified in a certain way by a given model. While there has been
important work on counterfactual explanations, less attention
has been devoted to semifactual ones. In this paper, we focus
on local post-hoc explainability queries within the semifactual
‘even-if’ thinking and their computational complexity among
different classes of models, and show that both linear and
tree-based models are strictly more interpretable than neural
networks. After this, we introduce a preference-based framework enabling users to personalize explanations based on their
preferences, both in the case of semifactuals and counterfactuals, enhancing interpretability and user-centricity. Finally,
we explore the complexity of several interpretability problems in the proposed preference-based framework and provide
algorithms for polynomial cases.

x1
[0,1,1]

[1,1,1]

counterfactual
[1,0,1]

[0,0,1]

y2
[1,1,0]

[0,1,0]

y1
[0,0,0]

[1,0,0]

decision boundary

semifactual

Figure 1: Binary classification model M: step(x·[−2, 2, 0]+
1) of Example 1 (hiring scenario). The binary feature f1
(resp., f2 and f3 ) represents part-time employment contract
(resp., salary lower than 5K$, and on site-working).

Introduction
The extensive study of counterfactual ‘if only’ thinking, exploring how things might have been different, has been a
focal point for social and cognitive psychologists (Kahneman
and Tversky 1981; McCloy and Byrne 2002). Consider a negative event, such as taking a taxi and due to traffic arriving
late to a party. By analyzing this situation, an individual (e.g.
Alice) might engage in counterfactual thinking by imagining
how things could have unfolded differently, such as, ‘if only
Alice had not taken the taxi, she would not have arrived late
at the party’. This type of counterfactual thinking, where
an alternative scenario is imagined, is a common aspect of
daily life. In such a case the counterfactual scenario negates
both the event’s cause (antecedent) and its outcome, presenting a false cause and a false outcome that are temporarily
considered as true (e.g., Alice took the taxi and arrived late).
Counterfactual thinking forms the basis for crafting counterfactual explanations, which are crucial in automated
decision-making processes. These explanations leverage
imagined alternative scenarios, aiding users in understanding
why certain outcomes occurred and how different situations
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15347

might have influenced decisions. Counterfactual explanations
empower users to grasp the rationale behind decisions, fostering transparency and user trust in these systems. Several
definitions of counterfactual explanations exist in the literature (Guidotti 2022; Jiang et al. 2024; Wu, Wu, and Barrett
2023). According to most of the literature, counterfactuals
are defined as the minimum changes to apply to a given instance to let the prediction of the model be different (Barceló
et al. 2020).
While significant attention in AI has been given to counterfactual explanations, there has been a limited focus on the
equally important and related semifactual ‘even if’ explanations (Aryal and Keane 2023; Kenny and Huang 2023),
though they have been investigated much more in cognitive
sciences. While counterfactuals explain what changes to the
input features of an AI system change the output decision,
semifactuals show which input feature changes do not change
a decision outcome. Considering the above-mentioned situation where Alice took the taxi and arrived late at the party,
we might analyze ‘even if’ scenarios envisioning how things
could have remained the same, such as, “even if Alice had
not taken a taxi, she would have still arrived late at the party”.
Sharing the same underlying idea of counterfactuals, we define semifactuals as the maximum changes to be applied to a
given instance while keeping the same prediction. Indeed, the
larger the feature differences asserted in the semifactual, the
better (more convincing) the explanation (Aryal and Keane
2023). Semifactual explanations incorporating more feature
changes offer several benefits, including improved decision-

