The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

𝒗𝒐𝒙𝒆𝒍 𝟏

…

…

𝒆𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒓

𝒔𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆 𝟏

DC-PCN: Point Cloud Completion Network with𝒇𝒆𝒂𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒆 𝒑𝒓𝒆𝒅𝒊𝒄𝒕
𝒔𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆 𝑵 𝒗𝒐𝒙𝒆𝒍 𝑵
(a) Quantization
Dual-Codebook Guided

𝒐𝒓𝒊𝒈𝒊𝒏
𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒇𝒂𝒄𝒆

𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒇𝒂𝒄𝒆

Qiuxia Wu1 , Haiyang Huang1 , Kunming Su1 , Zhiyong Wang2 , Kun Hu2 *
1

South China University of Technology
2
The University of Sydney
qxwu@scut.edu.cn, {HaiYangHuang.5461, kunmingsu07}@gmail.com, {zhiyong.wang, kun.hu}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

(a)

𝒇𝒆𝒂𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒆 𝟏

…

…

𝒔𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆 𝟏

𝒆𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒓

𝒐𝒓𝒊𝒈𝒊𝒏 𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒇𝒂𝒄𝒆
𝒇𝒆𝒂𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒆 𝑵

𝒔𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆 𝑵

𝒇𝒆𝒂𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒆 𝑵

(b)

𝒔𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆 𝑵

𝒉𝒊𝒈𝒉

…

…

𝒇𝒆𝒂𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒆 𝟏

…

𝒔𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆 𝟏

𝒆𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒅𝒆𝒓

Point cloud completion aims to reconstruct complete 3D
shapes from partial 3D point clouds. With advancements in
deep learning techniques, various methods for point cloud
completion have been developed. Despite achieving encouraging results, a significant issue remains: these methods often
overlook the variability in point clouds sampled from a single
3D object surface. This variability can lead to ambiguity and
hinder the achievement of more precise completion results.
Therefore, in this study, we introduce a novel point cloud completion network, namely Dual-Codebook Point Completion
Network (DC-PCN), following an encder-decoder pipeline.
The primary objective of DC-PCN is to formulate a singular representation of sampled point clouds originating from
the same 3D surface. DC-PCN introduces a dual-codebook
design to quantize point-cloud representations from a multilevel perspective. It consists of an encoder-codebook and a
decoder-codebook, designed to capture distinct point cloud
patterns at shallow and deep levels. Additionally, to enhance
the information flow between these two codebooks, we devise
an information exchange mechanism. This approach ensures
that crucial features and patterns from both shallow and deep
levels are effectively utilized for completion. Extensive experiments on the PCN, ShapeNet_Part, and ShapeNet34 datasets
demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our method.

𝒇𝒆𝒂𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒆
𝒔𝒊𝒎𝒊𝒍𝒂𝒓𝒊𝒕𝒚
𝒐𝒓𝒊𝒈𝒊𝒏
𝒑𝒓𝒆𝒅𝒊𝒄𝒕
𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒇𝒂𝒄𝒆

𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒇𝒂𝒄𝒆

Figure 1: Comparison between different approaches: (a)
point-based approach and (b) ours.

segmentation, hindering the achievement of desired results
(Tchapmi et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2018).
Thanks to advances in deep learning, a variety of point
cloud completion methods have been explored. They can
be broadly categorized into the voxel-based approach and
the point-based approach . The voxel-based approach (Choy
et al. 2016; Girdhar et al. 2016; Dai, Ruizhongtai Qi, and
Nießner 2017; Han et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2015) introduces
a voxel paradigm to formulate structural representations for
3D objects with 3D convolutions. The major issue of this
approach is to control the voxel granularity. Smaller voxel
sizes typically demand high computational costs; while larger
voxels can lead to substantial degradation of the structural
information and the precision of the completion outcomes.
The point-based approach has been proposed to take point
cloud inputs directly such as PCN (Yuan et al. 2018), PFNet (Huang et al. 2020), MSN (Liu et al. 2020), TopNet
(Tchapmi et al. 2019) and GRNet (Xie et al. 2020). Recently,
to enhance the extraction of intricate structural patterns, PointTransformer (Zhao et al. 2021), Pointformer (Pan et al. 2021),
and PCT (Guo et al. 2021) integrate Transformer architectures into point cloud processing to capture long-range point
dependencies. Nonetheless, these methods overlook the fact
that point clouds sampled from a 3D object’s surface can
vary, leading to ambiguity issues for an identical 3D surface
and ultimately incur sub-optimal completion outcomes, as
illustrated in Figure 1 (a).
Therefore, in this study, we propose a novel point cloud

Code — https://github.com/tthrvfd/dcpcn.

Introduction
With the increasing popularity of 3D scanning devices such
as LiDAR scanners, laser scanners, and RGB-D cameras (Fei
et al. 2022a), the realm of vision and robotics has witnessed
a significant surge in interest in utilizing 3D data. Among
the various formats available, point clouds have emerged as
a prominent choice due to their advantages, including low
memory usage and detailed 3D shape information (Qi et al.
2017; Yuan et al. 2018; Mo et al. 2025). However, raw point
cloud data obtained directly from 3D sensors often suffers
from incompleteness due to the limitations such as viewpoint occlusion and the resolution of 3D scanners (Fei et al.
2022b). This incompleteness poses significant challenges
for downstream tasks, such as point cloud classification and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8441

