The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scalable Decentralized Algorithms for Online Personalized Mean Estimation
Franco Galante1 , Giovanni Neglia2 , Emilio Leonardi1
1

Politecnico di Torino
2
INRIA
franco.galante@polito.it, giovanni.neglia@inria.fr, emilio.leonardi@polito.it

Abstract

et al. 2020; Sattler, Müller, and Samek 2021; Ding and Wang
2022). Ideally, clustering would group clients with similar
local optimal models. However, since the optimal models
are unknown a priori, model learning and cluster identification become deeply interconnected tasks. Various studies have suggested empirical measures of similarity as a
workaround (e.g., Ghosh et al. 2020; Sattler, Müller, and
Samek 2021), while others rely on presumed knowledge
of distances across data distributions (e.g. Ding and Wang
2022; Even, Massoulié, and Scaman 2022). Nonetheless, accurately estimating these distances, especially within an FL
framework where clients may possess limited data, proves to
be particularly challenging. These estimation difficulties are
well documented in the literature—e.g., by Even, Massoulié,
and Scaman (2022) [Sec. 6]—highlighting the problem of
identifying similar clients for collaborative model learning
as a significant yet unresolved issue.
In this paper, we focus on a fundamental aspect of the
broader challenge: estimating the mean of an RK -valued
distribution. This problem is often regarded as the archetypal federated learning problem (Dorner et al. 2024; Tsoy
et al. 2024; Grimberg et al. 2021), but it also holds significant practical relevance across various fields, such as smart
agriculture, grid management, and healthcare, where multiple sensors collect private, noisy data on identical or related
variables (Adi et al. 2020).
We consider an online, decentralized scenario where, at
each time slot, clients receive new samples and exchange
information with a limited number of peers. To the best of
our knowledge, the state-of-the-art method in this setting is
the Collaborative Mean Estimation algorithm (ColME) by
Asadi et al. (2022). Unfortunately, ColME faces scalability
issues in large systems, as both its per-agent space and time
complexities are linear in the number of clients |A|. Moreover, in its current form, ColME is applicable only to scalar
mean estimation problems (K = 1) and its convergence
guarantees only hold for sub-Gaussian data distributions.
We extend the methodology proposed by Asadi et al.
(2022) to accommodate multidimensional data drawn from
the broader class of distributions with bounded fourth moment. To address ColME’s scalability challenges, we propose that clients self-organize into a network where each
client communicates with at most r neighbors. Over time,
this set of neighbors is pruned as clients progressively ex-

In numerous settings, agents lack sufficient data to learn a
model directly. Collaborating with other agents may help, but
introduces a bias-variance trade-off when local data distributions differ. A key challenge is for each agent to identify
clients with similar distributions while learning the model, a
problem that remains largely unresolved. This study focuses
on a particular instance of the overarching problem, where
each agent collects samples from a real-valued distribution
over time to estimate its mean. Existing algorithms face impractical per-agent space and time complexities (linear in the
number of agents |A|). To address scalability challenges, we
propose a framework where agents self-organize into a graph,
allowing each agent to communicate with only a selected
number of peers r. We propose two collaborative mean estimation algorithms: one employs a consensus-based approach,
while the other uses a message-passing scheme, with complexity O(r) and O(r · log |A|), respectively. We establish
conditions for both algorithms to yield asymptotically optimal estimates and we provide a theoretical characterization
of their performance.

Code — https://github.com/Franco-Galante/scalabledecentralized-algorithms-AAAI25

1

Introduction

Users’ devices have become increasingly sophisticated and
generate vast amounts of data. This wealth of data has enabled the development of accurate and complex models.
However, it has also introduced challenges related to security, privacy, real-time processing, and resource management. In response, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as
a key privacy-preserving approach for collaborative model
training (Kairouz et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020). While traditional FL methods aim to develop a single model for all
clients, the statistical diversity of clients’ datasets has led to
the development of personalized models, designed to better
align with the data distributions of individual clients (e.g.,
Ghosh et al. 2020; Fallah, Mokhtari, and Ozdaglar 2020; Li
et al. 2021; Marfoq et al. 2021; Ding and Wang 2022).
Many personalized FL strategies group clients into clusters and then tailor a model for each cluster (e.g., Ghosh
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16699

