The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pedestrian Attribute Recognition: A New Benchmark Dataset and A Large
Language Model Augmented Framework
Jiandong Jin2,3 , Xiao Wang2 * , Qian Zhu2 , Haiyang Wang2 , Chenglong Li1,3 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China
3
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Security Artificial Intelligence, Hefei 230601, China
{jdjinahu, wangxiaocvpr, lcl1314}@foxmail.com, {zq542664, why2434961256}@163.com
2

Abstract

and retrieval (Huang et al. 2024). However, the performance
of the current PAR model is still significantly affected by
challenging factors (e.g., low illumination, motion blur, and
complex backgrounds); moreover, there is still much room
for exploration in the relationship between pedestrian image
perception and multi-label attributes.
Considering these issues, we meticulously review the existing works and datasets on PAR and find that the development in the PAR field has begun to enter a bottleneck period.
As an effective driving force for promoting the development
of PAR, benchmark datasets play a crucial role. However,
we believe that the PAR community needs to address several core issues on the benchmark datasets as follows: 1).
The performance of existing pedestrian attribute recognition
datasets is close to saturation, and the performance improvement of new algorithms has shown a trend of weakening.
However, only one small-scale PAR-related dataset has been
released in the past five years, thus, there is an urgent need
for new large-scale datasets to support new research endeavors. 2). Existing PAR datasets use random partitioning for
model training and testing, which can measure the overall
recognition capability of a PAR model. However, this partitioning mechanism overlooks the impact of cross-domain
(e.g., different environments, times, populations, and data
sources) on the PAR model. 3). Existing PAR datasets do not
prominently reflect challenge factors, thus, this may potentially result in neglecting the impact of data corruption during real-world application, thereby introducing safety hazards in practical settings. In conclusion, it is evident that the
PAR community urgently requires a new large-scale dataset
to bridge the existing data gap.
In this paper, we propose a new benchmark dataset for
pedestrian attribute recognition, termed MSP60K, as shown
in Fig. 1. It contains 60,122 images, and over 5,000 person
IDs, collected using smart surveillance systems and mobile
phones. To make our dataset better reflect the challenges
found in real-world scenarios, in addition to annotating as
many complex images as possible, we also process these images using additional destructive operations, including blur,
occlusion, illumination, adding noise, jpeg compression, etc.
As these images belong to different domains and scenarios,
such as supermarket, kitchen, construction site, ski resort,
and various outdoor scenes, we split these images according
to two protocols, i.e., random split and cross-domain split.

Pedestrian Attribute Recognition (PAR) is one of the indispensable tasks in human-centered research. However, existing datasets neglect different domains (e.g., environments,
times, populations, and data sources), only conducting simple random splits, and the performance of these datasets has
already approached saturation. In the past five years, no largescale dataset has been opened to the public. To address this
issue, this paper proposes a new large-scale, cross-domain
pedestrian attribute recognition dataset to fill the data gap,
termed MSP60K. It consists of 60,122 images and 57 attribute annotations across eight scenarios. Synthetic degradation is also conducted to further narrow the gap between
the dataset and real-world challenging scenarios. To establish
a more rigorous benchmark, we evaluate 17 representative
PAR models under both random and cross-domain split protocols on our dataset. Additionally, we propose an innovative
Large Language Model (LLM) augmented PAR framework,
named LLM-PAR. This framework processes pedestrian images through a Vision Transformer (ViT) backbone to extract features and introduces a multi-embedding query Transformer to learn partial-aware features for attribute classification. Significantly, we enhance this framework with LLM for
ensemble learning and visual feature augmentation. Comprehensive experiments across multiple PAR benchmark datasets
have thoroughly validated the efficacy of our proposed framework.

Code&Dataset —
https://github.com/Event-AHU/OpenPAR

1

Introduction

Pedestrian Attribute Recognition (PAR) (Wang et al. 2022)
has been widely exploited in the Computer Vision (CV) and
Artificial Intelligence (AI) community. It aims to map the
given pedestrian image into semantic labels, such as gender, hairstyle, and wearings, using deep neural networks and
achieves high performance on current benchmark datasets.
These models can be employed in practical scenarios and
may work well in simple scenarios. It can also help other
human-centric tasks, e.g., pedestrian detection and tracking (Li et al. 2024), person re-identification (Lin et al. 2019)
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4138

