The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Genomics Data Lossless Compression with (S,K)-Mer Encoding
and Deep Neural Networks
Hui Sun* , Liping Yi* , Huidong Ma, Yongxia Sun, Yingfeng Zheng, Wenwen Cui,
Meng Yan, Gang Wang† , and Xiaoguang Liu†
Nankai-Baidu Joint Laboratory (NBJL), College of Computer Science, Nankai University (NKU), Tianjin 300350, China.
{sunh, yiliping, wgzwp, liuxguang}@nbjl.nankai.edu.cn.

Compression Ratio (bits/base)

Abstract
Learning-based compression shows competitive compression
ratios for genomics data. It often includes three types of
compressors: static, adaptive and semi-adaptive. However,
these existing compressors suffer from inferior compression
ratios or throughput, and adaptive compressors also faces
model cold-start problems. To address these issues, we propose DeepGeCo, a novel genomics data lossless adaptive
compression framework with (s, k)-mer encoding and deep
neural networks, involving three compression modes (MINI
for static, PLUS for adaptive, ULTRA for semi-adaptive) for
flexible requirements of compression ratios or throughput.
In DeepGeCo, (1) we develop BiGRU and Transformer as
the backbone to build Warm-Start and Supporter models in
terms of cold-start problems. (2) We introduce (s, k)-mer encoding to pre-process genomics data before feeding it into
the DNN model for improve model throughput, and we propose a new metric - Ranking of Throughput and Compression Ratio (RTCR) for effective encoding parameters selection. (3) We design a threshold controller and a probabilistic mixer within the backbone to balance compression ratios
and model throughput. Experiments on 10 real-world datasets
show that DeepGeCo’s three compression modes improve up
to a 22.949× average throughput and up to a 31.095% average compression ratio improvement while occupying low
CPU or GPU memory.

cold-start batches

The number of compression batch

Figure 1: An example of cold-start problem for adaptive
compressor TRACE on the GaGa dataset. The compression
ratio (bits/base) is defined as compressed bits relative to an
original DNA base (bytes). A lower compression ratio value
indicates a better compression effect.

based lossless methods that have been proven to be most effective in compressing genomics data, primarily comprising
two stages.
(1) Modeling, the probability distribution of the target genomics symbol is predicted by extracting the correlation between historical and current symbols; (2) Coding, the predicted probability distribution is fed into an entropy encoder
with Arithmetic Coding or Huffman Coding. The prediction
effects in the modeling stage dominate compression capability. Recently, the advancement of deep neural network technologies has led to improved modeling accuracy, enabling
learning-based methods to perform effective compression
for genomics data. However, current learn-based methods
still face the following challenges:
1) Model Cold-Start Problem. Learning-based compressors include three types: static, adaptive, semi-adaptive.
Adaptive compressors update model parameters while compressing data, they often face model cold-start problems, i.e.,
models with randomly initialized parameters may lead to
poor compression effect in early batches. Figure 1 shows an
example of adaptive TRACE (Mao et al. 2022b) compressor

Introduction
Genomics data has been widely applied in various medical
scenarios, such as virus tracing, forensic identification, drug
development, and disease diagnosis (Hernaez et al. 2019;
Sun et al. 2023b). The blossoming of sequencing technologies reduce the accessible costs of genomics data, enabling
an explosive genomics data growth, which introduces challenges for genomics data storage, transmission, and sharing. It’s urgent to design efficient lossy or lossless compressors to reduce the storing burden of genomics data. Lossless compressors can ensure consistency between decompressed files and original files, which are particularly suitable for genomics data compression where data integrity is
crucial. Learning-based compressors belong to modeling* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12577

