The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Offline-to-Online Hyperparameter Transfer for Stochastic Bandits
Dravyansh Sharma1 , Arun Suggala2
1

TTIC
Google DeepMind
dravy@ttic.edu, arunss@google.com
2

Abstract
Classic algorithms for stochastic bandits typically use hyperparameters that govern their critical properties such as the
trade-off between exploration and exploitation. Tuning these
hyperparameters is a problem of great practical significance.
However, this is a challenging problem and in certain cases
is information theoretically impossible. To address this challenge, we consider a practically relevant transfer learning setting where one has access to offline data collected from several
bandit problems (tasks) coming from an unknown distribution over the tasks. Our aim is to use this offline data to set
the hyperparameters for a new task drawn from the unknown
distribution. We provide bounds on the inter-task (number
of tasks) and intra-task (number of arm pulls for each task)
sample complexity for learning near-optimal hyperparameters
on unseen tasks drawn from the distribution. Our results apply
to several classic algorithms, including tuning the exploration
parameters in UCB and LinUCB and the noise parameter in
GP-UCB. Our experiments indicate the significance and effectiveness of the transfer of hyperparameters from offline
problems in online learning with stochastic bandit feedback.

Introduction
Bandit optimization is a very important framework for sequential decision making with numerous applications, including recommendation systems (Li et al. 2010), healthcare (Tewari and Murphy 2017), AI for Social Good
(AI4SG) (Mate et al. 2022), hyperparameter tuning in deep
learning (Bergstra et al. 2011). Over the years, numerous
works have designed optimal algorithms for bandit optimization in various settings (Garivier and Cappé 2011; AbbasiYadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári 2011; Whitehouse, Wu, and
Ramdas 2023). One of the key challenges in deploying these
algorithms in practice is setting their hyperparameters appropriately. Some examples of these hyperparameters include
the confidence width parameter in UCB (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi,
and Fischer 2002) and the noise variance parameter σ 2 in
GP-UCB (Srinivas et al. 2010). While one could rely on
theory-suggested hyperparameters, they often turn out to be
too optimistic and lead to suboptimal performance in practice.
This is because these hyperparameters are meant to guard the
algorithm against worst-case problems and are not necessarily optimal for typical problems arising in a domain. To see
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20362

this, consider a Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) instance with
two arms, with rewards of each arm drawn from a uniform
distribution over an unknown unit width interval. Suppose,
the problems encountered in practice are such that the two
distributions are well separated without any overlap. Then,
the optimal choice of the UCB confidence width parameter is
0 (i.e., there is no need for exploration). This is in contrast to
the theory suggested choice of 1, which incurs an exploration
penalty. This simplistic example illustrates the importance of
choosing hyperparameters appropriately in practice.
Hyperparameter selection, though well-studied in offline
learning (Stone 1974; Efron 1992), remains an active research
area in bandit optimization. Several recent studies have attempted to address this problem. One particularly popular
approach in this line of work is the design of meta-bandit algorithms that treat each hyperparameter as an expert and adaptively select the best expert by running another bandit algorithm on top (also known as corralling algorithms) (Agarwal
et al. 2017). However, the current algorithms for corralling
and their theoretical guarantees are not satisfactory. For instance, consider the stochastic MAB problem, and consider
the problem of picking the UCB confidence width parameter.
The corralling algorithm
√ of Agarwal et al. (2017) incurs a
regret overhead of O( M T ) compared to the regret of the
best hyperparameter (where M is the size of the hyperparameter search space). This overhead can be quite large when
M is large. Furthermore, their algorithm requires the base
algorithms to satisfy certain stability conditions. However,
UCB is known to satisfy this condition only for certain values of the hyperparameter. Recent works of Arora, Marinov,
and Mohri (2021) improved the regret guarantees of Agarwal et al. (2017) by considering stochastic bandits. But their
regret bounds, when specialized to UCB confidence width
tuning, are worse than the regret bounds obtained using the
theory-suggested hyperparameter.
Alternative approaches, such as variance-aware algorithms
like UCB-V (Mukherjee et al. 2018), hyperparameter-free
algorithms (Zimmert and Seldin 2021; Ito 2021), and instance
optimal algorithms such as KL-UCB (Garivier and Cappé
2011) still have certain hidden hyperparameters that need
careful tuning in practice. For example, UCB-V assumes the
reward is bounded between [0, 1]. Similarly, the parameterfree algorithms of Zimmert and Seldin (2021); Ito (2021), and
instance optimal algorithms assume the reward is bounded

