The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Text to Point Cloud Localization with Multi-Level Negative Contrastive Learning
Dunqiang Liu1,2 * , Shujun Huang1,2 * , Wen Li1,2 , Siqi Shen1,2 , Cheng Wang1,2†
2

1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, School of
Informatics, Xiamen University, China
{dqliu, huangshujun, liwen777}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {cwang, siqishen}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

or

Language-based localization is a crucial task in robotics and
computer vision, enabling robots to understand spatial positions through language. Recent methods rely on contrastive
learning to establish correspondences between global features of texts and point clouds. However, the inherent ambiguity of textual descriptions makes it difficult to convey geometric information accurately, forcing alignment of them in
the feature space may compromise the expressiveness of the
point clouds. Unlike previous methods, this paper proposes
using language as a filter to distinguish dissimilar locations.
To this end, we propose a robust framework of multi-level
negative contrastive learning for language-based localization,
fully leveraging the descriptive power of language for spatial
localization. Our method learns multiple mismatched factors
by minimizing the similarity of different locations at different levels, including global-level, instance-level and relationlevel, respectively. Extensive experiments conducted on the
KITTI360Pose benchmark demonstrate that our method outperforms better that the state-of-the-art methods. Specifically,
we achieve a 56.3% improvement in Top-1 retrieval recall
and a 45.9% improvement in 5m localization recall.

?

？

？

Where are you?
Which building?

Hi, I am standing
on-top of a green road,
: west of a gray wall,
User west of a green tree .....
Please pick me.

Figure 1: The key observation. City-scale point clouds are
typically sparse, resulting in significant repetition of instances, such as the green tree. Moreover, text is inherently
ambiguous, while point clouds provide precise geometric information, resulting in informational discrepancies.

allows robots to understand locations through human language. Developing this technology will benefit human-robot
collaboration, fostering applications such as autonomous delivery vehicles and language-guided navigation. However, to
date, only a few methods for natural language-based localization have been developed. Text2Pos (Kolmet et al. 2022)
is the pioneering work that aligns textual descriptions with
point clouds in a coarse-to-fine manner. In the first stage,
the goal is to retrieve its Top-k submaps that are likely to
contain the described position, while in the later stage, the
location is refined through matching. Text2Pos achieves the
two objectives within a single step, without considering instances (hints) association. In response, RET (Wang, Fan,
and Kankanhalli 2023) first designed a relation enhanced
transformer to implicitly learn relations and then proposed a
cascaded matching and refinement strategy to reduce noise
generated in the matching process, thereby improving performance. Recently, Text2Loc (Xia et al. 2024) introduced
the language model T5 (Raffel et al. 2020) to enhance text
descriptions, incorporating contrastive learning to achieve
optimal performance in a matching-free manner.
We highlight the significant contributions of the aforementioned works, but practical implementation still has a
long way to go. As illustrated in Figure 1, on one hand, cityscale point clouds are often sparse and may contain many

Code — https://github.com/dqliua/MNCL

Introduction
LiDAR localization aims to estimate the position of a LiDAR point cloud in a global map, which is a crucial component of many applications in computer vision and robotics.
e.g., autonomous driving and virtual reality.
Retrieval-based methods (Wang et al. 2024; Luo et al.
2023; Xia et al. 2023; Komorowski 2021; Kong et al. 2024;
Xia et al. 2021) address this task as a place recognition
problem, aiming to identify locations by comparing LiDAR
point clouds to stored references in a database. While these
methods have achieved satisfactory performance, they require physically reaching the query location. In contrast,
language-based LiDAR localization does not face this limitation. By describing the environmental information through
natural language, the model can identify its position. This
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5397

