The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Linking Industry Sectors and Financial Statements: A Hybrid Approach for
Company Classification
Guy Stephane Waffo Dzuyo1,2 , Gaël Guibon2,3 , Christophe Cerisara2 , Luis Belmar-Letelier1
1
Forvis Mazars
LORIA, CNRS, Université de Lorraine
3
Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, CNRS, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris Nord, LIPN, F-93430 Villetaneuse, France
guy.stephane.waffo@forvismazars.com, gael.guibon@lipn.fr,
christophe.cerisara@loria.fr, luis.belmar-letelier@forvismazars.com
2

Abstract
The identification of the financial characteristics of industry sectors has a large importance in accounting audit, allowing auditors to prioritize the most important area during
audit. Existing company classification standards such as the
Standard Industry Classification (SIC) code allow to map a
company to a category based on its activity and products. In
this paper, we explore the potential of machine learning algorithms and language models to analyze the relationship between those categories and companies’ financial statements.
We propose a supervised company classification methodology and analyze several types of representations for financial
statements. Existing works address this task using solely numerical information in financial records. Our findings show
that beyond numbers, textual information occurring in financial records can be leveraged by language models to match
the performance of dedicated decision tree-based classifiers,
while providing better explainability and more generic accounting representations. We think this work can serve as a
preliminary work towards semi-automatic auditing.

Figure 1: Balance sheet representations for Machine Learning Algorithms. Within US-GAAP taxonomy, each financial
account is mapped to an identifier with taxonomy tree which
help to organize financial information

sophisticated family of approaches called Intelligent Process Automation (IPA) (Nunes, Leite, and Pedrosa 2020).
IPA integrates AI technologies to handle more complex processes, including decision-making and analysis, mimicking
human cognitive functions. Machine Learning offers powerful tools for identifying patterns and anomalies in financial
data. These capabilities are crucial in auditing, where detecting irregularities early can prevent fraud and ensure compliance with financial regulations (Lokanan, Tran, and Vuong
2019). Machine Learning models can analyze historical financial data to predict potential risks (Cheng et al. 2023),
prioritize areas of focus for auditors, and even suggest corrective actions based on past trends.
Financial statements are a collection of financial reports
that present the financial status of a company at a specific
point in time. Balance sheets and income statements are two
common types of financial statements, generally published
at the end of a fiscal year. A balance sheet is a snapshot of
a company’s financial position at a specific point in time,
detailing its assets, liabilities, and equity. The income statement, on the other hand, provides a summary of the company’s financial performance over a period, highlighting its
revenues, expenses, and profits or losses.
As visible in Figure 1’s left part, a financial statement typically consists of a two-column table, where the first column contains the identifier of an account, and the second
column displays the corresponding amount in a given cur-

Code — https://github.com/WaguyMz/company classification

1

Introduction

Accounting is a key area of finance focused on recording, analyzing, and reporting a company’s financial transactions. It provides critical insights into a company’s financial
health, supporting informed decision-making and strategic
planning. An accounting audit involves a meticulous examination of a company’s financial reports to verify their compliance with accounting norms and regulations. The auditing process is labor-intensive and time-consuming, often requiring significant resources and expertise. Recent advancements in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and automation have
shown promise in transforming the auditing process. Prior
to the emergence of neural networks, there was a considerable focus on Robotic Process Automation (RPA), aiming
to automate manual tasks in accounting and auditing processes (Gotthardt et al. 2020). RPA is process-driven, as it
mainly consists in the automation of rule-based tasks including data collection and invoicing.
To further enhance the efficiency and accuracy of auditing processes, the field has seen a shift from RPA to a more
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16444

