The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ELDER: Enhancing Lifelong Model Editing with Mixture-of-LoRA
Jiaang Li1 , Quan Wang2 , Zhongnan Wang1 , Yongdong Zhang1 , Zhendong Mao1 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
jali@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangquan@bupt.edu.cn {zhyd73, zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

The most intuitive way to implement lifelong editing is
to perform model editing methods successively for multiple
times. However, most model editing methods are designed
for one-time use (Meng et al. 2022; Mitchell et al. 2022).
Repeated using them causes LLMs to forget previous edits
and pre-training data, significantly reducing their edit reliability and general ability on downstream tasks (Yao et al.
2023; Gu et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024b; Gupta, Rao, and
Anumanchipalli 2024; Lin et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2022).
Recently, a class of representative methods has been developed specifically for lifelong model editing (Hartvigsen
et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024). These methods freeze the original LLM parameters and incorporate additional adapters
to modify the model. They cluster the input data and assign a specific adapter to each cluster, maintaining discrete
data-adapter mappings. This approach enables the model to
manage different knowledge with independent parameters,
preventing interference between different edits. As a result,
it ensures high reliability after sequential edits and outperforms other techniques.
However, these key-value mapping methods exhibit poor
robustness and struggle with semantically equivalent inputs
(Tian et al. 2024; Lin et al. 2024). Due to the inherent discreteness of their data-adapter mappings, data points on opposite sides of a cluster boundary will map to entirely different adapters. Unfortunately, their clustering relies on manually set distance metrics and hyperparameters, resulting in
inaccurate cluster boundaries. Semantically equivalent data
with slight variations (e.g., rephrased sentences) could fall
outside the appropriate cluster and are assigned incorrect
adapters. Consequently, these methods are not robust and
prone to errors with rephrased edit data.
To address the robustness issues in previous discrete mapping methods, we propose a novel approach to create an
adaptive and continuous association between factual knowledge and adapter parameters, named ELDER (Enhancing
Lifelong moDel Editing with mixtuRe-of-LoRA). ELDER
successively updates model knowledge by utilizing a router
network to integrate multiple LoRAs (Hu et al. 2021),
akin to the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) structure (Jacobs
et al. 1991; Jordan and Jacobs 1994). Unlike previous lifelong model editing methods, it adaptively generates LoRA
weights through end-to-end learning instead of manuallyset distance metrics, and produces a weighted combination

Large language models (LLMs) require model editing to efficiently update specific knowledge within them and avoid factual errors. Most model editing methods are solely designed
for single-time use and result in a significant forgetting effect in lifelong editing scenarios, where sequential edits are
conducted over time. Previous approaches manage sequential
edits by freezing original parameters and discretely allocating
new parameters for each knowledge update. However, these
methods lack robustness to minor input variations due to the
discrete mapping between data and parameters. To overcome
this challenge, we propose ELDER, a novel approach to create a continuous association between data and adapters. ELDER integrates multiple LoRAs through a router network
and is trained to establish a smooth data-adapter association,
thereby enhancing the edit robustness and generalization of
semantically equivalent inputs. To ensure inputs containing
the same knowledge will be processed by the same LoRAs,
we design a novel loss to guide the model link LoRA allocations with edit knowledge. Furthermore, we propose a deferral mechanism to retain the original LLM capabilities postedit. Extensive experiments on GPT-2 XL and LLaMA2-7B
demonstrate that ELDER effectively edits models in the lifelong setting, outperforming eight baselines while exhibiting
strong scalability and preserving LLMs’ general abilities on
downstream tasks.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are renowned for their
text understanding and generation capabilities (Brown et al.
2020; Achiam et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Radford et al.
2019). Despite their widespread use, LLMs often produce
factual errors, including hallucinations and outdated information (Ji et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Tam et al. 2023).
Retraining or fine-tuning to update the model is expensive
and time-consuming. Therefore, model editing techniques,
which modify specific knowledge within LLMs with low resources, are gaining increasing attention (Yao et al. 2023;
Mitchell et al. 2022; Meng et al. 2022). In practice, evolving world knowledge necessitates repeated model edits over
time, which is known as lifelong model editing (Hartvigsen
et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author: Zhendong Mao
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24440

