The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Seg2Box: 3D Object Detection by Point-Wise Semantics Supervision
Maoji Zheng1,2 , Ziyu Xu1,2 , Qiming Xia1,2 , Hai Wu1,2 , Chenglu Wen1,2 * , Cheng Wang1,2
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
{zhengmaoji, xuziyu, xiaqiming, wuhai}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {clwen, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
LiDAR-based 3D object detection and semantic segmentation are critical tasks in 3D scene understanding. Traditional
detection and segmentation methods supervise their models
through bounding box labels and semantic mask labels. However, these two independent labels inherently contain significant redundancy. This paper aims to eliminate the redundancy
by supervising 3D object detection using only semantic labels. However, the challenge arises due to the incomplete geometry structure and boundary ambiguity of point-cloud instances, leading to inaccurate pseudo-labels and poor detection results. To address these challenges, we propose a novel
method, named Seg2Box. We first introduce a Multi-Frame
Multi-Scale Clustering (MFMS-C) module, which leverages
the spatio-temporal consistency of point clouds to generate
accurate box-level pseudo-labels. Additionally, the SemanticGuiding Iterative-Mining Self-Training (SGIM-ST) module
is proposed to enhance the performance by progressively refining the pseudo-labels and mining the instances without
generating pseudo-labels. Experiments on the Waymo Open
Dataset and nuScenes Dataset show that our method significantly outperforms other competitive methods by 23.7% and
10.3% in mAP, respectively. The results demonstrate the great
label-efficient potential and advancement of our method.

Figure 1: Our method uses only semantic annotation to train
3D object detection. It contains Pseudo-label Generation
stage and Self-train Loop-improvement stage.

assigns semantics to each foreground point through instance
clustering and box voting. Box2seg (Kulharia et al. 2020)
uses attention-based self-training and point class activation
mapping to avoid using semantic labels. However, background information is missing in the bounding box annotation. In addition, bounding boxes mainly focus on a coarse
level of instance layout. Using only bounding boxes to assign semantic labels inevitably introduces supervision noise,
significantly decreasing the segmentation performance.
Compared to the coarse bounding box, the semantic label is more precise and detailed. Therefore, using only semantic labels possibly attains accurate detection and segmentation results and decreases label redundancy remarkably. However, the objects in 3D scenes are primarily sparse
and self-occluded. Nowadays, how to recover the bounding
boxes from the semantic labels to train the 3D detectors still
remains a great challenge.
This paper mainly investigates two challenges of semantic label-supervised 3D object detection. (1) The incomplete
geometry structure resulting from sparse point clouds (Fig.
2 - ①) and occlusion (Fig. 2 - ②) leads to pseudo-labels
with erroneous size and position. (2) The boundary ambiguity arising from the truncated objects (Fig. 2 - ③) and the
adjacent objects (Fig. 2 - ④) results in pseudo-labels with
false boundaries. Consequently, the detector trained with the
low-quality pseudo-labels can not achieve desirable performance.
To address these challenges, we develop a two-stage 3D

Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D object detection and 3D semantic segmentation are widely applied in fields of autonomous driving (Zhu et al. 2024; Mao et al. 2023), robotics (Wisth,
Camurri, and Fallon 2022; Beuchert, Camurri, and Fallon
2023) and smart cities (Wang et al. 2020, 2019). Traditional
3D object detection and semantic segmentation frameworks
rely on their unique labels to supervise learning processes.
However, the annotations for semantic masks and bounding
boxes inherently contain considerable redundancy, as they
both implicitly convey the semantic content and geometric
structure of instances.
An intuitive solution to eliminate this redundancy is to
use only bounding box labels and assign the semantic labels
automatically to supervise the semantic segmentation task.
Several studies have investigated the technique of semantics
assignment. For example, Box2Mask (Chibane et al. 2022)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10591

