The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DCA: Dividing and Conquering Amnesia in Incremental Object Detection
Aoting Zhang1,3 , Dongbao Yang1,3 * , Chang Liu5 , Xiaopeng Hong4 * , Miao Shang4 , Yu Zhou2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Harbin Institute of Technology
5
Tsinghua University
{zhangaoting, yangdongbao}@iie.ac.cn, liuchang2022@tsinghua.edu.cn
hongxiaopeng@ieee.org, miaos0522@gmail.com, yzhou@nankai.edu.cn
Abstract

1

tvmonitor tvmonitor

0.07

0.5

Incremental object detection (IOD) aims to cultivate an object detector that can continuously localize and recognize
novel classes while preserving its performance on previous classes. Existing methods achieve certain success by
improving knowledge distillation and exemplar replay for
transformer-based detection frameworks, but the intrinsic forgetting mechanisms remain underexplored. In this paper, we
dive into the cause of forgetting and discover forgetting imbalance between localization and recognition in transformerbased IOD, which means that localization is less-forgetting
and can generalize to future classes, whereas catastrophic forgetting occurs primarily on recognition. Based on these insights, we propose a Divide-and-Conquer Amnesia (DCA)
strategy, which redesigns the transformer-based IOD into a
localization-then-recognition process. DCA can well maintain and transfer the localization ability, leaving decoupled
fragile recognition to be specially conquered. To reduce feature drift in recognition, we leverage semantic knowledge encoded in pre-trained language models to anchor class representations within a unified feature space across incremental
tasks. This involves designing a duplex classifier fusion and
embedding class semantic features into the recognition decoding process in the form of queries. Extensive experiments
validate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance, especially for long-term incremental scenarios. For
example, under the four-step setting on MS-COCO, our DCA
strategy significantly improves the final AP by 6.9%.

0

Localization of old

1

1
tvmonitor

0.5

0.5

0.94

0

(a)

Localization of future
seen classes
future classes

(c) Coupled features

0.74

0

(b)

old classes

Recognition of old
new classes

(d) Decoupled features

Figure 1: Forgetting imbalance within DETR-based IOD. (a)
Localization is class-agnostic and can generalize predicted
boxes on future classes with a high recall of 94%. (b) After
fine-tuning on new data, localization is less-forgetting with
recall of old classes slightly dropping from 94% to 87%,
while average accuracy of recognition drops from 86% to
12%. (c) In original DETR, localization features are clearly
influenced by recognition features and become categoryspecific. (d) After decoupling features, localization is obviously class-agnostic and we can focus on solving catastrophic forgetting on recognition.

Introduction
Object detection has experienced great advancements in recent years (He et al. 2017; Carion et al. 2020). Nevertheless,
prevailing models rely on fixed data, rendering them inadequate to adapt to dynamic data in real-world scenarios. To
equip object detection with the ability of lifelong learning
and knowledge integration like humans, incremental object
detection (IOD) is proposed, which can continuously localize and recognize object instances of new concepts while
maintaining old knowledge. It is a pivotal stride toward attaining artificial general intelligence.

IOD suffers from catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick
et al. 2017), where models tend to erase prior knowledge
when fine-tuning on new data. Due to privacy and security concerns, limited access to historical data makes training from scratch difficult. To address this, most methods
preserve old knowledge through exemplar replay (ER) (Liu
et al. 2020b; Joseph et al. 2021a) and knowledge distillation
(KD) (Zhou et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2022a), which adopt
CNN-based detectors containing numerous hand-crafted
components as the basic framework (Ren et al. 2015).
Within transformer-based incremental detection (DETR)
frameworks, established strategies like KD and ER are popu-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9851

