The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Constraint-Adaptive Policy Switching for Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning
Yassine Chemingui1 , Aryan Deshwal2 , Honghao Wei1 , Alan Fern3 , Jana Doppa1
1

Washington State University
2
University of Minnesota
3
Oregon State University
{yassine.chemingui,honghao.wei,jana.doppa}@wsu.edu, adeshwal@umn.edu, alan.fern@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Offline safe reinforcement learning (OSRL) involves learning
a decision-making policy to maximize rewards from a fixed
batch of training data to satisfy pre-defined safety constraints.
However, adapting to varying safety constraints during deployment without retraining remains an under-explored challenge.
To address this challenge, we introduce constraint-adaptive
policy switching (CAPS), a wrapper framework around existing offline RL algorithms. During training, CAPS uses offline
data to learn multiple policies with a shared representation that
optimize different reward and cost trade-offs. During testing,
CAPS switches between those policies by selecting at each
state the policy that maximizes future rewards among those
that satisfy the current cost constraint. Our experiments on 38
tasks from the DSRL benchmark demonstrate that CAPS consistently outperforms existing methods, establishing a strong
wrapper-based baseline for OSRL.

1

Introduction

Online reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great successes in applications where the agent can continuously interact with the environment to collect new feedback data to
improve its decision-making policy (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver
et al. 2018; Li 2017). However, in many real-world domains
such as agriculture, smart grid and healthcare, executing exploratory decisions is costly and/or dangerous, but we have
access to pre-collected datasets. Offline RL (Levine et al.
2020) is an emerging paradigm to learn decision policies
solely from such offline datasets, eliminating the need for additional interaction with the environment. The key challenge
in offline RL is addressing the distributional shift between the
state-action distribution of the offline dataset and the learned
policy, as this shift results in extrapolation error. Existing offline RL methods typically employ the principle of pessimism
in the face of uncertainty (i.e., some form of penalization to
deal with out-of-distribution states/actions) to address this
challenge (Levine et al. 2020).
In many safety-critical domains (e.g., agriculture and smart
grid), the agent behavior needs to also satisfy some cost constraints in addition to maximizing reward. Most of the prior
work on offline RL focuses on the unconstrained setting
where the policy is optimized to maximize rewards. There is
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15722

relatively less work on offline constrained/safe RL and the
majority of these methods assume that the cost constraint is
known during the training phase (as elaborated in the related
work section). However, in many applications, the cost constraints can change at deployment depending on the use-case
scenario. For example, in agricultural drones, the reward is
the area covered during spraying, and the cost is the battery/power consumption. The goal is to maximize efficiency
for a given agricultural field by optimizing coverage based
on the available battery power.
This paper studies the problem of offline safe RL (OSRL)
where the safety/cost constraints can vary after deployment.
We propose Constraint-Adaptive Policy Switching (CAPS),
an algorithm that can be wrapped around existing offline
RL methods and is easy to implement. CAPS handles the
challenge of unknown cost constraint threshold as follows.
At training time, we learn multiple policies with a shared
representation with the goal of achieving different reward
and cost trade-offs: one centered on reward maximization,
one on cost minimization, and other policies optimized for
varied linear scalarizations of costs and rewards. At testing
time, CAPS switches between the decisions from the trained
policies at each state, selecting the one that maximizes future
rewards from the ones that satisfy the cost constraint. We
also theoretically analyze the conditions under which CAPS
decision-making process has safety guarantees.
We perform experiments on 38 tasks from the DSRL
benchmark (Liu et al. 2024) to compare CAPS with state-ofthe-art OSRL baselines and our main findings are as follows.
First, CAPS wrapped around two qualitatively different offline RL algorithms exhibits safe behavior (first-order objective) on a larger fraction of tasks compared to baselines across
different cost threshold constraints. Prior methods struggle
even with known cost constraints, potentially because of estimation errors in value functions and/or instability in the
Lagrange multiplier. Second, the implicit Q-learning instantiation of CAPS demonstrates safe performance in 34/38
tasks (89%) and achieves the highest rewards in 18 of those
tasks compared to the baselines.. Third, CAPS using shared
representation performs significantly better than CAPS with
independently trained policies. Finally, increasing the number
of policies improves the overall performance of CAPS, but
CAPS with two policies (one for reward maximization and
one for cost minimization) is competitive, has the advantage

