The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Debiased All-in-one Image Restoration with Task Uncertainty Regularization
Gang Wu, Junjun Jiang, Yijun Wang, Kui Jiang* , Xianming Liu
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
{gwu, jiangjunjun, jiangkui, csxm}@hit.edu.cn, 2021112933@stu.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
All-in-one image restoration is a fundamental low-level vision task with significant real-world applications. The primary challenge lies in addressing diverse degradations within
a single model. While current methods primarily exploit task
prior information to guide the restoration models, they typically employ uniform multi-task learning, overlooking the
heterogeneity in model optimization across different degradation tasks. To eliminate the bias, we propose a task-aware optimization strategy, that introduces adaptive task-specific regularization for multi-task image restoration learning. Specifically, our method dynamically weights and balances losses
for different restoration tasks during training, encouraging the
implementation of the most reasonable optimization route. In
this way, we can achieve more robust and effective model
training. Notably, our approach can serve as a plug-andplay strategy to enhance existing models without requiring
modifications during inference. Extensive experiments in diverse all-in-one restoration settings demonstrate the superiority and generalization of our approach. For example, AirNet
retrained with TUR achieves average improvements of 1.16
dB on three distinct tasks and 1.81 dB on five distinct allin-one tasks. These results underscore TUR’s effectiveness in
advancing the SOTAs in all-in-one image restoration, paving
the way for more robust and versatile image restoration.

Baseline
Ours

Figure 1: Performance improvements of our proposed approach across multiple all-in-one image restoration settings,
demonstrating consistent and significant gains over existing
methods for various tasks and models.

where multiple degradation types emerge. This limitation
has given rise to the emerging field of all-in-one image
restoration, which aims to develop unified model capable of
handling multiple degradation types (Liu et al. 2022; Li et al.
2022; Potlapalli et al. 2023; Valanarasu, Yasarla, and Patel
2022; Zhang et al. 2023a; Kong, Dong, and Zhang 2024; Wu
et al. 2024). For more recent achievements in the field of allin-one image restoration, please refer to our survey paper
(Jiang et al. 2024a) and continuously updated project1 .
Existing approaches to all-in-one image restoration have
primarily focused on incorporating task priors to guide
model learning. These methods can be broadly categorized
into two types: two-stage approaches (Li et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2023a; Kong, Dong, and Zhang 2024) that pre-train
task-specific representations, and prompt-based methods
(Valanarasu, Yasarla, and Patel 2022; Potlapalli et al. 2023)
that directly embed task priors into the restoration model
using learnable prompts. While these approaches have improved model performance, they often overlook a critical
aspect: the optimization process in multi-task learning. Cur-

Introduction
Image restoration, a fundamental challenge in computer vision and image processing, seeks to recover high-quality
images from their degraded counterparts. Classical image
restoration relied on hand-crafted priors or domain-specific
assumptions about the degradation process (Banham and
Katsaggelos 1997).The advent of deep learning has ushered
in a paradigm shift in this field (Su, Xu, and Yin 2022). Modern data-driven methods can now learn powerful priors directly from large-scale datasets, resulting in more robust solutions for specific image restoration tasks. These tasks include, but are not limited to, denoising (Zhang et al. 2023b),
deraining (Jiang et al. 2020; Zamir et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2023), deblurring (Chen et al. 2022a; Cui et al. 2024a), and
dehazing (Qin et al. 2020; Cui et al. 2022, 2023). While
single-task models often struggle in real-world scenarios
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
https://github.com/Harbinzzy/All-in-One-Image-RestorationSurvey

8386

