The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Witty: An Efficient Solver for Computing Minimum-Size Decision Trees
Luca Pascal Staus1 , Christian Komusiewicz1 , Frank Sommer2 , Manuel Sorge2
1

Institute of Computer Science, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
2
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
luca.staus@uni-jena.de, c.komusiewicz@uni-jena.de, fsommer@ac.tuwien.ac.at, manuel.sorge@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

are thought to be more accurate on unknown data (Fayyad
and Irani 1990; Hu et al. 2020). The resulting optimization
problems are NP-hard, however (Hyafil and Rivest 1976;
Ordyniak and Szeider 2021). The use of heuristics such as
CART (Breiman et al. 1984) is therefore widespread. Recent
advancements in hardware and algorithms have made it feasible to compute provably optimal trees for training data sets
with up to several hundreds of examples (see the surveys by
Carrizosa, Molero-Rı́o, and Romero Morales (2021); Costa
and Pedreira (2023) and a full list of 26 implementations
in the full version). The implementations still suffer from
poor scalability, however (Costa and Pedreira 2023). In this
paper we contribute towards overcoming this limitation.
To that end, as has been done before (Janota and Morgado 2020; Narodytska et al. 2018; Demirovic et al. 2022),
we focus on the training problem in which we want to find
a minimum-size perfect decision tree for the input training
examples from two classes. Perfect means that all examples
are classified correctly. This choice is to create a baseline
method and we aim to later extend our approach to weaker
accuracy guarantees and more classes. We build on recent
theoretical algorithmic research that investigated what properties of the training data make computing smallest decision
trees hard or tractable (Ordyniak and Szeider 2021; Eiben
et al. 2023; Kobourov et al. 2023; Komusiewicz et al. 2023).
Our starting point is the algorithmic paradigm of witness trees, introduced by Komusiewicz et al. (2023). This
paradigm gives an algorithm with the current-best running
time bound of O((6δDs)s · sn) where n is the number of
training examples, D is the largest domain size, δ ≤ d is
the largest number of dimensions in which two training examples with different classes differ, and s is the number of
cuts in the solution tree. This bound guarantees that the algorithm is fast whenever D, δ, and s are reasonably small.
For D this is very often the case, in fact many data sets
have only binary dimensions. The cut number s should be
small since we aim for interpretable models. Finally, δ was
shown to be reasonably small in benchmark data (Ordyniak
and Szeider 2021), see also Table 3 in the full version. Thus,
the running time bound hints at practical usefulness of the
paradigm. Equally important for us is that the paradigm simplified previous theoretical approaches (Ordyniak and Szeider 2021; Eiben et al. 2023) to such an extent as to make it
promising as a foundation of a competitive solver. Addition-

Decision trees are a classic model for summarizing and
classifying data. To enhance interpretability and generalization properties, it has been proposed to favor small decision
trees. Accordingly, in the minimum-size decision tree training problem (MSDT), the input is a set of training examples
in Rd with class labels and we aim to find a decision tree that
classifies all training examples correctly and has a minimum
number of nodes. MSDT is NP-hard and therefore presumably not solvable in polynomial time. Nevertheless, a promising algorithmic paradigm called witness trees which solves
MSDT efficiently if the solution tree is small has been developed. In this work, we test this paradigm empirically. We
provide an implementation, augment it with extensive heuristic improvements, and scrutinize it on standard benchmark instances. The augmentations achieve a mean 324-fold (median
84-fold) speedup over the naive implementation. Compared
to the state of the art they achieve a mean 32-fold (median 7fold) speedup over the dynamic programming based MurTree
solver and a mean 61-fold (median 25-fold) speedup over
SAT-based implementations. As a theoretical result we obtain
an improved worst-case running-time bound for MSDT.

Full version on arXiv — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11954
Code, Data and Experimental Results —
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11235017

1

Introduction

Traditional decision trees recursively partition the feature
space with axis-parallel binary cuts and assign a class to
each part of the partition. When learning decision trees,
we are given a training data set that consists of examples
E ⊆ Rd labeled by classes and we want to find a decision
tree that classifies the training data set (see Section 2 for
the formal definitions). In addition, we want to optimize
certain criteria, chiefly among them we want to minimize
the number of cuts in the tree (or, equivalently, the size of
the tree).1 This is because small trees are more easily interpretable (Molnar 2020; Moshkovitz et al. 2020) and they
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Another popular choice is to minimize the depth of the tree.
We opted for the size criterion instead for simplicity. Our techniques are broadly applicable to the depth criterion, see the discussion in Section 8.

20584

