The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reconstruction Target Matters in Masked Image Modeling for Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Learning
Ran Ma, Yixiong Zou* , Yuhua Li, Ruixuan Li
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{ranma,yixiongz,idcliyuhua,rxli}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL) requires the
model to transfer knowledge from the data-abundant source
domain to data-scarce target domains for fast adaptation,
where the large domain gap makes CDFSL a challenging
problem. Masked Autoencoder (MAE) excels in effectively
using unlabeled data and learning image’s global structures,
enhancing model generalization and robustness. However, in
the CDFSL task with significant domain shifts, we find MAE
even shows lower performance than the baseline supervised
models. In this paper, we first delve into this phenomenon for
an interpretation. We find that MAE tends to focus on lowlevel domain information during reconstructing pixels while
changing the reconstruction target to token features could
mitigate this problem. However, not all features are beneficial, as we then find reconstructing high-level features can
hardly improve the model’s transferability, indicating a tradeoff between filtering domain information and preserving the
image’s global structure. In all, the reconstruction target matters for the CDFSL task. Based on the above findings and interpretations, we further propose Domain-Agnostic Masked
Image Modeling (DAMIM) for the CDFSL task. DAMIM includes an Aggregated Feature Reconstruction module to automatically aggregate features for reconstruction, with balanced learning of domain-agnostic information and images’
global structure, and a Lightweight Decoder module to further benefit the encoder’s generalizability. Experiments on
four CDFSL datasets demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: (a) The ratio of the accuracy of ViT, MAE, and our
method on four CDFSL datasets, where we can see MAE underperforms on these datasets. (b) The average performance
of ViT, MAE, iBOT, and our method, inspires us to think
about the role of reconstruction target in MIM for CDFSL.
target datasets usually make the transfer and downstream
learning difficult (Chen et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2020). Therefore, addressing domain gaps is crucial for the CDFSL task.
Masked Autoencoder (MAE) (He et al. 2022) is a selfsupervised learning method that focuses on predicting the
masked parts of the image, thereby deepening the model’s
understanding of the image’s global information. This approach has shown strong generalization capabilities across a
wide range of downstream tasks (He et al. 2022; Kong et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2024). However, when applying MAE to
train models for CDFSL tasks, we find that its performance1
in the target domain is often unsatisfactory (Fig. 1a), even
lagging behind that of the Vision Transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) trained with supervised learning. This
counter-intuitive phenomenon makes us wonder what is it
that makes MAE less effective under large domain gaps.
In this paper, we first delve into this phenomenon for
an interpretation. We first consider Masked Image Modeling (Bao et al. 2022) (MIM), the superset of MAE, to see
whether other methods exhibit similar behavior. We find that
iBOT (Zhou et al. 2022) outperforms MAE under large domain gaps (Fig. 1b). Since it takes token features as the reconstruction target while MAE takes image pixels, it raises
questions about the role of pixel-level reconstruction. Subsequently, we find MAE tends to absorb domain information
during pixel reconstruction, represented as low-level pixel

Introduction
With the advancement of deep learning, neural networks have become increasingly capable of handling large
datasets. However, collecting large amounts of data is difficult in some cases, such as healthcare, leading to the
emergence of Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL).
This task involves first training a model on a large-scale
dataset (source domain, such as a general dataset like ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009)) and then transferring it to specialized downstream datasets (target domain, such as medical
datasets (Codella et al. 2018)) where only a few samples are
available. Significant discrepancies between the source and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
As the accuracy of different datasets varies largely (e.g., 90 vs.
20), we use the ratio of accuracies against MAE for illustration.

19305

