The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Everywhere Attack: Attacking Locally and Globally to Boost Targeted
Transferability
Hui Zeng1,2∗ , Sanshuai Cui3∗ , Biwei Chen4† , Anjie Peng1
1

Southwest university of science and technology, Mianyang, China
2
Guangan institute of technology, Guangan, China
3
City University of Macau, Macau, China
4
Beijing normal university, Zhuhai, China
zengh5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, sanshuaicui@cityu.edu.mo, bchen@bnu.edu.cn, penganjie200012@163.com,
Abstract
Adversarial examples’ (AE) transferability refers to the phenomenon that AEs crafted with one surrogate model can also fool other models. Notwithstanding remarkable progress
in untargeted transferability, its targeted counterpart remains challenging. This paper proposes an everywhere scheme to
boost targeted transferability. Our idea is to attack a victim
image both globally and locally. We aim to optimize ‘an army
of targets’ in every local image region instead of the previous
works that optimize a high-confidence target in the image.
Specifically, we split a victim image into non-overlap blocks and jointly mount a targeted attack on each block. Such a
strategy mitigates transfer failures caused by attention inconsistency between surrogate and victim models and thus results in stronger transferability. Our approach is method-agnostic,
which means it can be easily combined with existing transferable attacks for even higher transferability. Extensive experiments on ImageNet demonstrate that the proposed approach
universally improves the state-of-the-art targeted attacks by
a clear margin, e.g., the transferability of the widely adopted
Logit attack can be improved by 28.8%∼300%. We also evaluate the crafted AEs on a real-world platform: Google Cloud
Vision. Results further support the superiority of the proposed
method.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed everywhere attack. We
attempt to synthesize an army of Wukongs (target, the monkey) into every local region of Bajie (victim, the pig).

Despite extensive studies constantly refreshing transferability under the untargeted mode, targeted transferability
is much more daunting since it requires unknown models outputting a specific label (Liu et al. 2017). To bridge
the gulf, tailored schemes for improving the transferability of targeted attacks have been proposed. For instance,
resource-intensive attacks seek extra, target-specific classifiers (Inkawhich et al. 2020) or generators (Naseer et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2022) to optimize adversarial perturbations. Other researchers find that integrating novel loss functions
with conventional simple iterative attacks can also enhance
targeted transferability (Li et al. 2020a; Zhao, Liu, and Larson 2021; Zeng et al. 2023; Weng et al. 2023).
Despite the recent progress of targeted attacks, the reported transferability is still unsatisfactory. Unlike the attention
regions (to the ground truth class) that are critical to untargeted attacks, which tend to overlap among diverse models (Wu et al. 2020), the target class-related attention regions
vary significantly across different models (refer to Figure 2),
resulting in limited targeted transferability. This paper proposes an everywhere scheme to alleviate the attention mismatch dilemma for targeted attacks. Our idea is illustrated in
Figure 1: Bajie (the pig) is expected to be attacked as WuKong (the monkey)1 . In contrast to conventional attacks that
try to plant a high-confidence Wukong into the victim im-

Code — https://github.com/zengh5/Everywhere Attack

Introduction
Adversarial example (AE) (Szegedy et al. 2014) is a powerful tool for uncovering potential vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNN) before their deployment in securitysensitive applications (Madry et al. 2018). An exciting property of the AE is that AEs crafted against one model have a
non-negligible chance to fool unseen victim models, a.k.a.,
transferability. Numerous transferable attacks have emerged
recently, e.g., stabilizing the optimization direction (Dong et
al. 2018; Lin et al. 2020; Wan, Ye, and Huang 2021) or diversifying inputs and surrogates (Xie et al. 2019; Dong et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020b; Fan et al. 2023).
∗

1
Wukong and Bajie are the two main characters in the Chinese
classical novel Journey to the West. Wukong can use his own hair to
transform into a large number of clones, thus gaining an advantage
in fighting.

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9789

