The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On The Power of Randomization for Obviously Strategy-Proof Mechanisms*
Shiri Ron1 , Daniel Schoepflin2
1

Weizmann Institute of Science
Rutgers University - DIMACS
shiriron@weizmann.ac.il, ds2196@dimacs.rutgers.edu
2

Abstract

own utility. Therefore, she must carefully design the elicitation mechanism to align the incentives of the agents with her
own objective.
For a specific example, consider the simplest setting
where an auctioneer wants to allocate a single item among
a set N of bidders. Each bidder i has a value vi for receiving the good. To maximize social welfare, the auctioneer should give the item to the bidder of highest value, i.e.,
i∗ = argmaxi∈N vi . For that, the auctioneer must design a
mechanism which collects information about the value of
the bidders and decides which bidder wins the good and the
payment pi ≥ 0 of each bidder i ∈ N .
The classic solution proposed for this setting is the sealedbid second-price auction, wherein bidders report their values directly to the auctioneer and the highest-valued bidder is awarded the good at the second highest price (Vickrey 1961). It is well-known that this auction is dominantstrategy incentive compatible (i.e., strategyproof ), meaning
that each bidder maximizes her utility by truthfully reporting
her private value regardless of the reports of the other bidders. Theory suggests, therefore, that bidders should never
misreport their value in this auction. However, in practice,
“real-world” bidders report bids not equal to their true value
(Kagel, Harstad, and Levin 1987). Thus, there appears to be
a mismatch between the prediction of the theory of strategyproof mechanisms and the observed outcomes.
An alternative to the sealed-bid second-price auction for
the single-item setting is the ascending price (Japanese) auction. In this auction, a price clock gradually increases over
time and bidders drop out whenever the asking price becomes too high. The ascending price auction implements
the exact same outcome as the sealed-bid auction: it awards
the item to the highest-valued bidder at the second-highest
value. However, bidders appear empirically more likely
to follow their optimal truthful strategy when facing an
ascending-price auction compared to the sealed-bid format.
To address this discrepancy, Li has defined the notion of
obvious strategyproofness (OSP), a strengthening of strategyproofness (Li 2017). Loosely speaking, if a mechanism
is OSP then even agents unable to perform contingent reasoning can identify that truth-telling is the optimal strategy.
Obvious strategy-proofness provides a theoretical explanation for the prevalence of the ascending auction, by claiming
that its popularity stems from the fact that it is simpler for

We investigate the problem of designing randomized obviously strategyproof (OSP) mechanisms in several canonical auction settings. Obvious strategyproofness, introduced
by Li [American Economic Review 2017], strengthens the
well-known concept of dominant-strategy incentive compatibility (DSIC). Loosely speaking, it ensures that even agents
who struggle with contingent reasoning can identify that their
dominant strategy is optimal.
Thus, one would hope to design OSP mechanisms with
good approximation guarantees. Unfortunately, Ron [SODA
2024] has showed that deterministic OSP mechanisms fail to
achieve an approximation better than the minimum of the
number of items and the number of bidders, even for the
simple settings of additive and unit-demand bidders. We circumvent these impossibilities by showing that randomized
mechanisms that are obviously strategy-proof in the universal
sense obtain a constant factor approximation for these classes.
We show that this phenomenon occurs also for the setting of
a multi-unit auction with single-minded bidders. Thus, our
results provide a more positive outlook on the design of OSP
mechanisms and exhibit a stark separation between the power
of randomized and deterministic OSP mechanisms.
To complement the picture, we provide lower bounds on the
performance of randomized OSP mechanisms in each setting.
This further demonstrates that OSP mechanisms are significantly weaker than dominant-strategy mechanisms: it is well
known that the deterministic VCG mechanism outputs an optimal allocation in dominant-strategies, whereas we show that
even randomized OSP mechanisms cannot obtain more than
87.5% of the optimal welfare.

1

Introduction

Economics is the science of how to allocate scarce resources
to several competing parties. In particular, auctions serve as
a useful playground to understand who should get what and
for what price. We assume a good-willed central planner
who aims to allocate the resources in a way that maximizes
the social welfare of all parties involved. To achieve that, she
has to overcome the following obstacle: the information of
bidders is private and they are interested in maximizing their
* The majority of the proofs and additional results can be found
in the full version.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14070

