The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PerReactor: Offline Personalised Multiple Appropriate Facial Reaction
Generation
Hengde Zhu1 , Xiangyu Kong2,3 , Weicheng Xie4 , Xin Huang5 , Xilin He4 , Lu Liu2 , Linlin Shen4 , Wei
Zhang6,3 , Hatice Gunes7 , Siyang Song2 *
1

School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
3
Affect AI, Anhui, China
4
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
5
School of Electronic Science and Engineering (School of Microelectronics), South China Normal University, Foshan, China
6
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
7
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
hz204@le.ac.uk, {xk219, l.liu3}@exeter.ac.uk, {wcxie, llshen}@szu.edu.cn, huangxin@m.scnu.edu.cn,
2020152115@email.szu.edu.cn, cstzhangwei@zju.edu.cn, {hg410, ss2796}@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
In dyadic human-human interactions, individuals may express multiple different facial reactions in response to the
same/similar behaviours expressed by their conversational
partners depending on their personalised behaviour patterns.
As a result, frequently-employed reconstruction loss-based
strategies lead the training of previous automatic facial reaction generation (FRG) models to not only suffer from the
‘one-to-many mapping’ problem, but also fail to comprehensively consider the quality of the generated facial reactions. Besides, none of them considered such personalised behaviour patterns in generating facial reactions. In this paper,
we propose the first adversarial FRG model training strategy
which jointly learns appropriateness and realism discriminators to provide comprehensive task-specific supervision for
training the target facial reaction generators, and reformulates
the ‘one-to-many (facial reactions) mapping’ training problem as a ‘one-to-one (distribution) mapping’ training task,
i.e., the FRG model is trained to output a distribution representing multiple appropriate/plausible facial reaction from
each input human behaviour. In addition, our approach also
serves as the first offline FRG approach that considers personalised behaviour patterns in generating of target individuals’ facial reactions. Experiments show that our PerReactor
not only largely outperformed all existing offline solutions for
generating appropriate, diverse and realistic facial reactions,
but also is the first offline approach that can effectively generate personalised appropriate facial reactions.

Figure 1: Comparison between the distributions learnt by
PerReactor and existing MAFRG approaches, which pair
the input speaker behaviour with: (a) the corresponding
‘GT’ real appropriate facial reaction (AFR); (b) a finite set
of generic real AFRs (expressed by different listeners) defined in the training set; (c) a infinite set of AFRs including
generic real AFRs defined in the training set and previously
unseen generic AFRs; and (d) a infinite set of personalised
real AFRs (expressed by the target listener) provided in the
training set and previously unseen personalised AFRs.
developing reliable automatic human-style facial reaction
generation (FRG) systems would promote humanoid virtual
agents/robots with the capability of reacting human interpretable emotional behaviours for various human-computer
interaction applications (Tang et al. 2023). While FRG is
a challenging ‘one-to-many mapping’ problem (Song et al.
2023b), where various human facial reactions could be triggered by the same/similar human behaviours (called speaker
behaviour) (Mehrabian and Russell 1974; Pandita, Mishra,
and Chib 2021), it is almost impossible to develop a generic
model that can accurately reproduce real facial reactions expressed by different individuals (called listeners) under various contexts. Specifically, previous studies found that gener-

Code — https://github.com/AffectAI/PerReactor

Introduction
In human-human dyadic interactions, facial reaction is defined as human non-verbal facial behaviours expressed in response to behaviours expressed by their conversational partners, which plays a key role for people to convey their intentions and emotional states (Sagliano et al. 2022). Therefore,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1665

