The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DualGFL: Federated Learning with a Dual-Level Coalition-Auction Game
Xiaobing Chen1 , Xiangwei Zhou1 , Songyang Zhang2 , Mingxuan Sun3
2

1
Division of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Louisiana State University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
3
Division of Computer Science and Engineering, Louisiana State University
{xchen87, xwzhou}@lsu.edu, songyang.zhang@louisiana.edu, msun@csc.lsu.edu

Abstract

within budget limits (Zhang et al. 2023a; Zhang, Shen, and
Bai 2023). Robust incentive mechanisms are therefore essential, and game theory offers a promising framework by
modeling strategic interactions among rational agents, improving utilities (Arisdakessian et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023)
and enhancing overall system efficiency (Charatsaris, Diamanti, and Papavassiliou 2023; Zhang et al. 2023b).
Existing game-theoretical approaches in federated learning often use one-level games, either in a purely cooperative
(Arisdakessian et al. 2023; Charatsaris, Diamanti, and Papavassiliou 2023) or competitive (Thi Le et al. 2021; Wu
et al. 2023; Mai et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023; Lim et al. 2020)
setting, missing complex dynamics among participants in
practice. Additionally, current methods tend to improve either client utility (Arisdakessian et al. 2023; Charatsaris,
Diamanti, and Papavassiliou 2023) or server utility (Zhang
et al. 2023a; Yang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023b; Wang
et al. 2022), rarely addressing both simultaneously. This narrow focus limits their applicability in real-world, large-scale
federated learning scenarios, where both cooperative and
competitive dynamics are present, and the goals of the server
and clients must be balanced.
Given these limitations, we pose the question: Can we design a comprehensive game-theoretical framework for practical federated learning that benefits both the server’s and
clients’ utilities? To address the question above, we propose an innovative Federated Learning framework with a
Dual-level Game in cooperative-competitive environments,
namely DualGFL, which meets the following criteria:

Despite some promising results in federated learning using
game-theoretical methods, most existing studies mainly employ a one-level game in either a cooperative or competitive environment, failing to capture the complex dynamics
among participants in practice. To address this issue, we
propose DualGFL, a novel Federated Learning framework
with a Dual-level Game in cooperative-competitive environments. DualGFL includes a lower-level hedonic game where
clients form coalitions and an upper-level multi-attribute auction game where coalitions bid for training participation. At
the lower-level DualGFL, we introduce a new auction-aware
utility function and propose a Pareto-optimal partitioning algorithm to find a Pareto-optimal partition based on clients’
preference profiles. At the upper-level DualGFL, we formulate a multi-attribute auction game with resource constraints
and derive equilibrium bids to maximize coalitions’ winning
probabilities and profits. A greedy algorithm is proposed to
maximize the utility of the central server. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate DualGFL’s effectiveness in improving both server utility and client utility.

Introduction
Federated learning enables decentralized model training
across edge devices without transmitting raw data to a central server, which reduces resource costs during local training and model transmission while maintaining performance.
The conventional FedAvg approach (McMahan et al. 2017)
reduces communication overhead by scheduling a subset of
clients per training round. To address data and system heterogeneity and improve efficiency or performance (Chen
et al. 2024a; Jing et al. 2024), existing studies have explored
various techniques, such as statistical client selection (Chen,
Horvath, and Richtarik 2022; Zeng, Yan, and Zhang 2021;
Cao et al. 2022; Nguyen et al. 2021), heuristic client selection (Lai et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022), and optimization-based
approaches (Wang et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2024b).
In practical deployments, clients and servers have distinct
objectives: clients seek access to the latest global model and
potential monetary payoffs (Yang et al. 2023). In contrast,
servers aim to incentivize high-quality data contributions

1. Clients can autonomously decide whether to participate
in the training based on their utilities.
2. The server can autonomously select participants to optimize its utility.
To achieve this goal, we leverage the hierarchical structure
in hierarchical federated learning (HFL) to develop a duallevel game-theoretical framework with both cooperative and
competitive elements. In HFL, edge servers act as intermediaries between clients and the central server, aggregating
model updates from clients and transmitting the aggregated
model to the central server. This hierarchical structure helps
reduce communication overhead (Liu et al. 2020), manage
system heterogeneity (Abad et al. 2020; Briggs, Fan, and
Andras 2020), and enhance scalability (Wang et al. 2023).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15904

