The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Preference-Oriented Supervised Fine-Tuning: Favoring Target Model over
Aligned Large Language Models
Yuchen Fan, Yuzhong Hong, Qiushi Wang, Junwei Bao* , Hongfei Jiang, Yang Song
Zuoyebang Education Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd
{fanyuchen02, hongyuzhong, wangqiushi02, jianghongfei, songyang}@zuoyebang.com
baojunwei001@gmail.com

Target model

Abstract
Alignment, endowing a pre-trained Large language model
(LLM) with the ability to follow instructions, is crucial for its
real-world applications. Conventional supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) methods formalize it as causal language modeling typically with a cross-entropy objective, requiring a large amount
of high-quality instruction-response pairs. However, the quality of widely used SFT datasets can not be guaranteed due
to the high cost and intensive labor for the creation and
maintenance in practice. To overcome the limitations associated with the quality of SFT datasets, we introduce a novel
preference-oriented supervised fine-tuning approach, namely
PoFT. The intuition is to boost SFT by imposing a particular preference: favoring the target model over aligned LLMs
on the same SFT data. This preference encourages the target
model to predict a higher likelihood than that predicted by the
aligned LLMs, incorporating assessment information on data
quality (i.e., predicted likelihood by the aligned LLMs) into
the training process. Extensive experiments are conducted,
and the results validate the effectiveness of the proposed
method. PoFT achieves stable and consistent improvements
over the SFT baselines across different training datasets and
base models. Moreover, we prove that PoFT can be integrated
with existing SFT data filtering methods to achieve better performance, and further improved by following preference optimization procedures, such as DPO.

SFT data

…

𝑥! , 𝑦!
𝑥" , 𝑦"
𝑥# , 𝑦#

Preference
score

≻

Preference
score

Figure 1: The overall modeling framework of PoFT. By
leveraging the Bradley-Terry ranking objective, we impose
a particular preference that favors the target model over the
aligned LLMs on the same SFT data. Note that the preference score is generated based on the corresponding predicted likelihood.

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is an essential phase of
alignment, wherein the task is framed as causal language
modeling performed on a pre-trained language model with
instruction-response data D = {⟨x, y⟩}. Generally, it leverages the cross-entropy objective function in optimization,
equipping the pre-trained language model with the ability
to follow instructions and generate coherent sequences. Several studies (Schick and Schütze 2021; Houlsby et al. 2019;
Ivison et al. 2023) are dedicated to exploring SFT training strategies to enhance the alignment of LLMs. However, due to the intrinsic traits of modeling, the optimization
process heavily depends on the availability of high-quality
⟨x, y⟩ data, which hinders its performance. Traditionally, the
prevalent large-scale SFT datasets in earlier research, such
as Alpaca (Taori et al. 2023) and ShareGPT (shareAI 2023),
were mainly developed via AI distillation or human-andAI interaction. Assuring the quality of these datasets can be
challenging, as the filtration and curation processes demand
significant human resources and efforts.
Instead of solely aligning the instruction and responses,
preference alignment (PA), such as InstructGPT (Ouyang
et al. 2022) and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
(Rafailov et al. 2023), optimizes the LLMs based on chosenrejected data ⟨x, y + , y − ⟩. These PA methods provide exceptional benefits in model alignment, enabling LLMs to

Code — https://github.com/Savannah120/alignmenthandbook-PoFT/

1

Aligned LLMs

Introduction

Large language models(LLMs) such as ChatGPT (OpenAI
et al. 2024) have exhibited successful and potent applications in comprehending human queries and delivering plausible responses. This ability has proven to be crucial in realworld applications, e.g. AI assistants and recommendation
systems. To equip LLMs with this ability, the alignment
methods are usually applied to pre-trained language models. Alignment enables pre-trained models to comprehend
the context and generate responses suitable to human interactions. Typical alignment methods can be broadly categorized into two types: Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and
Preference Alignment (PA).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23859

