The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Illusion of Empathy: How AI Chatbots Shape Conversation Perception
Tingting Liu1 * , Salvatore Giorgi1 , Ankit Aich1, 2 , Allison Lahnala1 ,
Brenda Curtis1 , Lyle Ungar2 , João Sedoc3
1

National Institute on Drug Abuse
2
University of Pennsylvania
3
New York University
{tingting.liu, sal.giorgi, ankit.aich, allison.lahnala, brenda.curtis}@nih.gov, ungar@cis.upenn.edu, jsedoc@stern.nyu.edu
Abstract

• Chatbots received lower ratings for empathy than humans, confirmed by user self-reports from 4 different empathy ratings, LLM annotations, and one pre-trained empathy model.
• Chatbots receive higher ratings for conversation quality,
although they are perceived as less empathetic than human partners.

As AI chatbots increasingly incorporate empathy, understanding user-centered perceptions of chatbot empathy and its
impact on conversation quality remains essential yet underexplored. This study examines how chatbot identity and perceived empathy influence users’ overall conversation experience. Analyzing 155 conversations from two datasets, we
found that while GPT-based chatbots were rated significantly
higher in conversational quality, they were consistently perceived as less empathetic than human conversational partners.
Empathy ratings from GPT-4o annotations aligned with user
ratings, reinforcing the perception of lower empathy in chatbots compared to humans. Our findings underscore the critical role of perceived empathy in shaping conversation quality,
revealing that achieving high-quality human-AI interactions
requires more than simply embedding empathetic language;
it necessitates addressing the nuanced ways users interpret
and experience empathy in conversations with chatbots.

The paper begins with a review of related work, covering
empathy in dialogues, language use, and the influence of
chatbot identities. We then present our study (see Figure
1), which includes four experiments to investigate perceived
empathy in chat partners: analyzing psychological ratings,
using LLM (GPT-4o) annotations, developing a perceived
empathy model, and evaluating pre-trained empathy models. The paper concludes with a discussion of the results and
their implications.

Related Work
Introduction

Empathy in Conversations

Empathetic communication plays a crucial role in text-based
interactions by enabling participants to process, understand,
and respond to each other’s emotional needs (Decety and
Jackson 2004), which enhances likability and trust (Brave,
Nass, and Hutchinson 2005). Extensive research has examined empathetic communication in both human-human and
human-bot conversations (Hosseini and Caragea 2021; Gao
et al. 2021) and in developing empathetic chat agents (Casas
et al. 2021). However, it remains unclear whether, how, and
to what extent perceived empathy differs between chatbots
and humans and how such differences influence conversation quality. Existing studies have not sufficiently explored
how users perceive empathy when interacting with chatbots
versus humans or the impact of these perceptions on overall
conversation quality.
Our study examines how users’ perceptions of conversation quality are influenced by the conversation partner’s
identity (human or chatbot) and perceived empathy, highlighting the interplay between chatbot identity, empathetic
communication, and user perceptions. We made two major
conclusions:

Linguistic research on empathy in human language use
has been conducted through qualitative approaches, such
as conversation analysis (CA). These qualitative approaches
have investigated how empathy is expressed in conversations (Alam, Danieli, and Riccardi 2018; Peräkylä 2012),
including through affiliative responses to complaint stories
(Lindström and Sorjonen 2012), emotion expression (Alam,
Danieli, and Riccardi 2018), reactions to each other’s emotions (Herlin and Visapää 2016), and the grammatical structures used to convey empathy (Atkinson and Heritage 1984).
For example, a common progression in conversations is using affiliative turns (Jefferson 1984).
Research on human-bot conversations often emphasizes
humanizing bots through appearance and language to enhance engagement and interaction quality. This has led
to creating emotionally aware chatbots that use sentiment
analysis, emotion recognition, and affect prediction (Alam,
Danieli, and Riccardi 2018; Raamkumar and Yang 2022).
Empathetic chatbot development focuses on recognizing
emotions in conversations and responding empathetically
(Casas et al. 2021; Wardhana, Ferdiana, and Hidayah 2021).
Previous studies on empathetic conversational agents often focus on enhancing empathy via linguistic strategies like
empathetic language and response formulation (Zhou et al.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14327

