The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hierarchical Consensus Network for Multiview Feature Learning
Chengwei Xia1 , Chaoxi Niu2 , Kun Zhan1 *
1

2

School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney
kzhan@lzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multiview feature learning aims to learn discriminative features by integrating the distinct information in each view. However, most existing methods still face significant challenges in
learning view-consistency features, which are crucial for effective multiview learning. Motivated by the theories of CCA
and contrastive learning in multiview feature learning, we propose the hierarchical consensus network (HCN) in this paper.
The HCN derives three consensus indices for capturing the
hierarchical consensus across views, which are classifying consensus, coding consensus, and global consensus, respectively.
Specifically, classifying consensus reinforces class-level correspondence between views from a CCA perspective, while
coding consensus closely resembles contrastive learning and
reflects contrastive comparison of individual instances. Global
consensus aims to extract consensus information from two perspectives simultaneously. By enforcing the hierarchical consensus, the information within each view is better integrated
to obtain more comprehensive and discriminative features.
The extensive experimental results obtained on four multiview
datasets demonstrate that the proposed method significantly
outperforms several state-of-the-art methods.

1

1.7

Height

60

Weight
Classifying

Introduction

Multiview data are universal in the real world and typically
contain multiple views of the same underlying semantic information. Generally, a single view cannot provide adequate
information for feature learning. To address this, multiview
feature learning aims to integrate the common and complementary information contained in multiple views to generate
more discriminative data features than a single view (Chen
et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2022).
Multiview feature learning methods are roughly divided
into two categories, i.e., traditional and deep methods. However, traditional methods typically suffer from limited representation capacity, and high computational complexity for
complex data scenarios. To alleviate these problems, many
works propose to perform multiview feature learning based
on deep neural networks and achieve superior performance
compared to the traditional methods.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21617

Coding

Global

Figure 1: The hierarchical consensus: Consider a scenario
with five students, where we collect their height and weight.
We employ two simple classifiers: one based on height (assigning ‘boy’ if height >1.7m and ‘girl’; otherwise) and another based on weight (assigning ‘boy’ if weight >60kg and
‘girl’ otherwise). Each view produces binary predictions. Our
hierarchical consensus objective involves deriving consensus
indices through inner product computations. (1) Classifying
Consensus: In the first column of the matrix, b(h) and b(w)
denote boys’ predictions from the two views. The result of 2
counts the number of boys. The objective of classifying consensus is to align predictions for gender quantity. (2) Coding
Consensus: Moving to the first row of the second matrix,
s(h) and s(w) represent the gender coding for a same student.
The result of 1 indicates consensus prediction of the student.
The objective of coding consensus is to align gender coding
of the student. (3) Global Consensus: To the whole matrix
perspective, a global consensus is established.

Most deep learning methods focus on learning consistency
between different view features to obtain a common representation through concatenation or adaptive weighted fusion (Trosten et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024b).
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1936) and
co-training (Blum and Mitchell 1998) are two representa-

