The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Multimodal Affective Analysis with Learned Live Comment Features
Zhaoyuan Deng, Amith Ananthram, Kathleen McKeown
Columbia University
zd2286@columbia.edu, amith@cs.columbia.edu, kathy@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Seeing others happy is really touching

Live comments, also known as Danmaku, are user-generated
messages that are synchronized with video content. These
comments overlay directly onto streaming videos, capturing
viewer emotions and reactions in real-time. While prior work
has leveraged live comments in affective analysis, their use
has been limited due to the relative rarity of live comments
across different video platforms. To address this, we first construct the Live Comment for Affective Analysis (LCAffect)
dataset which contains live comments for English and Chinese videos spanning diverse genres that elicit a wide spectrum of emotions. Then, using this dataset, we use contrastive
learning to train a video encoder to produce synthetic live
comment features for enhanced multimodal affective content
analysis. Through comprehensive experimentation on a wide
range of affective analysis tasks (sentiment, emotion recognition, and sarcasm detection) in both English and Chinese, we
demonstrate that these synthetic live comment features significantly improve performance over state-of-the-art methods.

Best wishes

So romantic

That's too hasty

OMG, so touching!
Congratulations!!
I burst into tears

Waited 7 seasons,
this moment is what I've been
looking forward to the most

Leonard: Penny, will you marry me?
Penny: Oh, my God, yes.
Figure 1: An example video frame and dialogue from the TV
show The Big Bang Theory with accompanying live comments overlaid. Below each original Chinese comment, we
include its English translation. By training a video encoder
to produce representations similar to these live comments,
we can produce multimodal features that adapt well to affective analysis tasks like emotion recognition.

Code, Dataset, and Appendix —
https://github.com/dzy49/AffectiveLiveComm

Introduction
Live comments, or Danmaku, are a subtitle system originating from Japan and popularized in China. This system
overlays real-time user-generated messages directly onto online video streams. These comments, synchronized with a
video’s timeline, offer a rich layer of viewer interaction, providing insights into user emotions, user reactions, and the
video’s broader context (see Figure 1). The richness of these
comments makes them an ideal resource for enhancing multimodal affective analysis, which seeks to interpret and categorize the emotional content and dynamics of videos. Although prior research, such as the study by Niu et al. (2018),
has demonstrated how live comments can improve performance in affective analysis tasks like emotion prediction,
their broader application remains constrained. Many video
platforms do not support live comments, rendering these
insights impossible for videos on those platforms. Consequently, the rarity of live comments poses significant challenges in fully exploiting their analytical potential.

In this work, we bridge this gap by proposing a novel
method for producing synthetic live comment features to improve the performance of multimodal affective analysis. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of these features in English
and Chinese across several video understanding tasks: sentiment analysis, emotion recognition, and sarcasm detection.
One major challenge in affective learning from live comments stems from the nature of existing large-scale live comment datasets which are primarily tailored to the live comment generation task. These datasets typically feature a large
percentage of popular content genres such as video games,
sports, and music videos. However, these categories typically lack the rich emotional context required for detailed affective analysis. This mismatch complicates the training of
models capable of accurately understanding and interpreting nuanced emotions. Additionally, the majority of these

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16253

