The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Trainability and Classical Simulability of Learning Matrix Product States
Variationally
Afrad Basheer1 , Yuan Feng2 , Christopher Ferrie1 , Sanjiang Li1 and Hakop Pashayan3
1

Centre for Quantum Software and Information, University of Technology Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems, Freie Universität Berlin 14195, Germany
afrad.m.basheer@student.uts.edu.au, yuan_feng@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{christopher.ferrie, sanjiang.li}@uts.edu.au, hakopsadventures@gmail.com
Abstract

We prove that using global observables to train the matrix product state ansatz results in the vanishing of all partial derivatives,
also known as barren plateaus, while using local observables
avoids this. This ansatz is widely used in quantum machine
learning for learning weakly entangled state approximations.
Additionally, we empirically demonstrate that in many cases,
the objective function is an inner product of almost sparse
operators, highlighting the potential for classically simulating
such a learning problem with few quantum resources. All our
results are experimentally validated across various scenarios.

Introduction
Quantum computing has made major strides in the past few
years in terms of qubit capacity (Chow, Dial, and Gambetta
2021; Gambetta 2022) and error correction (da Silva et al.
2024), prompting significant efforts in demonstrating concrete advantages over classical computers. Although this
has been achieved in some cases (Arute et al. 2019; Zhong
et al. 2020; Madsen et al. 2022), superiority in solving practically useful problems remains to be seen. With the emergence of Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices (Preskill 2018), recent focus has shifted to quantum
optimization algorithms, especially Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) (Cerezo et al. 2021a). In VQAs, we use
quantum computers to estimate objective functions involving quantum states and parameterized quantum circuits (also
called ansatzes) and update the parameters of these functions
classically. Popular examples include variational quantum
eigensolver (Peruzzo et al. 2014), quantum support vector
machines (Havlíček et al. 2019), quantum approximate optimization algorithm (Farhi, Goldstone, and Gutmann 2014),
etc.
An important example that features extensively in quantum information is learning cost-effective approximations
of quantum states (Cerezo et al. 2021b; Matos, Johri, and
Papić 2021; Gard et al. 2020). These techniques can be used
to learn ansatzes that can approximately prepare states using fewer gates than initially required. Among the many
choices of ansatzes used, interest has surged in the Matrix
Product State (MPS) ansatz (cf. Figure 1 (a)) (Rudolph et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15498

2022; Ran 2020; Ben-Dov et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2021; Rieser,
Köster, and Raulf 2023). The MPS ansatz leverages the MPS
data structure, which stores quantum states with space complexity that scales polynomially with the bond dimensions
(parameters that measure entanglement in linear qubit arrays).
Consequently, the MPS ansatz is particularly effective for
learning weakly entangled approximations, potentially resulting in fewer gate counts and simpler gate connectivity
requirements compared to other approaches.
Learning state approximations variationally can be performed using either global or local observables (Cerezo
et al. 2021b). Experimental results in (Ben-Dov et al. 2022)
showed that using the MPS ansatz along with global observables for state approximations can result in barren plateaus,
where all partial derivatives become exponentially small in
the number of qubits. This makes estimating these derivatives
using quantum devices require exponentially many executions. Moreover, the parameter updates also become exponentially small. In contrast, it was empirically shown that using
local observables can help mitigate this issue.
Theoretically proving this phenomenon is a challenging
task. Although this has been achieved for similar problems
such as optimization over the Hardware Efficient Ansatz
(HEA) (Cerezo et al. 2021b) (cf. Figure 1 (b)) and tensor
network-based optimization in quantum information (Liu
et al. 2022), these results cannot be used to explain exponentially vanishing objective functions and gradients for the
MPS ansatz.
This work provides rigorous trainability proofs for the
MPS ansatz. We prove that under uniformly random initialization of the circuit parameters, when using global observables,
the variance of the objective function decreases exponentially
while the usage of local observables ensures that the same
variance is lower bounded by a quantity whose dependence
on the number of qubits is linear and scales exponentially
only in the width of the subcircuit involved. We also relate
this with the variance of the partial derivatives and show that
similar results hold for them as well.
Trainability is closely interrelated with classical simulability. In (Cerezo et al. 2024), it was conjectured, with evidence,
that provably avoiding barren plateaus in this manner could
imply classical simulability with few quantum resources.
That is, for all provably trainable VQA objective functions,
one can simulate the whole optimization classically using

