The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Multimodal Social Media Popularity Prediction via Selective Retrieval
Knowledge Augmentation
Xovee Xu, Yifan Zhang, Fan Zhou, Jingkuan Song*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan 610054 China
xovee.xu@gmail.com, yifanzhang@std.uestc.edu.cn, fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn, jingkuan.song@gmail.com

Abstract
Understanding and predicting the popularity of online UserGenerated Content (UGC) is critical for various social and
recommendation systems. Existing efforts have focused on
extracting predictive features and using pre-trained deep
models to learn and fuse multimodal UGC representations.
However, the dissemination of social UGCs is not an isolated process in social network; rather, it is influenced by
contextual relevant UGCs and various exogenous factors, including social ties, trends, user interests, and platform algorithms. In this work, we propose a retrieval-based framework to enhance the popularity prediction of multimodal
UGCs. Our framework extends beyond a simple semantic retrieval, incorporating a meta retrieval strategy that queries a
diverse set of relevant UGCs by considering multimodal content semantics, and metadata from user and post. Moreover,
to eliminate irrelevant and noisy UGCs in retrieval, we introduce a new measure called Relative Retrieval Contribution to Prediction (RRCP), which selectively refines the retrieved UGCs. We then aggregate the contextual UGC knowledge using vision-language graph neural networks, and fuse
them with an RRCP-Attention-based prediction network. Extensive experiments on three large-scale social media datasets
demonstrate significant improvements ranging from 26.68%
to 48.19% across all metrics compared to strong baselines.

1

Prior Arts

UGC

Vanilla
Retrieval

UGC

Model

Popularity

Model

Popularity

Model

Popularity

Database

Meta
Retriever

SKAPP

Selective
Reﬁner

Database

UGC
RRCP = 0.18

-0.70

-0.46

Query

4.2 4.0
1.8

SMPD

MSE

MSE

3.7 3.5
1.0

MSE

-2.54

0.07

0.05

0.49

Retrieving UGCs selectively

1.8 1.8

ICIP

0.37

Prior Arts
2.1

Instagram

Vanilla Retrieval
Proposed SKAPP

Figure 1: Top: Model comparison between non-retrieval,
vanilla retrieval, and our proposed selective retrieval. Middle: Case study of selectively retrieving UGCs from the Instagram dataset. Bottom: Preliminary experiments.

2021). For example, visual features such as color patches,
gradient, and objects in images, alongside social features
like follower count and historical UGC popularity, were
found to be effective in (Khosla, Das Sarma, and Hamid
2014). Another research direction employed statistical models to simulate UGC diffusion processes (Zhao et al. 2015;
Mishra, Rizoiu, and Xie 2016), including survival analysis
and point processes. More recent attention has been paid
to UGC representation learning through neural networks,
which automatically capture complex UGC patterns and integrate multiple data modalities into a unified model, leading to state-of-the-art prediction performance (Cheung and
Lam 2022; Cheng et al. 2024; Hsu et al. 2023; Chen et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2023). For example, the vision-language
Transformers have been used in (Cheung and Lam 2022) to
learn visual and textual representations of UGC content; and
the hierarchical variational auto-encoders have been used in
(Xie, Zhu, and Chen 2023) to model UGC’s internal noises
and external uncertainties.
A major challenge in SMPP lies in identifying the intrinsic quality and diffusion patterns of UGCs that significantly impact future popularity. However, many exist-

Introduction

Social media popularity prediction (SMPP) is a critical task
across many domains, such as social networking services
(Hong, Dan, and Davison 2011) and online marketing (Aggrawal et al. 2017; Gu et al. 2024), benefiting applications ranging from information propagation and rumor detection (Moniz and Torgo 2019) to social recommendation
and network traffic management (Zhang et al. 2021; Cheng
et al. 2022). At its core, SMPP research seeks to understand
what factors influence the diffusion of user-generated content (UGC) among users and develop prediction models that
can accurately “foresee” the future popularity of UGCs.
Early efforts in SMPP focused on mining predictive patterns from UGC content and social context, exploring various UGC features and building machine learning models for
the prediction (Tatar et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2022; Zhou et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

932

