The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CSformer: Combining Channel Independence and Mixing for Robust
Multivariate Time Series Forecasting
Haoxin Wang1 , Yipeng Mo1 , Kunlan Xiang2 , Nan Yin1 , Honghe Dai1
Bixiong Li3 , Songhai Fan4 , Site Mo1 *
1
College of Electrical Engineering, Sichuan University
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
College of Architecture and Environment, Sichuan University
4
State Grid Sichuan Electric Power Research Institute
{whx1122, moyipeng}@stu.scu.edu.cn, mosite@126.com
2

Informer,Autoformer,...

Abstract
In the domain of multivariate time series analysis, the concept of channel independence has been increasingly adopted,
demonstrating excellent performance due to its ability to
eliminate noise and the influence of irrelevant variables.
However, such a concept often simplifies the complex interactions among channels, potentially leading to information
loss. To address this challenge, we propose a strategy of channel independence followed by mixing. Based on this strategy,
we introduce CSformer, a novel framework featuring a twostage multiheaded self-attention mechanism. This mechanism
is designed to extract and integrate both Channel-specific
and Sequence-specific information. Distinctively, CSformer
employs parameter sharing to enhance the cooperative effects between these two types of information. Moreover,
our framework effectively incorporates sequence and channel
adapters, significantly improving the model’s ability to identify important information across various dimensions. Extensive experiments on several real-world datasets demonstrate
that CSformer achieves state-of-the-art results in terms of
overall performance.

PatchTST

Channel-wise Embedding
Sequence-wise Embedding
Attention

iTransformer

Performance
Channel Mixing

Modified Attention
Sequence Transformation
Add & Norm
Feed-forward

Channel Independent

Figure 1: Transformer-based models categorized by channel
independence and channel mixing.

model, DLinear (Zeng et al. 2023), that surpasses traditional Transformer models. Given the Transformer’s success in other domains (NLP, CV, etc.) (Devlin et al. 2018;
Brown et al. 2020; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), researchers have
shifted their focus from modifying the attention structure
within Transformers to altering the input data. iTransformer
(Liu et al. 2023) treats sequences from each channel as a
single token, embedding them along the sequence dimension and applying attention across the channel dimension.
PatchTST (Nie et al. 2023) uses a channel independent approach. It divides the input data into patches before feeding
it into the Transformer and then embedding each patch as a
token. These approaches have reinstated Transformer methods to a prominent position. We summarize the Transformerbased model based on the channel processing approach. As
shown in Figure 1, traditional models like Informer and Autoformer (Li, Hui, and Zhang 2021; Wu et al. 2021) directly
embed variables, leading to channel mixing and potential
noise introduction, especially from varied sensors and distributions. To eliminate these defects, PatchTST (Nie et al.
2023) adopts a channel-independent approach, risking information loss due to reduced physical intuitiveness. These observations suggest that neither direct channel independence
nor mixing is optimal. To address this, hybrid methods like
iTransformer (Liu et al. 2023) combine sequence embedding with channel-wise attention, offering a balanced approach. However, embedding methods of iTransformer may

Introduction
Time series forecasting is vital in areas such as traffic management (Cirstea et al. 2022; Yin and Shang 2016; Qin et al.
2023), power systems (Stefenon et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2023; Mo et al. 2024), and healthcare (Ahmed, Lin, and Srivastava 2023; Alshanbari et al. 2023; Sen 2022). However,
it faces significant challenges due to the complex long-term
dependencies and variable interrelations inherent in time series data. These difficulties have propelled multivariate time
series forecasting (MTSF) to the forefront of research in
these domains.
Recently, many deep learning models have been applied
to MTSF, especially Transformer-based models, such as Informer (Li, Hui, and Zhang 2021), Autoformer (Wu et al.
2021), and Fedformer (Zhou et al. 2022). These models
have demonstrated improved predictive performance by refining the attention mechanism. However, recent research
has raised questions regarding the suitability of Transformer
models for MTSF task, proposing a straightforward linear
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21090

