The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fast Think-on-Graph: Wider, Deeper and Faster
Reasoning of Large Language Model on Knowledge Graph
Xujian Liang1,2 , Zhaoquan Gu2,3 *
1

School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University Of Posts And Telecommunications, China
2
Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
xjliang@bupt.edu.cn, guzhaoquan@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

The Graph-based RAG (GRAG) is widely considered an
advanced RAG by incorporating KGs as an external source
for LLMs. Employing various graph algorithms within a
graph database, GRAG empowers LLMs for complex operations (Liang et al. 2024) such as BFS and DFS querying,
path exploration, and even community detection, etc, providing LLMs a wider and deeper understanding of the relations within the data, making it possible to execute sophisticated reasoning and the generate more precise responses.
In this paper, GRAG is categorized into n-w GRAG and
n-d GRAG (Fig. 1) based on the breadth and depth of retrieval. Particularly, there are still quite a few 1-w 1-d Graph
RAG researches (Andrus et al. 2022; Baek, Aji, and Saffari 2023; Li et al. 2023). Similar to the “Retrieve one Read
One” paradigm of Naive RAG, most of the 1-w 1-d research
focuses on single entity or one-hop relationship queries,
thereby inheriting the shortcomings of Naive RAG. To overcome these, researches (Jiang et al. 2023; Modarressi et al.
2023; Edge et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024), categorized as nw GRAG, aim to expand the context window of retrieval.
Noteworthy works within the n-w GRAG category focus
on treating the densely interconnected groups of nodes as
the basic units for retrieval and reasoning. These groups are
partitioned from the graph by community detection, allowing them to furnish LLMs with more contextual information
compared to single node or random clustering methods. For
example, given the query concerning the “climate of the area
where Pennsylvania Convention Center is located”, triples
such as (Pennsylvania Convention Center, located in, Market
East Section),...,(Pennsylvania, climate, humid subtropical)
would be sufficient for answering as the entity Pennsylvania Convention Center of the query is linked to the relevant
entity humid subtropical over a short distance (n-hop). Despite its simplicity, the retrieval may falter if the distance is
too long between the entities (Fig 1 a,b). n-d GRAG (Sun
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2022a) are ideal for this predicament by broadening the depth of the context window. Analogous to “Let’s think step by step” (Kojima et al. 2022), n-d
GRAG takes entities and relations as intermediate steps in
the chain of thought (CoT) to guide the generation of LLMs.
As they are tightly coupled with KGs, these paradigms exhibit higher recall in retrieval. However, since LLMs are required to “think” at each step, longer chains result in heightened computational costs (Fig. 1, c). On the other hand, if

Graph Retrieval Augmented Generation (GRAG) is a novel
paradigm that takes the naive RAG system a step further
by integrating graph information, such as knowledge graph
(KGs), into large-scale language models (LLMs) to mitigate
hallucination. However, existing GRAG still encounter limitations: 1) simple paradigms usually fail with the complex
problems due to the narrow and shallow correlations capture
from KGs 2) methods of strong coupling with KGs tend to
be high computation cost and time consuming if the graph
is dense. In this paper, we propose the Fast Think-on-Graph
(FastToG), an innovative paradigm for enabling LLMs to
think “community by community” within KGs. To do this,
FastToG employs community detection for deeper correlation
capture and two stages community pruning - coarse and fine
pruning for faster retrieval. Furthermore, we also develop two
Community-to-Text methods to convert the graph structure
of communities into textual form for better understanding by
LLMs. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
FastToG, showcasing higher accuracy, faster reasoning, and
better explainability compared to the previous works.

Code — https://github.com/dosonleung/FastToG

Introduction
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al. 2020)
is a cutting-edge technique for large-scale language models
(LLMs) to generate accurate, reasonable, and explainable responses. The early RAG, known as Naive RAG (Gao et al.
2023), mostly works by indexing the documents into manageable chunks, retrieving relevant context based on vector
similarity (Karpukhin et al. 2020) to a user query, integrating the context into prompts, and generating the response via
LLMs. As the paradigm is simple and highly efficient for the
basic tasks, Naive RAG is widely adopted in various applications e.g. Q&A (Chan et al. 2024), Recommendation System
(Deldjoo et al. 2024), Dialogue System (Ni et al. 2023), etc.
However, there remain such as low precision as the ambiguity or bias (Thurnbauer et al. 2023) exist in the embedding
model, low recall when dealing with complex queries, and
lack of explainability as the queries and documents are embedded in high-dimensional vector spaces.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24558

