The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Approximated Variational Bayesian Inverse Reinforcement Learning for
Large Language Model Alignment
Yuang Cai, Yuyu Yuan, Jinsheng Shi, Qinhong Lin
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{cyang,yuanyuyu,jinsheng,linqinhong}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

LLMs with human feedback data (Shen et al. 2023). RLHF
first performs reward modeling to learn a reward function
from the feedback data and then fine-tunes the LLM policy
to maximize the expected reward achieved by its generated
content using Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Ouyang et al.
2022; Bai et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023).
DPO formulates the reward modeling objective as a ranking objective based on the LLM policy, which facilitates the
joint performance of reward modeling and LLM policy finetuning through a unified training objective (Yuan et al. 2023;
Rafailov et al. 2024; Song et al. 2024).
The Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) problem generally involves learning a reward model from observed
demonstration data produced by a Markov Decision Process
(MDP) (Ng, Russell et al. 2000). Conversely, the Natural
Language Generation (NLG) process can be viewed as an
MDP where the generated sentences are considered demonstration data (Ranzato et al. 2016). Therefore, the alignment
task performed by RLHF and DPO can be seen as addressing an IRL problem that infers the implicit reward function hidden in the preference-based human feedback data
and learns the LLM policy either separately or jointly. However, existing RLHF and DPO alignment approaches only
model the reward difference between the chosen and rejected demonstrations without explicitly modeling the true
reward of every single sentence. This limitation means that
the demonstration data is not fully utilized, which restricts
the representation ability of the reward model and can lead
to reward hacking (Skalse et al. 2022; Gao, Schulman, and
Hilton 2023; Coste et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024). Additionally, current approaches generally model the end-toend sentence-level reward without considering the reward
of intermediate states. Model generalization may be limited when confronted with data that have similar intermediate state distributions but different complete sentence distributions. It is more intuitive to model intermediate rewards
since humans can not only provide overall feedback on the
entire text but also explain which parts of the text influenced
their feedback.
In this paper, we propose a novel LLM alignment training
objective, Approximated Variational Alignment (AVA),
based on Bayesian Inverse Reinforcement Learning (BIRL)
(Ramachandran and Amir 2007). Specifically, we formulate the reward distribution as a posterior distribution condi-

The alignment of large language models (LLMs) is crucial
for generating helpful and harmless content. Existing approaches leverage preference-based human feedback data to
learn the reward function and align the LLM with the feedback data. However, these approaches focus on modeling the
reward difference between the chosen and rejected demonstrations, rather than directly modeling the true reward from
each demonstration. Moreover, these approaches assume that
the reward is only obtained at the end of the sentence, which
overlooks the modeling of intermediate rewards. These issues lead to insufficient use of training signals in the feedback data, limiting the representation and generalization ability of the reward and potentially resulting in reward hacking.
In this paper, we formulate LLM alignment as a Bayesian Inverse Reinforcement Learning (BIRL) problem and propose
a novel training objective, Approximated Variational Alignment (AVA), to perform LLM alignment through Approximated Variational Reward Imitation Learning (AVRIL). The
BIRL formulation facilitates intermediate reward modeling
and direct reward modeling on each single demonstration,
which enhances the utilization of training signals in the feedback data. Experiments show that AVA outperforms existing LLM alignment approaches in reward modeling, RL finetuning, and direct optimization.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) trained on massive corpus
encode a large amount of knowledge and demonstrate powerful linguistic and reasoning capabilities in various domains
(OpenAI 2022; Achiam et al. 2023). However, due to the
inevitable harmful and useless information in the training
data, LLMs can potentially generate content inconsistent
with human values or requirements (Holtzman et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2019; Weidinger et al. 2021). LLM alignment
is a prevalent and effective approach for LLMs to generate harmless and helpful content. The alignment task typically relies on human feedback data in the form of preferences, where each preference data consists of a chosen
sentence and a rejected sentence, labeled by human annotators (Zopf 2018; Tay et al. 2020). Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO) are two common approaches to align
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23505

