The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AIF-SFDA: Autonomous Information Filter-driven Source-Free Domain
Adaptation for Medical Image Segmentation
Haojin Li1, 2 , Heng Li1, * , Jianyu Chen1, 2 , Rihan Zhong1, 2 , Ke Niu3 , Huazhu Fu4 , Jiang Liu1, 2, *
1

Research Institute of Trustworthy Adaptive Systems, Southern University of Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Beijing Information Science & Technology University
4
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research

2

Abstract
Decoupling domain-variant information (DVI) from domaininvariant information (DII) serves as a prominent strategy for
mitigating domain shifts in the practical implementation of
deep learning algorithms. However, in medical settings, concerns surrounding data collection and privacy often restrict
access to both training and test data, hindering the empirical decoupling of information by existing methods. To tackle
this issue, we propose an Autonomous Information Filterdriven Source-free Domain Adaptation (AIF-SFDA) algorithm, which leverages a frequency-based learnable information filter to autonomously decouple DVI and DII. Information Bottleneck (IB) and Self-supervision (SS) are incorporated to optimize the learnable frequency filter. The IB governs the information flow within the filter to diminish redundant DVI, while SS preserves DII in alignment with the specific task and image modality. Thus, the autonomous information filter can overcome domain shifts relying solely on
target data. A series of experiments covering various medical
image modalities and segmentation tasks were conducted to
demonstrate the benefits of AIF-SFDA through comparisons
with leading algorithms and ablation studies.

Figure 1: To develop an autonomous information filter in
SFDA scenarios, we utilize IB-constrained mutual information constraint to reduce DVI in the image information while
preserving DII through SS-constrained guidance.
data. A prominent strategy (Yang and Soatto 2020; Liu et al.
2021) within UDA revolves around decoupling information
into domain-variant and domain-invariant information (DVI
& DII), followed by the compression of DVI and the enhancement of DII to enable robust inference on novel data.
Specifically, configurable information filters based on frequency filtering are applied to process images or features,
selecting DVI and DII from various frequency components.
In these type of approach, filter configurations are typically derived by identifying characteristics and commonalities between the source and target domains in the frequency
spectrum. Configurations can be obtained by empirically
comparing frequency features (Liu et al. 2023) or through
autonomous optimization guided by task-related losses (Lin
et al. 2023). Nevertheless, jointly accessing both source and
target domains leads to concerns involving data collection
and privacy, often unacceptable in various practical contexts,
especially medical scenarios.
Accordingly, source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) (Li
et al. 2024b) becomes imperative to enable the adaptation of
pre-trained models solely using unlabeled target data. However, challenges emerge in decoupling DVI and DII in SFDA
settings. 1) The absence of labeled source data in SFDA results in a lack of guidance for decoupling DVI and DII. 2)
The preservation of DII is complicated when relying solely
on unseen and unlabeled target data. 3) Frequency filter-

Introduction
In recent years, there has been considerable advancement
in the field of medical image segmentation methods based
on deep learning (DL) (Li et al. 2024a). However, realworld scenarios frequently involve open datasets where the
test data (target domain) is unseen and likely exhibits domain shifts in comparison to the training data (source domain) (Guan and Liu 2021), attributed to practical variations
in acquisition devices, patient demographics, image quality,
and other variables. These domain shifts can significantly
affect the performance of segmentation models on target domains (Li et al. 2023a). Therefore, effectively transferring
segmentation models from the source domain to the target
domains is both logical and essential to enhance the utilization of DL algorithms.
To address this issue, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA) has been proposed to generalize models by leveraging labeled source data in conjunction with unlabeled target
* Corresponding authors: lih3, liuj@sustech.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4716

