The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SPAC: Sparse Partitioning and Adaptive Core Tensor Pruning Model for
Knowledge Graph Completion
Chuhong Yang1 , Bin Li1,2 * , Nan Wu1,2
1

2

Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing, Zhejiang, China
{3120230733, binli, wunan}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

tion (KGC), which aims to address this issue by inferring
missing relationships or entities, has attracted significant attention in recent years.
In KGC tasks, Tensor Decomposition (TD) models
demonstrate substantial competitiveness. These models conceptualize a knowledge graph as a three-dimensional tensor and treat KGC as a tensor completion problem. These
TD models can be viewed as shallow neural networks. Despite the simplicity, they achieve impressive performance.
The RESCAL model (Nickel et al. 2011) interprets the specific relationships between head and tail entities as unique
weight matrices, facilitating interactions between their embedding vectors. DistMult (Yang et al. 2014) simplifies the
relationship embedding in RESCAL into diagonal weight
matrices. ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016) extends DistMult’s real embeddings into the complex space, enhancing
its capacity to handle asymmetric relationships. Subsequent
models like SimplE and QuatE (Kazemi and Poole 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019a) have further simplified and expanded
upon ComplEx, and have notable performance. In 2019, the
author of (Balažević, Allen, and Hospedales 2019) applied
Tucker decomposition to KGC tasks and illustrated that the
aforementioned models can be regarded as special cases of
Tucker decomposition with a sparse core tensor.
From the perspective of core tensor structure, models like
DistMult and ComplEx, while interpretable to some extent,
suffer from performance issues due to the excessive sparsity of the core tensor, which limits effective interaction between embedding dimensions. Conversely, Tucker’s dense
core tensor structure leads to excessive interactions, but significantly reduces training efficiency and increases the risk
of overfitting. MEI and MEIM (Tran and Takasu 2020;
Nghiep Tran and Takasu 2022) model the core tensor with
a diagonally blocked sparse structure, striking a balance between effectiveness and efficiency. These developments motivate us toward exploring a sparse and better dynamically
adaptive core tensor structure, starting from a semi-sparse
structure and pruning unnecessary parts to achieve a streamlined model. From an efficiency standpoint, pruning along
the diagonal blocks is beneficial. Instead of completely discarding the pruned dimensions, we replace some parts of the
dense interactions with sparse interactions, which can capture general semantic information. Meanwhile, dense interactions can capture precise semantic information. Further-

Tensor decomposition (TD) models are promising solutions
for knowledge graph completion due to their simple structures but powerful representation capacities. These TD models typically adopt Tucker decomposition with a structured
core tensor. Some models with a sparse core tensor, such as
DistMult and ComplEx, are too simple and thus limit the interaction between embedding components, while other models with a dense core tensor are too complex and may lead to
significant overfitting. To address these issues, we propose a
new TD model called SPAC (Sparse Partitioning and Adaptive Core tensor pruning). Specifically, SPAC captures coarse
and fine-grained semantic information using a hybrid core
tensor, where auxiliary cores are used to model sparse interactions and main cores for dense interactions. Moreover, SPAC
introduces a gating mechanism to control the output of intermediate variables, enhancing the interaction between different partition groups. Furthermore, SPAC employs an adaptive
pruning approach to dynamically adjust the shape of the core
tensor. The proposed TD model enhances expressive capacity
and reduces the number of parameters in the core tensor. Experiments are conducted on datasets FB15k-237, WN18RR,
and YAGO3-10. The results demonstrate that SPAC outperforms state-of-the-art tensor decomposition models, including MEIM and Tucker models. A series of ablation studies
show that the gating mechanism and adaptive pruning strategy in SPAC are crucial for the performance improvement.

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) have emerged as a compelling
structure for representing structured and semi-structured
data across a wide range of domains. They provide a flexible and intuitive way to model entities and their interrelationships, making them an essential tool for various applications such as semantic search (Cha et al. 2023), recommendation systems (Yang et al. 2023), and natural language
processing (Zhang et al. 2019b). Constructing and maintaining a large-scale KG can be challenging due to the dynamic nature of data and the complexity of relationships.
Moreover, large KGs often contain missing or incomplete
information, which can hinder the performance of downstream applications. Therefore, Knowledge Graph Comple* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15230

