The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Momentum Pseudo-Labeling for Weakly Supervised Phrase Grounding
Dongdong Kuang1 , Richong Zhang1,3* , Zhijie Nie1,4 , Junfan Chen1,2 , Jaein Kim1
1

CCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
4
Shen Yuan Honors College, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{kuangdd, zhangrc, niezj, chenjf}@act.buaa.edu.cn, jaein@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Weakly supervised phrase grounding tasks aim to learn
alignments between phrases and regions with coarse imagecaption match information. One branch of previous methods
established pseudo-label relationships between phrases and
regions based on the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm combined with contrastive learning. However, adopting a simplified batch-level local update (partial) of pseudolabels in E-step is sub-optimal, while extending it to global
update requires inefficiently numerous computations. In addition, their failure to consider potential false negative examples in contrastive loss negatively impacts the effectiveness of M-step optimization. To address these issues, we propose a Momentum Pseudo Labeling (MPL) method, which
efficiently uses a momentum model to synchronize global
pseudo-label updates on the fly with model parameter updating. Additionally, we explore potential relationships between
phrases and regions from non-matching image-caption pairs
and convert these false negative examples to positive ones
in contrastive learning. Our approach achieved SOTA performance on 3 commonly used grounding datasets for weakly
supervised phrase grounding tasks.

Figure 1: Comparison of pseudo-label updating mechanisms. (a) Previous method: Utilizes an encoder model to
update the pseudo-label matrix locally within each batch.
(b) MPL: Employs a momentum model to perform global
updates on the pseudo-labels across batches and addresses
the issue of potential false negatives.

Introduction
Phrase grounding is a crucial task in multimodal learning,
involving the identification of specific regions within an image that corresponds to a given textual description (Liu and
Hockenmaier 2019). This task has significant practical applications, including visual question answering (Chen, Anjum, and Gurari 2022) and cross-modal regions retrieval
(Li* et al. 2022). Existing fully supervised methods (Huang
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022) depend heavily on extensive
annotations of fine-grained object detection bounding boxes,
which provide precise locations of objects within an image to achieve high performance. However, obtaining such
detailed annotations is costly. In contrast, matched imagecaption pairs, where each image is paired with a descriptive
caption, are more readily available and do not require detailed spatial information about object locations. This ease
of availability leads to growing interest in weakly supervised
phrase grounding (WSPG), which aims to learn the corre-

spondence between phrase and image regions without the
need for extensive annotations.
Recent works in WSPG (Gupta et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2022; Rigoni et al. 2023; Zhang, Wang,
and Liu 2023) have utilized image-caption level or phraseregion level contrastive losses based on image-caption supervision to align the representations of phrases and regions. However, under a weakly supervised setting, it is
challenging to accurately identify positive samples during
contrastive learning. To address this difficulty, these methods establish pseudo-label relationships between phrases
and regions within matched image-caption pairs based on
the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm.
However, existing methods encounter two main challenges. First, they may encounter efficiency problems in Estep computation. As shown in Figure 1 (a), to quickly update the posterior probabilities of the latent variable, they
adopt a simplified batch-level local update of pseudo-labels
in E-step, usually on a batch of image-caption examples and
fail to update the out-of-batch examples. This updating strat-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24348

