The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TrustUQA: A Trustful Framework for Unified Structured Data Question Answering
Wen Zhang1,4 , Long Jin1 , Yushan Zhu1 , Jiaoyan Chen2 , Zhiwei Huang1 , Junjie Wang1 , Yin Hua1
, Lei Liang3 , Huajun Chen1,4,5 *
1
Zhejiang University
University of Manchester
3
Ant Group
4
ZJU-Ant Group Joint Lab of Knowledge Graph
5
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing
{zhang.wen, longjin, yushanzhu, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Natural language question answering (QA) over structured
data sources such as tables and knowledge graphs have been
widely investigated, especially with Large Language Models
(LLMs) in recent years. The main solutions include question
to formal query parsing and retrieval-based answer generation. However, current methods of the former often suffer
from weak generalization, failing to dealing with multi-types
of sources, while the later is limited in trustfulness. In this
paper, we propose TrustUQA, a trustful QA framework that
can simultaneously support multiple types of structured data
in a unified way. To this end, it adopts an LLM-friendly and
unified knowledge representation method called Condition
Graph (CG), and uses an LLM and demonstration-based twolevel method for CG querying. For enhancement, it is also
equipped with dynamic demonstration retrieval. We have evaluated TrustUQA with 5 benchmarks covering 3 types of structured data. It outperforms 2 existing unified structured data
QA methods. In comparison with the baselines that are specific to one data type, it achieves state-of-the-art on 2 of the
datasets. Further more, we have demonstrated the potential
of our method for more general QA tasks, QA over mixed
structured data and QA across structured data.

Code — https://github.com/zjukg/TrustUQA
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18916

1

Introduction

Question answering (QA) seeking answers for a natural language question from structured data has attracted increasing attention in the past decade (2023a; 2023), leading to a
few directions including QA over tables (2023), QA over
knowledge graph (i.e., KGQA) (2018), QA over temporal KG (2023b) and so on. A straightforward and widely
studied solution is to parse questions into formal queries
that can be executed on data storage and reasoning engines (a.k.a. NL2Query). According to the data source types,
these works are divided into NL2SQL (2020) for relational
databases, NL2SPARQL (2020) for KGs, etc. However, current NL2Query methods are specifically developed for one
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25931

query language corresponding to one data type.This significantly limits their generality and usage in real-world scenarios, especially when it is unknown in which data resource the
answer lies, or the answer relies on multiple data sources.
With the development of LLMs and Retrieval-augmented
Generation (RAG), another solution, which first retrieves
relevant evidences of the question from data sources and
then generates the answer, has become more and more popular (2023a; 2024). Using different retrieval techniques for different structured data, this solution can lead to more general
methods. For example, StructGPT(2023a) iteratively retrieves
evidences and feeds them into an LLM for answer generation,
supporting KG, table and relational database. However, this
solution suffers from some trustfulness issues: (i) the generated answer may be inconsistent with the original structured
data due to the hallucination of LLMs (2023b), the insistence
of LLMs’ parametric knowledge (2023) and the irrelevant evidences that are retrieved; (ii) a list of evidences are exposed
to the LLM, potentially leaking private data if a third-party
LLM is used; (iii) the evidences can provide some plausible
citations to the answer but it is hard to provide high quality
explanations. In contrast, NL2Query can mostly avoid the
issue of (i) and (ii) as only some meta data and prototypes
need to be exposed to the LLM to generate the query instead
of the answer, and the issue of (iii) since the query and its
reasoning procedure are both accessible, providing logically
rigorous explanation to the answer. Therefore, in this work,
we adopt NL2Query, and propose a trustful and unified
framework named TrustUQA supporting different types
of structured data simultaneously.
There are two desiderata for TrustUQA. (1) It is expected
to represent diverse structured data. Thus we propose Condition Graph (CG) and corresponding techniques for translating tables, KGs and temporal KGs into a CG. (2) It can
support effective querying over the data representation. Thus
we propose a method called Lwo-layer Function-based
CG Query, which firstly uses LLMs to write basic queries
(i.e., LLM queries) based on the question, and then uses predefined rules to transform these LLM queries to queries that
can be executed on the CG (i.e., execution queries) for the
eventual answer. Functions of the LLM query are designed
with simple vocabularies that are more understandable by
LLMs, and thus this method can get higher accuracy using
no fine-tuning but few-shot prompting. We also propose a dy-

