The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AGFSync: Leveraging AI-Generated Feedback for Preference Optimization in
Text-to-Image Generation
Jingkun An1 * , Yinghao Zhu1 * , Zongjian Li2 * , Enshen Zhou1 ,
Haoran Feng3 , Xijie Huang1 , Bohua Chen4 , Yemin Shi2 , Chengwei Pan1, 5†
1

Beihang University, Beijing, China
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China
5
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
anjingkun02@gmail.com, pancw@buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract

as proposed in the data-centric AI philosophy, can significantly improve performance (Zhou et al. 2024a). Therefore
a high-quality image caption and its corresponding image
pair dataset is crucial in training (Betker et al. 2023).
At the model architecture level, advancements include
the optimization of cross-attention mechanisms to improve
model compliance (Feng et al. 2023). These efforts, both at
the dataset and model architecture levels, follow the traditional training paradigm of using elaborately designed models with specific datasets. In contrast, in the training domain,
strategies inspired by the success of large language models,
such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023), include supervised finetuning (SFT) and alignment stages. With a pretrained T2I diffusion model, enhancing the model for better image quality can be approached in either the SFT stage
or the alignment stage. The former approach, as seen in
the latest work DreamSync (Sun et al. 2023), finetunes the
diffusion model through a selected image selection procedure where a Vision-Language Model (VLM) (Achiam et al.
2023; Qin et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2024c; Qin et al. 2024)
evaluates and then selects high-quality text-image pairings
for further finetuning. However, DreamSync exhibits a lower
prompt generation conversion rate and is limited by the intrinsic capabilities of the diffusion model, leading to uncontrollable data distribution in the finetuning dataset. The
latter approach, DPOK (Fan et al. 2024), DDPO (Black
et al. 2023), and DPO (Rafailov et al. 2023) use reinforcement learning for alignment, while Diffusion-DPO (Wallace
et al. 2023) applies Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
for model alignment, modifying the original DPO algorithm
to directly optimize diffusion models based on preference
data. Yet, it only focuses on evaluating image quality from
one aspect. Furthermore, existing methods mostly depend
on extensive, quality-controlled labeled data.
Addressing these requires a cost-effective, low-labor approach that minimizes the need for human-labeled data
while considering multiple quality aspects of images. Leveraging AI in generating datasets and evaluating image quality can fill these gaps without human intervention. Through
generating diverse textual prompts, assessing generated images, and constructing a comprehensive preference dataset,

Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in image generation. Despite their progress,
challenges remain in both prompt-following ability, image
quality and lack of high-quality datasets, which are essential for refining these models. As acquiring labeled data is
costly, we introduce AGFSync, a framework that enhances
T2I diffusion models through Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) in a fully AI-driven approach. AGFSync utilizes Vision-Language Models (VLM) to assess image quality across style, coherence, and aesthetics, generating feedback data within an AI-driven loop. By applying AGFSync to
leading T2I models such as SD v1.4, v1.5, and SDXL-base,
our extensive experiments on the TIFA dataset demonstrate
notable improvements in VQA scores, aesthetic evaluations,
and performance on the HPS v2 benchmark, consistently outperforming the base models. AGFSync’s method of refining
T2I diffusion models paves the way for scalable alignment
techniques.

Project — https://anjingkun.github.io/AGFSync

1

Introduction

The advent of Text-to-Image (T2I) generation technology
represents a significant advancement in generative AI. Recent breakthroughs have predominantly utilized diffusion
models to generate images from textual prompts (Rombach et al. 2022a; Betker et al. 2023; Podell et al. 2023;
Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023; Zhou et al. 2024b). However, achieving high fidelity and aesthetics in generated images poses challenges, including deviations from prompts
and inadequate image quality (Zhang et al. 2023). Addressing these challenges requires enhancing diffusion models’
ability to accurately interpret detailed prompts (promptfollowing ability (Betker et al. 2023)) and improve the generative quality across style, coherence, and aesthetics.
Efforts to overcome these challenges span dataset, model,
and training levels. High-quality text-image pair datasets,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1746

