The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking Masked Data Reconstruction Pretraining
for Strong 3D Action Representation Learning
Tao Gong1, 2, 3 , Qi Chu1, 2, 3 * , Bin Liu1, 2, 3 , Nenghai Yu1, 2, 3
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security
3
the CCCD Key Lab of Ministry of Culture and Tourism
{tgong, qchu, flowice, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

In 3D human action recognition, limited supervised data
makes it challenging to fully tap into the modeling potential of powerful networks such as transformers. As a result, researchers have been actively investigating effective
self-supervised pre-training strategies. For example, MAMP
shows that instead of following the prevalent masked joint
reconstruction, explicit masked motion reconstruction is key
to the success of learning effective feature representation for
3D action recognition. However, we find that if we make
a simple and effective change to the reconstructed target of
masked joint reconstruction, masked joint reconstruction can
achieve the same results as masked motion reconstruction.
The devil is in the special characteristic of 3D skeleton data
and the normalization process of training targets. We need
to dig for all effective information of targets during normalization. Besides, considering that mask data reconstruction
focuses more on learning local relations in input data for fulfilling the reconstruction task, instead of modeling the relation among samples, we further employ contrastive learning
to learn more discriminative 3D action representations. We
show that contrastive learning can consistently boost the performance of model pre-trained by masked joint prediction under various settings, especially in the semi-supervised setting
that has a very limited number of labeled samples. Extensive
experiments on NTU-60, NTU-120, and PKU-MMD datasets
show that the proposed pre-training strategy achieves stateof-the-art results without bells and whistles.

Raw Joints

Temporal Motion

Raw Joints with NAT

Decoder

Decoder

Decoder

Contrastive
Loss

Encoder

Encoder

Online
Encoder

Momentum
Encoder

mask

mask

mask

(a) Masked joint
reconstruction

(b) Masked motion
reconstruction

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Illustration of pre-training objective comparison
among prevalent masked joint reconstruction, masked motion reconstruction, and ours.

well-annotated training sequences, which are labor-intensive
and time-consuming to acquire. Furthermore, limited supervision also leads to the overfitting issue in general models.
These facts motivate the exploration of self-supervised 3D
action representation learning. In the literature, the prevalent pretext tasks originally developed for images have been
adapted for 3D action representation learning, such as colorization (Yang et al. 2021), contrastive learning (Li et al.
2021a; Thoker, Doughty, and Snoek 2021; Tianyu et al.
2022), etc. Among them, contrastive learning once dominated 3D action representation learning with its concise
framework and promising performance. Nevertheless, as a
global representation learner, it still suffers from certain limitations, such as the over-reliance on heuristic action data
augmentations (Liu et al. 2023), impeding its further exploration of 3D actions.
Recently, as transformers flourished in computer vision,
masked autoencoder (MAE) (He et al. 2022) has attracted
a surge of research interest for its exceptional performance.
Given that a 3D skeleton serves as an abstract representation of human behaviors, there has been growing interest
in applying the MAE concept to 3D action representation
learning, to capture the underlying spatio-temporal dynamics of skeleton sequences. Early attempts, such as SkeletonMAE (Wu et al. 2022), generally followed the practice

Introduction
How to accurately recognize human actions has been a longstanding challenge in computer vision. Recently, with the
advances in techniques of depth sensing and pose estimation
(Cao et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2020), skeletonbased 3D human action recognition has become an emerging problem to the community, which is of great significance
in a series of applications such as human-computer interaction, video surveillance, virtual reality, etc. Despite the computation efficiency and background robustness of skeletons,
existing supervised 3D action recognition methods (Chen
et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021b; Liu et al.
2020b; Shi et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2020) heavily rely on
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3149

