The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Asymptotic Unbiased Sample Sampling to Speed Up Sharpness-Aware
Minimization
Jiaxin Deng1 , Junbiao Pang1 * , Baochang Zhang2,3 , Guodong Guo4
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Hangzhou Research Institute, School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
3
Nanchang Institute of Technology, Nanchang, China
4
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
dengjiaxin@emails.bjut.edu.cn, junbiao pang@bjut.edu.cn, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, guodong.guo@mail.wvu.edu
Abstract

The generalization capacity of a model significantly impacts
its effectiveness and reliability in practical applications,
making it a consistently important topic in deep learning
research (Neyshabur et al. 2017; Izmailov et al. 2018; Cha
et al. 2021; Andriushchenko and Flammarion 2022; Zhang
et al. 2023). Several studies have delved into the correlation between generalization performance and the geometry
of the loss landscape (Keskar et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2020;
Wu, Xia, and Wang 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). The loss landscape is complex and non-convex, with many local minima
that exhibit varying generalization performance (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1994). These studies observed that flatter minima on the loss landscape tend to generalize more

effectively than sharper minima. This motivates the idea of
finding flatter minima during training.
Foret et al. recently introduced the Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al. 2021) algorithm, which offers
an elegant approach to seek flat minima and improve generalization. The SAM prevents the model from converging to
sharp minima, thereby enhancing generalization. SAM and
its variants have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance
across various applications (Kwon et al. 2021; Jiang et al.
2023; Zhuang et al. 2022). However, SAM lacks efficiency
due to its requirement of two forward and two backward
in each optimization step. In recent years, various methods have been proposed to accelerate SAM. These can be
roughly divided into methods for reducing gradient computations, such as G-RST (Zhao, Zhang, and Hu 2022), LookSAM (Liu et al. 2022), AE-SAM (Jiang et al. 2023), vSAM
(Deng et al. 2024) and methods for efficient SAM optimization processes, such as SAF (Du et al. 2022b), K-SAM (Ni
et al. 2022) and ESAM (Du et al. 2022a). However, most of
them tends to potentially reduce the model’s performance,
especially the acceleration approach by reducing the number
of SAM updates. Although some strategies can help models to maintain the performance, the extra operations introduced by implementing these strategies may limit gains in
optimization efficiency.
In this paper, we introduce a dynamic sampling strategy
for each mini-batch, based on maintaining expected sharpness across sampled and original data. Our theoretical analysis indicates that samples with larger gradient norms are
crucial for preserving the model’s generalization. Thus, we
assign a score to each sample during forward propagation
according to its gradient norm and prioritize higher-scoring
samples in each mini-batch for training. This approach significantly improves optimization efficiency while preserving
the model’s generalization ability without excessive compromise. Compared to data pruning methods (Toneva et al.
2018; Paul, Ganguli, and Dziugaite 2021; Raju, Daruwalla,
and Lipasti 2021), our method reduces the gradient expectation bias between the entire batch and the selected samples,
achieving asymptotic unbiasedness as training progresses.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We discovered that implementing SAM with mini-batch
subsets characterized by high gradient norms effectively
preserves the generalization capabilities of the model.

Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) has emerged as a
promising approach for effectively reducing the generalization error. However, SAM incurs twice the computational cost compared to the base optimizer (e.g., SGD). We
propose Asymptotic Unbiased data sampling to accelerate
SAM (AUSAM), which maintains the model’s generalization capacity while significantly enhancing computational efficiency. Concretely, we probabilistically sample a subset of
data points beneficial for SAM optimization based on a theoretically guaranteed criterion, i.e., the Gradient Norm of each
Sample (GNS). We further approximate the GNS by evaluating the difference in loss values before and after perturbation
in SAM. As a plug-and-play, architecture-agnostic method,
our approach consistently accelerates SAM across various
tasks and networks, i.e., classification, human pose estimation, and network quantization. On CIFAR-10/100 and TinyImageNet, AUSAM achieves results comparable to SAM
while providing a speedup of over 70%. By adjusting hyperparameters, AUSAM can match the speed of the base optimizer while significantly surpassing the base optimizer’s performance. Compared to recent dynamic data pruning methods, AUSAM is better suited for SAM and excels in maintaining performance. Additionally, AUSAM accelerates optimization in human pose estimation and model quantization without sacrificing performance, demonstrating its broad
practicality.

Introduction

16208

