The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Query-centric Audio-Visual Cognition Network for
Moment Retrieval, Segmentation and Step-Captioning
Yunbin Tu1 , Liang Li2,1 * , Li Su1,3 * , Qingming Huang1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Key Laboratory of AI Safety of CAS, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
tuyunbin22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn, {suli,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract

Query: “How to make perfect strawberry glazed pie”

Video has emerged as a favored multimedia format on the internet. To better gain video contents, a new topic HIREST
is presented, including video retrieval, moment retrieval,
moment segmentation, and step-captioning. The pioneering
work chooses the pre-trained CLIP-based model for video retrieval, and leverages it as a feature extractor for other three
challenging tasks solved in a multi-task learning paradigm.
Nevertheless, this work struggles to learn the comprehensive
cognition of user-preferred content, due to disregarding the
hierarchies and association relations across modalities. In this
paper, guided by the shallow-to-deep principle, we propose
a query-centric audio-visual cognition (QUAG) network to
construct a reliable multi-modal representation for moment
retrieval, segmentation and step-captioning. Specifically, we
first design the modality-synergistic perception to obtain rich
audio-visual content, by modeling global contrastive alignment and local fine-grained interaction between visual and
audio modalities. Then, we devise the query-centric cognition that uses the deep-level query to perform the temporalchannel filtration on the shallow-level audio-visual representation. This can cognize user-preferred content and thus attain
a query-centric audio-visual representation for three tasks.
Extensive experiments show QUAG achieves the SOTA results on HIREST. Further, we test QUAG on the query-based
video summarization task and verify its good generalization.

Moment
Retrieval
0s

65s

347s

417s

Moment
Segmentation

…
Step
Captioning
88s

Add strawberry
juice on plate

…
Put dough on top

108s

227s

277s 319s

Add some sacs
on top
347s

Figure 1: The illustrative example consisting of moment
retrieval, moment segmentation, and step-captioning. First,
given a text query “How to make perfect strawberry glazed
pie”, the model is required to localize the most related moment in the video (moment retrieval). Then, the model proceeds to break down the moment into finer-level steps (moment segmentation). Finally, the model should describe each
step with a concise sentence (step-captioning).

it into finer-level steps, and caption each with a succinct sentence for a better understanding, such as “Add strawberry
juice on plate”, “Put dough on top”, etc. This shift in user
preference sparks an emerging research topic: hierarchical
retrieval and step-captioning (HIREST) (Zala et al. 2023).
This topic benchmarks four tasks of video retrieval, moment retrieval, moment segmentation, and step captioning.
In the pioneering work (Zala et al. 2023), Zala et al. implement video retrieval by the pre-trained CLIP-based model
and use it as a feature extractor for the three downstream
tasks. Their focus is to jointly address the three tasks in a
single architecture. Toward this end, they propose a Joint
model that first leverages pre-trained models (Fang et al.
2023; Radford et al. 2023; Reimers and Gurevych 2019) to
produce the multi-modal representation for visual frames,
audio and query. Next, this representation is used to predict
the boundaries of moments and steps, as well as yielding
each step caption. In this process, the model is trained via a
multi-task setup in a round-robin way (Cho et al. 2021).
Despite the promising results, the above work has the
limitations in learning a comprehensive cognition of user-

Code — https://github.com/tuyunbin/QUAG
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.13543

Introduction
Recently, we have been witnessing an exponential growth of
videos, along with the advance of generative AI (e.g., Sora)
and video platforms. Accordingly, a plethora of studies (Wu
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024c) have been
proposed to enhance video retrieval capabilities. However,
given a text query, returning the whole video is not always
satisfied. Sometimes, users want to directly localize the moment most related to the query. For instance, when learning
how to make a strawberry pie, users tend to only focus on
the instructional moment, as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, if
this moment is intricate, we anticipate machines to segment
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding authors.

7464

