The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

WHALE-FL: Wireless and Heterogeneity Aware Latency Efficient Federated
Learning over Mobile Devices via Adaptive Subnetwork Scheduling
Huai-an Su1* , Jiaxiang Geng2* , Liang Li3 , Xiaoqi Qin2 ,
Yanzhao Hou2 , Hao Wang4 , Xin Fu1 , Miao Pan1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Houston
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Frontier Research Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Stevens Institute of Technology
{hsu3, xfu8, mpan2}@uh.edu, {lelegjx, xiaoqiqin, houyanzhao}@bupt.edu.cn, lil03@pcl.ac.cn, hwang9@stevens.edu
2

Abstract

2018), smart home hazard detection (Yu et al. 2020), health
event detection (Brisimi et al. 2018), and so on.
While FL over mobile device has great potentials, its
practical deployment faces significant challenges due to the
inherent heterogeneity among real-world mobile devices,
varying in computing capability, wireless conditions and local data distribution (Lai et al. 2021). Existing FL studies often assume the model-homogeneous setting, where
global and local models share identical architectures across
all clients. However, as devices are forced to train models
within their individual capability, developers have to choose
between excluding low-tier devices, introducing training
bias (Bickel, Hammel, and O’Connell 1975), or maintaining
a low-complexity global model to accommodate all clients,
resulting in degraded accuracy (Cho, Wang, and Joshi 2021;
Ye et al. 2020). The trend towards large models like Transformers (Liu et al. 2023) exacerbates the issue, hindering
their training on mobile devices. Furthermore, unlike GPU
clusters with stable high-speed Internet connections, mobile
devices’ computing resources are constrained and heterogeneous, and their wireless transmissions are relatively slow
and dynamic, both of which lead to huge latency in FL training (Chen et al. 2022) and may severely degrade the performance of associated applications.
To address the limitations of model-homogeneous FL, researchers have recently studied how to train different sized
models across heterogeneous mobile clients and corresponding global model aggregation in FL training. Subnetwork
training, exemplified by pioneering approaches like widthbased subnetwork generation in Federated Dropout (Wen,
Jeon, and Huang 2021) and HeteroFL (Diao, Ding, and
Tarokh 2021), and depth-based generation in DepthFL (Kim
et al. 2023), has proven effective by enabling mobile devices to train smaller subnetworks derived from the large
global server model. These designs also offer solutions to
aggregating diverse devices’ subnetworks. By tailoring subnetwork architecture for the individual device, subnetwork
training can ensure compatibility with mobile devices owning heterogeneous computing and communication capabilities. However, a prevalent challenge in current subnetwork
approaches lies in their static fixed-size subnetwork assignment policy. Such a policy may fail to unleash the full potential of subnetwork based training, mainly due to the un-

As a popular distributed learning paradigm, federated learning (FL) over mobile devices fosters numerous applications,
while their practical deployment is hindered by participating devices’ computing and communication heterogeneity.
Some pioneering research efforts proposed to extract subnetworks from the global model, and assign as large a subnetwork as possible to the device for local training based on
its full computing capacity. Although such fixed size subnetwork assignment enables FL training over heterogeneous
mobile devices, it is unaware of (i) the dynamic changes of
devices’ communication and computing conditions and (ii)
FL training progress and its dynamic requirements of local
training contributions, both of which may cause very long
FL training delay. Motivated by those dynamics, in this paper, we develop a wireless and heterogeneity aware latency
efficient FL (WHALE-FL) approach to accelerate FL training through adaptive subnetwork scheduling. Instead of sticking to the fixed size subnetwork, WHALE-FL introduces a
novel subnetwork selection utility function to capture device
and FL training dynamics, and guides the mobile device to
adaptively select the subnetwork size for local training based
on (a) its computing and communication capacity, (b) its dynamic computing and/or communication conditions, and (c)
FL training status and its corresponding requirements for local training contributions. Our evaluation shows that, compared with peer designs, WHALE-FL effectively accelerates
FL training without sacrificing learning accuracy.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) recently experienced a notable evolution, expanding its scope from conventional data center environments to harness the potential
of mobile devices (Li et al. 2021a; Chen et al. 2023). This
shift has been propelled by the continuous advancements
in hardware, empowering mobile devices like the NVIDIA
Xavier, iPhone 16, etc. with increasingly robust on-device
computing capabilities tailored for local training. With the
collective intelligence of edge devices and FL’s fundamental
principle of preserving data privacy, FL over mobile devices
has paved the way for a diverse spectrum of innovative mobile applications, including keyboard predictions (Hard et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20619

