The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MVReward: Better Aligning and Evaluating Multi-View
Diffusion Models with Human Preferences
Weitao Wang1 * , Haoran Xu2 * , Yuxiao Yang1 , Zhifang Liu1 , Jun Meng2† , Haoqian Wang1†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Zhejiang University

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress in 3D content generation. However, corresponding evaluation methods
struggle to keep pace. Automatic approaches have proven
challenging to align with human preferences, and the mixed
comparison of text- and image-driven methods often leads to
unfair evaluations. In this paper, we present a comprehensive
framework to better align and evaluate multi-view diffusion
models with human preferences. To begin with, we first collect and filter a standardized image prompt set from DALL·E
and Objaverse, which we then use to generate multi-view
assets with several multi-view diffusion models. Through a
systematic ranking pipeline on these assets, we obtain a human annotation dataset with 16k expert pairwise comparisons and train a reward model, coined MVReward, to effectively encode human preferences. With MVReward, imagedriven 3D methods can be evaluated against each other in a
more fair and transparent manner. Building on this, we further propose Multi-View Preference Learning (MVP), a plugand-play multi-view diffusion tuning strategy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MVReward can serve as a reliable metric and MVP consistently enhances the alignment of
multi-view diffusion models with human preferences.

Figure 1: Automatic metrics often struggle to align with
human preferences in evaluating image-to-3D tasks. Our
MVReward model fills this gap and our MVP further enhances the alignment of existing multi-view diffusion models with human preferences.
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024), existing automatic methods such
as FID, LPIPS, CLIPScore, etc. often fail to align with human preferences, as shown in Figure 1. Furthermore, taking
the widely-used GSO dataset (Downs et al. 2022) as an example, the test objects are not consistently unified across different methods, exacerbating this misalignment. Meanwhile,
comparing generated content to ground truth (GT) data in
an ill-posed task, is a one-sided approach that may stifle
the model’s creative potential. The everyday objects in the
GSO dataset also lack adequate evaluation of those imaginative, unrealistic objects that are common in generative tasks.
Considering the reasons above, most 3D generation methods rely heavily on qualitative analysis—comparing results
through the subjective judgment of the viewer which may
differ greatly across individuals.
Several works (Xu et al. 2024b; Wu et al. 2023) attempt to
apply RLHF (Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback) methods to text-to-3D tasks to solve the problem
of misalignment with human preferences. However, similar research is absent in the image-to-3D field, particularly
for multi-view diffusion methods, and the evaluation biases
brought by the GSO dataset have not been taken seriously.
On the other side, the mixed evaluation of text- and

Code — https://github.com/victor-thu/MVReward

1

Introduction

3D content generation is developing rapidly, thanks to the
powerful generation ability of 2D diffusion and increasing
efforts (Poole et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023) to lift its rich priors to 3D. Given a text or image prompt, current methods
can generate 3D objects with detailed geometry and texture
in seconds, with multi-view diffusion models playing an indispensable role. These models pave the way for fast and
robust 3D generation by training view-aware diffusions to
generate consistent images. As the 3D generation field gains
more attention, its further development is highly anticipated.
Nonetheless, the lack of corresponding 3D evaluation
methods is becoming a significant obstacle to progress in
this area. As fully illustrated in previous research (Otani
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7898

