The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DreamUHD: Frequency Enhanced Variational Autoencoder for
Ultra-High-Definition Image Restoration
Yidi Liu∗ , Dong Li* , Jie Xiao, Yuanfei Bao, Senyan Xu, Xueyang Fu†
School of Information Science and Technology and MoE Key Laboratory of
Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China
{liuyidi2023, dongli6, ustchbxj, syxu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xyfu@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Existing ultra-high-definition (UHD) image restoration methods often struggle with consistency due to downsampling.
We aim to address these challenges by leveraging the powerful latent space representation and reconstruction capabilities of Variational Autoencoders (VAE). However, applying
VAE to UHD image restoration presents challenges: 1) Highperforming VAEs have large parameter sizes, leading to significant carbon footprints; 2) The self-reconstruction property of VAE hinders bridging the domain gap between clean
and degraded images; 3) Latent encoding in VAE can lose
high-frequency information, compromising image detail. To
overcome these challenges, we propose a frequency enhanced
VAE UHD image restoration framework by integrating frequency priors. First, we design the Fourier-based lightweight
frequency learning within the VAE to improve parameter efficiency. Then, we introduce a wavelet-based adapter that extracts multi-scale image information and employs frequencyaware adaptive modulation to bridge the domain gap by integrating degraded image data into the pre-trained VAE. Additionally, the adapter injects high-frequency information into
the VAE decoder, enhancing detail in the restored images. In
this way, our method effectively combines the powerful latent
space representation with frequency priors to enhance UHD
image restoration. Extensive experiments on various UHD
image restoration tasks show that our method surpasses stateof-the-art methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Figure 1: The impact of different resampling methods on
UHD image restoration. We present the restoration results
using Lanczos interpolation, PixelShuffle, learnable resampling operators (Yu et al. 2024), and our VAE-based resampling, along with the residuals between the results and
ground truth in the Fourier amplitude spectrum. It is indicated that previous resampling methods not only lead to inconsistencies in the final restoration but also result in significant loss of high-frequency information.

images challenges the efficiency of existing image processing methods. Therefore, the development of UHD-specific
image restoration methods is crucial and has garnered significant attention.
Most existing UHD image restoration methods attempt to reduce computational costs by reducing resolution, typically following a “downsampling-enhancementupsampling” paradigm (Zheng et al. 2021b,a). With the
progress in deep learning, some works have replaced traditional interpolation-based upsampling and downsampling
with learnable resampling operators, achieving remarkable
results (Recasens et al. 2018; Sun and Chen 2020). However,
this paradigm inevitably loses information during downsampling, and upsampling struggles to recover the details, leading to inconsistent restoration results, as illustrated in Figure 1. To compensate for the loss of details, some methods
retain a full-resolution branch outside the resampling branch
to supplement information (Wang et al. 2024b,a). However,
these methods do not fundamentally address the limitations
imposed by resampling, and the high computational burden of the full-resolution branch makes full-resolution inference on consumer-grade GPUs challenging. Therefore, how
to ensure consistency as much as possible while reducing
computational cost becomes the core problem of UHD im-

Code — https://github.com/lyd-2022/dreamUHD

Introduction
In recent years, ultra-high-definition (UHD) imaging technology has made significant strides, driven by advancements
in imaging sensors and displays. However, UHD images
captured under challenging conditions, such as fast motion,
haze, or low light, often suffer from quality degradation,
severely impacting their visual quality and limiting their applicability in advanced visual tasks. Current learning-based
image restoration algorithms struggle to handle UHD images effectively, and the increased number of pixels in these
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence
(www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Co-first authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author.

5712

