The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bayesian Persuasion with Externalities: Exploiting Agent Types
Jonathan Shaki1 , Jiarui Gan2 , Sarit Kraus1
1

Bar-Ilan University
University of Oxford
jonath.shaki@gmail.com, jiarui.gan@cs.ox.ac.uk, sarit@cs.biu.ac.il
2

Abstract

Persuading multiple agents in the presence of externalities is computationally challenging for several reasons. First,
even when there are no externalities, public persuasion (i.e.,
when signals are sent through a public channel visible to every agent) is known to be intractable. It is shown that no
polynomial time approximation scheme (PTAS) exists for
computing optimal public persuasion policies unless P =
NP (Bhaskar et al. 2016; Rubinstein 2017; Dughmi 2019).
When introducing externalities, the problem does not become computationally easier, as it is a strict generalization
of the case without externalities. For public persuasion, the
above hardness result holds automatically, whereas for private persuasion, while the case without externalities can be
trivially solved as independent single-agent persuasion problems against individual agents, this is not possible when externalities are present. In the presence of the externalities,
the actions of the agents need to be coordinated, too. Indeed, coordination is necessary even when the principal does
not possess any private information about the hidden state,
whereby the goal of the principal is essentially to induce a
correlated equilibrium among the agents that is optimal for
the principal. Hence, the problem we address is essentially a
combination of optimal persuasion and coordination.

We study a Bayesian persuasion problem with externalities.
In this model, a principal sends signals to inform multiple
agents about the state of the world. Simultaneously, due to
the existence of externalities in the agents’ utilities, the principal also acts as a correlation device to correlate the agents’
actions. We consider the setting where the agents are categorized into a small number of types. Agents of the same type
share identical utility functions and are treated equitably in
the utility functions of both other agents and the principal,
while taking actions independently. We study the problem of
computing optimal signaling strategies for the principal, under three different types of signaling channels: public, private,
and semi-private. Our results include revelation-principlestyle characterizations of optimal signaling strategies, linear
programming formulations, and analysis of in/tractability of
the optimization problems. It is demonstrated that when the
maximum number of deviating agents is bounded by a constant, our LP-based formulations compute optimal signaling
strategies in polynomial time. Otherwise, the problems are
NP-hard.

1

Introduction

Bayesian persuasion, introduced by (Kamenica and
Gentzkow 2011), is a framework where a persuader (the
principal) seeks to design a signaling scheme that conveys
information to a decision-maker (the agent) to influence
their choices in the principal’s desired direction (Kamenica
2019; Fujii and Sakaue 2022; Celli, Coniglio, and Gatti
2020). The computational analysis of multi-agent Bayesian
persuasion has been studied extensively in recent years,
considering various domains, such as congestion games
(Vasserman, Feldman, and Hassidim 2015; Castiglioni
et al. 2021; Bhaskar et al. 2016; Azaria et al. 2014; Das,
Kamenica, and Mirka 2017; Griesbach et al. 2022), auctions
(Li and Das 2019; Bacchiocchi et al. 2022), security
(Rabinovich et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2023), and advertising
(Kumar et al. 2023). In this paper, we consider persuading
multiple agents in the presence of externalities in the agents’
utilities—that is, the utility of an agent may depend on other
agents’ actions as well, instead of just their own—and we
consider a fairly general model that is not tied to specific
applications (e.g., congestion games).

Given the computational barriers, we consider a more
amenable but fairly natural special case of the model where
the agents can be classified into a small number of types.
Similarly to other works in game theory (Shrot, Aumann,
and Kraus 2010; Lovejoy 2006), agents of the same type
share identical utility function and are treated equitably in
the utility functions of the other players (however, they
still act independently and need not take the same action).
Hence, the agents’ joint action can be succinctly represented
as a vector that describes, for each agent type T and action a, how many agents of type T are performing action
a. Succinct representations are necessary for many applications as they avoid explicitly defining the utilities of possible joint actions, which grow exponentially with the number of agents. From a computational perspective, however,
this means that designing an efficient algorithm, which runs
in time polynomial in the size of the problem representation, becomes harder. Indeed, it has been shown that correlated equilibria are hard to optimize in many succinctly
represented games (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2005;
Barman and Ligett 2015).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14095

