The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A-VL: Adaptive Attention for Large Vision-Language Models
Junyang Zhang1 , Mu Yuan1 , Ruiguang Zhong2 , Puhan Luo1 , Huiyou Zhan1 , Ningkang Zhang1 ,
Chengchen Hu2 , Xiang-Yang Li1 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
NIO Inc., Shanghai, China
{zhangjunyang, ym0813, luopuhan, zhangnk}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, taurus.zhong@nio.com, zhanhuiyou@foxmail.com,
huc@ieee.org, xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

rapidly expanding token sequences. Recent studies explored
adaptive attention and KV cache compression techniques
for single-modal language models, achieving significant advancements. For instance, StreamingLLM (Xiao et al. 2023)
maintains only fixed cache positions, while H2 O (Zhang
et al. 2024b) preserves the most important caches based on
the accumulated attention. These methods reduce memory
usage and enhance the inference speed of LLMs. However,
these methods are designed specifically for single-modal
language models. Our experiments demonstrate the uniqueness of the attention pattern of LVLMs, which has inspired
us to develop an adaptive attention scheme tailored to the
unique needs of different modalities within LVLMs.
Adaptive attention methods must address two critical
aspects: identifying redundancy and maintaining performance. To develop an effective adaptive attention method for
LVLMs, we must first examine the specific characteristics of
attention in LVLMs. Subsequently, we can design a strategy
based on these characteristics to reduce memory usage and
computational demands while maintaining performance. In
this paper, we reveal that different modalities of LVLMs exhibit different attention patterns, necessitating separate analysis and processing for each modality within LVLM’s adaptive attention mechanism. Vision inputs, though positioned
at the beginning of the sequence, consistently receive a substantial proportion of attention during generation. In contrast, text inputs at the sequence’s end exhibit rapid attention
decay. Vision inputs also show patterns of attention sparsity
and drift. Specially, the attention at the token level for vision
inputs presents a surprisingly sparse distribution. Additionally, we find that some useful vision caches are not required
at every step. We observe a gradual shift in attention among
these useful vision caches.
To address this issue, we develop distinct methods for different modalities. In response to the sparsity and attention
drift observed in vision attention, we categorize attention
importance and dynamically compute the most critical parts
of the KV cache. Specifically, we first preserve caches likely
to be useful in subsequent inference and evict those deemed
useless. We then select the most critical caches in the current
step from these useful caches for computation. Simultaneously, we regularly update this critical cache to ensure accurate computations. For text attention, which rapidly loses
attention, we concentrate on the local cache and retain only

The Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) integrates computer vision and natural language processing techniques, offering substantial application potential. However, these models demand extensive resources during inference. Adaptive
attention techniques can dynamically reduce computational
redundancy and thus improve efficiency. Although current
adaptive attention methods significantly reduce the memory
requirements of Transformer-based language models, they
are not tailored for LVLMs. We observe that LVLMs generate responses from both remote image tokens and local
text tokens, and different modalities have different attention
patterns. This observation inspires us to manage the attention for each modality separately. Specifically, for visual input, we store the cache of potentially useful information but
only compute the most critical parts. For language input, we
care more about local information. Based on our observation and analysis of vision-language attention patterns, we
develop A-VL, a plug-and-play adaptive attention tailored
for LVLM inference. Extensive evaluations on three visionlanguage tasks and five datasets show the effectiveness of our
designs. Our approach A-VL outperforms existing adaptive
attention methods in reducing memory usage and computational load without compromising performance.

Introduction
In recent years, large vision-language models (LVLMs) have
exhibited exceptional capabilities in vision-language understanding and reasoning (Liu et al. 2024a; Bai et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2023). LVLMs are increasingly integrated into
many applications, such as personal intelligent assistants
and vehicle cockpit systems. Despite their impressive performance, deploying LVLMs in real-world systems still
faces practical challenges due to expensive resource overheads. Consequently, reducing computational overheads and
improving inference speed have become critical problems.
In LVLM inference, visual and text inputs are separately
encoded and fed into the pretrained large language model
(LLM). As each token generated through LLM autoregression depends on all preceding tokens, this process consumes
considerable time and memory resources. This issue is exacerbated in LVLMs since high-resolution images lead to
* Xiang-Yang Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22461

