The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

When Witnesses Defend:
A Witness Graph Topological Layer for Adversarial Graph Learning
Naheed Anjum Arafat1 , Debabrota Basu2 , Yulia Gel3 , Yuzhou Chen4
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
3
Virginia Tech, USA
4
University of California, Riverside, USA
naheed anjum@u.nus.edu, debabrota.basu@inria.fr, ygl@vt.edu, yuzhou.chen@ucr.edu

2

Abstract
Capitalizing on the intuitive premise that shape characteristics
are more robust to perturbations, we bridge adversarial graph
learning with the emerging tools from computational topology,
namely, persistent homology representations of graphs. We
introduce the concept of witness complex to adversarial analysis on graphs, which allows us to focus only on the salient
shape characteristics of graphs, yielded by the subset of the
most essential nodes (i.e., landmarks), with minimal loss of
topological information on the whole graph. The remaining
nodes are then used as witnesses, governing which higherorder graph substructures are incorporated into the learning
process. Armed with the witness mechanism, we design Witness Graph Topological Layer (WGTL), which systematically
integrates both local and global topological graph feature representations, the impact of which is, in turn, automatically
controlled by the robust regularized topological loss. Given
the attacker’s budget, we derive the important stability guarantees of both local and global topology encodings and the
associated robust topological loss. We illustrate the versatility
and efficiency of WGTL by its integration with five GNNs and
three existing non-topological defense mechanisms. Our extensive experiments across six datasets demonstrate that WGTL
boosts the robustness of GNNs across a range of perturbations
and against a range of adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Recent studies have shown that Graph neural networks
(GNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Small, often
unnoticeable perturbations to the input graph might result
in substantial degradation of GNN’s performance in downstream tasks (Jin et al. 2021b). In turn, compared to non-graph
data, adversarial analysis of graphs still remains largely underexplored (Sun et al. 2022). Hence, systematic assessment
of adversarial contagions and consequently the development
of robust GNN models able to withstand a wide spectrum of
malicious attacks are of significant practical importance.
Presently, the three main strategies to defend GNNs against
adversarial attacks are graph purification, adversarial training,
and adversarial defense-based neural architectures (Feng et al.
2019; Günnemann 2022; Mujkanovic et al. 2022). These
existing methods largely rely on pairwise relationships in
the graph at a node level while ignoring higher-order graph
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15408

(sub)structures, their multi-scale properties, and interrelationships, which are instrumental for the downstream learning
task (Benson et al. 2018; Torres et al. 2021). Relying on
pairwise relationships also results in the removal of a considerable amount of the edges that are actually clean edges,
which decreases the gain in robustness (In et al. 2024).
In turn, in the last few years, we have observed a spike
of interest in the synergy of graph learning and Persistent
Homology (PH) representations of graphs (Zhao and Wang
2019; Carrière et al. 2020; Horn et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2022;
Chen, O’Bray, and Borgwardt 2022; Chen and Gel 2023).
PH representations enable us to glean intrinsic information
about the inherent object shape. By shape here, we broadly
understand properties that are invariant under continuous
transformations such as twisting, bending, and stretching.
This phenomenon can be explained by the important higherorder information, which PH-based shape descriptors deliver
about the underlying graph-structured data. This leads to
an enhanced GNN performance in a variety of downstream
tasks, such as link prediction, and node and graph classification (Hofer et al. 2020; Carrière et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2021;
Horn et al. 2022; Chen, Sizikova, and Gel 2022). Furthermore,
in view of the invariance with respect to continuous transformations, intuitively we can expect that shape characteristics
are to yield higher robustness to random perturbations and
adversarial attacks. While this intuitive premise of robustness
and its relationship with DNN architectures has been confirmed by some recent studies (Chen, Coskunuzer, and Gel
2021; Gebhart, Schrater, and Hylton 2019; Goibert, Ricatte,
and Dohmatob 2022), to the best of our knowledge, there are
no attempts to incorporate PH-based graph representations
for adversarial defense.
In this paper, we bridge this gap by merging adversarial
graph learning with PH representations of graph-structured
data. Our key idea is to leverage the concept of witness complex for graph learning. This allows us firstly, to enhance the
computational efficiency of the proposed topological defense,
which is one of the primary bottlenecks for the wider adoption of topological methods, and lastly, to reduce the impact
of less important or noisy graph information. In particular,
the goal of the witness complex is to accurately estimate the
intrinsic shape properties of the graph using not all available
graph information, but only a subset of the most representative nodes, called landmarks. The remaining nodes are

