The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Flexible Sharpness-Aware Personalized Federated Learning
Xinda Xing1, 2 * , Qiugang Zhan3, 4, 5 * , Xiurui Xie1† ,
Yuning Yang2 , Qiang Wang6 , Guisong Liu3, 4, 5†
1

Laboratory of Intelligent Collaborative Computing, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
China
2
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
Complex Laboratory of New Finance and Economics, Southwest University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Finance, Ministry of Education, Chengdu, China
5
Kash Institute of Electronics and Information Industry, China
6
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
{xingxd, yangyuning}@std.uestc.edu.cn, xiexiurui@uestc.edu.cn, {zhanqg, gliu}@swufe.edu.cn,
wangq637@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

models for each client. Previous research on PFL has primarily based on model interpolation (Hanzely and Richtárik
2020; Ma et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023b; Wu et al. 2023),
as well as parameter decoupling (Arivazhagan et al. 2019;
Collins et al. 2021; Xu, Tong, and Huang 2023; Zhang et al.
2023a).

Personalized federated learning (PFL) is a new paradigm
to address the statistical heterogeneity problem in federated
learning. Most existing PFL methods focus on leveraging
global and local information such as model interpolation or
parameter decoupling. However, these methods often overlook the generalization potential during local client learning. From a local optimization perspective, we propose a
simple and general PFL method, Federated learning with
Flexible Sharpness-Aware Minimization (FedFSA). Specifically, we emphasize the importance of applying a larger perturbation to critical layers of the local model when using the
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) optimizer. Then, we
design a metric, perturbation sensitivity, to estimate the layerwise sharpness of each local model. Based on this metric,
FedFSA can flexibly select the layers with the highest sharpness to employ larger perturbation. Extensive experiments
are conducted on four datasets with two types of statistical
heterogeneity for image classification. The results show that
FedFSA outperforms seven state-of-the-art baselines by up
to 8.26% in test accuracy. Besides, FedFSA can be applied to
different model architectures and easily integrated into other
federated learning methods, achieving a 4.45% improvement.

However, existing PFL methods mainly focus on effectively leveraging global and local information, neglecting
the inherent generalization potential during local training.
Therefore, recently, there has been a new trend to improve the local learning process of clients by applying optimizer methods from centralized learning to FL (Reddi et al.
2020; Caldarola, Caputo, and Ciccone 2022; Qu et al. 2022;
Zhou and Li 2023). Among these methods, the SharpnessAware Minimization (SAM) optimizer (Foret et al. 2021)
used in FedSAM (Caldarola, Caputo, and Ciccone 2022)
and MoFedSAM (Qu et al. 2022) has shown outstanding
generalization ability in centralized learning. SAM solves
a min-max problem by minimizing both the training loss
and sharpness, aiming to achieve a flat loss landscape and
thereby improve the model’s generalization performance.
SAM introduces a perturbation when addressing the maximization problem.

Code and Appendix — https://github.com/xxdznl/FedFSA

1

Recent research on SAM has shown promising findings
on this perturbation. SSAM (Mi et al. 2022) and SAMON
(Mueller et al. 2024) suggest that perturbing all parameters
may not be necessary. Additionally, DISAM (Zhang et al.
2024) has demonstrated, through both theoretical analysis
and experiments, that the larger perturbation can enhance the
model’s generalization ability, provided that convergence
is ensured. For the FL scenarios, PLGU (Qu et al. 2023)
and FedSOL (Lee et al. 2024) investigate the application of
perturbation to specific layer parameters. Additionally, they
have devised an adaptive method for determining the perturbation amplitude based on either the level of model personalization or the disparity between local and global models.
Though these methods enhance the model’s generalization
performance, they barely investigate the influence of perturbation amplitude and the perturbed parameters from the

Introduction

Traditional federated learning (FL) methods (McMahan
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020; Karimireddy et al. 2020) focus on
obtaining one effective global model through collaborative
learning. However, in practice, a single global model often
fails to meet the needs of all clients due to the typically nonidentically and independently distributed (non-IID) nature
of client data (Kairouz et al. 2021; Tan et al. 2022; Ye et al.
2023). Personalized federated learning (PFL) effectively alleviates the non-IID problem by customizing personalized
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21707

