The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Weakly Supervised Gland Segmentation with Class Semantic Consistency and
Purified Labels Filtration
Siyang Feng1 , Huadeng Wang1 , Chu Han1,2 , Zhenbing Liu1 , Hualong Zhang1 ,
Rushi Lan1,3 * , Xipeng Pan1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Information Security, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence in Medical Image Analysis and Application,
Guangzhou 510080, China
3
International Joint Research Laboratory of Spatio-temporal Information and Intelligent Location Services,
Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
rslan@guet.edu.cn, pxp201@guet.edu.cn
Image

Abstract

Overlaid

Image-level weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) reduces the dependence on high-quality data annotation, which plays a crucial role in computational pathology.
Benefit from the ability to localize the objects with only binary labels, Class Activation Map (CAM) is a widely used
method to initial pseudo masks. However, due to the low
contrast among different tissues in histopathological images,
most existing CAM-based methods perform poorly in gland
segmentation. We retrospect this process and find that class
consistency and semantic consistency can guide the network
to effectively distinguish confusing pixels and generate finegrained pseudo masks. Specifically, for class consistency, we
propose Consistency Correlation Attention (CCA) to encourage the network to focus on the contribution of class features
to semantic dependencies. For semantic consistency, we propose Multi-scale Pyramid Fusion Pooling (MPFP) to aggregate coarse-to-fine global semantic information from CAMs
at multiple spatial resolutions, thus identifying class localization. Additionally, we introduce a Purified Labels Filtration
(PLF) strategy during the segmentation phase to mitigate the
noisy supervision signal and improve the segmentation quality of the model. Extensive experiments show that the our
method achieves new state-of-the-art results on three publicly
available gland datasets. Furthermore, our method demonstrates impressive domain adaptation capability, achieving
satisfactory results with only a small portion of samples when
faced with unseen domain data.

Figure 1: Characteristic difference between natural images
and histopathological gland images. The upper row is raw
images, and the bottom row is overlaid results with ground
truth. It can be seen that the characteristics of gland images
are morphological homogeneity and ambiguous boundaries
among different tissues.

can rapidly locate and quantify glandular features, assisting
pathologists in clinical diagnosis, therapeutic effect evaluation and prognostic prediction. In recent years, many automated gland segmentation methods (Graham et al. 2019;
Wen et al. 2020; Ding et al. 2022; Sun, Huang, and Zheng
2023) require a large amount of elaborate pixel-level annotations to achieve desirable segmentation results. However,
these histopathological gland images with dense labels are
often difficult to obtain due to the high annotation costs.
Is there a solution that can achieve good results without extensive annotation data? The answer is yes. Imagelevel weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS)
can address this issue. According to previous studies (Lin
et al. 2014; Han et al. 2022), giving image-level labels for
an image can save approximately 60 times the annotation
time compared to fine-grained pixel-level labels. Therefore,
WSSS holds great promise for gland segmentation tasks.
Currently, many WSSS works (Ahn and Kwak 2018; Jiang
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022b; Yoon et al. 2024; Feng
et al. 2024) utilize classification network to generate Class
Activation Map (CAM) (Zhou et al. 2016) as pixel-level
pseudo masks for subsequent segmentation. Nevertheless,
these methods are mostly designed based on natural images
and are not suitable for histopathological gland datasets for
several reasons. First, as shown in Fig. 1, objects in natural
images usually have recognizable boundaries, and different

Introduction
Histopathological image analysis is the gold standard for
cancer diagnosis. Quantitative measurement of glands from
digitized whole slide images (WSIs) is crucial to determine
grades of several cancers, such as colorectal adenocarcinoma (Kim et al. 2020), breast cancer (Rechsteiner, Dietrich,
and Varga 2023), prostate cancer (Epstein et al. 2016), and
endometrial adenocarcinoma (Stolnicu et al. 2021). Manual identification of these glands not only requires specialized clinical expertise, but also is often time-consuming.
While deep learning-based automated gland segmentation
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2987

