The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Few-Shot Fine-Grained Image Classification with Progressively Feature
Refinement and Continuous Relationship Modeling
Zhen-Xiang Ma, Zhen-Duo Chen * , Tai Zheng, Xin Luo, Zixia Jia, Xin-Shun Xu
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
mazhenxiang0923@163.com, {chenzd.sdu, zt5369623, luoxin.lxin, jiazixia770}@gmail.com, xuxinshun@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, a number of effective methods have been proposed
to tackle the challenging task of Few-Shot Fine-Grained Image Classification (FS-FGIC). However, how to fully leverage the backbone network to discover and extract detailed
features to generate more discriminative class prototypes, as
well as how to accurately model the similarity relationship
between query samples and the class prototypes, are still issues to be further considered. Therefore, we propose a novel
progreSsively featUre refInement and conTinuous rElationship moDeling method, SUITED for short, to address these
two issues existing in the State-of-the-Art FS-FGIC methods.
Specifically, we design the Progressive Feature Refinement
Module (PFRM) to fully exploit the backbone network’s
progressive feature extraction capabilities, forming multiscale feature representations to further enhance discriminative features. Then, the Continuous Relationship Modeling
Module (CRMM) is proposed to capture the dependencies
between query samples and the corresponding class prototypes, achieving precise optimization of the distances among
corresponding sample points in the feature space. We conducted extensive experiments on five fine-grained benchmark
datasets, and the experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method is comprehensively ahead of the existing
State-of-the-Art methods.

Figure 1: Comparison between the existing discrete modeling methods (a) and our proposed continuous modeling
method (b) regarding Query optimization direction, where
θ1 to θ5 are the optimization directions guided by P1 to P5,
and θ is the final optimization direction obtained by the vector sum of all these optimization directions.

researchers have shifted their focuses to Few-Shot FineGrained Image Classification (FS-FGIC), aiming to enable
models to accurately recognize unseen novel samples with
a few labeled samples by learning task-transfer knowledge
from base classes, thus narrowing the gap with humans.
The limited labeled data (support) for Few-Shot Learning (FSL) (Wertheimer, Tang, and Hariharan 2021) determines that the traditional supervised learning strategy cannot be effectively applied. During the past several years,
the Prototype-based classification strategy proposed by ProtoNet (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017) has gradually become the most representative FSL strategy. The simplicity
and effectiveness of this strategy have inspired most subsequent methods, which have consistently maintained Stateof-the-Art results for FSL and FS-FGIC tasks in recent years
(Zhao et al. 2024; Ma et al. 2024; Lee, Moon, and Heo
2022). The basic idea of ProtoNet is to calculate the prototypes representing each class based on a limited number
of support samples, and then determine the class of query
samples by evaluating their similarity to these prototypes.
Obviously, for the FS-FGIC task, two key points are crucial
for the effectiveness of this strategy: Firstly, the prototypes
should be sufficiently representative and discriminative of
the categories, to effectively reflect the features that distin-

Introduction
With the continuous advancement of computer vision technology (He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), the task
of Fine-Grained Image Classification (FGIC) has made unprecedented progress. FGIC aims to distinguish between visually similar subclasses under the same basic-level category, such as different breeds of dogs or different types of
cars. However, rare category samples within fine-grained
datasets are relatively scarce, and the cost of obtaining finegrained annotations is expensive, which limits the general
applicability of traditional FGIC methods. In contrast, humans can distinguish subtle differences between subclasses
after learning with a very limited number of samples. Inspired by this, to enhance model generalization in datascarce scenarios without relying on large-scale training data,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6036

