The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Answering Conjunctive Queries with Safe Negation and Inequalities
over RDFS Knowledge Bases
Gianluca Cima, Marco Console, Roberto Maria Delfino, Maurizio Lenzerini, Antonella Poggi
Sapienza University of Rome
{cima, console, delfino, lenzerini, poggi}@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract

user-defined queries (Khan 2023) to enhancing the results of
generative AI models (Yang et al. 2024; Pan et al. 2024).
Usually, KBs come with an attached semantics, i.e., a formally defined meaning that is the basis for all the information management tasks. Such semantics is often obtained by
specifying the KB in a formal language, and then using the
semantics of this language to interpret the KB. In this context, a prominent family of languages is that of Description
Logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2017). DLs are fragments of first
order logic with a dedicated syntax, based on unary and binary predicates, and a semantics defined via first order interpretations and models. A DL KB, often called ontology, is
simply a logical theory constituted by DL axioms typically
organized into two components: a TBox T and an ABox A,
specifying, respectively, intensional and extensional knowledge about the domain of interest. Due to these characteristics, DL Ontologies have been successfully used to provide
semantics to knowledge graph systems (Xiao et al. 2019). In
such frameworks, a knowledge graph is represented by the
ABox and the TBox of a DL ontology, and the models of
such ontology define the semantics of the knowledge graph.
A crucial computational task underlying information
management in DL ontologies is query answering (Calvanese et al. 2007; Bienvenu and Ortiz 2015). In simple words, query answering amounts to checking whether
a query, i.e., an expression defined in a formal language,
is satisfied by all the models of the ontology. Some of
the query languages that have received most attention in
this context are, arguably, those of Conjunctive Queries
(CQs) and Unions thereof (UCQs), i.e., queries specified
by the existential-positive fragment of first-order logic with
(UCQs) or without (CQs) disjunction. After decades of studies, we have a fairly complete picture of the problem of answering UCQs over DL ontologies. Notably, such problem
remains decidable, although intractable, even for expressive
DLs such as SHIQ (Glimm et al. 2008).
While expressive enough to define several important
properties, UCQs are unable to express even the most basic
form of negation. For example, a UCQ cannot ask for individuals of a specific class that do not posses a given property
(safe negation) or whether there are two distinct individuals
with specific characteristics (inequality atoms). These features are crucial in several context, e.g., to deal with knowledge graphs that represent information coming from multi-

Expressing negative conditions is a crucial feature of query
languages for knowledge bases (KBs). Answering such
queries over ontological KBs, however, is a very challenging
task that becomes undecidable even for lightweight Description Logic (DL) ontologies. Such negative results hold even
for Conjunctive Queries (CQs) equipped with basic forms of
negative conditions such as the so-called “safe” negation or
inequality atoms. One ontology language that is seemingly
unaffected by these results is (the DL counterpart of) RDFS
even if equipped with disjointness axioms. Answering CQs
with inequalities over such ontologies is known to be Πp2 complete, if the number of inequality atoms is unbounded,
and NP-complete if we limit this number to one. Notably,
these results leave open the cases of CQs with a fixed number greater than two of inequality atoms. Additionally, such a
thorough analysis is missing for CQs with safe negation.
In this paper, we embark in a refined analysis of the combined
complexity of answering CQs with inequality atoms and safe
negation over RDFS ontologies augmented with disjointness
axioms. Firstly, we provide a unified Πp2 query answering algorithm for the general problem. Secondly, we confirm the
generally held conjecture according to which answering CQs
with two inequality atoms over such ontologies is already Πp2 hard. This result closes an important gap in the current literature and has an impact on the widely influential problem
of query containment. Lastly, for CQs with safe negation, we
prove a behavior similar to that of CQs with inequality atoms.
Specifically, we show that answering CQs with at most one
negated atom can be done in NP, while allowing at most two
negated atoms is sufficient to obtain Πp2 -hardness.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Base (KB) systems are AI systems that have access to a KB, i.e., a symbolic representation of knowledge
related to specific application domains. AI systems may interact with their KBs to perform several information management tasks. The results thus obtained are then used to either provide information to end-users or to improve the performance of other AI systems. The recent trend of knowledge graphs provides perfect examples of KB systems. In
particular, the KB of such systems is the knowledge graph
itself, and the tasks they perform may vary from answering
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14824

