The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Regional Expected Improvement for Efficient Trust Region Selection
in High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization
Nobuo Namura, Sho Takemori
Fujitsu Limited, Kawasaki, Japan
{namura.nobuo, takemori.sho}@fujitsu.com

Abstract

optimizing an acquisition function, which quantifies the utility of any point in the design space based on the GP model.
However, conventional BO using global GP models suffers from performance degradation as the number of design variables increases, making it primarily suitable for
problems up to about 10 dimensions. For medium to highdimensional black-box optimization problems exceeding 10
dimensions, the exponentially increasing design space poses
a challenge due to the limited number of samples available
for objective function evaluations (Binois and Wycoff 2022).
As a result, problem simplification approaches are often applied. Common techniques include local exploration using
GP models within trust regions (Regis 2016), dimensionality
reduction assuming a sparse set of effective design variables
(Wang et al. 2016), reducing sensitivity in non-essential dimensions (Eriksson and Jankowiak 2021), simplifying GP
models to capture only global trends under the assumption
of a simple objective function (Hvarfner, Hellsten, and Nardi
2024), and solving subproblems under the assumption of
separable design variables (Duvenaud, Nickisch, and Rasmussen 2011).
These methods have enabled improvements in objective
function values even for problems with hundreds of dimensions. However, methods that rely on assumptions about
problem characteristics may not perform well on problems
that deviate from these assumptions. In practice, the characteristics of a problem are often unknown until it is solved,
which raises concerns about the generalization performance
of these methods. Even for problems with tens of dimensions, they underperform compared to standard BO with
global GP models (Li et al. 2017). High-dimensional BO
methods that do not rely on such assumptions are limited
(Oh, Gavves, and Welling 2018; Gupta et al. 2020). Among
these, methods that use trust regions have been gaining attention. However, these methods primarily focus on local
search, which raises concerns about stagnation in local optima. For instance, trust region BO (TuRBO) (Eriksson et al.
2019) explores multiple randomly defined trust regions simultaneously to capture the global optimum, but efficiently
obtaining the global optimum remains challenging due to the
vast design space in high-dimensional problems.
In this study, we propose a novel acquisition function, regional expected improvement (REI), to enhance
trust-region-based BO for global optimization in high-

Real-world optimization problems often involve complex objective functions with costly evaluations. While Bayesian optimization (BO) with Gaussian processes is effective for these
challenges, it suffers in high-dimensional spaces due to performance degradation from limited function evaluations. To
overcome this, simplification techniques like dimensionality
reduction have been employed, yet they often rely on assumptions about the problem characteristics, potentially underperforming when these assumptions do not hold. Trust-regionbased methods, which avoid such assumptions, focus on local search but risk stagnation in local optima. In this study,
we propose a novel acquisition function, regional expected
improvement (REI), designed to enhance trust-region-based
BO in medium to high-dimensional settings. REI identifies
regions likely to contain the global optimum, improving performance without relying on specific problem characteristics.
We provide a theoretical proof that REI effectively identifies optimal trust regions and empirically demonstrate that
incorporating REI into trust-region-based BO outperforms
conventional BO and other high-dimensional BO methods in
medium to high-dimensional real-world problems.

1

Introduction

Real-world optimization problems often involve objective
functions where gradients are difficult to obtain, and evaluations are time-consuming. Typical examples include the design optimization of industrial products like aircraft (Liem,
Mader, and Martins 2015) and automobiles (Moustapha
et al. 2015), drug discovery (Shields et al. 2021), materials development (Zhang, Apley, and Chen 2020), and the
tuning of hyperparameters in machine learning models (Perrone et al. 2021). For such optimization problems, surrogatebased methods that can optimize with only tens to a few
thousand of objective function evaluations are widely used.
In particular, Bayesian optimization (BO) (Mockus, Tiesis,
and Zilinskas 1978) using Gaussian processes (GPs) (Matheron 1963) is frequently employed because it effectively balances the exploitation of the best-known solutions and the
exploration of uncharted regions. This method constructs a
GP model to represent the probability distribution of objective function values using a small number of evaluated sample points. It then iteratively generates new sample points by
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19624

