The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RaDIO: Real-Time Hallucination Detection with Contextual Index Optimized
Query Formulation for Dynamic Retrieval Augmented Generation
Jia Zhu1 , Hanghui Guo1 , Weijie Shi2 * , Zhangze Chen1 , Pasquale De Meo3
1

The Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application, Zhejiang Normal University, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Messina, Italy
{jiazhu, ghh1125}@zjnu.edu.cn, wshiah@connect.ust.hk, zjnuczz@zjnu.edu.cn, pdemeo@unime.it
Abstract

The Dynamic Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)
paradigm actively decides when and what to retrieve during the text generation process of Large Language Models
(LLMs). However, current dynamic RAG methods fall short
in both aspects: identifying the optimal moment to activate
the retrieval module and crafting the appropriate query once
retrieval is triggered. To overcome these limitations, we introduce an approach, namely, RaDIO, Real-Time Hallucination
Detection with Contextual Index Optimized query formulation for dynamic RAG. The approach is specifically designed
to make decisions on when and what to retrieve based on the
LLM’s real-time information needs during the text generation process. We evaluate RaDIO along with existing methods
comprehensively over several knowledge-intensive generation datasets. Experimental results show that RaDIO achieves
superior performance on all tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our work.

Figure 1: The framework of traditional RAG

A more advanced solution is the dynamic RAG, i.e., a
RAG that performs multiple retrievals during the LLM’s
generation process (Borgeaud et al. 2022). Dynamic RAG
involves two key steps: identifying the optimal time instant
to activate the retrieval module and crafting the appropriate
query once retrieval is triggered (Jiang et al. 2022).
Several kinds of dynamic RAG methods are currently
available and each of them implements ad-hoc strategies to
carry out the two steps above. For instance, IRCoT (Trivedi
et al. 2022) employs a global augmentation method, and it
activates the retrieval module for each generated sentence,
and the query is formed using the latest sentence. IC-RALM
(Ram et al. 2023) defines a sliding window and triggers the
retrieval module after processing a preset number of tokens,
using the last n tokens to form the query.
Designing a dynamic Retrieval-Augmented Generation
technique raises two crucial questions: When is the optimal
time to initiate the retrieval phase? How can we formulate
effective queries to external sources that address the immediate information needs of a Large Language Model?
Current dynamic RAG strategies often rely on static rules
to determine when to retrieve information, without considering whether retrieval is truly necessary. This approach
can lead to unnecessary retrievals, introducing irrelevant or
noisy data that compromises the quality of the LLM output.
Furthermore, implementing retrieval augmentation increases the time and computational cost of LLM inference.
This added cost is unwarranted if the LLM can produce accurate output independently or if the integrated content does
not meet acceptable standards.
Moreover, current RAG strategies for determining what to

Code — https://github.com/ghh1125/RaDIO

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have advanced significantly in a range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks
and are increasingly being integrated into various AI applications (Chowdhery et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023a). Despite their impressive capabilities, LLMs often generate text
that appears coherent but is factually incorrect, a problem
known as LLM hallucination (Maynez et al. 2020; Ji et al.
2023a,b; Su et al. 2024c).
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has become a
key approach to addressing hallucinations in LLMs. As illustrated in Figure 1, RAG improves LLMs by retrieving
relevant information from external databases and adding it
to the model’s inputs (Jiang et al. 2022). In many NLP challenges, the use of RAG has led to superior effectiveness
(Borgeaud et al. 2022; Shi et al. 2023b).
Traditional RAG usually relies on single-round retrieval,
that is they use the LLM generated text as input to retrieve
relevant information from external sources. This method
performs well for simpler tasks but struggles with complex,
multi-step, and long-form generation tasks.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26129

