The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DisCo-DSO: Coupling Discrete and Continuous Optimization for Efficient
Generative Design in Hybrid Spaces
Jacob F. Pettit, Chak Shing Lee, Jiachen Yang, Alex Ho, Daniel Faissol, Brenden Petersen,
Mikel Landajuela*
Computational Engineering Division
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA, 94550, USA
Abstract
We consider the challenge of black-box optimization within
hybrid discrete-continuous and variable-length spaces, a
problem that arises in various applications, such as decision
tree learning and symbolic regression. We propose DisCoDSO (Discrete-Continuous Deep Symbolic Optimization), a
novel approach that uses a generative model to learn a joint
distribution over discrete and continuous design variables to
sample new hybrid designs. In contrast to standard decoupled approaches, in which the discrete and continuous variables are optimized separately, our joint optimization approach uses fewer objective function evaluations, is robust
against non-differentiable objectives, and learns from prior
samples to guide the search, leading to significant improvement in performance and sample efficiency. Our experiments
on a diverse set of optimization tasks demonstrate that the
advantages of DisCo-DSO become increasingly evident as
the complexity of the problem increases. In particular, we
illustrate DisCo-DSO’s superiority over the state-of-the-art
methods for interpretable reinforcement learning with decision trees.

(a) Standard decoupled approach

(b) DisCo-DSO

Figure 1: Comparison of the standard decoupled approach
and DisCo-DSO for discrete-continuous optimization using
an autoregressive model. In the decoupled approach, the discrete skeleton τd = ⟨(l1 , ·), . . . , (lT , ·)⟩ is sampled first and
then the continuous parameters β1 , . . . , βT are optimized independently. In contrast, DisCo-DSO models the joint distribution over the sequence of tokens ⟨(l1 , β1 ), . . . , (lT , βT )⟩.
Here, the notation ⊕ stands for concatenation of vectors.

Introduction
Deep learning methods have shown success in important
combinatorial optimization problems (Bello et al. 2016), including generating interpretable policies for continuous control (Landajuela et al. 2021a) and symbolic regression (SR)
to discover the underlying mathematical equations from the
data (Petersen et al. 2021; Biggio et al. 2021; Kamienny
et al. 2022; Landajuela et al. 2022). Existing approaches
train a generative model that constructs a solution to the optimization problem by sequentially choosing from a set of discrete tokens, using the value of the objective function as the
terminal reward for learning. However, these approaches do
not jointly optimize the discrete and continuous components
of such hybrid problems: Certain discrete tokens require the
additional specification of an associated real-valued parameter, such as the threshold value at a decision tree node or the
value of a constant token in an equation, but the learned generative model does not produce these values. Instead, they
adopt the design choice of decoupled optimization, whereby

only the construction of a discrete solution skeleton is optimized by deep learning, while the associated continuous
parameters are left to a separate black-box optimizer.
We hypothesize that a joint discrete-continuous optimization approach (Figure 1(b)) that generates a complete solution based on deep reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and
Barto 2018) has significant advantages compared to existing
decoupled approaches that employ learning only for the discrete skeleton (Figure 1(a)). In terms of efficiency, a joint approach only requires one evaluation of the objective function
for each candidate solution, whereas the decoupled approach
based on common non-linear black-box optimization methods such as BFGS (Fletcher 2000), simulated annealing (Xi-

* Corresponding author: landajuelala1@llnl.gov.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27117

