The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TrackGo: A Flexible and Efficient Method for Controllable Video Generation
Haitao Zhou* 1, 2 , Chuang Wang* 1, 2 , Rui Nie 1 , Jinlin Liu 2 , Dongdong Yu 2 ,
Qian Yu 1 † , Changhu Wang 2 †
1

Beihang University
2
AIsphere Tech
{zhouhaitao, chuangwang, qianyu, nierui }@buaa.edu.cn
{yudongdong, linjinxiao, wangchanghu}@aishi.ai
Abstract
Recent years have seen substantial progress in diffusionbased controllable video generation. However, achieving precise control in complex scenarios, including fine-grained object parts, sophisticated motion trajectories, and coherent
background movement, remains a challenge. In this paper,
we introduce TrackGo, a novel approach that leverages freeform masks and arrows for conditional video generation.
This method offers users with a flexible and precise mechanism for manipulating video content. We also propose the
TrackAdapter for control implementation, an efficient and
lightweight adapter designed to be seamlessly integrated into
the temporal self-attention layers of a pretrained video generation model. This design leverages our observation that the
attention map of these layers can accurately activate regions
corresponding to motion in videos. Our experimental results
demonstrate that our new approach, enhanced by the TrackAdapter, achieves state-of-the-art performance on key metrics
such as FVD, FID, and ObjMC scores.

Figure 1: Attention map visualization of the last temporal selfattention layer in Stable Video Diffusion Model. The highlighted
areas in the attention map correspond to the moving areas in the
video. The video has a total of 25 frames, and we selected frames
1, 12, and 23 at equal intervals for visualization. And Attn(i, j)
denotes the temporal attention map between frame i and frame j.

thing (Wu et al. 2024) employs a center point and a Gaussian map to guide the target object along a predefined path.
However, it fails to control the movement of partial or finegrained objects effectively. Another approach, Boximator
(Wang et al. 2024a), utilizes bounding boxes to dictate motion control. It uses a box to specify the target area, where
the sequence of movements of the box guides the motion
of the target. Unfortunately, bounding boxes often encompass redundant regions, which can interfere with the motion of the target and disrupt the coherence of the background in the generated videos. The second challenge is efficiency. Existing works often incorporate conditions in a
way that significantly increases the number of model’s parameters. For instance, DragAnything utilizes the architecture of ControlNet (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023), and
DragNUWA (Yin et al. 2023) employs heavy encoders to
map guidance signals into the latent space of the pretrained
model. These design choices inevitably lead to slower inference times, which can impede the practical deployment of
these models in real-world applications.
In this work, we tackle the task of controllable video generation by addressing two crucial questions: First, what type
of control should be employed to accurately describe the
motion of the target? Second, how can this control be implemented efficiently?
For the first question regarding the type of control suitable for describing the motion of the target, we propose
a novel combination of a free-form mask and an arrow to

Project Page — https://zhtjtcz.github.io/TrackGo-Page/

Introduction
With the rapid development of diffusion models (Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Song et al. 2020), video generation has witnessed significant progress, with the quality
of generated videos continuously improving. Unlike textbased (Blattmann et al. 2023b; Zhang et al. 2023; Guo et al.
2023b) or image-based (Blattmann et al. 2023a) video generation, controllable video generation (Hu et al. 2023; Yin
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024) focuses on achieving precise
control over object movement and scene transformations in
generated videos. This capability is particularly valuable in
industry such as film production and cartoon creation.
Controllable video generation remains a highly challenging task. The primary challenge is precise control, which
includes managing the target movement objects and their
trajectories. Existing methods often struggle to achieve precise control over these elements. For instance, DragAny* These authors contributed equally. Interns in AIsphere Tech.
†Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10743

