The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-Spectral Gaussian Splatting with Spatial Occupancy Consistency
Haipeng Guo, Huanyu Liu* , Jiazheng Wen, Junbao Li,
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
haipengguo.hit@gmail.com, liuhuanyu@hit.edu.cn, 22b903087@stu.hit.edu.cn, lijunbao@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

*Asynchronous Multi-Spectral
Images Acquirement

Using images captured by cameras with different light spectrum sensitivities, training a unified model for cross-spectral
scene representation is challenging. Recent advances have
shown the possibility of jointly optimizing cross-spectral
relative poses and neural radiance fields using normalized cross-device coordinates. However, such method suffers
from cross-spectral misalignment when collecting data asynchronously from devices and lacks the capability to render in
real-time or handle large scenes. We address these issues by
proposing cross-spectral Gaussian Splatting with spatial occupancy consistency, strictly aligns cross-spectral scene representation by sharing explicit Gaussian surfaces across spectra and separately optimizing each view’s extrinsic using a
matching-optimizing pose estimation method. Additionally,
to address field-of-view differences in cross-spectral cameras, we improve the adaptive densify controller to fill nonoverlapping areas. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that SOC-GS achieves superior performance in novel view
synthesis and real-time cross-spectral rendering.

CROSS SPECTRAL GAUSSIAN
SPLATTING WITH
OCCUPANCY CONSISTENCY

+

RGB

*Better Rendering Quality
PSNR↑4.01dB/SSIM↑0.04

MS

*Better Cross-spectra Align
MI↑0.09/↑0.08/↑0.08

IR

*Faster Rendering Speed
FPS↑100×
X-NeRF - 30.33dB/0.88

SOC-GS - 37.09dB/0.97

Figure 1: Cross-spectral rendering comparison. We propose SOC-GS for cross-spectral scene representation and
pose estimation. Our method achieves more strictly alignment and better rendering quality in cross-spectral NVS.

Code — https://github.com/GuoHP-HIT/SOC-GS.

Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) defines a task that represents
the scene by the given sparse views, and generates novel
views invisible during sampling, play an important role in
fields such as 3D reconstruction (Remondino et al. 2023),
AR/VR (Li et al. 2022), and autonomous driving (He et al.
2024) et al. With the proposal of NeRF (Mildenhall et al.
2021), use neural radiance fields to represent scenes as a 5D
vector-valued function F (x, θ, ϕ), and map the representation to color c and volume density σ by MLP gradually become the mainstream choice for NVS. Further, 3DGS (Kerbl
et al. 2023) represents the scene surface as a set of deterministic Gaussian functions, realize more adaptive and flexible
3D object representation which overcomes the limitations
of volume rendering methods. Meanwhile, the differentiable
rasterisation makes Gaussian splatting optimizing rapidly.
However, in real-world scene representation, visible spectral images alone may not provide complete scene views.

Additional sensor data can be introduced to enhance the
overall comprehensiveness of scene representation. For instance, IMU and LIDAR pointcloud data can serve as Gaussian Splatting surfaces initialization (Hong et al. 2024),
while depth-resolved imaging sonar (Qadri et al. 2024), thermal images (Ye et al. 2024) and multi-spectral images (Li
et al. 2024) can provide supplementary imaging data beyond RGB cameras, enhancing scene representation. Generally, the introduction of supplementary modalities in these
systems is typically achieved by developing an imaging
system that maintains fixed relative positions. This limitation arises from the challenge of cross-modality information
alignment. When processing single spectral image inputs,
camera poses can be easily obtained using the Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) method. However, this approach proves
ineffective when used with cross-spectral images. In crossspectral scene representation, only the camera poses of one
spectrum can be obtained by SfM; additional spectral camera poses obtained independently through SfM do not main-

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3229

