The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Noisy Node Classification
by Bi-level Optimization Based Multi-Teacher Distillation
Yujing Liu1,2 , Zongqian Wu3 , Zhengyu Lu1,2,4 Ci Nie1,2 ,
Guoqiu Wen1,2 , Yonghua Zhu1,2,5, * , Xiaofeng Zhu1,2,3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China
Guangxi Key Lab of Multisource Information Mining and Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
4
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Anyang Institute of Technology, Anyang, China
5
Information Systems Technology Design Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
liuyujingcn@gmail.com, yhzhu9423@gmail.com
2

Abstract

reasons is that previous methods design a single model only
to handle with noisy label to result in error accumulation.
To alleviate the above issue, the multi-teacher distillation
method is proposed to transfer knowledge from multiple
models to deal with noisy labels. For instance, MTS-GNN
(Liu et al. 2023a) uses models saved from earlier iterations
to guide model training and label correction for later iterations. However, previous multi-teacher distillation methods
still have limitations to be addressed. First, the constructed
multi-teacher models across nearby iterations have few differences, and thus resulting in the lack of diversity. Second,
previous methods do not consider the complementary information among teacher models and could not fully exploit the
knowledge of teacher models.
Addressing the above issues of multi-teacher distillation
methods is challenging. First, since the labelled data is
sparse and with noise, it is difficult to train diverse teacher
models by existing methods (e.g., randomly sampling training subsets from the training set). Second, previous methods usually require a large number of correct labels to learn
the weights of the teacher models, which is not practical
for NNC tasks. For example, MTS-GNN sets the weights of
teacher models as hyper-parameters, resulting in expensive
time cost and difficult to reasonably set the weights.
In this paper, we propose a new multi-teacher distillation
method based on bi-level optimization (namely BO-NNC,
shown in Figure 1) to address the above issues. To do this,
we first employ diverse self-supervised graph methods (e.g.,
(Veličković et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2021; Mo et al. 2022))
to construct multiple teacher models, solving the first issue
of previous methods, and then construct a teacher weight
matrix to integrate the predictions of the teacher models as
the soft label matrix, which is regarded as the ground truth
of the student model. Moreover, we propose a new bi-level
optimization strategy to iteratively train the teacher weight
matrix and the student model. This allows the teacher weight
matrix to be dynamically adjusted based on the training
progress of the student model without requiring a large number of correct labels to learn the weights of the teacher models. In particular, the proposed bi-level optimization algorithm helps to learn the complementary information among
teacher models. After the bi-level optimization, we further

Previous graph neural networks (GNNs) usually assume that
the graph data is with clean labels for representation learning, but it is not true in real applications. In this paper, we
propose a new multi-teacher distillation method based on bilevel optimization (namely BO-NNC), to conduct noisy node
classification on the graph data. Specifically, we first employ multiple self-supervised learning methods to train diverse teacher models, and then aggregate their predictions
through a teacher weight matrix. Furthermore, we design a
new bi-level optimization strategy to dynamically adjust the
teacher weight matrix based on the training progress of the
student model. Finally, we design a label improvement module to improve the label quality. Extensive experimental results on real datasets show that our method achieves the best
results compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Node classification usually relies on correct supervised information to predict unlabelled nodes on the graph data.
However, real-world graph data often contain incorrect supervised information, i.e., noisy labels, which easily misleads the training model and in turn degrades the node classification performance. To address this issue, noisy node classification (NNC) has been widely proposed to train graph
neural networks (GNNs) on the graph data with noisy labels
(Li, Yin, and Chen 2021), so NNC has garnered growing interest in practical applications.
A number of methods have been proposed to handle noisy
labels. For example, NRGNN (Dai, Aggarwal, and Wang
2021) trains a pseudo-label miner to select pseudo-labels
for augmenting the supervision information. UnionNET (Li,
Yin, and Chen 2021) first trains a GNN using the original
labels and then performs label correction based on the node
embeddings learned by the obtained GNN. However, these
methods excessively depend on the performance of individual model and struggle to handle datasets with high noise
rates. For instance, in the case of high noise rates, NRGNN
will select incorrect pseudo-labels and UnionNET will contaminate correct labels with label correction. One of the key
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19033

