The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-axis Prompt and Multi-dimension Fusion Network for All-in-one
Weather-degraded Image Restoration
Yuanbo Wen1 , Tao Gao2 * , Jing Zhang3 , Ziqi Li1 , Ting Chen1∗
1

2

School of Information Engineering, Chang’an University, China
School of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Chang’an University, China
3
School of Computing, Australian National University, Australia
{wyb, gaotao, tchen, lzq}@chd.edu.cn, jing.zhang@anu.edu.au
Abstract

Existing approaches aiming to remove adverse weather
degradations compromise the image quality and incur the
long processing time. To this end, we introduce a multi-axis
prompt and multi-dimension fusion network (MPMF-Net).
Specifically, we develop a multi-axis prompts learning block
(MPLB), which learns the prompts along three separate axis
planes, requiring fewer parameters and achieving superior
performance. Moreover, we present a multi-dimension feature interaction block (MFIB), which optimizes intra-scale
feature fusion by segregating features along height, width and
channel dimensions. This strategy enables more accurate mutual attention and adaptive weight determination. Additionally, we propose the coarse-scale degradation-free implicit
neural representations (CDINR) to normalize the degradation
levels of different weather conditions. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the significant improvements of our model over
the recent well-performing approaches in both reconstruction
fidelity and inference time.

Figure 1: Efficiency comparisons of the involved comparative approaches. Our proposed model achieves the best
trade-off between the image quality and inference time.

Code — https://github.com/chdwyb/MPMF-Net

Introduction

In this work, we propose a multi-axis prompt and multidimension fusion network (MPMF-Net) for all-in-one traffic weather removal. Specifically, existing methods utilize
learnable prompts to capture task-related knowledge, but
they only focus on either the spatial dimension (Valanarasu,
Yasarla, and Patel 2022) or the channel dimension (Potlapalli et al. 2023). This narrow focus leads to inaccurate
task representation, affecting the overall task understanding
and the quality of reconstructed images. Additionally, these
methods require a large number of parameters to learn the
prompts, which makes the solution space for the prompts unstable. To this end, we propose a multi-axis prompts learning
block (MPLB), which learns the prompts separately along
the hw-axis ch-axis, and cw-axis. This approach enables
more comprehensive and accurate prompt learning. Moreover, our MPLB uses fewer parameters than existing approaches but achieves the best all-in-one traffic weatherdegraded image restoration.
Furthermore, existing methods for cross-stage intra-scale
feature fusion (Wen et al. 2023; Gao et al. 2024c; Wang
et al. 2022) struggle to adjust the weighting of different
features based on input variations, leading to less effective

Traffic images often suffer from texture loss and color distortion due to adverse weather conditions (Wen, Gao, and
Chen 2024a; Jiang et al. 2024), which significantly reduce
the effectiveness of subsequent computer vision algorithms
(Gao et al. 2024a,b; Wen, Gao, and Chen 2024b). Currently,
weather removal algorithms can be divided into three categories, task-specific, task-aligned and all-in-one methods.
Task-specific approaches (Ding et al. 2025a; Zhang et al.
2021) involve creating custom physical models for specific
weather conditions, allowing the network to accurately identify the corresponding weather effects. Meanwhile, taskaligned methods (Wang et al. 2022) employ a single network architecture to handle different weather degradations,
training the model with various weather-degraded datasets.
Recent advancements (Gao et al. 2024c) train an all-inone model that can simultaneously address multiple weather
conditions. However, these research faces issues with reduced image quality and longer processing times.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8323

