The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FCOM: A Federated Collaborative Online Monitoring Framework via
Representation Learning
Tanapol Kosolwattana1 , Huazheng Wang2 , Raed Al Kontar3 , Ying Lin1
1

Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Houston
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University
3
Department of Industrial & Operations Engineering, University of Michigan
tkosolwattana@uh.edu, huazheng.wang@oregonstate.edu, alkontar@umich.edu, ylin53@central.uh.edu
2

Abstract

methods offer a solution by dynamically allocating limited
resources, effectively balancing the exploitation of processes
yielding high rewards and the exploration of uncertain processes. While existing online learning algorithms, including
those cited above, show promise, they still exhibit certain
limitations that hinder their effectiveness in addressing the
complexities of monitoring under resource constraints. The
primary limitation of existing algorithms stems from their
reliance on a centralized setting, necessitating the transmission of all data to a central server for model training. While
this approach has demonstrated utility, it raises profound
concerns about data privacy. In healthcare applications, such
as patient health monitoring systems, this centralized model
poses a substantial threat to data privacy, particularly with
electronic health records (EHRs) containing sensitive patient
information that ideally should remain within local organizations for privacy protection (Xu et al. 2021). Beyond privacy, issues related to the costs of communication and data
storage in a central server further underscore the imperative
for a decentralized approach (Kontar et al. 2021). Therefore, it is crucial to develop decentralized algorithms that
empower the storage and analysis of monitoring data at the
local level, mitigating privacy risks and reducing communication and storage costs.
An ostensibly straightforward method to achieve decentralized monitoring is by modeling and monitoring the progression dynamic of each process independently using conventional online learning algorithms (Wang et al. 2019).
However, this approach can be less effective due to the uneven data distribution among individual processes, where the
disparity in available data for each process can lead to suboptimal model performance. (Penny and Atkinson 2012).
Secondly, training the model with stored data is less suitable
for various real-world applications where data are usually
available in an online manner with dynamic distributions
(Zhang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020). Given that each process features a heterogeneous dynamic that is not entirely
independent, neglecting to exploit information sharing between processes may overlook opportunities to effectively
span the model space for these processes’ models (Xu et al.
2021). Failing to capitalize on inter-process information can
result in a limited understanding of the broader context and
interconnected dynamics within the monitored processes.
Several federated online learning algorithms have been

Monitoring a large population of dynamic processes with limited resources presents a significant challenge across various
industrial sectors. This is due to 1) the inherent disparity between the available monitoring resources and the extensive
number of processes to be monitored and 2) the unpredictable
and heterogeneous dynamics inherent in the progression of
these processes. Online learning approaches, commonly referred to as bandit methods, have demonstrated notable potential in addressing this issue by dynamically allocating resources and effectively balancing the exploitation of highreward processes and the exploration of uncertain ones. However, most online learning algorithms are designed for 1) a
centralized setting that requires data sharing across processes
for accurate predictions or 2) a homogeneity assumption that
estimates a single global model from decentralized data. To
overcome these limitations and enable online learning in a
heterogeneous population under a decentralized setting, we
propose a federated collaborative online monitoring method.
Our approach utilizes representation learning to capture the
latent representative models within the population and introduces a novel federated collaborative UCB algorithm to
estimate these models from sequentially observed decentralized data. This strategy facilitates informed monitoring of resource allocation. The efficacy of our method is demonstrated
through theoretical analysis, simulation studies, and its application to decentralized cognitive degradation monitoring in
Alzheimer’s disease.

Code — https://github.com/TKosolwattana/FCOM AAAI

Introduction
Monitoring a large population of dynamic processes within
the constraints of monitoring resources poses a significant
challenge across various industrial sectors, including healthcare and engineering systems (Lin, Liu, and Huang 2018;
Kosolwattana, Wang, and Lin 2023). The complexity arises
from two key factors: 1) the inherent disparity between the
limited monitoring resources available and the large population of processes to be monitored, and 2) the uncertain
and heterogeneous dynamics in the progression of these
processes. In tackling this intricate problem, online learning from bandit feedback has demonstrated notable potential (Kosolwattana, Wang, and Lin 2023; Auer 2002). These
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17957

