The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DesignEdit: Unify Spatial-Aware Image Editing via Training-free Inpainting with
a Multi-Layered Latent Diffusion Framework
Yueru Jia1 , Aosong Cheng1 , Yuhui Yuan2 * , Chuke Wang1 , Ji Li3 , Huizhu Jia1 , Shanghang Zhang1 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University;
2
Microsoft Research Asia;
3
Microsoft
jiayueru@stu.pku.edu.cn, yuyua@microsoft.com, shanghang@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

their original appearance consistent. Latent diffusion models (LDMs) (Avrahami, Fried, and Lischinski 2023; Saharia
et al. 2022) like Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022;
Podell et al. 2023) have shown strong capabilities in image
generation, and various inpainting models (Cao et al. 2024;
Singh et al. 2023) based on LDMs have demonstrated impressive results. They fill regions based on text instructions,
but focus on editing specific areas rather than spatial layout.
Previous spatial-aware image editing methods use LDMs
through classifier guidance, updating latent features during
each denoising step, where the loss function constrains the
position and size of elements to match the target. However,
these methods often overlook background filling and struggle with removing large objects. Additionally, the soft constraints on the latent space can lead to a loss of detail in the
objects, and these methods heavily depend on the type of
operation and the objects being edited, limiting their ability
to handle multiple objects with complex operations.
Our method is inspired by the layer concept in the design
field, where each layer represents elements that can be manipulated independently. Instead of gradually updating the
latent representation with loss guidance, our approach integrates removal-specific inpainting into the diffusion process and directly utilizes the flexible latent representation in
LDMs to address the two main challenges mentioned above.
First, we propose a key-masking self-attention scheme applied during the initial K denoising steps. This training-free,
straightforward method allows the Query to ignore masked
regions and focus on the surrounding areas in the Key. To
improve removal results, we introduce artifact suppression
by adding an additional refinement mask to the Key, which
helps reduce attention to areas that may cause artifacts. Additionally, we design a multi-layered framework with two
sub-processes: latent decomposition and fusion, enabling
flexible editing of multiple objects in a single denoising process. The original image is first broken down into separate
latent layers with background inpainting, and then the layers
are fused at a specific timestep T − K, following layer-wise
instructions or a target layout, which can be generated by
GPT-4V. Finally, we unify various spatial-aware image editing tasks within the multi-layered framework by designing
task-specific masks for inpainting and assigning different latents for removal.
We conduct extensive qualitative and quantitative experi-

Spatial-aware image editing focuses on modifying the position and size of elements within a given image. However, previous works still struggle with maintaining background harmony in the original editing areas, as well as preserving the
initial identity of the edited elements, making it difficult to
achieve complex multi-object editing in a single pass. In this
paper, we aim to perform flexible spatial editing in a simple yet straightforward manner. We propose to inpaint the
background first and develop a two-stage multi-layered latent diffusion framework to edit each element independently.
Specifically, we design a key-masking self-attention scheme
alongside artifact suppression to achieve background inpainting within the denoising process, leveraging the powerful
generative capabilities of the Latent Diffusion Model, Stable Diffusion XL-1.0. The latent decomposition and fusion
framework is capable of unifying various spatial-aware operations, including removal, resizing, relocation, flipping, addition, camera panning, zooming out, occlusion-aware editing, and cross-image editing. Experiments demonstrate the
superior inpainting quality for object removal, along with enhanced versatility and higher precision in spatial-aware editing achieved by our method.

Project Page — https://design-edit.github.io/
Code — https://github.com/design-edit/DesignEdit

Introduction
Spatial-aware image editing helps users adjust the position and size of elements in an image. For instance, Fig. 1
shows a “Three Little Pigs” storybook design generated by
DALLE-3 (OpenAI 2023), the overall style and details are
quite refined, but on closer inspection, there are four pigs
instead of three, which means one needs to be removed.
Spatial-aware editing allows us to remove or add pigs, resize and move houses, erase text and clouds, pan, zoom out,
and even redesign the original image.
This type of complex spatial-aware editing faces two main
challenges: how to fill in the background after something
is removed and how to edit multiple objects while keeping
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3958

