The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DoGA: Enhancing Grounded Object Detection
via Grouped Pre-Training with Attributes
Yang Liu1,2 * , Feng Hou1,2 * , Yunjie Peng3 * , Gangjian Zhang4 , Yao Zhang4 , Dong Xie4 ,
†
Peng Wang4 , Yang Zhang4 , Jiang Tian4 , Zhongchao Shi4 , Jianping Fan4 , Zhiqiang He1,2,5
1

Institute of Computing Technology (ICT), Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
Beihang University,
4
AI Lab, Lenovo Research,
5
Lenovo Ltd.
{liuyang20c, houfeng19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yunjiepeng@buaa.edu.cn, hezq@lenovo.com

Abstract

in COCO (Lin et al. 2014), failing to perceive a diverse range
of visual concepts in an open world. Following the emerging vision-language pre-training approaches (Radford et al.
2021; Jia et al. 2021), GLIP (Li et al. 2022) considers object
detection as a grounding problem and leverages additional
grounding phrases to facilitate the alignment between visual
embeddings and language prompts of objects. The following
studies (Liu et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022)
further demonstrate the efficacy of grounded pre-training.
Ideally, genuine vision-language detectors should generalize arbitrary linguistic comprehension and accurately locate objects/instances based on the given language prompts.
Nevertheless, aligning with rudimentary language prompts
(i.e., plain category names, and concise grounding phrases)
restricts the model within a coarse-grained level of linguistic comprehension and consequently confuses the model in
complicated open-vocabulary detection. For example, even
the highly generalized pre-trained detector (Liu et al. 2023)
still experiences significant performance deterioration when
subjected to categories having fine-grained level descriptions (the AP degrades from 48.2 to 19.2, see Figure 3).
As shown in Figure 1(c), contextual definition leads to a
mount of inferior boxes with incorrect categories. Furthermore, such rudimentary descriptions also lead to hallucinations and a large sensitivity in referring expression comprehension. As shown in Figure 1(d), when facing the confused
prompt, the existing pre-trained detector easily neglects the
specific contextual details and cursorily detects the “black
cat” and “wooden chair” with relatively high scores.
To alleviate these problems, we propose DoGA, a novel
vision-language detector through grouped pre-training with
various attributes. The attribute feature offers two advantages: 1) semantic connection builds the explicit commonality for the same category entity (intra-class compactness)
and assists in identifying the different categories (inter-class
separation); and 2) instance specificity describes and represents different individuals within a same entity. Specifically,
DoGA is characterized by three core designs:
1) Attribute-based definitions and hard-negative concepts

Recent advances in vision-language pre-training have significantly enhanced the model capabilities in open-vocabulary
object detection. However, these studies often pre-train with
coarse-grained text prompts, such as plain category names
and brief grounded phrases. This limitation curtails the
model’s capacity for fine-grained linguistic comprehension
and leads to a significant decline in performance when
faced with detailed descriptions or contextual information.
To tackle these problems, we propose DoGA: Detect objects
with Grouped Attributes, which employs commonly apparent
attributes to bridge different granular semantics and uses specific attributes to identify the object discrepancy. Our DoGA
incorporates three principal components: 1) Generation of
attribute-based prompts, consisting of linguistic definitions
enriched with common-sense visible attributes and hard negative notations derived from the image-specific attribute features; 2) Paralleled entity fusion and optimization, designed
to manage long attribute-based descriptions and negative concepts efficiently; and 3) Prompt-wise grouped training to accommodate model to perform many-to-many assignments,
facilitating to process multiple attribute-based synonyms. Extensive experiments demonstrate that training with synonymous attribute-based prompts allows DoGA to generalize
multi-granular prompts and surpass previous state-of-the-art
approaches, yielding 50.2 on the COCO and 38.0 on the LVIS
benchmarks under the zero-shot setting.

Code — https://github.com/liuyang-ict/DoGA

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision,
aiming to recognize and localize each object from input images. Traditional detectors are mostly constrained to a closed
set of categories defined by training data, e.g., 80 categories
* This work was done when working as an intern at AI Lab,
Lenovo Research, Beijing, China.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5658

