The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Unified Framework for Human-Allied Learning of Probabilistic Circuits
Athresh Karanam* , Saurabh Mathur* , Sahil Sidheekh* , Sriraam Natarajan
The University of Texas at Dallas
{Athresh.Karanam, SaurabhSanjay.Mathur, Sahil.Sidheekh, Sriraam.Natarajan}@utdallas.edu

Abstract

Domain experts can provide invaluable insights that go beyond the raw data, grounded in experience and contextual
understanding. This knowledge can not only mitigate the
risk of overfitting without sacrificing expressive power but
also tailor models to specific domain constraints. For instance, fairness and privileged information might be crucial
factors in real-world decision-making, requiring models to
incorporate such constraints. Knowledge-intensive learning
strategies have demonstrably enhanced both discriminative
and generative models in various contexts (Kokel et al. 2020;
Odom et al. 2015; Altendorf, Restificar, and Dietterich 2005;
de Campos, Tong, and Ji 2008; Yang and Natarajan 2013;
Mathur, Gogate, and Natarajan 2023). These models perform more reliably in scenarios with limited or suboptimal
data. However, the concept of integrating human expertise
and domain knowledge remains relatively unexplored in the
context of the general class of PCs.
This work addresses this problem by introducing a framework for incorporating domain knowledge into PC learning. We first develop a unified framework that allows encoding various types of knowledge as probabilistic domain
constraints. A key aspect of our work is that we can model
any constraint as long as its violation can be measured
by a differentiable function. We then demonstrate how
some of these constraints, including equality constraints for
generalization and privileged information, and inequality
constraints for handling class imbalance, monotonicity, and
variable interactions, can be seamlessly integrated into PC
learning. Our method can be interpreted as frustratingly
easy as with Shi et al. (2022), however, it works well and
is generalizable, precisely why simpler learning methods
should be favored over unnecessarily complex ones (Rudin
et al. 2024; Rudin 2019). This approach makes PCs more
adaptable to real-world scenarios with limited data and specific modeling requirements. The key tenets of our framework are (1) Expressivity - allowing incorporation of a wide
variety of well-known domain knowledge, (2) Effectiveness
- consistently improving model performance by leveraging
the domain knowledge and (3) Simplicity - allowing domain
experts to easily quantify their domain knowledge through
equality and inequality constraints.
We make the following key contributions:(1) We propose
a unified framework that subsumes several types of domain
knowledge and allows encoding them as domain constraints

Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) have emerged as an efficient framework for representing and learning complex
probability distributions. Nevertheless, the existing body
of research on PCs predominantly concentrates on datadriven parameter learning, often neglecting the potential
of knowledge-intensive learning, a particular issue in datascarce/knowledge-rich domains such as healthcare. To bridge
this gap, we propose a novel unified framework that can
systematically integrate diverse domain knowledge into the
parameter learning process of PCs. Experiments on several
benchmarks as well as real-world datasets show that our proposed framework can both effectively and efficiently leverage domain knowledge to achieve superior performance compared to purely data-driven learning approaches.

Code — https://github.com/athresh/unified-constraints-pc/

Introduction
Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) have emerged as powerful tools
for representing complex probability distributions. Their key
advantage is enabling efficient and exact probabilistic inference (Choi, Vergari, and Van den Broeck 2020). Recent work has focused on improving PC expressivity, and
allowing them to compete with deep generative models
(DGMs) (Peharz et al. 2020a; Liu, Zhang, and den Broeck
2023; Correia et al. 2023; Sidheekh, Kersting, and Natarajan 2023). However, similar to DGMs, this data-driven approach often leads to models that are highly reliant on large
datasets, make strong assumptions, and are susceptible to
outliers (Ventola et al. 2023). Purely data-driven PCs often
struggle in data-scarce and noisy domains, exhibiting overfitting and reduced generalizability. While traditional techniques like regularization can address overfitting to some extent, they often do so by introducing strong and sometimes
arbitrary assumptions about the data distribution (Domingos
1999). This can limit the model’s ability to capture the true
underlying relationships between variables.
Incorporating domain knowledge and expert insights into
PC learning offers a compelling solution to these problems.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17779

