The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Compact Model for Mathematics Problem Representations Distilled from BERT
Hao Ming1 , Xinguo Yu1,2 * , Xiaotian Cheng1,2 , Zhenquan Shen1 , Xiaopan Lyu1
1

2

Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China
Central China Normal University Wollongong Joint Institute, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China
{hming, xgyu}@ccnu.edu.cn, xiaotiancheng@mails.ccnu.edu.cn, {shenzhenquan, xiaopanlv}@ccnu.edu.cn

Abstract

to develop high-quality MWP solvers (Qin et al. 2021),
owing to their effective semantic representation and massive knowledge. However, due to the large parameter sizes
and high latency, LLMs are often unsuitable for resourceconstrained environments, such as the Internet of Things
(IoTs) and small intelligent devices, which hinders their
practical applications (Kok, Demirci, and Ozdemir 2024).
Low-resource areas, especially in the education underdeveloped countries, have a greater need for lightweight models.
Knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015)
is an effective approach to model compression and has
developed rapidly due to its efficacy in practical applications. Knowledge distillation involves transferring knowledge from a larger model (teacher) to a smaller one (student). Recently, task-agnostic knowledge distillation (Wang
et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2020a) has been developed to construct
compact models that can replace LLMs in general natural
language processing tasks. These models are trained without task-specific data and do not require fine-tuning of the
teacher model. However, student models often fail to learn
sufficient knowledge from LLMs, and their performance on
specific downstream tasks remains unsatisfactory even after fine-tuning. This issue may also arise in MWP solving,
as the experimental results in this paper further confirm this
inference. Successful attempts have been made to develop
compact models in the fields of biomedicine and clinical
applications (Rohanian et al. 2023). However, a compact
model for MWP representations has not been reported yet,
and no dedicated distillation strategy has been considered.
MWPs have unique symbols and linguistic representations of mathematics relationships, therefore, it is crucial
to conduct task-specific distillation focused on mathematics representations and to design specialized knowledge
types and distillation strategies. Within the studies of MWP
solvers, it has been found that the part of speech (POS) and
their combinations might encode underlying mathematical
relations (Yu et al. 2023). Consequently, POS knowledge
could be a fundamental basis for understanding MWPs. Inspired by this method, we propose a distillation approach
that leverages POS pretraining and thoroughly explores the
knowledge types and distillation strategies specifically for
MWP representations. In this work, a compact model dedicated to MWP representation is proposed. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

Large language models (LLMs) have made significant advancements in math problem solving, but their large size
and high latency render them impractical for real-world applications in intelligent mathematics solvers. Recently, taskagnostic compact models have been developed to replace
LLMs in general natural language processing tasks. However, these models often struggle to acquire sufficient mathrelated knowledge from LLMs, leading to unsatisfactory performance in solving math word problems (MWPs). To develop a specialized compact model for representing MWPs,
we develop the knowledge distillation (KD) technique to extract mathematical semantics knowledge from the large pretrained model BERT. Effective knowledge types and distillation strategies are explored through extensive experiments.
Our KD algorithm employs multi-knowledge distillation to
extract fundamental knowledge from hidden states in the middle to lower layers, while also incorporating knowledge of
mathematical relations and symbol constraints from higherlayer outputs and math decoder outputs, by leveraging bottleneck networks. Pre-training tasks on MWP datasets, such as
masked language modeling and part-of-speech tagging, are
also utilized to enhance the generalization of the compact
model for MWP understanding. Additionally, a simple parameter mixing strategy is employed to prevent catastrophic
forgetting of acquired knowledge. Our findings indicate that
our approach can reduce the size of a BERT model by 10%
while retaining approximately 95% of its performance on
MWP datasets, outperforming the mainstream BERT-based
task-agnostic compact models. The efficacy of each component has been validated through ablation studies.

Introduction
Solving Math Word Problems (MWPs) automatically has
the potential to significantly advance both the development
and application of intelligent math education. Large pretrained language models (LLMs) (Peters et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019) have achieved remarkable success in many
natural language processing tasks, benefiting from extensive
parameters and training on large-scale corpora. Recently,
LLMs have continuously improved their mathematical capabilities, and many of them have been successfully employed
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24867

