The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Both Supply and Precision: Sample Debias and Ranking Consistency
Joint Learning for Large Scale Pre-Ranking System
Feng Gao1 , Xin Zhou1 , Yinning Shao2,1 * , Yue Wu1 , Jiahua Gao1 , Yujian Ren1 , Fengyang Qi1 ,
Ruochen Deng1 , Jie Liu1
1

Sina Weibo Inc.
Tongji University, China
{gaofeng15, zhouxin6, wuyue7, yujian7, fengyang7, ruochen, liujie20}@staff.weibo.com,
yinningshao@tongji.edu.cn, jiahua3@staff.sina.com
2

Abstract

ranking and re-ranking stages, and finally best tens of items
will be displayed to the user. The items ranked at pre-ranking
stage is on ten orders of magnitude greater than the ranking stage. To ensure system efficiency, the pre-ranking stage
usually adopts vector-product based model (Huang et al.
2013) or interaction based model (Wang et al. 2020) with
lighter network architecture and fewer features. In recent
years, most researchers mainly focus on improving model
expressive power via feature interaction enhancement, feature selection, network compression, distillation (Li et al.
2022a; Ma et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022b; Xu et al. 2020) based
on these two model paradigms. However, little research has
been done for Sample Selection Bias (SSB) and Ranking
Consistency (RC) problems at pre-ranking stage.
The SSB problem is caused by the inconsistency between
the training and inference data space. As shown in Figure 1, matching and pre-ranking serve as the initial stage
in the cascade ranking architecture, where their inference
data spaces, D0 and D1 , are significantly larger in magnitude compared to the data space of training, D4 , which
is the data exposed to users. This means the data distribution during training is far different from that during inference. Consequently, the online ranking score of the data unseen during training will be lack of reliability. Specifically,
some low-quality items may get high ranking score and then
forwarded to the ranking stage, which will result in suboptimal performances. A practical recipe for resolving the
SSB problem is negative sampling. (Covington, Adams, and
Sargin 2016) ensures the consistency between training and
inference phases by randomly sampling negatives from the
whole item pool (Item Pool in Figure 1), (Gillick et al. 2019)
employs a sampling method in training batches where for
each user, positive samples from other users within the same
batch are used as negative samples for that user. Moreover,
(Huang et al. 2020) proposes to mix up randomly negative
sampling and hard negative mining for sample optimization.
(Song et al. 2022) randomly sampling negatives from nonexposure of pre-ranking D2 ∩ D̄4 and non-pre-ranking of
matching D1 ∩ D̄2 . Those works ignore data flow among
stages and treat all negative samples equally in the final loss,
although proving effective, this strategy is not optimal.
Apart from SSB problem, the pre-ranking stage also suffers from RC problem owing to the differences in ranking
quality between the pre-ranking and ranking stages. Com-

Cascade ranking architecture, composed of matching, preranking, ranking and re-ranking stages, is usually adopted
to balance the efficiency and effectiveness in real-world recommendation system (RS). As the middle stage of RS, preranking aims to quickly filter out the low-quality items selected at the matching stage and then forwarding high-quality
items to the ranking stage. Existing pre-ranking approaches
mainly endure two problems 1) Sample Selection Bias (SSB)
problem, which heavily limits the performance improvement
of filtering out low-quality items owing to ignoring the data
flow between stages; and 2) Ranking Consistency (RC) problem, which may cause the ranked lists of the ranking stage
and previous pre-ranking stage to be inconsistent. As a result,
the competitive items with high scores at the ranking stage
may not be selected because of low scores at the pre-ranking
stage. These both two problems may cause sub-optimal performances, but previous works usually only focus on the one
of them. In this paper, we propose a novel Sample Debias
and Ranking Consistency Joint Learning Framework (SDCL)
to jointly alleviate SSB and RC problems. SDCL consists of
two main modules including 1) Multi-Task Distillation Module (MTD), which enhances the ability of identifying highquality items by distilling knowledge across all tasks simultaneously from the more complex ranking model which jointly
trained with the pre-ranking model; and 2) Adaptive Negative Sample Learning Module (ANSL), which improves the
performance of filtering out low-quality items by adaptively
adjusting negative samples learning weights based on the
current performance of model. SDCL seamlessly integrates
two modules in an end-to-end multi-task learning framework.
Evaluations on both real-world large-scale traffic logs and
online A/B test demonstrate the efficacy and superiority of
SDCL.

Introduction
Weibo homepage recommendation, the largest feed recommendation system in China, is a typical multi-stage cascade
ranking architecture, as illustrated in Figure 1. Each stage
takes different magnitude of items, ranks these items and
then feeds top ones to the next stage. The pre-ranking stage
needs to select thousands of items from the matching output
set, these selected items subsequently ranked by following
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11672

