The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Debiased Multimodal Understanding for Human Language Sequences
Zhi Xu1 * , Dingkang Yang1 * † , Mingcheng Li1 , Yuzheng Wang1 , Zhaoyu Chen1 ,
Jiawei Chen1 , Jinjie Wei1 , Lihua Zhang1,2,3‡
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Institute of Metaverse & Intelligent Medicine, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{zhixu20, dkyang20}@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

exploiting representation learning architectures (Yang et al.
2022a; Liang et al. 2021b) and fusion strategies (Tsai et al.
2019; Lv et al. 2021), they invariably suffer from a prediction bias when applied to testing samples of new subjects.
The harmful prediction bias is mainly caused by the subject variation problem. Specifically, different subjects’ expression styles and behaviours (e.g., facial expressions or
acoustic information) from the training data are highly idiosyncratic in social communication, affected by the subjects’ customs or culture (Li and Deng 2020). Once welldesigned models are trained on such data, subject-specific
semantic correlations (e.g., particular facial action unit cooccurrence (Chen et al. 2022)) would inexorably affect performance and generalizability. Worse still, the spurious connections between the trained models and specific subjects
will be transmitted via multiple modalities when the data
paradigm is extended from isolated to multimodal situations.
Recall the prominent MLU benchmarks (e.g., MOSI (Zadeh
et al. 2016) for sentiment analysis or UR FUNNY (Hasan
et al. 2019) for humor detection), whose collectors advocated video-level data splitting so that segments from the
same video will not appear across train, valid, and test splits.
Although the trained models may avoid memorizing the average affective state of a subject (Liang et al. 2021a), they
cannot generalize well across new subjects. The examples
in Figure 1 provide strong evidence of this. Concretely, subjects 1, 2, and 3 tend to use sentimentally unimportant words
“but” and “just” to express negative emotions. In this case,
the MLU model (Li, Wang, and Cui 2023) is misled to focus on spurious clues from the textual utterances of the subjects and make an entirely incorrect prediction when applied
to subject 4. Similar observations are found in the visual
and audio modalities. For instance, the trained model erroneously takes subject-specific facial appearances (e.g., “grimace and pursed mouth” from subjects 1 and 2) and acoustic behaviours (e.g., “agitated tone” from subjects 2 and 3)
as semantic shortcuts to infer frustrating negative sentiment.
Motivated by the above observations, this paper aims
to improve MLU methods by causal demystification rather
than beating them. We propose a Subject Causal Intervention module (SuCI) to disentangle the impact of semantic
differences among subjects from multimodal expressions.
Specifically, we first formulate a universal causal graph to
analyze the MLU procedure and interpret the causalities

Human multimodal language understanding (MLU) is an indispensable component of expression analysis (e.g., sentiment or humor) from heterogeneous modalities, including visual postures, linguistic contents, and acoustic behaviours.
Existing works invariably focus on designing sophisticated
structures or fusion strategies to achieve impressive improvements. Unfortunately, they all suffer from the subject variation problem due to data distribution discrepancies among
subjects. Concretely, MLU models are easily misled by distinct subjects with different expression customs and characteristics in the training data to learn subject-specific spurious
correlations, limiting performance and generalizability across
new subjects. Motivated by this observation, we introduce a
recapitulative causal graph to formulate the MLU procedure
and analyze the confounding effect of subjects. Then, we propose SuCI, a simple yet effective causal intervention module
to disentangle the impact of subjects acting as unobserved
confounders and achieve model training via true causal effects. As a plug-and-play component, SuCI can be widely applied to most methods that seek unbiased predictions. Comprehensive experiments on several MLU benchmarks clearly
show the effectiveness of the proposed module.

Introduction
As a research hotspot that combines linguistic and nonverbal behaviours (e.g., visual and acoustic modalities), human multimodal language understanding (MLU) has attracted significant attention from computer vision (Yang
et al. 2022a), natural language processing (Tian et al. 2022),
and speech recognition communities (Yang et al. 2022b,d) in
recent years. Thanks to the progressive development of multimodal language benchmarks (Hasan et al. 2019; Zadeh and
Pu 2018; Zadeh et al. 2016), extensive studies (Rahman et al.
2020; Han, Chen, and Poria 2021; Liu et al. 2018; Yu et al.
2021; Tsai et al. 2019; Liang et al. 2021b; Lv et al. 2021;
Pham et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2022; Lei et al. 2023) have presented impressive multimodal models on training data containing distinct subjects, diverse topics, and different modalities. Despite the achievements of previous approaches by
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Project lead.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

14450

