The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Linear Equations with Min and Max Operators: Computational Complexity
Krishnendu Chatterjee1 , Ruichen Luo1 , Raimundo Saona1 , Jakub Svoboda1
1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria
Am Campus 1
Klosterneuburg, 3400 Austria
krishnendu.chatterjee@ist.ac.at, rluo@ist.ac.at, raimundo.saona@gmail.com, jakub.svoboda@ist.ac.at

Abstract

max operators. Since linear equalities are very basic operations, and min and max operators are the most fundamental optimization operators, this corresponds to a very natural
class of optimization problems, for example, this is a natural
generalization of linear equations with Boolean variables.

We consider a class of optimization problems defined by a
system of linear equations with min and max operators. This
class of optimization problems has been studied under restrictive conditions, such as, (C1) the halting or stability condition; (C2) the non-negative coefficients condition; (C3) the
sum up to 1 condition; and (C4) the only min or only max operator condition. Several seminal results in the literature focus
on special cases. For example, turn-based stochastic games
correspond to conditions C2 and C3; and Markov decision
process to conditions C2, C3, and C4. However, the systematic computational complexity study of all the cases has not
been explored, which we address in this work. Some highlights of our results are: with conditions C2 and C4, and with
conditions C3 and C4, the problem is NP-complete, whereas
with condition C1 only, the problem is in UP intersects coUP.
Finally, we establish the computational complexity of the decision problem of checking the respective conditions.

Restrictive Conditions. Given the generality of the above
class, the associated decision problems are computationally
hard. Hence, several natural sub-classes of the above optimization problem have been studied in the literature and we
first recall the restrictive conditions: (C1) the halting or the
stability condition; (C2) the non-negative coefficients condition; (C3) the sum up to 1 condition; and (C4) the min-only
or max-only operator condition. Condition C1 has a natural interpretation in Markov chains, Markov Decision Processes, and Stochastic Games as a geometric convergence to
termination irrespective of the action of the players. See Section 3 for concrete examples illustrating all these conditions.
For example, in the example “co-evolution in ecosystem”,
condition C1 is equivalent to the condition that all species
will go extinct when there is no external intervention.

Extended version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12228

1

Classical Complexity Results from the Literature. Several
seminal results consider subsets of the above conditions.
First, conditions C2 and C3 together represent stochasticity or probability distributions. With these two conditions
and both max and min operators, we obtain the very wellstudied class of simple stochastic games (SSGs). SSGs have
been studied in the seminal work of Condon (1992) as an
important sub-class of Shapley games (Shapley 1953). The
computational problem of SSGs is known to be in NP ∩
CO NP (Condon 1992), as well as UP ∩ CO UP 1 (Chatterjee
and Fijalkow 2011). The existence of polynomial-time algorithms for SSGs is a major and long-standing open problem in game theory. We mention a problem is SSG-hard if
there is a polynomial-time reduction from the SSGs; hence
for SSG-hard problems polynomial-time algorithms require
a major breakthrough. If we have conditions C2, C3, and C4,
then this corresponds to the class of Markov decision processes (MDPs), where there is a single player, as opposed
to SSGs where there are two adversarial players. Hence, un-

Introduction

Optimization Problems. Optimization problems are in the
core of most applications of artificial intelligence. Prominent
examples include: learning algorithms, where stochastic gradient descent approaches are fundamental (Bottou 2010);
game theory, where the connection between matrix games
and linear programming was established in the seminal work
of von Neumann and Morgenstern; sequential decision making, where the solution is obtained via Markov decision processes which can be solved via linear programming (Puterman 2014). Hence, understanding the computational complexity of different classes of optimization problems is a
fundamental question in artificial intelligence and learning
and an active research area, for example, linear programming (Dantzig 2002), convex optimization (Nesterov 2013),
semi-definite programming (Gärtner and Matousek 2012),
to name a few.
Linear Equations with Min and Max Operators. In this
work, we consider the class of optimization problems defined by a system of linear equations along with min and

1
A language is in UP (or CO UP) if a given Y ES (or N O) answer
can be verified in polynomial time, and the verifier machine only
accepts at most one answer for each problem instance (Hemaspaandra and Rothe 1997).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11150

