The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Braess’s Paradox of Generative AI
Boaz Taitler, Omer Ben-Porat
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
boaztaitler@campus.technion.ac.il, omerbp@technion.ac.il

Abstract
ChatGPT has established Generative AI (GenAI) as a significant technological advancement. However, GenAI’s intricate
relationship with competing platforms and its downstream impact on users remains under-explored. This paper initiates the
study of GenAI’s long-term social impact resulting from the
weakening network effect of human-based platforms like Stack
Overflow. First, we study GenAI’s revenue-maximization optimization problem. We develop an approximately optimal
solution and show that the optimal solution has a non-cyclic
structure. Then, we analyze the social impact, showing that
GenAI could be socially harmful. Specifically, we present an
analog to Braess’s paradox in which all users would be better
off without GenAI. Finally, we develop necessary and sufficient conditions for a regulator with incomplete information
to ensure that GenAI is socially beneficial.

1

Introduction

ChatGPT has made Generative AI (GenAI) a household
name, capturing the attention of the general public as the
first fully operational GenAI (Naveed et al. 2023; Chang
et al. 2023). Its widespread adoption stems from its capability to generate coherent texts and answer complex queries,
showcasing human-like performance and even surpassing
it (Katz et al. 2024). Beyond mere functionality, GenAI has
revolutionized various applications, ranging from automating
customer service interactions to facilitating creative writing
endeavors. This transformative impact is underpinned by
GenAI’s strengths, which are attributed to an extensive corpus used during its training phase, encompassing many fields
and languages.
In contrast to those benefits, there is a growing body of
work raising various concerns regarding GenAI, such as biases (Abid, Farooqi, and Zou 2021), abusive and inappropriate content (Solaiman et al. 2023), and negative effects on
users’ behavior (Dvorak et al. 2024; Abbas, Jam, and Khan
2024). On top of those concerns, frequent training on highquality data is a major issue (Chen, Zaharia, and Zou 2023).
Updated training data is crucial to the quality of GenAI’s
answers, necessitating the continual incorporation of new
data to reflect current trends and changes.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14139

To illustrate, consider ChatGPT and Stack Overflow as
competing platforms. ChatGPT utilizes the questions and
answers on Stack Overflow as its training data, providing
users with a quick answer tailored to their questions. Consequently, users shift towards ChatGPT and neglect Stack
Overflow as a forum for their queries (as witnessed by recent
work (del Rio-Chanona, Laurentsyeva, and Wachs 2023)).
Over time, without additional training, the absence of fresh
training data hampers ChatGPT’s ability to provide accurate
responses about new programming packages, while the diminished user activity on Stack Overflow affects both the
volume and quality of answers available on the platform.
This harmful combination negatively impacts the welfare of
users, who suffer from outdated information and a lack of
engagement in previously thriving community forums.
While the literature on ChatGPT and, more broadly, GenAI
grows at an exponentially rapid pace, most of the research
on ChatGPT since its release has focused on its performance (Frieder et al. 2024; Kocoń et al. 2023; Chen, Zaharia,
and Zou 2023) and its applications across diverse domains
(Kasneci et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024). However, research
has allocated scant attention, if any, to its social impacts
concerning its intricate relationship with other competing
platforms. Although GenAI is unanimously useful, its social
impact prompts a critical research question: Is the existence
of GenAI as Q&A platforms genuinely beneficial to its users,
or would they be better off without it? Specifically, is the way
we use GenAI socially beneficial in the long term?
Our contribution This paper initiates the study on GenAI’s
long-term social impact due to the weakening network effect
of human-based platforms like Stack Overflow. We propose
a sequential model that includes two platforms: A generative AI-powered service we term GenAI, and a human-based
forum called Forum in which users can ask questions and answer questions of others. In our model, GenAI gains revenue
from increased user traffic and incurs training and maintenance costs. GenAI chooses a training scheme: Strategically
deciding in which rounds to train on fresh data. In contrast,
Forum is a passive (i.e., non-strategic). A population of users
utilizes GenAI and Forum. We assume that user utility from
GenAI decreases between training rounds. We further assume
that Forum has a network effect: User utility increases as the
proportion of users using it rises. In our model, users choose

