The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dense Audio-Visual Event Localization under
Cross-Modal Consistency and Multi-Temporal Granularity Collaboration
Ziheng Zhou1 , Jinxing Zhou1 * , Wei Qian1 , Shengeng Tang1 , Xiaojun Chang2,3 , Dan Guo1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
zzhhfut@gmail.com, zhoujxhfut@gmail.com, guodan@hfut.edu.cn
Abstract
…

In the field of audio-visual learning, most research tasks focus
exclusively on short videos. This paper focuses on the more
practical Dense Audio-Visual Event Localization (DAVEL)
task, advancing audio-visual scene understanding for longer,
untrimmed videos. This task seeks to identify and temporally
pinpoint all events simultaneously occurring in both audio
and visual streams. Typically, each video encompasses dense
events of multiple classes, which may overlap on the timeline, each exhibiting varied durations. Given these challenges,
effectively exploiting the audio-visual relations and the temporal features encoded at various granularities becomes crucial.
To address these challenges, we introduce a novel CCNet,
comprising two core modules: the Cross-Modal Consistency
Collaboration (CMCC) and the Multi-Temporal Granularity
Collaboration (MTGC). Specifically, the CMCC module contains two branches: a cross-modal interaction branch and a temporal consistency-gated branch. The former branch facilitates
the aggregation of consistent event semantics across modalities through the encoding of audio-visual relations, while the
latter branch guides one modality’s focus to pivotal eventrelevant temporal areas as discerned in the other modality.
The MTGC module includes a coarse-to-fine collaboration
block and a fine-to-coarse collaboration block, providing bidirectional support among coarse- and fine-grained temporal
features. Extensive experiments on the UnAV-100 dataset validate our module design, resulting in a new state-of-the-art
performance in dense audio-visual event localization.

0s

5s

…

10s

…

15s

20s

…

25s

…

30s

35s

40s

GT
A-E
V-E
tap dancing

man speaking

people slapping

Figure 1: Illustration of the Dense Audio-Visual Event Localization (DAVEL) task. The DAVEL task requires temporally
localizing the events that occur simultaneously in both audio
and visual tracks of untrimmed videos. These dense events
may overlap on the timeline and vary in duration. “GT” denotes the ground truth for audio-visual events, which are the
intersection of audio events (“A-E”) and visual events (“VE”).

Introduction
Hearing and vision are two crucial senses for humans in perceiving their surroundings. Within the research community,
recent years have seen a surge of interest in the joint exploration and comprehension of audio and visual signals, giving
rise to numerous audio-visual learning tasks. These include
audio-visual event localization (Tian et al. 2018b; Zhou et al.
2024a) and video parsing (Tian, Li, and Xu 2020; Zhou et al.
2023, 2024b,c; Gao, Chen, and Xu 2023; Zhao et al. 2024),
sound source localization (Senocak et al. 2021; Hu, Nie, and
Li 2019; Qian et al. 2020) and segmentation (Zhou et al. 2022,
2024d; Mao et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023; Guo
et al. 2023), audio-visual question answering (Lao et al. 2023;
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10905

Li et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024a,b; Li, Hou,
and Hu 2023) and captioning (Tian et al. 2018a; Iashin and
Rahtu 2020; Mao et al. 2024; Shen et al. 2023), etc. However,
the majority of these tasks have predominantly focused on
trimmed videos of short durations, commonly 5s or 10s.
In this paper, we focus on a more realistic task termed
Dense Audio-Visual Event Localization (DAVEL) (Geng
et al. 2023), which concentrates on the scene understanding
of long, untrimmed audible videos. Notably, the DAVEL can
be considered an extension of the existing audio-visual event
localization (AVEL) (Tian et al. 2018b) task. Both tasks aim
to identify and temporally localize the audio-visual events,
events occurring in both audio and visual tracks. The key
difference is that the AVEL focuses on short videos (fixed at
10s) where each video contains only a specific event class. In
contrast, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the DAVEL task addresses
untrimmed videos, with an average length of 42.1s for the
official UnAV-100 (Geng et al. 2023) dataset. Furthermore,
each video usually contains dense events, and events from
multiple classes can temporally overlap, indicating the event’s
co-occurrence. More importantly, the AVEL is formulated
as a segment-level classification problem, while the DAVEL
seeks to precisely regress the start and end timestamps of each

