The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

InvSeg: Test-Time Prompt Inversion for Semantic Segmentation
Jiayi Lin1 , Jiabo Huang2 , Jian Hu1 , Shaogang Gong1
1

Queen Mary University of London
2
Sony AI
{jiayi.lin, jian.hu, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk, raymond.huang@sony.com

Abstract
Visual-textual correlations in the attention maps derived from
text-to-image diffusion models are proven beneficial to dense
visual prediction tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation. However,
a significant challenge arises due to the input distributional
discrepancy between the context-rich sentences used for image generation and the isolated class names typically used
in semantic segmentation. This discrepancy hinders diffusion
models from capturing accurate visual-textual correlations. To
solve this, we propose InvSeg, a test-time prompt inversion
method that tackles open-vocabulary semantic segmentation
by inverting image-specific visual context into text prompt
embedding space, leveraging structure information derived
from the diffusion model’s reconstruction process to enrich
text prompts so as to associate each class with a structureconsistent mask. Specifically, we introduce Contrastive Soft
Clustering (CSC) to align derived masks with the image’s
structure information, softly selecting anchors for each class
and calculating weighted distances to push inner-class pixels closer while separating inter-class pixels, thereby ensuring mask distinction and internal consistency. By incorporating sample-specific context, InvSeg learns context-rich text
prompts in embedding space and achieves accurate semantic
alignment across modalities. Experiments show that InvSeg
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the PASCAL VOC,
PASCAL Context and COCO Object datasets.

input image

person

woman

a person in
a red jacket

I ("person")

ground truth

input image

bus

buses

double decker
buses

I ("bus")

ground truth

Prompt Inversion

(a) Comparison of segmentation results for “ person ” or “ bus ”
using text prompts with different levels of image-specific details.

<begin>

“grass”

“horse”

<begin> 𝑰(“grass”) 𝑰(“horse”)

“tree”

…

Stable Diffusion

input image

𝑰(“tree”)

…

InvSeg

ground truth

(b) Overall process of InvSeg. We exploit the structural information from image to enrich the original isolated class names (top)
into image-specific text prompt which derives more accurate
segmentation results (bottom).

Figure 1: Motivation of test-time prompt inversion.
is costly and the performance can be limited when generalizing to new scenarios under distribution shifts. Therefore, to
eliminate the need for expensive pixel-level annotation and
achieve better generalization ability, several unsupervised
approaches (Tian et al. 2023; Karazija et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2023) are proposed and have achieved notable results.
However, most current unsupervised approaches (Tian et al.
2023; Karazija et al. 2023) solely use isolated class names
as the text prompt for diffusion models, which ignores the
distributional discrepancy between the isolated class names
for visual perception and descriptive, context-rich sentences
used for image generation. This discrepancy in input text
richness can hinder the performance of diffusion models in
semantic segmentation, where precise image-text correlations
is required. Although some approaches (Wang et al. 2023)
enrich the class name by combining it with other descriptive
text of current class, this process is cumbersome and may
not always derive to satisfying output. As in our preliminary
study (Fig. 1a), we evaluate text prompts with varying levels
of sample-specific information: original class name, sample-

Project Page — https://jylin8100.github.io/InvSegProject

Introduction
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation (OVSS) aims to
divide an image into several semantically consistent regions,
corresponding to label names in a large, unrestricted vocabulary. Recently, thanks to visual-textual correlation ability
learned from large scale image-text pairs, stable diffusion
models (Rombach et al. 2022) have shown substantial potential in open vocabulary semantic segmentation. Some approaches employ the stable diffusion model for generating
pseudo labels (Wu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024; Li et al.
2023; Xiao et al. 2023) or use it as a feature extractor for further training a segmenter (Xu et al. 2023b). However, among
these approaches, the process of collecting per-pixel labels
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5245

