The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Data Augmentation Approaches for Satellite Imagery
Laurel M. Hopkins1 , Weng-Keen Wong1 , Hannah Kerner2 , Fuxin Li1 , Rebecca A. Hutchinson1
1

Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281
{hopkilau,wongwe}@oregonstate.edu, hkerner@asu.edu, {lif,rah}@oregonstate.edu
2

Abstract

One limitation to more widespread modeling of satellite
imagery is the lack of annotated labels. While satellite data
archives greatly outweigh the amount of data in “large” machine learning datasets, satellite data paired with groundtruth labels is scarce (Rolf et al. 2024) and collecting more
data is costly in time and/or financially (Zhu et al. 2018).
Methods designed for small datasets and methods that do
not require labeled data have been applied to satellite imagery, such as transfer learning (Jean et al. 2016), representation learning (Jean et al. 2019; Neumann et al. 2019;
Rolf et al. 2021; Klemmer et al. 2023), meta-learning (Tseng
et al. 2021), and more recently, foundation models (Tseng
et al. 2023; Lacoste et al. 2024; Stewart et al. 2024). An alternative method for handling the lack of annotated data is
data augmentation.
To date, data augmentation methods for images have
largely been developed for natural imagery (i.e., images
that compose common computer vision datasets like ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and CIFAR (Krizhevsky, Hinton
et al. 2009)). Many of these data augmentation strategies involve transforming the colors and/or geometry of the images. However, the differences between natural and satellite images may complicate direct transfer of such methods
to satellite imagery. For example, some operations common
to natural image data augmentation distort topology (e.g.,
shear), which may be undesirable for satellite imagery (Yu
et al. 2017). Modifying spectral intensities for satellite imagery has been discouraged as certain tasks may rely on
the absolute pixel values (i.e., spectral information may be
more sensitive to changes in satellite images than natural
images) (Neumann et al. 2019; Hao et al. 2023). Moreover,
many color-distorting operations are only defined for 3-band
images, which renders them useless on datasets with more
than three spectral channels (i.e., multi- and hyperspectral
images) (Stewart et al. 2024). There is currently no consensus on which image data augmentation strategies to use
for satellite imagery (Hao et al. 2023; Lacoste et al. 2024);
many studies use simple geometric transformations such as
flipping, rotating, and occasionally translating and random
cropping (Yu et al. 2017; Neumann et al. 2019; Abdelhack
2020; Lacoste et al. 2024).
In this paper, we experimentally compare data augmentation techniques on a variety of satellite imagery analysis
tasks. Our main contributions are:

Deep learning models commonly benefit from data augmentation techniques to diversify the set of training images. When
working with satellite imagery, it is common for practitioners
to apply a limited set of transformations developed for natural
images (e.g., flip and rotate) to expand the training set without overly modifying the satellite images. There are many
techniques for natural image data augmentation, but given the
differences between the two domains, it is not clear whether
data augmentation methods developed for natural images are
well suited for satellite imagery. This paper presents an extensive experimental study on three classification and three
regression tasks over four satellite image datasets. We compare common computer vision data augmentation techniques
and propose three novel satellite-specific data augmentation
strategies. Across tasks and datasets, we find that geometric transformations are beneficial for satellite imagery while
color transformations generally are not. Additionally, our
novel Sat-SlideMix, Sat-CutMix, and Sat-Trivial methods all
exhibit strong performance across all tasks and datasets.

Introduction
Machine learning allows us to harness satellite data for
a variety of applications with societal impact. For example, convolutional neural networks can analyze greenhouse
gas emissions detected in satellite images and detect where
large emissions are occurring (Rolnick et al. 2022). Machine learning models trained on satellite images in datarich areas can be transferred to data-scarce areas to inform socioeconomic indicators, such as poverty (Jean et al.
2016). Neural networks have the capacity to model complex interactions between species and their environments
which can be used to monitor biodiversity at large scales
(Chen et al. 2016; Davis et al. 2023). Population predictions
can be produced more frequently than censuses (Robinson,
Hohman, and Dilkina 2017). Predicting water quality from
satellite imagery has enabled higher-resolution (both spatial and temporal) mapping and monitoring compared to traditional methods (Peterson, Sagan, and Sloan 2020). Crop
type maps produced from satellite images in areas where
labeled data is scarce can aid in humanitarian efforts (You
et al. 2017; Kerner et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28097

