The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Knockoffs Inference for Partially Linear Models with Automatic Structure
Discovery
Hao Wang1 , Biqin Song1,2, * , Hao Deng1,2 , Hong Chen1, 2
1

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430062, China
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, Wuhan, China
hao wang@webmail.hzau.edu.cn, biqin.song@mail.hzau.edu.cn, dengh@mail.hzau.edu.cn, chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Variable selection for PLM has drawn extensive attention
over the past two decades. It has usually been studied by
using a specially designed penalty function under different
smooth regression conditions, such as the component selection and smoothing operator penalty (Lin and Zhang 2006),
the smoothly clipped absolute deviation penalty (Xie and
Huang 2009), and the doubly penalized procedure (Wang
et al. 2014a). Additional methods of variable selection for
PLM can be found in the works of Wang et al. (2014b); Su
and Candès (2016); Lian, Zhao, and Lv (2019); Lv and Lian
(2022). While these methods primarily focus on variable selection, they often lack control of error selections, such as
the false discovery rate (FDR).
One very recent approach for FDR control is knockoffs
which was first proposed by Barber and Candès (2015). The
key idea of knockoff is to construct fake variables which
have a similar structure to the original ones but have no effect on the response, then computing an importance score
for each variable and selecting those with higher scores than
their fake copies. This work achieved effective FDR control
in the context of Gaussian linear model, where the dimensionality d does not exceed the sample size n. The knockoff
filter was subsequently extended to high-dimensional linear
models with the help of data splitting and feature screening
techniques (Barber and Candès 2016). To achieve FDR control in general high dimensional nonlinear model, model-X
knockoff (Candès et al. 2018) was proposed. It can accommodate arbitrary dependence structure of the response variable y on input variables x and bypass the need of calculating accurate p-values. Fan et al. (2020) expanded model-X
knockoff to nonparametric additive model. Building on this
work, Xiaowu Dai and Li (2023) proposed a kernel knockoffs selection method. This allowed the knockoff approach
to be applied in more flexible, non-linear settings, beyond
the original linear model assumptions. Su et al. (2023) first
applied the generalized knockoffs framework for variable
selection in PLM, but it was a linear model by nature. As
far as we know, few existing works studies about knockoffs
inference for PLM with nonlinear settings.
The works described above have all accomplished FDR
control, but a few studies have conducted comprehensive
theoretical analysis for power as in (Fan et al. 2020; Weinstein et al. 2022). However, their power analysis was limited
to the linear model setting, and a more general theoretical

Partially linear models (PLM) have attracted much attention
in the field of statistical machine learning. Specially, the ability of variable selection of PLM has been studied extensively
due to the high requirement of model interpretability. However, few of the existing works concerns the false discovery rate (FDR) controllability of variable selection associated
with PLM. To address this issue, we formulate a new Knockoffs Inference scheme for Linear And Nonlinear Discoverer
(called KI-LAND), where FDR is controlled with respect to
both linear and nonlinear variables for automatic structure
discovery. For the proposed KI-LAND, theoretical guarantees are established for both FDR controllability and power,
and experimental evaluations are provided to validate its effectiveness.

Introduction
Linear and non-parametric models are two important classes
statistical modeling tools, each with their own unique advantages. The linear model is simple and has fine interpretability, but it is limited by the linearity assumption. In contrast,
the non-parametric model is much more flexible and can
adapt to a wide range of functional forms present in the data,
but it tends to be less interpretable. Therefore, a fundamental accuracy-interpretability tradeoff is need to be taken into
account. Semi-parametric model inherits the interpretation
of the linear model and flexibility of non-parametric model
by allowing covariates to be linear or nonlinear, which can
model complex data in some scientific fields, such as econometrics, social sciences, information sciences, biomedicine,
and so on (Ruppert, Wand, and Carroll 2003; Härdle et al.
2004; Fuller 2009). Partially linear model (PLM) is the classic example of Semi-parametric model (Engle et al. 1986;
Härdle, Liang, and Gao 2000). For the response variable y ∈
R and input variables (x, t) = (x1 , . . . , xp , t1 , . . . , tq ) ∈
Rp+q , PLM is given by:
y = b + x⊤ β + f (t) + ε,

(1)

where b and β are the intercept and the vector of coefficients
for linear terms, respectively. f is a nonlinear function from
Rq to R, and ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 ).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21071

