The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Debate Helps Weak-to-Strong Generalization
Hao Lang, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li *
Tongyi Lab
{hao.lang, f.huang, shuide.lyb}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

even human experts can not reliably verify the quality or correctness of model outputs, and the role of human evaluation
will evolve into non-experts overseeing experts (Amodei
et al. 2016; Bowman et al. 2022; Burns et al. 2023; Khan
et al. 2024). The expected deficiency of human evaluation
will limit the effectiveness of most existing alignment approaches (Casper et al. 2023; McAleese et al. 2024). Moreover, these predicted inaccurate training signals could lead to
reward overoptimization and reward tampering during policy training that seriously weakens its safety (Gao, Schulman, and Hilton 2023; Denison et al. 2024).
There are two complementary approaches to tackle the
above issue: scalable oversight (SO) and weak-to-strong
generalization (W2SG) (Leike 2023). SO approaches aim
to improve the ability of humans to supervise more capable models, such that accurately labelled data can be used
for alignment (Bowman et al. 2022). Instead of improving
human supervision, W2SG approaches finetune a strong pretrained model to generalize accurately from weak human supervision (Burns et al. 2023).
We note that most prior SO and W2SG techniques are
studied separately. In contrast, we attempt to combine the
strength of SO and W2SG to further improve AI alignment.
We investigate ways of improving human supervision with a
strong pretrained model and then supervise the strong model
with enhanced weak human supervision. To make iterative
empirical progress, we consider an analogy (Burns et al.
2023; Kenton et al. 2024): can we use a strong model to improve weak model supervision and then use it to supervise
the strong model?
In this paper, we empirically test it by finetuning a small
weak model on ground truth labels with the additional help
of knowledge from a large strong model, and then finetuning the strong model on labels generated by the weak model.
We assume a strong model pretrained on internet-scale data
can provide contextual information on samples when training a weak model (Brown et al. 2020). This gives us hope
that a weak-strong model team could create a better weak
supervisor to elicit the capabilities of the strong model.
A major challenge in building a weak-strong model team
involves finding ways of extracting trustworthy information
from untrustworthy models (Bowman et al. 2022). More
specifically, strong pretrained models have huge capabilities but are not well aligned with human values and inten-

Common methods for aligning already-capable models with
desired behavior rely on the ability of humans to provide supervision. However, future superhuman models will surpass
the capability of humans. Therefore, humans will only be able
to weakly supervise superhuman models. This expected deficiency of human evaluation would weaken the safety of future AI systems. Scalable oversight and weak-to-strong generalization are two complementary approaches to tackle this
issue. In this paper, we attempt to combine the strengths of
these two approaches to further improve alignment. Specifically, we investigate ways of improving human supervision
with a strong pretrained model and then supervise the strong
model with enhanced weak human supervision. To make iterative empirical progress, we consider an analogy: can we
use a strong model to improve weak model supervision and
then use it to supervise the strong model? We empirically
test it by finetuning a small weak model on ground truth labels with the additional help from a large strong model, and
then finetuning the strong model on labels generated by the
weak model. We find that debate can assist a weak model
in extracting trustworthy information from an untrustworthy
strong model, which provides leverage as context on samples
when training a weak model. We also show that an ensemble of weak models helps exploit long arguments generated
by strong model debaters and obtain a more robust supervision estimate. Extensive experiments on the OpenAI weak-tostrong NLP benchmarks show that the combination approach
leads to better alignment, which indicates that debate has the
potential to help weak-to-strong generalization.

Introduction
Current AI alignment techniques heavily rely on the availability of human labelled data, such as human demonstrations for supervised finetuning (SFT) (Wei et al. 2021;
Chung et al. 2024) and human preferences for reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al.
2017; Ouyang et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2022). These techniques
can be leveraged to build the most capable AI systems currently deployed (OpenAI 2023; Anthropic 2023).
However, as models grow increasingly more capable, they
will surpass the ability of humans (CAIS 2023). In that case,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27410

