The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-supervised Trusted Contrastive Multi-view
Clustering with Uncertainty Refined
Shizhe Hu, Binyan Tian, Weibo Liu, Yangdong Ye *
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
ieshizhehu@gmail.com, binyan@gs.zzu.edu.cn, liuweibo@stu.zzu.edu.cnl.com, ieydye@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract

these MVCs, contrastive learning based MVC demonstrates
excellent performance by learning deep feature representations in a self-supervised manner (Hu et al. 2023; Chen
et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2020). For example, in the work
(Lu et al. 2024a), it utilized similarity information within
and across the modalities to learn consistent representations.
Recent method in (Hu et al. 2024) further optimized feature
representation and clustering results by incorporating contrastive learning with dual correlation learning. However,
the current deep contrastive MVCs still face several challenges. (1) First, most of them select the same samples between views as positive pairs while treating other samples
as negative pairs. This often overlooks the numerous false
negatives within the negative sample pairs that need to be
eliminated, leading to inaccurate contrastive learning (Zhao
et al. 2019). (2) Existing methods typically ignore the varying importance of multiple views or simply attain unchanged
view weights, leading to limited generalization and learning
ability. (3) Although these methods have been proven effective in experiments, they often lack reliability and robustness (Gawlikowski et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2022). Most rely
on deterministic factors to define the output results, but they
ignore the estimation of uncertainty, which makes it impossible to guarantee the reliability of the decision, thus limiting
their practical application.

Multi-view clustering (MVC), especially contrastive MVC,
has demonstrated promising potential in many fields and
practical scenarios. However, existing contrastive MVC
methods still ignore the reliability of clustering results and
the impact of false negative pairs, which limits the application of methods in critical security areas. To solve the above
challenges, we propose a Self-supervised Trusted Contrastive
Multi-view Clustering with Uncertainty Refined (STCMCUR) method, which integrates clustering results and uncertainty learning to guide the self-supervised contrastive learning. First, the evidence of a specific view is generated in the
evidence generation module. Afterwards, the belief masses
and uncertainty of each view are learned and we fuse multiple views with the Dempster-Shafer theory to generate the
final clustering result and the uncertainty of the view. Different from existing methods, with the clustering result and
uncertainty generated by the fusion, we design a feature-level
uncertainty-refined self-supervised contrastive learning module, where the pseudo-label is selectively employed in each iteration to conduct more accurate contrastive learning. As a result, the modules are mutually beneficial, which is conducive
to more effective feature learning and clustering structure discovery, and more accurate learning results are obtained. Extensive experiments on five datasets show that the proposed
method has significant improvements in effectiveness compared with the latest methods.

Recently, the characterization of model uncertainty has
received extensive attention (Zheng et al. 2023; Zhu et al.
2024), especially in safety-critical fields such as medical
diagnosis and self-driving, where understanding the reliability and confidence of algorithmic decisions is crucial
(Pedersen et al. 2017). A series of uncertainty-based learning has been proposed, including Bayesian neural networks
(BNN) (Blundell et al. 2015), confidence learning (Han et al.
2022b), and evidence-based learning (Audun 2001). For example, BNN estimates uncertainty by learning the distribution of weights. However, due to the surge in the size of
neural network parameters, BNN is computationally expensive. MC-Dropout (Gal and Ghahramani 2016) alleviates
this problem to a certain extent by dropout sampling. Confidence learning is committed to capturing and optimizing
the confidence of the results through a carefully designed
calibration process to ensure its reliability. Different from
the Bayesian theory, Dempster-Shafer theory is a classic evidence theory first proposed by Dempster (Dempster 2008)

Code — https://github.com/ShizheHu.

Introduction
In recent years, multi-view clustering (MVC) has achieved
satisfactory clustering performance (Li et al. 2019; Tao et al.
2019) by exploring and utilizing the consistency and complementary information between multiple views, and has
been widely adopted in various practical scenarios (Hu et al.
2022; Han et al. 2022a).
Motivation. With the rapid development of deep learning (Mao et al. 2021; Han et al. 2024), deep neural networks based MVC methods have gained attention due to
their superior capabilities in feature extraction and clustering performance compared to traditional methods. Among
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17305

