The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scaffold-BPE: Enhancing Byte Pair Encoding for Large Language Models
with Simple and Effective Scaffold Token Removal
Haoran Lian1 , Yizhe Xiong2,3 , Jianwei Niu1,4,5,6 * , Shasha Mo1 * , Zhenpeng Su7 ,
Zijia Lin2 * , Hui Chen2,3 * , Jungong Han2 , Guiguang Ding2,3 *
1

Beihang University,
Tsinghua University,
3
BNRist,
4
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University,
5
Zhongguancun Laboratory,
6
Zhengzhou University Research Institute of Industrial Technology, Zhengzhou University,
7
Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lianhaoran,niujianwei,moshasha}@buaa.edu.cn, xiongyizhe2001@163.com, suzhenpeng@iie.ac.cn,
linzijia07@tsinghua.org.cn, {jichenhui2012,jungonghan77}@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

bytes or characters in a dataset into a new token and adds it
to the vocabulary until a desired vocabulary size is reached.
And in the encoding stage, the vocabulary is utilized to represent any text. The adoption of BPE in LLMs is driven by
its capability to decompose words into smaller, manageable
subword units, thus avoiding out-of-vocabulary words, facilitating flexible and semantically complete representations
of input data. Actually, BPE has also been widely used in
traditional NLP tasks, like machine translation (Provilkov
et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020), information extraction (Wei et al.
2021, 2023b,a) and summarization (Wu et al. 2021; Xu et al.
2022).
Since its inception, BPE has undergone various modifications to better suit the needs of complex NLP tasks, including identifying the optimal vocabulary size for various tasks
(Xu et al. 2020; Gutierrez-Vasques et al. 2021), optimizing
the encoding paths of tokens to achieve subword regularization (Provilkov et al. 2019; He et al. 2020), etc.
However, there is an inherent limitation in the BPE
method: the iterative merging process can lead to an imbalance in token frequencies by including low-frequency tokens in vocabulary. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1,
in the commonly used Pile dataset (Gao et al. 2020) that
is tokenized by the original BPE method of 32K vocabulary size (as LLaMA series (Touvron et al. 2023a,b)), the
token “zona” mostly appears as a component of the token
“Arizona” rather than as an independent, high-frequency token. Despite its lower standalone frequency, BPE includes
“zona” in the final vocabulary because it is the “intermediate token” to derive the frequent token “Arizona”. We define
such intermediate tokens that are crucial for constructing
longer frequent tokens but do not appear frequently on their
own as Scaffold Tokens. Note that not all subwords are simply scaffold tokens. For example, “ing” is not identified as a
scaffold token, as there are many words containing “ing” but
are not tokens in the vocabulary. For example, “connecting”
is represented as “connect”+“ing” (2 tokens). Such words
help to keep “ing” a frequent token. Therefore, “ing” is not

Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) serves as a foundation method for
text tokenization in the Natural Language Processing (NLP)
field. Despite its wide adoption, the original BPE algorithm
harbors an inherent flaw: it inadvertently introduces a frequency imbalance for tokens in the text corpus. Since BPE
iteratively merges the most frequent token pair in the text
corpus to generate a new token and keeps all generated tokens in the vocabulary, it unavoidably holds tokens that primarily act as components of a longer token and appear infrequently on their own. We term such tokens as Scaffold Tokens. Due to their infrequent occurrences in the text corpus,
Scaffold Tokens pose a learning imbalance issue. To address
that issue, we propose Scaffold-BPE, which incorporates a
dynamic scaffold token removal mechanism by parameterfree, computation-light, and easy-to-implement modifications
to the original BPE method. This novel approach ensures the
exclusion of low-frequency Scaffold Tokens from the token
representations for given texts, thereby mitigating the issue of
frequency imbalance and facilitating model training. On extensive experiments across language modeling and even machine translation, Scaffold-BPE consistently outperforms the
original BPE, well demonstrating its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have become a burgeoning paradigm in handling a broad array of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. The tokenization process in most modern LLMs (Radford et al. 2019;
Brown et al. 2020; Rae et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Biderman et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023a; Yang et al. 2023;
Achiam et al. 2023; Dubey et al. 2024; Lian et al. 2024a)
employs Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al. 2015),
a method that was originally designed for data compression
(Gage 1994). BPE consists of two main stages. In the training stage, BPE iteratively merges the most frequent pairs of
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24539

