The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Move and Act: Enhanced Object Manipulation and Background Integrity for
Image Editing
Pengfei Jiang1 , Mingbao Lin2 , Fei Chao1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
2
Skywork AI Singapore
pengfeijiang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, linmb001@outlook.com, fchao@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Current methods commonly utilize three-branch structures of
inversion, reconstruction, and editing, to tackle consistent image editing task. However, these methods lack control over
the generation position of the edited object and have issues
with background preservation. To overcome these limitations,
we propose a tuning-free method with only two branches: inversion and editing. This approach allows users to simultaneously edit the object’s action and control the generation position of the edited object. Additionally, it achieves improved
background preservation. Specifically, we transfer the edited
object information to the target area and repair or preserve
the background of other areas during the inversion process at
a specific time step. In the editing stage, we use the image
features in self-attention to query the key and value of the
corresponding time step in the inversion to achieve consistent
image editing. Impressive image editing results and quantitative evaluation demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

(a) Input

(b) A running cat

(c) Input

(d) A running bear

Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-image generation using diffusion models (Nichol et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022;
Ramesh et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022) have significantly
improved image generation capabilities. By capitalizing on
extensive training data, these models (Saharia et al. 2022;
Ramesh et al. 2022) excel in generating remarkable images
based on user prompts. Compared to generative adversarial
networks (GANs), diffusion models provide superior quality and diversity in image generation. Consequently, numerous studies (Hertz et al. 2023; Tumanyan et al. 2023; Parmar et al. 2023; Dong et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2023; Huang
et al. 2023) have begun investigating diffusion models for
image editing tasks. Predominantly, these methods involve
text-conditioned editing, where users supply text input to
modify images. Although techniques like (Hertz et al. 2023;
Tumanyan et al. 2023; Parmar et al. 2023; Dong et al. 2023)
can adeptly edit image style, object appearance, and object
category based on text input, they do not alter scene layout
or modify object actions in the image. Nonetheless, there
are instances where users desire to edit an object’s action

Original image

(f) InstructPix2Pix

(g) PnP

(e) Input

(h) MasaCtrl

(i) Move&Act
(Ours)

Figure 1: (a) - (d): our method allows users to control where
to place the edited object. (e) - (i): altering only action, our
method captures the “standing” pose and maintains consistent backgrounds with the input image.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4039

