The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mjölnir: Breaking the Shield of Perturbation-Protected Gradients via Adaptive
Diffusion
Xuan Liu1 , Siqi Cai2 , Qihua Zhou3 , Song Guo4* , Ruibin Li1 , Kaiwei Lin2
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
Hubei Key Laboratory of Transportation Internet of Things, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
xuan18.liu@connect.polyu.hk, csiqi@whut.edu.cn, qihuazhou@szu.edu.cn, songguo@cse.ust.hk
ruibin.li@connect.polyu.hk, 297662@whut.edu.cn
2

Inject perturbation to protect local gradients

Abstract

𝜵𝑾′𝟏

Perturbation-based mechanisms, such as differential privacy,
mitigate gradient leakage attacks by introducing noise into
the gradients, thereby preventing attackers from reconstructing clients’ private data from the leaked gradients. However,
can gradient perturbation protection mechanisms truly defend against all gradient leakage attacks? In this paper, we
present the first attempt to break the shield of gradient perturbation protection in Federated Learning for the extraction
of private information. We focus on common noise distributions, specifically Gaussian and Laplace, and apply our
approach to DNN and CNN models. We introduce Mjölnir,
a perturbation-resilient gradient leakage attack that is capable of removing perturbations from gradients without requiring additional access to the original model structure or external data. Specifically, we leverage the inherent diffusion
properties of gradient perturbation protection to develop a
novel diffusion-based gradient denoising model for Mjölnir.
By constructing a surrogate client model that captures the
structure of perturbed gradients, we obtain crucial gradient
data for training the diffusion model. We further utilize the
insight that monitoring disturbance levels during the reverse
diffusion process can enhance gradient denoising capabilities, allowing Mjölnir to generate gradients that closely approximate the original, unperturbed versions through adaptive sampling steps. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
Mjölnir effectively recovers the protected gradients and exposes the Federated Learning process to the threat of gradient
leakage, achieving superior performance in gradient denoising and private data recovery.

Server

𝜵𝑾𝑪𝒍𝒊𝒆𝒏𝒕
𝟏
𝜵𝑾′𝟐
Mjölnir

𝜵𝑾𝑪𝒍𝒊𝒆𝒏𝒕
𝟐

𝜵𝑾′𝒏

Local Clients

𝜵𝑾𝑹
𝑵

Denoises 𝜵𝑾′𝑵
infers input data

𝜵𝑾𝑪𝒍𝒊𝒆𝒏𝒕
𝒏
𝜵𝑾𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒕𝒆𝒄𝒕

Clients’ private data leakage

𝜵𝑾𝑪𝒍𝒊𝒆𝒏𝒕
- 𝐎riginal local gradients 𝜵𝑾′𝑵 - Clients Upload Perturbed gradients
𝑵
𝜵𝑾𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒕𝒆𝒄𝒕 - Server scatters global gradients to clients

Figure 1: Threat model. The FL training process is threatened by gradient leakage attacks, where the attacker can intercept the exchanged gradients ∇W to recover the private
training data. Previous work often protects the gradients by
injecting perturbation into the gradients to form ∇WN′ and
∇W P rotect . Our Mjölnir removes the perturbation injected
in the protected gradients via the adaptive diffusion process.

Liu, and Han 2019), in which adversaries can potentially reconstruct sensitive user data from the shared gradients. This
vulnerability has spurred significant research into gradient
protection techniques (Tan et al. 2024a; Rodrı́guez-Barroso
et al. 2023). Gradient Perturbation, such as differential privacy (DP), injecting noise into gradients to enhance privacy,
has been proven to be an effective strategy for safeguarding
data in FL scenarios (Wei et al. 2020; Ouadrhiri and Abdelhadi 2022; Wang, Hugh, and Li 2024).
Perturbation-based gradient protection achieves its goal
by adding noise to the gradients. If a method is developed
to eliminate this noise effectively, the protective mechanism
of this approach becomes ineffective. Diffusion Model (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Gong 2023) has the natural applicability to denoising the perturbation and is a potential approach to attack perturbation-based gradient protection. We
hold the above idea based on two points: 1) Considering that
gradient is the result of linear transformations applied to the
training data, such as image data, we posit that if the original
data are stable and predictable, then the corresponding gradient data will also be stable and predictable. 2) The essence of

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
paradigm that facilitates collaborative model training without directly transmitting raw training data. Instead, it aggregates gradients or parameters shared among clients to build
a global model (McMahan et al. 2017; Gong et al. 2024; Wu
et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024). This approach preserves the
privacy of raw data by keeping it within its originating domain, addressing concerns associated with traditional centralized data processing. However, FL is vulnerable to gradient inversion attacks (Geng et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Zhu,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26308

