The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

To Measure or Not: A Cost-Sensitive, Selective Measuring Environment for
Agricultural Management Decisions with Reinforcement Learning
Hilmy Baja, Michiel Kallenberg, Ioannis N. Athanasiadis
Artificial Intelligence Group, Wageningen University and Research
hilmy.baja@wur.nl, michiel.kallenberg@wur.nl, ioannis.athanasiadis@wur.nl

Abstract

sure the soil (or leaf) nitrogen content and based on that decide when and how much fertilizer to apply (Berghuijs et al.
2024).
However, acquiring a large amount of in-field agricultural data is labor intensive, time-consuming and expensive
(Wu et al. 2022a). In most cases, the cost and inconvenience
of collecting and processing the data outweigh its informational usefulness for the farmer (Thompson et al. 2019).
Furthermore, this issue is compounded in regions with low
data availability and high data collection costs, as the infrastructure required for gathering such data is limited, presenting a large hurdle for applying data-driven optimization
(Cravero et al. 2022). By integrating data-collection recommendations as part of decision-making, data collection can
be optimized and executed only when it is the most beneficial for the farmer. Specifically, it is of importance to have
a system that simultaneously recommends optimal moments
in a growing season to obtain measurements of crop states
for the objective of cost-effective and optimal management.
The unrealistic assumption that feature observations are
readily available has prompted recent work in reinforcement
learning (RL) pertaining to active feature measuring for balancing measurement costs (Bellinger et al. 2021a). Previous
work has shown early success in this setting, however, it assumed uniformity in the feature costs (Yin et al. 2020). In
the real-world, recognizing that certain features are more expensive to measure than others is essential, as it potentially
influences the policies that an RL agent learns.
In this work, we experiment on the effect of cost in a
measure-and-control paradigm and design an RL environment in which an agent interacts with a crop growth model
(CGM) environment during a growing season. It is important
to acknowledge that crop features have different measuring
costs. The ability to optimize fertilization with fewer crop
state measurements is important to lower the hurdle of applying data-driven methods for improving agricultural management activities. We summarize our contributions below:
• We propose an RL paradigm of costly measurements
for crop management, incorporating crop state measurements as part of decision making;
• We design and provide code for an RL environment,
coupled with the WOFOST (Berghuijs et al. 2024) crop
growth model, that allows an agent to simultaneously
learn a control policy (fertilization, irrigation, etc.) and

Farmers rely on in-field observations to make well-informed
crop management decisions to maximize profit and minimize adverse environmental impact. However, obtaining
real-world crop state measurements is labor-intensive, timeconsuming and expensive. In most cases, it is not feasible
to gather crop state measurements before every decision moment. Moreover, in previous research pertaining to farm management optimization, these observations are often assumed
to be readily available without any cost, which is unrealistic.
Hence, enabling optimization without the need to have temporally complete crop state observations is important. An approach to that problem is to include measuring as part of decision making. As a solution, we apply reinforcement learning
(RL) to recommend opportune moments to simultaneously
measure crop features and apply nitrogen fertilizer. With realistic considerations, we design an RL environment with explicit crop feature measuring costs. While balancing costs, we
find that an RL agent, trained with recurrent PPO, discovers
adaptive measuring policies that follow critical crop development stages, with results aligned by what domain experts
would consider a sensible approach. Our results highlight the
importance of measuring when crop feature measurements
are not readily available.

Code — https://github.com/WUR-AI/CropGymToMeasureOrNot

Introduction
As the global population continues to grow and the impacts
of climate change become more prominent, optimal farm
management decisions play a crucial role in our future sustenance. Effective farm management practices are key to not
only ensure food security but also mitigate the apparent environmental risks related to agriculture (Lipper et al. 2014).
Environmental risks come from mismanagement of farming activities, such as over-applying fertilizer and pesticides
(Martı́nez-Dalmau, Berbel, and Ordóñez-Fernández 2021).
In practice, farmers rely on their experience and in-field observations to make better-informed management decisions
in order to minimize costs and reduce environmental impacts. For instance, before fertilizing, a farmer might meaCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27831

