The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adversarial Contrastive Graph Masked AutoEncoder Against
Graph Structure and Feature Dual Attacks
Weixuan Shen1 , Xiaobo Shen1 * , Shirui Pan2
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia
wxshen@njust.edu.cn, njust.shenxiaobo@gmail.com, s.pan@grifith.edu.au

80

Abstract
Accuracy(%)

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been shown vulnerable
to graph adversarial attacks. Current robust graph representation learning methods mainly defend against graph structure
attack, and improve performance of GNNs. However, node
features in graph can also be easily attacked in reality. The
joint defense on graph structure and feature dual attacks remains challenging yet less studied. To fulfill this gap, we propose Adversarial Contrastive Graph Masked AutoEncoder
(ACGMAE) to defend against graph structure and feature
dual attacks. ACGMAE employs adversarial feature masking for reconstructing node features to mitigate the influence of feature attack. Additionally, ACGMAE employs contrastive learning on kNN graph and attacked graph, considering neighbor nodes as positive samples. By calculating the
probabilities of these neighbors being true positive, ACGMAE effectively reduces the influence of adversarial edges.
Extensive experiments on node classification and clustering
tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed ACGMAE, especially under graph structure and feature dual attacks.

Accuracy(%)

80
60
40
20
0

Clean

+Struc.
Attack

(a) Cora

+Feat.
Attack

60
40

GCN
DGI
ARIEL
STABLE
ACGMAE

20
0

Clean

+Struc.
Attack

+Feat.
Attack

(b) Citeseer

Figure 1: Performance of representative graph embedding
methods under incremental structure attack (25% metattack)
and feature attack (50% normally distributed noise).

downstream tasks. The lack of robustness of GNNs may lead
to serious consequences in some critical real-world applications, e.g., financial transactions, fraud detection. Therefore,
some studies focus on improving the robustness of GNNs
against graph structural attacks by designing new architecture (Jin et al. 2021; Geisler, Zügner, and Günnemann 2020)
or refining graph structure (Jin et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021b).
Figure 1 reports the accuracies of node classification of five
representative graph embedding methods on two benchmark
datasets, i.e., Cora, Citeseer. The performances of two conventional GNNs, i.e., GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017) and
DGI (Velickovic et al. 2019) on attacked graphs are obviously degraded in comparison to those on clean graphs,
and two robust graph embedding methods, i.e., STABLE (Li
et al. 2022), ARIEL (Feng et al. 2022) exhibit notably less
degradation under graph structure attack. As label is usually
expensive to obtain, some recent efforts (Feng et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2022) have been made towards unsupervised robust
graph embedding learning.
In addition to graph structure, node features are frequently
attacked as well. In financial networks, for example, attackers may manipulate customers’ transaction histories and
credit scores, thereby posing significant challenges for fraud
detection systems to accurately identify potential fraudulent activities. Existing robust graph representation learning
(GRL) methods mainly focus on defending against graph
structural attack, and employ properties of node features (Jin
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2022), e.g., feature smoothing to reduce

Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous data structures that exist in many realworld scenarios, e.g., social networks, knowledge graphs,
and chemical molecules. It is crucial to learn effective graph
embeddings and apply them to downstream tasks. Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) have developed rapidly and made
breakthroughs in many graph analysis tasks, e.g., node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017), link prediction (Zhang
and Chen 2018), and graph classification (Han et al. 2022).
The core of GNNs lies in message passing mechanism
(Gilmer et al. 2017), where GNNs regard node features
and hidden representations as messages, and propagate them
through edges.
Despite achieving satisfactory performance, most existing GNNs assume that graphs are clean, which usually does
not hold in reality. Some studies (Dai et al. 2018; Sun et al.
2022) have underscored the vulnerability of GNNs to adversarial structural attacks, and showed that subtle perturbations on graph structure, primarily in the form of edge additions or deletions, can severely degrade the performance of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12515

