The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diffusion Prior Interpolation for Flexibility Real-World Face Super-Resolution
Jiarui Yang1, 2 , Tao Dai3, * , Yufei Zhu3 , Naiqi Li2 , Jinmin Li2 , Shu-Tao Xia2
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
1120230264@mail.nankai.edu.cn, daitao.edu@gmail.com
zhuyufei2021@email.szu.edu.cn, ljm22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {linaiqi, xiast}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

It is well-known that such learning objectives favor distortion measures and constrain the SR output to the average of
multiple possibilities. This maintains a certain consistency
but potentially results in over-smoothing outputs (Sajjadi,
Scholkopf, and Hirsch 2017), as shown in Fig. 1(c-d).
In contrast, generative methods such as Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Liu, Siu, and Wang 2021), Normalizing
Flows (NFs) (Lugmayr et al. 2020), Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Wang et al. 2023c) and Diffusion Models (DMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and
Ermon 2020) have the capability to generate high-fidelity images. Among these, Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) have recently
gained significant attention and research interest due to their
impressive generative capabilities. DDPMs exhibit advantages such as stable training and enhanced controllability
compared to other generative models (Brock, Donahue, and
Simonyan 2018; Kirichenko, Izmailov, and Wilson 2020; Bredell et al. 2023). At present, diffusion-based FSR work can
be broadly categorized into those that require task-directed
retraining (Saharia et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022;
Whang et al. 2022) and prior-based methods (Choi et al. 2021;
Chung et al. 2022; Kawar et al. 2022). Training a conditional
DDPM from scratch requires significant computational resources and can limit the prior space to lead to sub-optimal
results (Wang et al. 2023b). Introducing conditions to utilize the priors encapsulated in the pre-trained model is an
alternating solution. However, adding conditions to a pretrained model introduces errors and visual artifacts in the
intrinsic probability distributions at each time step, leading to
the generation of results that deviate from the model’s prior
manifold (Mei, Nair, and Patel 2022). As shown in Fig. 1(ef), although these prior-based methods achieve good visual
perception, the issue of consistency remains unresolved. This
is primarily because prior-based methods are unsupervised
and generative in nature. When dealing with low-level tasks
requiring pixel-level accuracy, it is challenging to achieve
precise discrimination.
We are aware that the sampling process of DDPMs is
an iterative one, progressing from coarse to fine. Wang et
al. (Wang et al. 2023d) have been demonstrated that there
exists a time step that partitions the sampling interval, and
beyond this time step, the error between the real posterior
distribution and the posterior distribution introduced by con-

Diffusion models represent the state-of-the-art in generative
modeling. Due to their high training costs, many works leverage pre-trained diffusion models’ powerful representations
for downstream tasks, such as face super-resolution (FSR),
through fine-tuning or prior-based methods. However, relying
solely on priors without supervised training makes it challenging to meet the pixel-level accuracy requirements of discrimination task. Although prior-based methods can achieve
high fidelity and high-quality results, ensuring consistency
remains a significant challenge. In this paper, we propose a
masking strategy with strong and weak constraints and iterative refinement for real-world FSR, termed Diffusion Prior
Interpolation (DPI). We introduce conditions and constraints
on consistency by masking different sampling stages based
on the structural characteristics of the face. Furthermore, we
propose a condition Corrector (CRT) to establish a reciprocal
posterior sampling process. DPI can balance consistency and
diversity and can be seamlessly integrated into pre-trained
models. In extensive experiments conducted on synthetic and
real datasets, along with consistency validation in face recognition, DPI demonstrates superiority over SOTA FSR methods.

Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a classic ill-posed problem aimed at enhancing image quality by restoring highresolution (HR) details from low-resolution (LR) images. In
the context of face super-resolution (FSR), this technology
is applied in areas such as face recognition (Zou and Yuen
2011) and visual enhancement (Jiang et al. 2021). These applications typically require SR images to exhibit both high
consistency and fidelity. Previous SR work has tended to
overly pursue distortion-based quantitative metrics (such as
PSNR, SSIM) (Chen et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2023). Blau et
al. (Blau and Michaeli 2018) mathematically prove that distortion and perceptual quality are at odds with each other, implying that excessive pursuit of PSNR or SSIM indirectly leads
to poorer fidelity. Moreover, discriminative model-based SR
methods (Gao et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a) typically employ end-to-end training, achieving it by minimizing pixelwise loss between the SR output image and the GT image.
* Corresponding author: daitao.edu@gmail.com.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9211

