The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Balanced and Fair Partitioning of Friends
Argyrios Deligkas1 , Eduard Eiben1 , Stavros D. Ioannidis1 , Dušan Knop2 , Šimon Schierreich2
1

Royal Holloway, University of London,
Czech Technical University in Prague
{argyrios.deligkas, eduard.eiben, stavros.ioannidis}@rhul.ac.uk, {dusan.knop, schiesim}@fit.cvut.cz
2

create k groups of almost equal size such that the resulting grouping is “fair”. They have focused on two fairness
notions: a version of the core, refined for this model, and
almost envy-free partitions, denoted EFr, which is most relevant to this work. In an EFr partition, no agent could increase the number of friends by at least r by replacing an
agent from another group. Li et p
al. showed that for general
friendship graphs and r = O( nk log k), where n is the
number of agents and k is the number of parts, EFr partitions always exist and can be computed in polynomial time.
They also showed that EF1 partitions do not always exist.
Although the model of Li et al. is elegant and sets the
foundation of the framework, it implicitly assumes that: (a)
every agent values their friends equally, i.e., each friend
counts the same, and friendships are symmetric; (b) the valuations are additive. Furthermore, the computational complexity of finding fair partitions remained unexplored. As
someone can imagine, the aforementioned assumptions can
be rather restrictive for a variety of real-life situations. Can
we augment the model in order to handlepa wider variety of
situations? Moreover, the factor r = O( nk log k) for EFr
in general graphs could be prohibitive to convince the agents
that the partition is fair. Having said this, the space between
general graphs and more restricted graph classes is vast. Can
one exploit the structure of the friendship graph and provide
stronger fairness guarantees? The goal of the paper is to shed
some light on these questions.

Abstract
In the recently introduced model of fair partitioning of
friends, there is a set of agents located on the vertices of an
underlying graph that indicates the friendships between the
agents. The task is to partition the graph into k balanced-sized
groups, keeping in mind that the value of an agent for a group
is equal to the number of edges they have in that group. The
goal is to construct partitions that are “fair”, i.e., no agent
would like to replace an agent in a different group. We generalize the standard model by considering utilities for the agents
that are beyond binary and additive. Having this as our foundation, our contribution is threefold: (a) we adapt several fairness notions that have been developed in the fair division literature to our setting; (b) we give several existence guarantees
supported by polynomial-time algorithms; (c) we initiate the
study of the computational (and parameterized) complexity
of the model and provide an almost complete landscape of
the (in)tractability frontier for our fairness concepts.

1

Introduction

You are the coordinator of your organization’s annual banquet, and your task is to allocate seats on tables for the
employees. As you aim for perfection, you want to ensure
that every employee believes that they are part of one of the
“best” tables of the banquet. In other words, you want each
employee to value the company of their table “almost” as
much as the company they would get if they replace an employee at a different table. However, you have the following
constraints: (a) there are only k tables whose overall size exactly fits the participants; (b) friendships between employees
vary; (c) you want to be “fair” to every employee. So, what
seat allocation would bring all employees to the tables?
Scenarios like the one above appear in several other domains where the goal is to partition a group of people into k
groups of almost the same size: students for team projects,
employees for training groups, kids for camp houses, or
clustering in general. Recently, Li et al. (2023) introduced
an elegant framework in order to formally study those situations. In their model, there is a friendship graph where
every node corresponds to an agent and every edge corresponds to a friendship between the agents. The task is to

Our Contribution
Our initial contribution is the generalization of the model
of (Li et al. 2023), which goes beyond binary, symmetric,
and additive utilities and thus, it can capture more real-life
scenarios. Having this as our foundation, our contribution
is threefold: (a) we adapt several fairness notions that have
been developed in the fair division literature to our setting,
thus, we can choose the most appropriate one depending on
the scenario; (b) we give several existence guarantees supported by polynomial-time algorithms; (c) we initiate the
study of the computational (and parameterized) complexity
of the model and provide an almost complete landscape of
the (in)tractability frontier for our fairness concepts.
More specifically, in Section 3, we define the fairness notions for our model, and we provide a complete taxonomy
for their interconnections. Next, in Section 4, we provide

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13754

