The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pareto Set Learning for Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning
Erlong Liu, Yu-Chang Wu, Xiaobin Huang, Chengrui Gao,
Ren-Jian Wang, Ke Xue, Chao Qian
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{liuel, wuyc, huangxb, gaocr, wangrj, xuek, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

problems may involve multiple conflicting objectives. Contrary to standard RL, Multi-Objective RL (MORL) aims to
generate an optimal policy tailored to each preference over
multiple objectives, constructing a diverse set of optimal
policies that collectively form a Pareto set.
Traditional MORL methods transform the multidimensional objective space into a scalar representation [Mannor and Shimkin 2001] through the static
assignment of weights to each objective, achieving a
trade-off between multiple objectives. Such approaches,
however, struggle with objectives of varying magnitudes
and require extensive domain knowledge to set the appropriate weights/preferences [Amodei et al. 2016]. Moreover,
they inherently limit the solution to a singular policy for a
predetermined weight, disregarding the demand for multiple
trade-off solutions in real-world scenarios. When extending
such approaches to find the dense Pareto set, the inefficiency
of repetitively retraining the policy is unacceptable [Parisi
et al. 2014]. Recent studies have proposed several multipolicy methods, which simultaneously learn a set of policies
over multiple preferences using a single network [Parisi,
Pirotta, and Peters 2017, Chen et al. 2019, Xu et al. 2020,
Basaklar, Gumussoy, and Ogras 2023]. However, these
methods either cannot construct a continuous Pareto front,
or will suffer from the curse of dimensionality and poor performance when confronting with the conflicting objectives
due to the reason that they only obtain a single network for
all the preferences.
To address these limitations, in this work, we integrate
Pareto Set Learning (PSL) [Lin et al. 2022, Lin, Yang,
and Zhang 2022] within the context of MORL, utilizing
the specialty of PSL in covering the whole preference
space. Considering that the solutions to MORL problems
are generated by the policy networks, we propose to employ hypernetwork [Ha and Le 2017] as the PSL model
to generate a continuum of Pareto-optimal policy parameters using a decomposition-based method, and thus generate the relatively personalized policy network for each preference. Since the trained hypernetwork can generate policy parameters for every possible weight without any additional cost (e.g., evaluation and fine-tuning), our proposed
framework can dynamically align with user-specified preferences [Abels et al. 2019]. It is worth noting that our method
is a general MORL framework, which can be equipped with

Multi-objective decision-making problems have emerged in
numerous real-world scenarios, such as video games, navigation and robotics. Considering the clear advantages of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in optimizing decision-making
processes, researchers have delved into the development of
Multi-Objective RL (MORL) methods for solving multiobjective decision problems. However, previous methods either cannot obtain the entire Pareto front, or employ only a
single policy network for all the preferences over multiple
objectives, which may not produce personalized solutions for
each preference. To address these limitations, we propose a
novel decomposition-based framework for MORL, Pareto Set
Learning for MORL (PSL-MORL), that harnesses the generation capability of hypernetwork to produce the parameters of
the policy network for each decomposition weight, generating relatively distinct policies for various scalarized subproblems with high efficiency. PSL-MORL is a general framework, which is compatible for any RL algorithm. The theoretical result guarantees the superiority of the model capacity of PSL-MORL and the optimality of the obtained policy
network. Through extensive experiments on diverse benchmarks, we demonstrate the effectiveness of PSL-MORL in
achieving dense coverage of the Pareto front, significantly
outperforming state-of-the-art MORL methods in the hypervolume and sparsity indicators.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto 2018]
has become a prevalent technique for addressing decisionmaking and control problems in a wide range of scenarios, including video games [Mnih et al. 2015], navigation [Yang, Sun, and Narasimhan 2019], robotics [Schulman et al. 2017], dynamic algorithm configuration [Xue
et al. 2022], and financial cloud services [Yang et al. 2024].
In standard RL, the main objective is obtaining an optimal policy that achieves the best expected returns. However, in many real-world scenarios, spanning from robotics,
where the balance between speed and energy efficiency is
paramount [Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012], to smart systems design, where the trade-offs between competing metrics must be dynamically managed [Azzouz et al. 2018], the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18789

