The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AutoSciLab: A Self-Driving Laboratory for Interpretable Scientific Discovery
Saaketh Desai1 , Sadhvikas Addamane1 , Jeffrey Y. Tsao2 , Igal Brener1 , Laura P. Swiler3 , Remi
Dingreville1 , Prasad P. Iyer1*
1

Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM
Material, Physical and Chemical Sciences Center, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM
3
Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, Center for Computing Research, Albuquerque, NM
*ppadma@sandia.gov
2

Abstract

traverse a high-dimensional space - i.e.,‘Blindly looking for
a needle in a hay-stack with an expensive rake’.
Machine learning (ML) methods have excelled at aiding
researchers in identifying patterns and correlations within
dense datasets, (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Vaswani et al. 2017), even in the physical sciences, (Jumper
et al. 2021; Choudhary et al. 2022), demonstrating the ability to execute a few of the necessary steps leading up to interpretable scientific discovery, e.g., active learning (AL) for
efficient design of experiments (Ling et al. 2017; Kusne et al.
2020), or deep neural networks to extract high-dimensional
correlations in conducted experiments (DeCost et al. 2019;
Feng, Zhou, and Dong 2019). However, a complete machine learning framework which realizes interpretable scientific discovery that can augment the human intuition remains
an open challenge. Key impediments to the development of
such a framework include the ability to design a large search
space of candidate experiments significantly beyond current
scientific understanding, efficiently discovering optimal candidates in this search space, and realizing interpretable results.
Here, we present a solution titled AutoSciLab, which is a
self-driving laboratory that employs machine learning methods to drive automated experiments. AutoSciLab accomplishes the following tasks:

Advances in robotic control and sensing have propelled
the rise of automated scientific laboratories capable of
high-throughput experiments. However, automated scientific laboratories are currently limited by human intuition
in their ability to efficiently design and interpret experiments in high-dimensional spaces, throttling scientific discovery. We present AutoSciLab, a machine learning framework for driving autonomous scientific experiments, forming a surrogate researcher purposed for scientific discovery
in high-dimensional spaces. AutoSciLab autonomously follows the scientific method in four steps: (i) generating highdimensional experiments (x ∈ RD ) using a variational autoencoder (ii) selecting optimal experiments by forming hypotheses using active learning (iii) distilling the experimental results to discover relevant low-dimensional latent variables (z ∈ Rd , with d ≪ D) with a ‘directional autoencoder’ and (iv) learning a human interpretable equation connecting the discovered latent variables with a quantity of interest (y = f (z)), using a neural network equation learner.
We validate the generalizability of AutoSciLab by rediscovering a) the principles of projectile motion and b) the phasetransitions within the spin-states of the Ising model (NPhard problem). Applying our framework to an open-ended
nanophotonics challenge, AutoSciLab uncovers a fundamentally novel method for directing incoherent light emission that
surpasses the current state-of-the-art (Iyer et al. 2023b, 2020).

(a) Drives autonomous scientific experiments by hypothesizing the next experiment from a generated space of experiments, without the aid of human intuition
(b) Minimizes the number of scientific experiments required
to gain insight into the physical process while accounting
for stochastic experiments
(c) Distills the experiments to discover an informative latent
space complimenting any prior knowledge
(d) Learns an equation relating the discovered latent space
with the physical property of interest

Introduction
Scientific discoveries over the past centuries have been fueled in large parts by human intuition and ingenuity (Koyré
2013). The traditional scientific discovery process involves
hypothesis generation, design of experiments to test hypotheses, and distillation of data into interpretable forms,
such as equations. Scientists build upon these learnt equations, often extrapolating with their intuition to guide the
next iteration of scientific discovery. However, a critical bottleneck in this scientific discovery process is the reliance on
human intuition to generate a valid hypotheses, design experiments to test those hypotheses and interpret results in
a large, high-dimensional design space. Within the physical sciences, the intuition bottleneck manifests as a lack of
theoretical frameworks, requiring expensive experiments to

Related Work
Self-driving labs where automated experiments are driven
by ML algorithms have recently gained popularity in the
physical sciences (Abolhasani and Kumacheva 2023; Seifrid
et al. 2022; MacLeod et al. 2020). While significant effort
has focused on automating the ‘mechanical’ tasks of a physical science experiment (robotic sample handling, automated

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

146

