The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GeoMamba: Towards Multi-granular POI Recommendation with
Geographical State Space Model
Yifang Qin1 , Jiaxuan Xie2 , Zhiping Xiao3 * , Ming Zhang 1 *
1

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
PKU-Anker LLM Lab, Peking University
2
School of Earth and Space Sciences, Peking University
3
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
qinyifang@pku.edu.cn, 2100012427@stu.pku.edu.cn, patxiao@uw.edu, mzhang cs@pku.edu.cn
Geographical
State Space

Abstract
Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation plays an important
role in a wide range of location-based social network applications, aiming to accurately predicting users’ next visits based on their historical check-in records. Previous efforts have primarily focused on the modifications of existing sequential models, neglecting the fact that POI visiting
sequences typically involve continuous state transformation
of geographical and intention signals. Additionally, the diverse time span between check-ins require the model to properly recognize user’s multi-granular preference. While recent advances of State Space Model (SSM) have revealed
their potential in handling intricate temporal signals, we propose a state-based model that is tailored for spatio-temporal
POI sequences. On top of traditional SSMs that are typically
limited to linear sequences like Mamba, we propose GeoMamba, which customizes the model states to accommodate
the spatio-temporal sequences, especially fitting for POI recommendations. Specifically, while the approximation operator HiPPO sets the foundation of linear SSMs, we introduce a novel GaPPO operator that extends the model’s state
space into graph-represented geographical domains. This innovation allows us to construct locational SSM encoders that
seamlessly integrate users’ spatio-temporal characteristics.
The sequence-aware outputs of GeoMamba are further processed to generate multi-scale behavior representations. Extensive experimental results illustrate the superiority of GeoMamba over several state-of-the-art baselines.

Fine

Coarse

…

…

…

…

…

…

Intention …
State Space

Figure 1: An example of multi-scale state transitions.
In previous efforts to develop sequential POI recommendation models, a variety of architectural approaches
have been employed to handle the spatio-temporal visit sequences. Early attempts proposed to incorporate the geographical correlations of POIs into traditional recommendation techniques, such as collaborative filtering (Ye et al.
2011) and matrix factorization (Lian et al. 2014; Feng
et al. 2015). Graph-embedding-based models (Wang et al.
2015; Xie et al. 2016) recognized the advantages of graphstructured data to reflect geographical influences. Other
studies integrated distances and time slots into existing
matching models (Wang et al. 2018) or recurrent networks
(Sun et al. 2020). More recent researches have turned to utilize cutting-edge sequence-model structures, including selfattention (Luo, Liu, and Liu 2021), graph neural networks
(Wang et al. 2022a), and diffusion models (Qin et al. 2023b).
Despite the advancements in different model architectures, they mostly rely on the integration of explicit correlations between check-ins, such as distance and time intervals, into existing sequence models. However, it is noteworthy that apart from these, the implicit state transitions of
user’s intentions are inherently neglected from these architectures. Additionally, the broad time spans between checkins require models to effectively recognize user’s preference
shifts from a variety of time scales. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, in a user’s tour during Paris Olympics,
their preference evolve across different states over multiple time scales. In the early days of the trip, the visits are

Introduction
The flourishing location-based services and applications
have generated great demand for more precise and personalized Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendations. Since
users have left massive check-in records on location-based
platforms like Foursquare and Gowalla (Cho, Myers, and
Leskovec 2011; Yang et al. 2014), the goal of POI recommender systems is to maximize the utility of such
spatio-temporal trajectories. A well-designed recommendation model can significantly improve user experience by suggesting POIs that align with both their geographical preferences and personal interests (Cheng et al. 2013; Wang et al.
2018; Luo, Liu, and Liu 2021; Li et al. 2021).
* Correspondence authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12479

