The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Local Causal Discovery for Structural Evidence of Direct Discrimination
Jacqueline Maasch1 , Kyra Gan1 , Violet Chen2 , Agni Orfanoudaki3 , Nil-Jana Akpinar4* , Fei Wang5
1

Cornell Tech
Stevens Institute of Technology
3
University of Oxford
4
Amazon AWS AI/ML (*Work done outside Amazon)
5
Weill Cornell Medicine
2

Abstract

2017), shifting the focus from associations to interventions
and counterfactual outcomes.
Causal fairness analysis (CFA) provides a theoretical
framework for disentangling the mechanisms of unfairness
using the language of structural causal models (SCMs). Previous works in CFA (Zhang and Bareinboim 2018; Plecko
and Bareinboim 2023) and the allied field of mediation
analysis (Pearl 2014; VanderWeele 2016) generally assume
significant prior structural knowledge in order to decompose direct, indirect, and spurious effects. In practice, structural knowledge is often incomplete, absent, or contentious
for complex domains, even among experts (Petersen et al.
2023). Furthermore, the identifiability of direct and indirect
effects has been a topic of extensive debate among theoreticians (Pearl 2014), raising barriers to entry for applied
researchers (Vanderweele 2011). Thus, existing methodologies in CFA can be challenging to apply in complex systems.
Among the many fairness measures proposed in CFA, the
controlled direct effect (CDE) is a relatively straightforward
qualitative indicator of direct discrimination that takes nonzero values only when the exposure is a direct cause of the
outcome (Zhang and Bareinboim 2018). The CDE has often been favored in policy evaluation over alternative direct
effect measures (Vanderweele 2011; VanderWeele 2013) as
it is more interpretable for real-world interventions and requires fewer untestable assumptions and less prior structural
knowledge (Pearl 2001; Shpitser and VanderWeele 2011).
To increase the practicality of CFA in complex domains, we
choose to focus on the CDE as a starting point for this work.
In low-knowledge domains, we can support CFA by learning causal structure directly from observational data. However, global causal discovery is challenging in finite data due
to high sample complexity (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines
2001) and exponential time complexity in unconstrained
search spaces (Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek 2004;
Claassen, Mooij, and Heskes 2013). Learned causal graphs
often disagree with expert knowledge in complex domains
(Shen et al. 2020; Petersen et al. 2023), and can yield conflicting causal fairness conclusions in CFA (Binkytė et al.
2023 and Section 6 of this paper).
While global discovery learns the relations among all observed variables, local causal discovery only learns the substructures relevant for downstream tasks, such as causal effect estimation (Gupta, Childers, and Lipton 2023; Maasch

Identifying the causal pathways of unfairness is a critical objective for improving policy design and algorithmic decisionmaking. Prior work in causal fairness analysis often requires
knowledge of the causal graph, hindering practical applications in complex or low-knowledge domains. Moreover,
global discovery methods that learn causal structure from data
can display unstable performance on finite samples, preventing robust fairness conclusions. To mitigate these challenges,
we introduce local discovery for direct discrimination (LD3):
a method that uncovers structural evidence of direct unfairness by identifying the causal parents of an outcome variable.
LD3 performs a linear number of conditional independence
tests relative to variable set size, and allows for latent confounding under the sufficient condition that all parents of the
outcome are observed. We show that LD3 returns a valid adjustment set (VAS) under a new graphical criterion for the
weighted controlled direct effect, a qualitative indicator of direct discrimination. LD3 limits unnecessary adjustment, providing interpretable VAS for assessing unfairness. We use
LD3 to analyze causal fairness in two complex decision systems: criminal recidivism prediction and liver transplant allocation. LD3 was more time-efficient and returned more plausible results on real-world data than baselines, which took
46× to 5870× longer to execute.

1

Introduction

Fairness holds fundamental importance in policy design and
algorithmic decision-making, especially in high-stakes domains such as healthcare and policing (Starke et al. 2022;
Corbett-Davies et al. 2023). Various criteria have been proposed for measuring unfairness with respect to protected
or sensitive attributes, such as gender and ethnicity (Verma
and Rubin 2018). Legal doctrines generally differentiate between direct discrimination and indirect or spurious forms of
unfairness, codifying the notion that mechanisms of unfairness matter (Barocas and Selbst 2016; Carey and Wu 2022).
However, fairness criteria based solely on statistical associations cannot disentangle these mechanisms (Kilbertus et al.
2017; Makhlouf, Zhioua, and Palamidessi 2020), limiting
their informativeness and actionability for policy interventions. Consequently, there is a growing emphasis on applying causal reasoning in fairness analysis (Kilbertus et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19349

