The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Networks Perform Sufficient Dimension Reduction
Shuntuo Xu, Zhou Yu*
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science – MOE
School of Statistics, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
oaksword@163.com, zyu@stat.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Zou (2019) highlighted the fragility of this type of interpretation, as indistinguishable perturbations could result in
completely different interpretations.
For the sake of striking a balance between the complexity
of representation and the power of prediction, Tishby and
Zaslavsky (2015) and Saxe et al. (2019) pioneered the interpretability of deep neural networks via the information
bottleneck theory. Ghosh (2022) further linked the information bottleneck to sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) (Li
1991; Cook 1996), which is a rapidly developing research
field in regression diagnostics, data visualization, pattern
recognition and etc.
In this paper, we provide a theoretical understanding of
neural networks for representation learning from the SDR
perspective. Let x ∈ Rp represent the covariates and y ∈
R represent the response. Consider the following regression
model
y = f0 (B0> x) + ,
(2)

This paper investigates the connection between neural networks and sufficient dimension reduction (SDR), demonstrating that neural networks inherently perform SDR in regression tasks under appropriate rank regularizations. Specifically, the weights in the first layer span the central mean subspace. We establish the statistical consistency of the neural
network-based estimator for the central mean subspace, underscoring the suitability of neural networks in addressing
SDR-related challenges. Numerical experiments further validate our theoretical findings, and highlight the underlying
capability of neural networks to facilitate SDR compared to
the existing methods. Additionally, we discuss an extension
to unravel the central subspace, broadening the scope of our
investigation.

Introduction
Neural networks have achieved significant success in a
tremendous variety of applications (Lee and Abu-El-Haija
2017; Silver et al. 2018; Jumper et al. 2021; Brandes et al.
2022; Thirunavukarasu et al. 2023). As the most essential
foundation, a feedforward neural network is typically constructed by a series of linear transformations and nonlinear activations. To be specific, a function f implemented by
a feedforward neural network with L layers can be represented as
f (x) = φL ◦ σL−1 ◦ φL−1 ◦ · · · ◦ σ1 ◦ φ1 (x).

where B0 ∈ Rp×d is a nonrandom matrix with d ≤ p,
f0 : Rd → R is an unknown function, and  is the noise
such that E(|x) = 0 and Var(|x) = ν 2 for some positive constant ν. Intuitively, the semiparametric and potentially multi-index model (2) asserts that the core information for regression is encoded in the low-dimensional linear
representation B0> x. In the literature of SDR, model (2) has
been extensively studied. Based on model (2) , Cook and Li
(2002) proposed the objective of sufficient mean dimension
reduction as
y ⊥⊥ E(y|x)|B > x
(3)

(1)

Here, ◦ is the functional composition operator, φi (z) =
Wi> z + bi denotes the linear transformation and σi represents the elementwise nonlinear activation function. Despite a clear architecture, the formula (1) provides limited
insight into how the information within the input data is processed by the neural networks. To comprehensively understand how neural networks retrieve task-relevant information, there have been extensive efforts towards unraveling
their interpretability (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017; Guidotti
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2021). For instance, post-hoc interpretability (Lipton 2018) focused on the predictions generated by neural networks, while disregarding the detailed
mechanism and feature importance. Ghorbani, Abid, and

for some matrix B, where ⊥⊥ means statistical independence. Denote the column space spanned by B as ΠB , which
is commonly referred to as the mean dimension-reduction
subspace. It is evident that the matrix B satisfying (3) is far
away from uniqueness. Hence, we focus on the intersection
of all possible mean dimension-reduction subspace, which is
itself a mean dimension-reduction subspace under mild conditions (e.g., when the domain of x is open and convex; see
Cook and Li (2002)), and term it the central mean subspace.
Agreeing to condition (3), B0 defined in model (2) yields
the central mean subspace, denoted as ΠB0 , under certain
assumption. Statistical estimation and inference about the
central mean subspace is the primary goal of SDR. Popular statistical methods for recovering central mean subspace

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21806

