The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

StoryWeaver: A Unified World Model for
Knowledge-Enhanced Story Character Customization
Jinlu Zhang1 * , Jiji Tang2 * , Rongsheng Zhang2 , Tangjie Lv2 , Xiaoshuai Sun1†
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Fuxi AI Lab, Netease Inc., Hangzhou, China
zhangjinlu@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {tangjiji01, zhangrongsheng, hzlvtangjie}@corp.netease.com, xssun@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

the whole storylines (Gong et al. 2023; Su et al. 2023; Song
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2022; Cheng et al. 2024).
Recent diffusion methods for character-consistent image
generation (Gal et al. 2022; Ruiz et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023;
Li, Li, and Hoi 2024; Kumari et al. 2023; Han et al. 2023)
can be broadly categorized into two types, i.e., adapter-based
and customization-based. Adapter-based methods (Ye et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024) introduce imageconditioned side networks within diffusion models to provide visual guidance. For example, IP-Adapter (Ye et al.
2023) deploys an image adapter to extract features from input images, while StoryGEN (Liu et al. 2024) incorporates
a context module to provide visual context from previous
frames. However, these methods struggle with detailed identity extraction and precise character customization. As depicted in Fig. 1(a), IP-Adapter captures the coarse semantics
of Petty, e.g., a penguin wearing purple, but overlooks finer
details of the appearance.
On the other hand, customization-based methods (Ruiz
et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2021; Gal et al. 2022; Han et al. 2023)
conceptualize the character on a set of customized images,
achieving better identity preservation. However, since they
are trained in an entangled way, i.e., rely on few text tokens
to capture coarse-grained semantics, these methods are overfit and hard to respond to text instructions, also illustrated in
Fig. 1(a). Furthermore, their per-concept optimization necessitates a distinct model for each character, resulting in a
significant demand for storage resources.
Unlike previous works, we are keen to a unified framework with fine-grained modeling for comprehensive multicharacter customization to achieve high-fidelity identity
preservation and precise text-semantic alignments. Inspired
by ERNIE (Zhang et al. 2019), which enhances language
representation through external knowledge, we argue that
finer-grained details within each story can be effectively captured with enhanced semantic-rich knowledge. Then we propose a novel Character-Graph (CG) to encode fine-grained
semantics about the story world, including the given characters, their detailed attributes, and their relations. Characters
are presented as object nodes in CG with multiple attribute
node attached, and their relations serve as the edge to connect all objects. These components collectively define the
essence of each story scene. Then each visual story scene
can be detailed in text captions through CG. By Customiz-

Story visualization has gained increasing attention in artificial intelligence. However, existing methods still struggle with maintaining a balance between character identity
preservation and text-semantics alignment, largely due to
a lack of detailed semantic modeling of the story scene.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel knowledge
graph, namely Character-Graph (CG), which represents various story-related knowledge, including the characters, their
attributes and the relationship. We then introduce StoryWeaver, an image generator that achieves Customization
via Character-Graph (C-CG), capable of consistent story
visualization with rich text semantics. To further improve
the multi-character generation performance, we incorporate
knowledge-enhanced spatial guidance (KE-SG) into StoryWeaver to precisely inject character semantics into generation. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed method,
extensive experiments are conducted using a new benchmark called TBC-Bench. The experiments confirm that our
StoryWeaver excels not only in creating vivid visual story
plots but also in accurately conveying character identities
across various scenarios with considerable storage efficiency,
e.g., achieving an average increase of +9.03% DINO-I and
+13.44% CLIP-T. Furthermore, ablation experiments are
conducted to verify the superiority of each proposed module.

Code — https://github.com/Aria-Zhangjl/StoryWeaver
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.07375

Introduction
Story Visualization is an emerging task in artificial intelligence with wide-ranging applications in education and entertainment, e.g., comic books creation and movie production (Li et al. 2019; Maharana, Hannan, and Bansal 2022;
Zhou et al. 2024b; Cheng et al. 2024). Given a textual narrative and portrait images of characters, the task of story visualization is to generate a series of images visually represent
the story. Therefore, the main obstacle in this task is to customize the given characters faithfully and synthesize semantically diverse images that align well with the prompt along
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9951

