The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KeyPose: Category-Level 6D Object Pose Estimation with Self-Adaptive Keypoints
Sheng Yu1 , Di-Hua Zhai1∗ , Yuanqing Xia1,2
1

School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Zhongyuan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, Henan, China
yusheng@bit.edu.cn, zhaidih@bit.edu.cn, xia yuanqing@bit.edu.cn.

Category-level object pose estimation is an important task in
computer vision. Some prior methods based on assumptions
often struggle with drastic changes in object appearance. To
address this challenge, we propose a new method for object
pose estimation based on object-adaptive keypoints. In this
paper, we first introduce a transformer-based keypoint prediction method for adaptive forecasting of point cloud keypoints. This method calculates the similarity between keypoint features and point cloud features, allowing keypoints to
represent object geometry more effectively. Furthermore, to
enhance the geometric feature construction of keypoints, we
propose a graph-based keypoint feature aggregation method,
which considers both the structural relationships between
keypoints and the point cloud, strengthening the network’s
understanding of geometric structures. At this stage, keypoints remain at the geometric spatial level of the object and
have not been predicted in NOCS. To improve the accuracy of
keypoint prediction in NOCS, we design a NOCS voxelization method that divides NOCS into multiple voxels and accurately predicts NOCS keypoints within these voxels. Experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our proposed KeyPose method outperforms all existing
methods, achieving over 20% improvement in pose accuracy
on some critical datasets.

1

Keypoint to Keypoint
Graph Aggregation

RGB Patch

Abstract

Self-Adaptive
Keypoints
Detector

Keypoints

Graph-based
Feature
Aggregation
Keypoint to Cloud
Graph Aggregation

Point Cloud

Combine
6D Pose

NOCS
KeyPoints

NOCS
Voxelization

Voxel-based
NOCS Keypoint
Prediction

Figure 1: KeyPose takes the RGB and the point cloud as
the input, and detects the keypoints with a self-adaptive keypoints detector.

Compared to instance-level object pose estimation methods, category-level object pose estimation methods do not
rely on the object’s 3D model. They can effectively predict
the poses of all unknown objects within the same category,
demonstrating strong practical applicability and generalization performance. But due to variations in shape among different instances within the same category, category-level object pose estimation faces significant challenges.
Currently, most methods achieve object pose estimation
by establishing correspondences between the object’s model
in Normalized Object Coordinate Space (NOCS) and the actual object point cloud. Some methods, such as (Tian, Ang,
and Lee 2020; Chen and Dou 2021; Lin et al. 2022a), based
on prior point clouds for pose estimation usually deform the
prior point cloud and establish dense correspondences between the deformed prior point cloud and the actual point
cloud, thereby predicting the object’s pose. However, these
methods of predicting poses through deformation and subsequent correspondence often encounter local matching errors. Additionally, studies like (Liu et al. 2023) have demonstrated that prior point clouds are unnecessary for categorylevel object pose estimation. Therefore, we need a direct and
effective approach to replace prior point clouds for accurately representing the 3D structure of objects.
We notice that each object category contains distinct rep-

Introduction

Object pose estimation is an important task in the field of
computer vision and is widely applied in robotics manipulation (Wang et al. 2019a; Lin et al. 2022a), augmented reality (Tjaden, Schwanecke, and Schomer 2017), autonomous
driving (Manhardt, Kehl, and Gaidon 2019), and other fields.
Previous pose estimation methods have often focused on
instance-level object pose estimation, such as (Xiang et al.
2018; Kehl et al. 2017; Peng et al. 2019; He et al. 2020), but
these methods rely on the object’s 3D model, making them
difficult to apply to pose estimation tasks involving realworld unknown objects. To address this issue, researchers
have proposed category-level object pose estimation methods, such as (Wang et al. 2019b; Tian, Ang, and Lee 2020;
Chen et al. 2021; Chen and Dou 2021; Lin et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2020a; Di et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2022a).
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9653

