The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Breaking the Resource Monopoly from Industries: Sustainable and Reliable LLM
Serving By Recycling Outdated and Resource-Constrained GPUs
Tianlong Chen
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
tianlong@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

tainable computing, and reliable serving against software
and hardware attacks.

In recent years, Large Language Model (LLM) agents, exemplified by models like ChatGPT, and PaLM, have showcased remarkable prowess in various tasks, owing to their
vast number of parameters and emergent in-context learning capabilities. People expect the wide usage of LLM serving at-edge hardware, personal devices, and organization/enterprise IT infrastructures to revolutionize global access
to information, communication, automation, and creativity.
However, due to the extreme large-scale LLM parameters
(LLaMA 3.1 contains 405 billion of 2 or 4 bytes floating
point numbers), the LLM serving is facing significant sustainability pressure due to its requirements on the latest highembodied carbon hardware (e.g., GPUs, HBMs, memory,
storage, and network hardware) and the high operational carbon emissions, leading to a significant and alarming increase
in carbon emissions and a high barrier to their widespread
deployments and practical applications in various scenarios. Companies, organizations, and institutes usually have
the complete general-purpose IT infrastructure, which consists of a large amount of computing, memory, storage, and
network hardware. Although these general-purpose IT infrastructures are far more than enough for existing application executions, deploying and executing the LLM for a
broad spectrum of serving platforms can be challenging and
difficult due to resource limitations. Purchasing the latest
hardware including GPUs (e.g., Nvidia H100 or H200) will
lead to considerable issues including 1) serious embodied
carbon emissions during the new hardware production, 2)
no explicitly lower operational carbon emissions with essential modeling and optimizations, 3) high economic and
financial pressures, and 4) potentially tremendous existing
hardware resource wasting. Therefore, it is a trend and becomes a must to explore how to use the existing hardware, especially outdated hardware, to collectively improve both environmental sustainability, efficiency, and
reliability for LLM serving. A few pioneering examples
include Microsoft’s Project Natick, Google’s TPU Pod Optimization, Alibaba’s Cloud Server Repurposing, and Facebook’s Network Hardware Reuse. This talk will particularly
emphasize modularized LLM architecture, in-storage sus-

Structure of the Talk
▷ (Part 1 — 10 mins) Modularize, Allocate, and Compress: Enable Sustainable LLM Serving on ResourceConstrained GPUs. Initiating our journey. I will briefly
introduce the challenges of LLM serving on outdated and
resource-constrained GPUs. To address these pain points,
I will review recent advances in modularizing, allocating,
and compressing LLMs for sustainable serving. I will first
explain how to convert vanilla LLMs into their modularized counterparts without sacrificing the serving quality [1].
Then, I will cover solutions to advance modular network
allocations by tackling unbalanced routing, modular expert
collapse, modular network training instability, modular network overfitting, etc. ▷ (Part 2 — 10 mins) Loop Your
CPU and Storage in: Enable Scalable LLM Serving via
In-storage Computing. Moving forward, I will introduce
the difficulties of using outdated and budget-constrained
hardware to afford LLM serving. To tackle the challenges, I
will discuss the possibility of looping CPU and storage into
the computation from a full-stack system view. The spotlight
here pivots in-storage computing — leveraging a carefully
designed multi-level cache management system that could
dynamically assign LLM submodules to HBM, DRAM, and
SSDs for serving. ▷ (Part 3 — 10 mins) Against Both
Software and Hardware Attacks: Enable Reliable LLM
Serving on Risky Outdated GPUs. As it transitions to serving reliability, I will present the unique safety challenges
of serving on risky outdated GPUs beyond classic software
perspectives. Specifically, I plan to share our work and recent advances in LLM adversarial serving, jailbreak, hallucination, and hardware-induced stochastic bit-flip errors on
outdated GPUs. The goal of my talk is to survey and foster
new trends and advances in sustainable and reliable AI, discussing the possibility of recycling outdated GPUs to break
the resource monopoly from industries.

References
[1] Chen, T.; Zhang, Z.; JAISWAL, A. K.; Liu, S.; and Wang, Z.
2023. Sparse MoE as the New Dropout: Scaling Dense and
Self-Slimmable Transformers. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28707

