The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-Shot Video Restoration and Enhancement Using Pre-Trained
Image Diffusion Model
Cong Cao1 , Huanjing Yue1 * , Xin Liu2 , Jingyu Yang1
1

2

School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Laboratory, School of Engineering Science, Lappeenranta-Lahti University of
Technology LUT, Lappeenranta, Finland
caocong 123@tju.edu.cn, huanjing.yue@tju.edu.cn, linuxsino@gmail.com, yjy@tju.edu.cn
Abstract

With the emergence of powerful pre-trained text-to-image
diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.
2022), using off-the-shelf text-to-image diffusion model for
zero-shot video editing has garnered increasing attention (Wu
et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023). To generate temporally consistent edited video, the motion information from the original
video is typically utilized to design various temporal modules (Cong et al. 2023). However, predicting motion becomes
more challenging when dealing with video restoration and
enhancement tasks since input videos suffering from various degradations. In order to address this issue, we propose
Short-Long-Range (SLR) temporal attention which consists
cross-neighbour-frame attention and self-corrected trajectory
attention. The cross-neighbor-frame attention implicitly models short-range temporal correlation without explicitly estimating motion, while the self-corrected trajectory attention
compensates for inaccurate explicit motion estimation to capture long-range temporal correlation. The explicitly estimated
motion information is utilized to construct guidance for pixellevel temporal consistency, which is a complementary of
semantic-level consistency guidance. We observe that temporal flickering is mainly caused by inherent stochasticity in the
diffusion model. Therefore, we introduce spatial-temporal
noise sharing to mitigate this stochasticity effect. Additionally, we propose an early stopping sampling strategy since
flicking details are usually generated during sampling in the
later stage.
In summary, there are mainly three contributions in this
work. First, we propose the first framework for Zero-shot
Video Restoration and enhancement using a pre-trained image Diffusion model (ZVRD). Second, we propose SLR
temporal attention, temporal consistency guidance, spatialtemporal noise sharing, and early stopping sampling strategy
to maintain temporal consistency during video restoration
and enhancement. Third, extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

Diffusion-based zero-shot image restoration and enhancement
models have achieved great success in various tasks of image restoration and enhancement. However, directly applying
them to video restoration and enhancement results in severe
temporal flickering artifacts. In this paper, we propose the first
framework for zero-shot video restoration and enhancement
based on the pre-trained image diffusion model. By replacing
the spatial self-attention layer with the proposed short-longrange (SLR) temporal attention layer, the pre-trained image
diffusion model can take advantage of the temporal correlation between frames. We further propose temporal consistency
guidance, spatial-temporal noise sharing, and an early stopping
sampling strategy to improve temporally consistent sampling.
Our method is a plug-and-play module that can be inserted
into any diffusion-based image restoration or enhancement
methods to further improve their performance. Experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method.

Code — https://github.com/cao-cong/ZVRD

Introduction
Recently, Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021) have demonstrated
advanced generative capabilities surpassing those of GANs,
inspiring further exploration of restoration and enhancement
methods based on diffusion models. Different from using
supervised learning and diffusion framework to train models
for specific restoration and enhancement tasks (Saharia et al.
2022; Yin et al. 2023), the works in (Song and Ermon 2019;
Chung et al. 2022; Fei et al. 2023; Shi and Liu 2024) employ
a pre-trained image diffusion model for universal zero-shot
image restoration and enhancement. These methods constrain
the content between generated results in the reverse diffusion
process and degraded images. However, due to the absence
of temporal modeling in pre-trained image diffusion models,
although these methods have shown promising results in
image restoration and enhancement, their direct application
to video restoration and enhancement can lead to significant
temporal flickering.

Related Works
Diffusion-Based Zero-Shot Image Restoration and
Enhancement
The success of diffusion-based generative models has enlightened diffusion-based image restoration and enhancement methods. These methods can be divided into two cate-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1935

