The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Decision Making Through the Integration of Large Language Models
and Operations Research Optimization
Segev Wasserkrug 1 , Leonard Boussioux 2,3,4 , Dick den Hertog5 , Farzaneh Mirzazadeh6 , Ş. İlker
Birbil 5 , Jannis Kurtz 5 , Donato Maragno 5
1
IBM Research - Israel, Haifa, Israel
University of Washington, Michael G. Foster School of Business, Seattle, WA, USA
3
University of Washington, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, Seattle, WA, USA
4
Laboratory for Innovation Science at Harvard (LISH), Cambridge, MA, USA
5
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam Business School, Business Analytics Section, The Netherlands
6
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, Cambridge, MA, USA
segevw@il.ibm.com, leobix@mit.edu, d.denhertog@uva.nl, farzaneh@ibm.com, s.i.birbil@uva.nl, j.kurtz@uva.nl,
d.maragno@uva.nl
2

1

Abstract

Introduction

Many critical real-world decision-making problems in areas like supply chain and healthcare involve numerous possible actions, complex constraints, and objectives that can
be modeled with a mathematical function. Mathematical
optimization, a core discipline within Operations Research
(OR), is well-suited to solving such problems and has delivered significant financial and societal benefits in real-world
applications, such as more efficient food delivery by the
United Nations (Peters et al. 2022), millions in savings for ecommerce sites (Deng et al. 2023), and improved radiotherapy treatment for cancer patients (Zarepisheh et al. 2022).
However, applying mathematical optimization requires significant expertise and time, and most decision-makers lack
the necessary skills or access to experts. Thus, it has long
been an important goal to make optimization widely accessible to decision-makers.
Large Language Models (LLMs), like ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023a), have democratized AI, making advanced capabilities accessible through natural language and simplifying tasks such as document and code generation. This technology can enhance the effectiveness and productivity of
knowledge workers, from accelerating programming with
tools like GitHub Copilot (Peng et al. 2023) to enabling
business consultants to deliver higher-quality results more
quickly (Dell’Acqua et al. 2023).
With the new capabilities provided by LLMs, we believe
the time is right to bring together the AI and OR communities to integrate these technologies towards the goal of
creating a Decision Optimization CoPilot (DOCP): an AI
tool that interacts with decision-makers in natural language,
leveraging the decision-makers’ knowledge and feedback to
generate and solve problem-specific optimization models.
In this article, we outline the DOCP vision and the core requirements for its implementation, describe the current state
of the art, and suggest research directions to address existing
gaps. We conclude with a call to action for the AI and OR
communities to come together to realize this vision, thereby
significantly enhancing the impact of AI and OR on complex, critical decision-making.

Many critical business and societal decisions in areas such as
supply chain and healthcare involve numerous potential actions, complex constraints, and goals that can be modeled as
objective functions. Mathematical optimization, a core area
in Operations Research (OR), provides robust, mathematically grounded methodologies to address such decisions and
has shown tremendous benefits in many applications. However, its application requires the creation of accurate and efficient optimization models, necessitating rare expertise and
considerable time, creating a barrier to widespread adoption
in decision-making. Thus, it is a long-standing goal to make
these capabilities widely accessible.
The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has made advanced Artificial Intelligence (AI) capabilities widely accessible through natural language. LLMs can accelerate expert
work in creating formal models like computer programs, and
emerging research indicates they can also speed up the development of optimization models by OR experts. We, therefore, propose integrating and advancing LLM and optimization modeling to empower organizational decision-makers to
model and solve such complex problems without requiring
deep expertise in optimization.
In this work, we present our vision for democratizing optimization modeling for organizational decision-making by
such a combination of LLMs and optimization modeling. We
identify a set of fundamental requirements for the vision’s
implementation and describe the state of the art through a literature survey and some experimentation. We show that a)
LLMs already provide substantial novel capabilities relevant
to realizing this vision, but that b) major research challenges
remain to be addressed. We also propose possible research
directions to overcome these gaps. We would like this work
to serve as a call to action to bring together the LLM and
OR optimization modeling communities to pursue this vision,
thereby enabling much more widespread improved decisionmaking and increasing by orders of magnitude the benefits AI
and OR can bring to enterprises and society.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28643

