The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Ambiguous Instance-Aware Contrastive Network with Multi-Level Matching for
Multi-View Document Clustering
Zhenqiu Shu, Teng Sun, Yunwei Luo , Zhengtao Yu *
Faculty of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology
shuzhenqiu@163.com, st251100@163.com, lywinaaa@gmail.com, ztyu@hotmail.com

Abstract

Traditional MVC methods (Wang et al. 2022b; Li et al.
2023; Shu et al. 2023) usually use shallow machine learning techniques to cluster multi-view data. For example, matrix factorization-based MVC methods (Zhao, Ding, and Fu
2017; Wang, Zhang, and Gao 2018) learn latent representations by decomposing the original multi-view data matrix.
Graph-based MVC methods (Li et al. 2021; Huang et al.
2021) exploit the structural information of multi-view data
by learning graph representations and then performing spectral clustering algorithms. Subspace-based MVC methods
(Li et al. 2019a; Yin, Wu, and Wang 2015) aim to learn a
low-dimensional subspace from original high-dimensional
data that can better reveal the intrinsic structure. However,
due to the limited representation ability of shallow learning
methods, they usually perform poorly in complex scenarios
such as multilingual document clustering.
Recently, deep MVC (DMVC) technology has attracted
increasing attention due to the excellent feature representation ability of deep neural networks (DNNs). DMVC methods based on shared representation learning (Du et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2021a) learn nonlinear feature representations between different views by using autoencoders while maintaining consistency in the latent space through parameter
sharing and reconstruction loss. DMVC methods based on
self-supervised learning (Xu et al. 2022a; Xia et al. 2021)
usually design self-supervised losses to optimize the autoencoder network jointly. GCN-based DMVC methods (Zhao,
Yang, and Nie 2023; Cheng et al. 2021) use GCN to automatically learn node feature representations, thus effectively
capturing high-order structural relationships between multiview data. GAN-based DMVC algorithms (Li et al. 2019b;
Shu et al. 2024) try to align the feature distributions of multiview data through generators and discriminators. Most existing DMVC methods utilize contrastive learning techniques
to explore the consistency of multi-view data by maximizing the similarity between positive pairs and minimizing it
between negative pairs in the latent space (Xu et al. 2022b;
Chen et al. 2023). However, they treat all positive and negative instance pairs equally, without considering that some
instance pairs are easier to classify while others are more
challenging and ambiguous.
Although the effectiveness of these techniques has been
demonstrated in several real-world applications, they suffer
from the following challenges: 1) The distribution of multi-

Multi-view document clustering (MvDC) aims to improve
the accuracy and robustness of clustering by fully considering the complementarity of different views. However, in
real-world clustering applications, most existing works suffer from the following challenges: 1) They primarily align
multi-view data based on a single perspective, such as features and classes, thus ignoring the diversity and comprehensiveness of representations. 2) They treat each instance
equally in cross-view contrastive learning without considering ambiguous ones, which weakens the model’s discriminative ability. To address these problems, we propose an ambiguous instance-aware contrastive network with multi-level
matching (AICN-MLM) for MvDC tasks. This model contains two key modules: a multi-level matching module and an
ambiguous instance-aware contrastive learning module. The
former attempts to align multi-view data from different perspectives, including features, pseudo-labels, and prototypes.
The latter dynamically adjusts instance weights through a
weight modulation function to highlight ambiguous instance
pairs. Thus, our proposed method can effectively explore
the consistency of multi-view document data and focus on
ambiguous instances to enhance the model’s discriminative
ability. Extensive experimental results on several multi-view
document datasets verify the effectiveness of our proposed
method.

Introduction
In this era of rapid information development, data often originates from various sources, such as news organizations reporting the same event in different languages. Many studies
treat each language document as a separate view, utilizing
multi-view analysis techniques to explore semantic information from multilingual documents. Compared with singleview data, multi-view data offers a more comprehensive
understanding and usually achieves better results in downstream tasks. Multi-view clustering (MVC) (Chao, Sun, and
Bi 2021) attempts to reveal hidden data patterns and group
structures by integrating information from multi-view data.
Existing MVC methods are divided into two offers: traditional MVC methods and deep MVC methods.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20479

