The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Last-iterate Convergence in Regularized Graphon Mean Field Game
*

Jing Dong1, , Baoxiang Wang1,3,∗ , Yaoliang Yu2,3,∗
1

Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
2
University of Waterloo,
3
Vector Institute
jingdong@link.cuhk.edu.cn, bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn, yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

This framework has been successfully applied to many realworld tasks, including social networks (Yang et al. 2018),
and swarm robotics (Cui et al. 2023).
The MFG framework leverages the assumption of agent
homogeneity and has demonstrated success across various
applications. However, this assumption becomes a hindrance
when dealing with heterogeneous agents. To address this
limitation, the Graphon mean field games (GMFG) (Parise
and Ozdaglar 2019; Aurell et al. 2022) framework has been
introduced as an extension of MFGs to accommodate heterogeneous agent modeling. The GMFG framework captures agent interactions through a graphical structure and is
shown to be successful in applications like modeling investment decisions in financial markets (Tangpi and Zhou 2024).
Despite the empirical success of MFG and GMFG, our theoretical understanding of this framework remains limited.
In monotone MFGs (Lasry and Lions 2007), and under
the access to the exact cost and transition functions, (Perrin et al. 2020) proposed a continuous time fictitious play
algorithm, where the averaged iterates policy converge to
a Nash equilibrium in O(T −1 ) iterations. For discrete-time
monotone GMFGs with access to exact cost and transition
functions, (Zhang et al. 2023) proposed a mirror descentbased algorithm that converges to the Nash equilibrium in
O(T −1/2 ) iterations.
However, in real-world applications, approximating
continuous-time dynamics can be challenging, and exact
knowledge of cost and transition functions may not be feasible. Agents typically only receive bandit feedback, meaning they observe the cost and transitions associated with the
states and actions they have visited. Meanwhile, the existing
approaches only guarantee the convergence of the time average of the joint action profile, rather than the last-iterate convergence, the convergence of the joint action profile. Lastiterate convergence holds greater appeal as it offers a descriptive account of the evolution of players’ overall behavior. In contrast, while the trajectory of players’ joint action
converge in the time-average sense, it may exhibit cycling,
which is not suitable for practical deployment (Mertikopoulos, Papadimitriou, and Piliouras 2018). The following question thus arises.
How fast can discrete-time algorithms converge (in the last
iterate) to a Nash equilibrium in GMFGs with bandit
feedback?

To model complex real-world systems, such as traders in
stock markets, or the dissemination of contagious diseases,
graphon mean-field games (GMFG) have been proposed to
model many agents. Despite the empirical success, our understanding of GMFG is limited. Popular algorithms such as mirror descent are deployed but remain unknown for their convergence properties. In this work, we give the first last-iterate
convergence rate of mirror descent in regularized monotone
GMFG. In tabular monotone GMFG with finite state and
action spaces and under bandit feedback, we show a lastiterate convergence rate of O(T −1/4 ). Moreover, when exact
knowledge of costs and transitions is available, we improve
this convergence rate to O(T −1 ), matching the existing convergence rate observed in strongly convex games. In linear
GMFG, our algorithm achieves a last-iterate convergence rate
of O(T −1/5 ). Finally, we verify the performance of the studied algorithms by empirically testing them against fictitious
play in a variety of tasks.

Introduction
In many real-world applications, the presence of complex
systems including many interacting individuals or components is indispensable. These systems manifest in various forms, from the intricate networks of neurons within
human brains (Bullmore and Sporns 2009, 2012; AvenaKoenigsberger, Misic, and Sporns 2018), to the dynamic interactions of traders in stock markets (Bakker et al. 2010;
Bian, Xu, and Li 2016), and to the dissemination of contagious diseases throughout societies (Newman 2002; PastorSatorras et al. 2015). Due to the large number of interacting individuals or components, these systems pose significant challenges for modeling. Mean field games (MFG)
(Caines, Huang, and Malhamé 2006; Lasry and Lions 2007)
have emerged as a highly effective approach for addressing
this complexity, offering both scalability and robust theoretical guarantees in these multi-agent systems. MFG operates on the principle of weak interactions, positing that each
individual’s influence on the overall system is negligible.
* Authors are listed alphabetically, all authors are corresponding
authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13779

