The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Suboptimal Search with Dynamic Distribution of Suboptimality
Mohammadreza Hami1 , Nathan R. Sturtevant1, 2
1

2

University of Alberta
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
hami@ualberta.ca, nathanst@ualberta.ca

Abstract

that state with a shorter path (Sepetnitsky, Felner, and Stern
2016). Recent papers have explored BFS algorithms that
never re-expand states (BFS-NR) and introduced new priority functions, including the convex downward parabola
(XDP) and the convex upward parabola (XUP) (Chen and
Sturtevant 2019). XDP prioritizes near-optimal solutions
early in the search, allowing for more suboptimal actions
as the heuristic value of generated states decreases and the
g-value increases. On the other hand, XUP prioritizes nearoptimal solutions in states with low heuristic values near
the goal, allowing for more suboptimal actions early in the
search. Unlike XDP and XUP, WA* distributes suboptimality uniformly across the search. But, in all these priority
functions, distribution of suboptimality is fixed before the
search begins. Focal list algorithms on the other hand, such
as Dynamic Potential Search (Gilon, Felner, and Stern 2016)
or Explicit Estimation Search (Thayer and Ruml 2011) adjust their search according to the best path found so far, but
have to re-expand states when a shorter path is found and
may need to re-sort the O PEN list when the bound on the
best path changes.
This paper performs an analysis of the properties of priority functions that can be used with BFS-NR. The primary
contribution of this paper is a detailed description of a novel
framework for search that dynamically assigns different suboptimality to different parts of the search, while maintaining
an overall suboptimality bound, avoiding the requirement
to perform re-expansions, and to re-prioritize the O PEN list
during search. The suboptimality weight for each part is determined by the policy used in the framework. Several policies are proposed. Although no single policy is uniformly
best on all domains, this framework outperforms existing
baselines across most benchmarks. It works particularly well
on domains with dynamic costs that are not accounted for by
the heuristic guidance.

In bounded-suboptimal heuristic search, the aim is to find
a solution path within a given bound as quickly as possible, which is crucial when computational resources are limited. Recent research has demonstrated Weighted A* variants
such as XDP that find bounded suboptimal solutions without
needing to perform state re-expansions; they work by shifting
where the suboptimality in the search is allowed. However,
the suboptimality distribution is fixed before the search begins. This paper introduces Dynamic Suboptimality Weighted
A* (DSWA*), a search framework that allows suboptimality
to be dynamically distributed at runtime, based on the properties of the search. Experiments show that dynamic policies
can consistently outperform existing algorithms across a diverse set of domains, particularly those with dynamic costs.

Code — https://github.com/nathansttt/hog2/tree/PDBrefactor/papers/DSWA

Introduction
Optimal search algorithms must expand all nodes with an
f -value less than C ∗ , where C ∗ is the optimal cost to reach
the goal from the start state. In harder problems, the number of nodes with f < C ∗ grows significantly, resulting in
increased time to find the optimal solution. This observation has spawned extensive research into suboptimal search
methods (Pohl 1970; Pearl and Kim 1982; Thayer and Ruml
2008, 2011; Valenzano et al. 2013; Gilon, Felner, and Stern
2016; Chen and Sturtevant 2021), wherein a suboptimal solution is accepted in exchange for substantial reduction in
number of node expansions.
One category of suboptimal search is bounded suboptimal search, which establishes a relationship between the optimal and returned solutions (Gilon, Felner, and Stern 2016).
The first historical example of a bounded suboptimal search
algorithm is Weighted A* (WA*) (Pohl 1970). It finds solutions that cost no more than a predetermined multiple, w
times the optimal solution cost (Ebendt and Drechsler 2009).
WA* is a Best-First Search (BFS) algorithm like A* with a
different priority function that returns a bounded suboptimal
solution. When WA* finds a shorter path to an already expanded state, it has the option of whether or not to re-expand

Background
Our problem definition follows closely from Chen and
Sturtevant (2021), as we build on their work. It is assumed that all search algorithms are DXBB (deterministic
expansion-based black box) (Dechter and Pearl 1985; Eckerle et al. 2017), meaning they are only able to access the
state space through a black box expansion function - a state
can be accessed only if that state is start or a successor of a

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26991

