The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Epistemic EFX Allocations Exist for Monotone Valuations
Hannaneh Akrami1,2 , Nidhi Rathi1,3
2

1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Graduiertenschule Informatik, Universität des Saarlandes
3
Saarland Informatics Campus
hakrami@mpi-inf.mpg.de, nrathi@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract

the seminal work of Steinhaus, Banach, and Knaster (Steinhaus 1948). Since then, the theory of fair division has received significant attention and a flourishing flow of research
from areas across economics, social science, mathematics,
and computer science; see (Amanatidis et al. 2022; Brams
and Taylor 1996; Brandt and Procaccia 2016; Robertson and
Webb 1998) for excellent expositions.
The development of fair division protocols plays a crucial
role in ensuring equitable outcomes in the design of many
social institutions. With the advent of internet, the necessity
of having division rules that are both transparent and agreeable or, in other words, fair has become evident (Moulin
2019). There are many examples to see how the principles
of fair division are being applied in various technological
platforms today.1 2
Some of the central solution concepts and axiomatic characterizations in the fair division literature stem from the
cake-cutting context (Moulin 2004) where the resource to
be divided is considered to be a (divisible) cake [0, 1].
The quintessential notion of fairness—envy-freeness—was
also mathematically formalized in this setup (Foley 1967;
Varian 1973). We say an allocation is envy-free if every
agent prefers their share in the division at least as much
as any other agent’s share. Strong existential guarantees of
envy-free cake division that also establishes a connection
with topology (Stromquist 1980; Su 1999), has made envyfreeness as the representative notion of fairness in resourceallocation settings. Unfortunately, an envy-free allocation is
not guaranteed to exist when we need to fairly divide a set
of indivisible items: consider two agents and a single valuable item. Only one agent can get the item, and the other
agent will be envious. Furthermore, it is NP-hard to decide
whether an envy-free allocation exists e.g., see (Bouveret
and Lemaı̂tre 2016). Infeasibility along with high computational complexity of envy-free allocations has led to study
of its various relaxations for the discrete setting.
In this paper, we consider the setting where the resource is
a set of discrete or indivisible items, each of which must be
wholly allocated to a single agent. A fair division instance
consists of a set N = {1, 2 . . . , n} of n agents and a set M
of items. Every agent i specifies her preferences via a valua-

We study the fundamental problem of fairly dividing a set of
indivisible items among agents with (general) monotone valuations. The notion of envy-freeness up to any item (EFX)
is considered to be one of the most fascinating fairness concepts in this line of work. Unfortunately, despite significant
efforts, existence of EFX allocations is a major open problem
in fair division, thereby making the study of approximations
and relaxations of EFX a natural line of research. Recently,
Caragiannis et al. (2023) introduced a promising relaxation of
EFX, called epistemic EFX (EEFX). An allocation is EEFX,
if for every agent, it is possible to shuffle the items in the remaining bundles so that she becomes “EFX-satisfied”. Caragiannis et al. (2023) prove existence and polynomial-time
computability of EEFX allocations for additive valuations. A
natural question asks what happens when we consider valuations more general than additive?
We address this important open question and answer it affirmatively by establishing the existence of EEFX allocations
for an arbitrary number of agents with general monotone valuations. To the best of our knowledge, besides EF1, EEFX
is the only known relaxation of EFX to have such strong
existential guarantees. Furthermore, we complement our existential result by proving computational and informationtheoretic lower bounds. We prove that even for an arbitrary
number of (more than one) agents with identical submodular
valuations, it is PLS-hard to compute EEFX allocations and
it requires exponentially-many value queries to do so.

1

Introduction

The theory of fair division addresses the fundamental problem of dividing a set of resources in a fair manner among individuals (often called agents) with varied preferences. This
problem arises naturally in many real-world settings, such as
division of inheritance, dissolution of business partnerships,
divorce settlements, assigning computational resources in a
cloud computing environment, course assignments, allocation of radio and television spectrum, air traffic management, course assignments, to name a few (Etkin, Parekh, and
Tse 2007; Moulin 2004; Vossen 2002; Budish and Cantillon 2012). Although the roots of fair division can be found
in antiquity, for instance, in ancient Greek mythology and
the Bible, its first mathematical exposition dates back to

1

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

13520

See www.spliddit.org
http://www.nyu.edu/projects/adjustedwinner/

