The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Memory Efficient Matting with Adaptive Token Routing
Yiheng Lin1, 2 , Yihan Hu1, 2, 4 , Chenyi Zhang1, 2, 4 ,
Ting Liu4 , Xiaochao Qu4 , Luoqi Liu4 , Yao Zhao1, 2, 3 * , Yunchao Wei1, 2, 3
1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Visual Intelligence + X International Joint Laboratory of the Ministry of Education
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
MT Lab, Meitu Inc
{yiheng.lin, Yihan.hu, chenyi22, yzhao, yunchao.wei}@bjtu.edu.cn, {lt, qxc, llq5}@meitu.com
2

Abstract

Down
sample

Up
sample

Ours
Full-Resolution

Figure 1: Illustration of the importance of full-resolution input in image matting. The crop-and-stitch manner introduces
artifacts, while downsampling manner causes distortion.

In recent years, vision transformers (ViT) have achieved
impressive results in image matting (Hu et al. 2025;
Yao et al. 2024) due to their long-range modeling capability. Nevertheless, applying ViT-based methods on
memory-limited GPUs is challenging as global attention has
quadratic complexity and full-resolution input for matting
is crucial. As shown in Figure 1, image matting demands
high precision for each pixel, and simply downsampling the
image leads to distortion. Moreover, a patch-based cropand-stitch manner is also inappropriate as it destroys global
context and introduces artifacts. These limitations raise the
question: how can we reduce the memory cost of global attention while maintaining full-resolution input?
A common approach to solve this problem involves token pruning (Rao et al. 2021; Liang et al. 2022) and token
merging (Bolya et al. 2023), where a fixed ratio of redundant
tokens is progressively discarded at specific network stages.
However, this paradigm presents two problems: P1) Applying a fixed ratio results in poor performance and inefficiency.
For instance, a fixed ratio causes unnecessary computational
overhead for simple images and performance degradation
for complex images. Additionally, using a fixed ratio across
different network stages is inefficient, since global attention
behaves like convolution in the early stages (Park and Kim
2022; Ghiasi et al. 2022). P2) Progressive token discarding degrades performance, as discarded tokens are excluded
from subsequent calculations. This approach risks losing im-

Introduction
Natural image matting is a crucial task in computer vision that aims to accurately separate the foreground object
by predicting the alpha matte. Given a foreground F ∈
RH×W ×C , a background B ∈ RH×W ×C , and an alpha
matte α ∈ RH×W , a natural image I ∈ RH×W ×C can be
represented as:
α ∈ [0, 1] ,

Stitch

Input

Code — https://github.com/linyiheng123/MEMatte

Ii = αi Fi + (1 − αi )Bi ,

ViT-based Model

Crop

Transformer-based models have recently achieved outstanding performance in image matting. However, their application to high-resolution images remains challenging due to
the quadratic complexity of global self-attention. To address
this issue, we propose MEMatte, a memory-efficient matting
framework for processing high-resolution images. MEMatte
incorporates a router before each global attention block, directing informative tokens to the global attention while routing other tokens to a Lightweight Token Refinement Module (LTRM). Specifically, the router employs a local-global
strategy to predict the routing probability of each token, and
the LTRM utilizes efficient modules to simulate global attention. Additionally, we introduce a Batch-constrained Adaptive Token Routing (BATR) mechanism, which allows each
router to dynamically route tokens based on image content
and the stages of attention block in the network. Furthermore, we construct an ultra high-resolution image matting
dataset, UHR-395, comprising 35,500 training images and
1,000 test images, with an average resolution of 4872×6017.
This dataset is created by compositing 395 different alpha
mattes across 11 categories onto various backgrounds, all
with high-quality manual annotation. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that MEMatte outperforms existing methods on
both high-resolution and real-world datasets, significantly reducing memory usage by approximately 88% and latency by
50% on the Composition-1K benchmark.

(1)

where H, W , and C denote the height, width, and channel
of the image, respectively, and i denotes the pixel index.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5298

