The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Just a Few Glances: Open-Set Visual Perception with Image Prompt Paradigm
Jinrong Zhang2 * , Penghui Wang1 , Chunxiao Liu1 , Wei Liu1 , Dian Jin1 , Qiong Zhang1†‡ , Erli
Meng1‡ , Zhengnan Hu1
1

Xiaomi AI Lab, Beijing, China
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
zjr15272565639@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wangpenghui, liuchunxiao, liuwei67, jindian1, zhangqiong1, mengerli,
huzhengnan}@xiaomi.com
2

Abstract
To break through the limitations of pre-training models on
fixed categories, Open-Set Object Detection (OSOD) and
Open-Set Segmentation (OSS) have attracted a surge of interest from researchers. Inspired by large language models,
mainstream OSOD and OSS methods generally utilize text
as a prompt, achieving remarkable performance. Following
SAM paradigm, some researchers use visual prompts, such
as points, boxes, and masks that cover detection or segmentation targets. Despite these two prompt paradigms exhibit
excellent performance, they also reveal inherent limitations.
On the one hand, it is difficult to accurately describe characteristics of specialized category using textual description.
On the other hand, existing visual prompt paradigms heavily rely on multi-round human interaction, which hinders
them being applied to fully automated pipeline. To address
the above issues, we propose a novel prompt paradigm in
OSOD and OSS, that is, Image Prompt Paradigm. This
brand new prompt paradigm enables to detect or segment specialized categories without multi-round human intervention.
To achieve this goal, the proposed image prompt paradigm
uses just a few image instances as prompts, and we propose a novel framework named MI Grounding for this new
paradigm. In this framework, high-quality image prompts
are automatically encoded, selected and fused, achieving the
single-stage and non-interactive inference. We conduct extensive experiments on public datasets, showing that MI Grounding achieves competitive performance on OSOD and OSS
benchmarks compared to text prompt paradigm methods and
visual prompt paradigm methods. Moreover, MI Grounding
can greatly outperform existing method on our constructed
specialized ADR50K dataset.

Figure 1: Image prompt paradigm vs. previous prompt
paradigms. The text prompt paradigm struggles to accurately describe specialized categories. The visual prompt
paradigm relies on multi-round human interaction. The proposed image prompt paradigm uses just a few image instances which can handle specialized categories without any
manual annotation.

also generalize to open scenarios, which greatly improve the
ability and applicability (Li et al. 2022).
Inspired by the remarkable success achieved by foundational models (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022), mainstream OSOD and OSS methods employ a prompt as an
input, which tells the model what to detect or segment in
the image. Existing prompt paradigms can be mainly categorized into two types: text prompt paradigm and visual
prompt paradigm. As for text prompt paradigm, users are
required to provide a textual description to depict characteristics of detection or segmentation targets, and models are
trained to align text prompt with visual contents in the latent
space (Liu et al. 2023; Ding, Wang, and Tu 2022). Following SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023), another line of approaches
employ visual prompts, such as points, boxes, and masks.
The visual prompt needs to be manually designed that can
locate specific targets. Such a design makes this process generally involves multi-round interaction to avoid ambiguous
prompts (Kirillov et al. 2023).
However, textual and visual prompt paradigms have the

Introduction
To break through the limitations of pre-training models on
fixed categories, Open-Set Object Detection (OSOD) and
Open-Set Segmentation (OSS) have attract a surge of interest from researchers. In these fields, trained models can
not only detect or segment predefined specific categories but
* The work was done while Jinrong Zhang was a research intern
at Xiaomi AI Lab.
†
These authors contributed equally.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9969

