The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LS-TGNN: Long and Short-Term Temporal Graph Neural Network for
Session-Based Recommendation
Zhonghong Ou1 * , Xiao Zhang2 , Yifan Zhu2 , Shuai Lyu2 , Jiahao Liu3 , Tu Ao2
1

State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
Meituan Inc.
{zhonghong.ou, xiao20010420, yifan zhu, Lxb savior}@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract
Session-Based Recommendation (SBR) based on Graph Neural Networks (GNN) has become a new paradigm for recommender systems, and plays a fundamental role in e-commerce
and other relevant domains. Existing graph aggregation methods primarily form node representations by capturing basic
relationships between neighboring and central nodes. Despite
their encouraging results, the global relationships of items
and user intentions within sessions typically change over
time, which degrades the effectiveness of existing embedding
schemes. To resolve this challenge, we propose a Long and
Short-Term Temporal Graph Neural Network (LS-TGNN) for
SBR. LS-TGNN employs a novel temporal session graph to
aggregate neighborhood information, and models user interests from both long and short-term perspectives. Specifically,
we design long-term and short-term encoders to model the
long and short-term interests of users, respectively. In order
to better model the interests of users in different time dimensions, we introduce an item-granularity method that distinguishes between long and short-term interests. Extensive experiments on three widely used datasets demonstrate that LSTGNN outperforms existing methods with a large margin.

Figure 1: Changes in association pairs between an item and
other items in a session.

As shown in Fig. 1, in a user session, taking v1 as an example, we extract the first-order neighbors of v1 items from
the session data. Its neighbors also form a time series based
on the order of their appearances in the original session. In
constructing the representation of user interests, v1 is more
relevant to its most recently appearing neighbor v7 , than to
earlier ones such as v2 .
To better harness the potential of evolving user interests,
we propose to model the evolution of user interests over
time from a new perspective. We name the scheme Long and
Short-Term Temporal Graph Neural Network (LS-TGNN),
which is a novel framework specifically designed to distinguish and model the two critical dimensions of user interests: the temporal scope (long and short-term interests)
and the adaptability to evolving patterns. LS-TGNN not
only distinguishes between short-term and long-term user
interests, but also investigates the evolution and changes
in user interests over time, thus resulting in more accurate
and personalized recommendations. It proposes a unique architecture that integrates Temporal Graph Neural Network
(TGNN) and self-supervised learning mechanisms to dynamically and precisely capture user preferences. The proposed model consists of multiple layers, each designed to
address specific challenges in recommendation systems, including modeling long-term and short-term user interests,

Introduction
Session-Based Recommendation (SBR) has become a focused recommendation scenario (Jannach, Ludewig, and
Lerche 2017), where its essence lies in making recommendations in an anonymous and ad hoc session environment.
SBR is more challenging than conventional recommendation tasks. In the rapidly evolving field of recommendation systems, accurately modeling user preferences is crucial
for enhancing user experience and engagement. In recent
years, methods based on Graph Neural Networks (GNN)
have emerged (Liu et al. 2023). By introducing complex
user-item interaction learning mechanisms, user preferences
are modeled (Mao et al. 2023). Although these methods have
made progress in handling complex relationships, they still
have to explicitly model the spatiotemporal coupling between user purchases.
In session-based recommendation, the degree of relevance between items depends on their temporal sequence.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12426

