The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dimension Reduction for Symbolic Regression
Paul Kahlmeyer, Markus Fischer, Joachim Giesen
Friedrich Schiller University Jena
paul.kahlmeyer@uni-jena.de, markus.fischer@uni-jena.de, joachim.giesen@uni-jena.de

Abstract

et al. (2020). Washburn’s equation describes the penetration
length (L) of a liquid into a capillary pore as a function of
time (t), properties of the liquid, namely, its dynamic viscosity (η) and its surface tension (γ), and the geometry of the
set-up, that is, the pore’s radius (r) and the contact angle (ϕ)
between the pore and the liquid. A key insight from Washburn’s equation is that the penetration length grows proportionally to the square root of the time variable, and the factor
of proportionality is a function of the liquid’s properties and
the geometry of the set-up. The right-hand side of Washburn’s equation, short Washburn’s formula, is a valid symbolic expression that is composed of five input variables
x1 = t, x2 = η, x3 = γ, x4 = r, and x5 = ϕ,
and the function symbols ·, /, √, cos, and const expr,
where the multiplication symbol is used three times and
const expr is instantiated by the constant 2. Washburn’s
formula is already quite complex. Its expression tree has five
input variable nodes and eight operator nodes that are labeled by function symbols, that is, 13 nodes in total, a number that serves as a measure of complexity.

Solutions of symbolic regression problems are expressions
that are composed of input variables and operators from a
finite set of function symbols. One measure for evaluating
symbolic regression algorithms is their ability to recover formulae, up to symbolic equivalence, from finite samples. Not
unexpectedly, the recovery problem becomes harder when the
formula gets more complex, that is, when the number of variables and operators gets larger. Variables in naturally occurring symbolic formulas often appear only in fixed combinations. This can be exploited in symbolic regression by substituting one new variable for the combination, effectively reducing the number of variables. However, finding valid substitutions is challenging. Here, we address this challenge by
searching over the expression space of small substitutions and
testing for validity. The validity test is reduced to a test of
functional dependence. The resulting iterative dimension reduction procedure can be used with any symbolic regression
approach. We show that it reliably identifies valid substitutions and significantly boosts the performance of different
types of state-of-the-art symbolic regression algorithms.

1

Introduction

1.0

In regression, we are given n observations


x(1) , y (1) , . . . , x(n) , y (n)

UDFS
DSR
Transf
PySR

0.8

d

Recovery

of d input variables x ∈ R and one output variable y ∈
R. The goal is to use the observations to find a function
f : Rd → R that generalizes well beyond the given observations. Symbolic regression adds another goal, namely, to
find an interpretable function f . In symbolic regression, f
is taken from a space of symbolic expressions that are composed of the input variables x1 , . . . , xd and a finite set of
function symbols, such as, for instance,
√
{+, −, ·, /, , log, exp, sin, cos, const expr}.

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
5

Washburn’s equation

10

15
Complexity

20

25

30

is an illustrative example out of a set of 880 formulas
that were extracted from Wikipedia articles by Guimerà

Figure 1: Fraction of successfully recovered expressions
from a set of 880 formulas from Wikipedia’s list of eponymous equations (Guimerà et al. 2020) for the state-of-the-art
symbolic regressors UDFS: search over expression DAGs,
DSR: reinforcement learning, TRANSF: seq2seq learning,
and P Y SR: genetic programming.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1 shows, that the ability of state-of-the-art re-

L=

γrt cos(ϕ)
2η

17707

