The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DME-Driver: Integrating Human Decision Logic and
3D Scene Perception in Autonomous Driving
Wencheng Han, Dongqian Guo, Cheng-Zhong Xu, Jianbing Shen*
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau
wencheng256@gmail.com, jianbingshen@um.edu.mo

Abstract

Tracking

There are two crucial aspects of reliable autonomous driving systems: the reasoning behind decision-making and the
precision of environmental perception. This paper introduces Decision-Maker and Executor (DME)-Driver, a new
autonomous driving system that enhances performance and
robustness by fully leveraging the two crucial aspects. This
system comprises two main models. The first, the Decision
Maker, is responsible for providing logical driving instructions. The second, the Executor, receives these instructions
and generates precise control signals for the vehicles. To ensure explainable and reliable driving decisions, we build the
Decision-Maker based on a large vision language model. This
model follows the logic employed by experienced human
drivers and simulates making decisions in a safe and reasonable manner. On the other hand, the generation of accurate
control signals relies on precise and detailed environmental
perception. Therefore, a planning-oriented perception model
is employed as the Executor. It translates the logical decisions
made by the Decision-Maker into accurate control signals for
the self-driving cars. To effectively train the proposed system,
a new dataset named Human-driver Behavior and Decisionmaking (HBD) dataset has been collected. This dataset encompasses a diverse range of human driver behaviors and
their underlying motivations. By leveraging this dataset, our
system achieves high-precision planning accuracy through a
logical thinking process.

Mapping

Motion

Occupancy

Planner

(a) Planning-oriented Method Structure
PrevStatus
... ...

Speed/Turning
Angle

Detection

Car, Pedestrian

LLM

(b) LLM Method Structure
1. Describe the Scene.
2. Where should pay
attention to?
3. What should you do?

Driving forward.
Drive Logic
[3 m/s, 5°]
Control Signal

Decision-Maker
Drive Logic
Driver Attention
LVLM

Consistency

Scene Description

Tracking

Executor

Encoder

Encoder

Mapping

Motion

Occupancy

Planner

(c) Our Decision-Maker Executor (DME) Structure

Figure 1: Comparative Structures in Autonomous Driving Systems: (a) Planning-oriented autonomous driving system; (b) LLM-based autonomous driving system; (c) Our
DME-Driver Autonomous Driving System.
technical challenge, but also a crucial step towards wider
acceptance and integration of autonomous cars in society.
Recently, deep learning-based methods have achieved remarkable success in the realm of autonomous driving (Feng,
Rosenbaum, and Dietmayer 2018; Maqueda et al. 2018).
Some works (Feng et al. 2024; Gu et al. 2023; Huang
et al. 2023) proposed planning-oriented autonomous driving systems that can be trained end-to-end. As illustrated in
Fig. 1(a), this system (Chen et al. 2023) encompasses several critical perception modules, including tracking, mapping, motion, and occupancy detection. The output of these
modules is fed into a planner that then generates the control signals for the vehicle. This approach takes full advantage of the perception models in autonomous driving cars,
significantly enhancing the overall accuracy of the planning
process. However, the end-to-end nature of such methods
leads to a lack of reasoning in terms of human driving logic,
resulting in a system that lacks interpretability. When confronted with scenarios that the model fails to resolve - which
we might term “bad cases” – it becomes challenging to un-

Introduction
Self-driving systems represent a significant advancement in
automobile car technology, combining computer vision and
artificial intelligence. These systems enable cars to perceive
their surroundings (Radecki, Campbell, and Matzen 2016;
Sun et al. 2020), make informed decisions (Hang et al. 2020;
Isele et al. 2018), and navigate without human intervention (Kamath et al. 2023; Shao et al. 2023). The keys to
these systems are sophisticated perception mechanisms and
decision-making algorithms. These components allow cars
to accurately understand their environment and make autonomous decisions, ensuring safe and efficient navigation.
However, the complexity of these systems requires a focus
on interpretability. Achieving interpretability is not just a
* Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3347

