The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Virtual Nodes Can Help: Tackling Distribution Shifts
in Federated Graph Learning
Xingbo Fu, Zihan Chen, Yinhan He, Song Wang, Binchi Zhang, Chen Chen, Jundong Li
University of Virginia
{xf3av, brf3rx, nee7ne, sw3wv, epb6gw, zrh6du, jundong}@virginia.edu

Abstract

Specifically, GNNs follow a message-passing mechanism
that recursively aggregates neighboring information of each
node to obtain its node embedding. The representation of an
entire graph can be obtained through different graph pooling
operations (Xu et al. 2019; Ying et al. 2018), e.g., by summing all node embeddings in the graph. The final graph representation can then be used for graph property prediction,
including graph classification and graph regression. Despite
their superior performance, most GNNs are trained in a centralized manner where graph data need to be collected in a
single machine before training. In the real world, however,
a great number of graph data are stored by different data
owners and cannot be shared due to data privacy (Voigt and
Von dem Bussche 2017; Wang et al. 2024), which hampers
us in training powerful GNNs.

Federated Graph Learning (FGL) enables multiple clients
to jointly train powerful graph learning models, e.g., Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs), without sharing their local graph
data for graph-related downstream tasks, such as graph property prediction. In the real world, however, the graph data
can suffer from significant distribution shifts across clients
as the clients may collect their graph data for different purposes. In particular, graph properties are usually associated
with invariant label-relevant substructures (i.e., subgraphs)
across clients, while label-irrelevant substructures can appear
in a client-specific manner. The issue of distribution shifts of
graph data hinders the efficiency of GNN training and leads to
serious performance degradation in FGL. To tackle the aforementioned issue, we propose a novel FGL framework entitled FedVN that eliminates distribution shifts through clientspecific graph augmentation strategies with multiple learnable Virtual Nodes (VNs). Specifically, FedVN lets the clients
jointly learn a set of shared VNs while training a global GNN
model. To eliminate distribution shifts, each client trains a
personalized edge generator that determines how the VNs
connect local graphs in a client-specific manner. Furthermore, we provide theoretical analyses indicating that FedVN
can eliminate distribution shifts of graph data across clients.
Comprehensive experiments on four datasets under five settings demonstrate the superiority of our proposed FedVN
over nine baselines.

Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) is a decentralized learning paradigm where multiple clients collaboratively train machine learning models over their local data
while preserving privacy. In this study, we focus on Federated Graph Learning (FGL) (Fu et al. 2022) that aims to
train GNNs over distributed graph data from multiple clients
in a federated fashion. One critical challenge in the context
of FGL is that graph data can encounter significant distribution shifts across clients. In graph property prediction, the
property of a graph (e.g., a molecule) is usually determined
by its causal substructure (e.g., functional groups) (Lucic
et al. 2022; Luo et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2021). Typically,
such causality can be consistent across all clients. Nonetheless, the non-causal substructure in a graph can vary significantly across clients in that the clients may collect graph data
for different purposes. Consider a medical system with two
institutes as an example. Institute A studies benzene-based
compounds so it mainly has molecules containing the phenyl
group (e.g., benzoic acid molecules). In contrast, Institute B
studies ester-based compounds so it mainly has molecules
containing an ester (e.g., glyceride molecules). The goal of
the two institutes is to jointly train a GNN model to predict the water solubility of molecules. Typically, the label
(i.e., the water solubility) of each molecule is causally determined by the substructure hydroxy (i.e., -OH), which is
invariant across the two institutes, while the function groups
- the phenyl group in Institute A and the ester in Institute
B - are non-causal substructures and quite different across
the two clients. Such distribution shifts of graph data caused

Code — https://github.com/xbfu/FedVN

1

Introduction

Graphs are pervasive in a wide range of real-world scenarios,
including bioinformatics (Yang et al. 2020; Yuan and BarJoseph 2020), healthcare systems (Cui et al. 2020; Fu et al.
2023), and fraud detection (Motie and Raahemi 2024; Zheng
et al. 2024). As a dominant approach for modeling graph
data, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017; Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al.
2018; Xu et al. 2019) have demonstrated great prowess in
graph representation learning and have been widely adopted
in various graph-level applications, such as molecular property regression (Li et al. 2022; Zhuang et al. 2023) and 3D
shape classification (Wang et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16657

