The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Feature Clipping for Uncertainty Calibration
Linwei Tao1 , Minjing Dong2 , Chang Xu1
1

University of Sydney
City University of Hong Kong
linwei.tao@sydney.edu.au, minjdong@cityu.edu.hk, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract

frameworks (Tao et al. 2023a; Liu et al. 2023), data augmentation (Wang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022; Hendrycks
et al. 2019), and regularization techniques like label smoothing (Müller et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2022) and entropy regularizers (Pereyra et al. 2017). Training losses such as dual focal
loss (Tao et al. 2023b) and focal loss (Mukhoti et al. 2020)
are also notable methods. The second stream is post-hoc calibration methods, which are applied to trained models and
modify the output probability. Representative works include
Isotonic Regression (Zadrozny and Elkan 2002), Histogram
Binning (Zadrozny and Elkan 2001), and Temperature Scaling (TS) (Guo et al. 2017). Among these, TS is widely accepted due to its simplicity and good performance. Many
subsequent works (Frenkel et al. 2021; Xiong et al. 2023;
Yang et al. 2024; Tomani et al. 2022) propose improved versions of TS, often making the temperature factor adaptive
according to different criteria.
Guo et al. (2017) identified overconfidence as a major
cause of miscalibration in most modern neural networks.
Adding a maximum-entropy penalty effectively increases
prediction uncertainty, thereby mitigating overconfidence issues. Many calibration methods can be summarized as using entropy regularization in various forms. Pereyra et al.
(2017) apply a maximum entropy penalty uniformly to all
samples. Similarly, Label Smoothing (Müller et al. 2019)
can be transformed into a form of entropy penalty, while Focal Loss (Mukhoti et al. 2020) can be viewed as the upper
bound of a form with negative entropy, effectively adding a
maximum entropy regularizer. TS often uses a temperature
parameter larger than 1, resulting in a smoother probability
distribution with higher entropy.
Since the features extracted by neural networks are direct representations of data, a possible way to mimic this
maximum-entropy penalty effect is by applying information loss directly to the features, thereby increasing entropy.
To explore this idea, we begin by comparing high calibration error samples with low calibration error samples. Accurately obtaining per-sample calibration error is nontrivial, so
we choose wrongly predicted samples with high confidence
(greater than 0.95) as high calibration error (HCE) samples and correctly predicted samples with high confidence
(greater than 0.95) as low calibration error (LCE) samples.
We randomly select 100 feature units from the feature of
these samples and plot the average unit value in Figure 1.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant success across various tasks, but ensuring reliable uncertainty
estimates, known as model calibration, is crucial for their
safe and effective deployment. Modern DNNs often suffer
from overconfidence, leading to miscalibration. We propose
a novel post-hoc calibration method called feature clipping
(FC) to address this issue. FC involves clipping feature values to a specified threshold, effectively increasing entropy in
high calibration error samples while maintaining the information in low calibration error samples. This process reduces the
overconfidence in predictions, improving the overall calibration of the model. Our extensive experiments on datasets such
as CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet, and models including CNNs and transformers, demonstrate that FC consistently
enhances calibration performance. Additionally, we provide
a theoretical analysis that validates the effectiveness of our
method. As the first calibration technique based on feature
modification, feature clipping offers a novel approach to improving model calibration, showing significant improvements
over both post-hoc and train-time calibration methods and pioneering a new avenue for feature-based model calibration.

Code — https://github.com/Linwei94/AAAI2025-FC.git

Introduction
While deep neural networks achieve significant improvements across various tasks, model calibration—ensuring a
model provides reliable uncertainty estimates—is as important as achieving high prediction accuracy. Accurate and reliable uncertainty estimation is vital for many safety-critical
downstream tasks, such as autonomous driving (Feng et al.
2019) and medical diagnosis (Chen et al. 2018). However,
recent studies (Guo et al. 2017) have found that most modern neural networks struggle to accurately reflect the actual
probabilities of their predictions through their confidence
scores. Thus, improving model calibration techniques is essential to enhance the reliability of these models.
Efforts to address this issue can be divided into two
streams: train-time calibration and post-hoc calibration. The
first stream is train-time calibration, which includes training
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20841

