The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Just What You Desire: Constrained Timeline Summarization with Self-Reflection
for Enhanced Relevance
Muhammad Reza Qorib1 , Qisheng Hu2 * , Hwee Tou Ng1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
mrqorib@u.nus.edu, qisheng001@e.ntu.edu.sg, nght@comp.nus.edu.sg

Original Timeline
2003-11-19: Receives the National Book Foundation
Medal for Distinguished Contribution to
American Letters.
2015-09-10: Is awarded the National Medal of Arts by
US President Barack Obama.
2015-11-03: Releases a collection of short stories entitled “The Bazaar of Bad Dreams.”
2018-07-25: King is an executive producer of a show
written for the streaming service Hulu. The
series, “Castle Rock,” is named after the
fictional small Maine town that provides
the setting for various King books and stories.
2020-04-21: King’s latest book, “If It Bleeds” is published. The book is a compilation of four
novellas.
2021-06-04: The miniseries “Lisey’s Story,” adapted by
King and based on his 2006 novel of the
same name, premieres on Apple TV+.
2022-09-06: King’s novel “Fairy Tale” is published.

Abstract
Given news articles about an entity, such as a public figure or
organization, timeline summarization (TLS) involves generating a timeline that summarizes the key events about the entity. However, the TLS task is too underspecified, since what
is of interest to each reader may vary, and hence there is not
a single ideal or optimal timeline. In this paper, we introduce a novel task, called Constrained Timeline Summarization (CTLS), where a timeline is generated in which all events
in the timeline meet some constraint. An example of a constrained timeline concerns the legal battles of Tiger Woods,
where only events related to his legal problems are selected
to appear in the timeline. We collected a new human-verified
dataset of constrained timelines involving 47 entities and 5
constraints per entity. We propose an approach that employs
a large language model (LLM) to summarize news articles
according to a specified constraint and cluster them to identify key events to include in a constrained timeline. In addition, we propose a novel self-reflection method during summary generation, demonstrating that this approach successfully leads to improved performance.

Code and Data — https://github.com/nusnlp/reacts

Constrained Timeline
Constraint: Focus on Stephen King’s book releases.
2015-11-03: Releases a collection of short stories entitled “The Bazaar of Bad Dreams.”
2020-04-21: King’s latest book, “If It Bleeds” is published. The book is a compilation of four
novellas.
2022-09-06: King’s novel “Fairy Tale” is published.

Introduction
In today’s internet era, the rapid and massive flow of information makes it hard to stay updated, particularly for topics with extensive coverage over time. In the United States
alone, Hamborg, Meuschke, and Gipp (2018) report that
more than 5,000 news articles are being published every day.
To help readers quickly grasp important information, many
news platforms offer news in a timeline format, especially
for important topics that progress over time, such as pandemics1 or conflicts2 .
The task of summarizing news articles, or any collections
of text documents, into timelines is called timeline summarization (TLS). Timeline summarization aims to automati-

Table 1: An unconstrained timeline of Stephen King and
a constrained version focusing on Stephen King’s book releases.

cally condense long-running news topics into temporally ordered time-stamped textual summaries of events on a particular topic. Timeline summarization aims to include any
important events into the timeline without considering particular aspects that the readers are interested in.
To take a reader’s interest into account when generating
a timeline, we propose a new task called constrained timeline summarization (CTLS). Constrained timeline summa-

* Work done while Qisheng Hu was affiliated with the National

University of Singapore.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.cdc.gov/museum/timeline/covid19.html
2
https://www.usnews.com/news/best-countries/slideshows/atimeline-of-the-russia-ukraine-conflict

25065

