The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S-INF: Towards Realistic Indoor Scene Synthesis via Scene Implicit Neural Field
Zixi Liang1 , Guowei Xu1 , Haifeng Wu2 , Ye Huang1 , Wen Li1,2 * , Lixin Duan1,3
1
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Sichuan Provincial Key Laboratory for Human Disease Gene Study and the Center for Medical Genetics, Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences and Sichuan Provincial People’s Hospital, UESTC
{zixiliang.acad, xuguowei368, haifengwu205, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com, edward.ye.huang@qq.com
2

Abstract

Classic Style？

…

Learning-based methods have become increasingly popular
in 3D indoor scene synthesis (ISS), showing superior performance over traditional optimization-based approaches. These
learning-based methods typically model distributions on simple yet explicit scene representations using generative models. However, due to the oversimplified explicit representations that overlook detailed information and the lack of guidance from multimodal relationships within the scene, most
learning-based methods struggle to generate indoor scenes
with realistic object arrangements and styles. In this paper,
we introduce a new method, Scene Implicit Neural Field (SINF), for indoor scene synthesis, aiming to learn meaningful representations of multimodal relationships, to enhance
the realism of indoor scene synthesis. S-INF assumes that
the scene layout is often related to the object-detailed information. It disentangles the multimodal relationships into
scene layout relationships and detailed object relationships,
fusing them later through implicit neural fields (INFs). By
learning specialized scene layout relationships and projecting
them into S-INF, we achieve a realistic generation of scene
layout. Additionally, S-INF captures dense and detailed object relationships through differentiable rendering, ensuring
stylistic consistency across objects. Through extensive experiments on the benchmark 3D-FRONT dataset, we demonstrate that our method consistently achieves state-of-the-art
performance under different types of ISS.

Object
Features

or
Style
Inconsistency

… Confused
Retrieval
Box

Shapes

Unrealistic
Results

Explicit Modeling

Modern Style？

（a) Previous Methods

Scene
Mesh

Style
Consistency

Layout

Related
Shape

S-INF

Implicit
Modeling

Clear
Retrieval

Realistic
Results

（b) Our Scene Implicit Neural Field (S-INF)

Figure 1: Unlike previous methods, we enhance the implicit
modeling process from the S-INF with scene layout relationships and detailed object relationships, to achieve more
layout realistic and style consistency generations.

Code — https://github.com/ZixiLiang/S-INF

Introduction
Synthesizing realistic and diverse 3D indoor scenes is a
long-standing problem in computer vision and graphics.
This research topic has received widespread attention due
to its significant cost reduction in fields such as virtual reality (Yu and Chen 2024; Li et al. 2022) and 3D design (Shi
et al. 2023; Yu, Yeung, and Terzopoulos 2015). Specifically,
ISS can virtually rearrange existing furniture, enabling more
convenient virtual interior design. Despite recent progress
on this topic (Gao et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2021a; Inoue et al.
2023; Zhao et al. 2023; Zhai et al. 2024b), the nature of the
underlying multimodal distribution, including scene layout

and detailed object relationships, makes it still challenging
to generate realistic and diverse 3D indoor scenes.
At the outset of this research, scene modeling and synthesis were typically formulated as an optimization problem (Zhang et al. 2019). Using scene priors like room design rules (Chang, Savva, and Manning 2014a; Chang et al.
2017) and in a human-centric manner (Qi et al. 2018a;
Fisher et al. 2015a; Fu et al. 2017a), they first sample an
initial scene and then refine its configuration through iterative optimization. However, defining precise rules demands significant expertise and may limit the representation
of complex, diverse scenes. In recent years, learning-based
methods have become popular, utilizing generative models

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5173

