The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Early Concept Drift Detection via Prediction Uncertainty
Pengqian Lu, Jie Lu* , Anjin Liu, Guangquan Zhang
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute (AAII),
University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia
{Pengqian.Lu@student., Jie.Lu@, Anjin.Liu@, Guangquan.Zhang@}uts.edu.au

Abstract
Concept drift, characterized by unpredictable changes in data
distribution over time, poses significant challenges to machine
learning models in streaming data scenarios. Although error
rate-based concept drift detectors are widely used, they often
fail to identify drift in the early stages when the data distribution changes but error rates remain constant. This paper introduces the Prediction Uncertainty Index (PU-index), derived
from the prediction uncertainty of the classifier, as a superior
alternative to the error rate for drift detection. Our theoretical
analysis demonstrates that: (1) The PU-index can detect drift
even when error rates remain stable. (2) Any change in the
error rate will lead to a corresponding change in the PU-index.
These properties make the PU-index a more sensitive and robust indicator for drift detection compared to existing methods.
We also propose a PU-index-based Drift Detector (PUDD) that
employs a novel Adaptive PU-index Bucketing algorithm for
detecting drift. Empirical evaluations on both synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate PUDD’s efficacy in detecting
drift in structured and image data.

Code — https://github.com/RocStone/PUDD
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11158

Introduction
In real-world applications, such as medical triage (Huggard
et al. 2020) or time series forecasting tasks (Miyaguchi
and Kajino 2019), the distribution of data may unpredictably change over time. This phenomenon, termed concept
drift (Yuan et al. 2022), significantly degrades model performance. Moreover, drift also manifests between clients and
servers in federated learning tasks (Jiang, Wang, and Dou
2022), or decision making process (Lu et al. 2020) further
complicating the learning process. Error rate-based drift detection is one of the most popular approaches to handling
concept drift due to its efficiency (Lu et al. 2018a). It continuously monitors the classifier’s error rate, issuing an alarm
when this rate exceeds a preset threshold (Raab, Heusinger,
and Schleif 2020; Frias-Blanco et al. 2014).
However, in the early stages of concept drift, a model’s
error rate may remain stable. In such a case, error rate-based
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19124

drift signals are unable to indicate the changes in data distribution. To address this, we explore alternative methods to
detect distribution changes before a drop in error rate occurs.
Upon rethinking the logic behind error rate-based drift signals, we realize that the distribution of prediction probability
from a given model will change prior to the error rate itself.
In addition, if the error rate does change, then the distribution
of prediction probability must change too.
Prediction probability is just an example of a quantitative measure of predictive uncertainty in models. We believe
that by clearly defining predictive uncertainty and demonstrating that it is a superior alternative to error rates, we can
significantly enhance the sensitivity and robustness of drift
detection. Therefore, we introduce the Prediction Uncertainty
Index (PU-index), which measures the probability assigned
by a classifier that an instance does not belong to the true
class. Fig. 1 shows an illustrative example.
The objective of this paper is to address two key questions:
(1) Can we identify a more effective drift detection signal
that captures changes in data distribution when the error rate
remains stable? (2) Can we theoretically prove that if the
drift detection signal shows no significant change, then the
model’s error rate will also remain stable? In other words,
we seek to develop a superior drift detection signal that can
detect drift when the error rate cannot, and to prove that if
the new signal fails to detect drift, the error rate will also
fail to do so. We believe that these criteria are essential for
evaluating and comparing different drift detection signals.
The theoretical results provided in this paper show strong
evidence for the superiority of the PU-index as a metric for
concept drift detection. It exhibits at least equivalent sensitivity to error-based metrics and potentially higher sensitivity in
certain scenarios, rendering it a more robust and comprehensive measure for identifying concept drift.
However, it could be argued that a more sensitive detection
method might result in a higher false alarm rate, potentially
overreacting to minor fluctuations in model performance. If
there is no significant drift in the error rate, why should we
still seek to detect it? To mitigate such concern, we employ
the Chi-square test, a robust statistical significance test, to the
PU-index for drift detection. This approach helps distinguish
between meaningful distributional shifts and inconsequential
variations, thereby maintaining the benefits of increased sensitivity while minimizing false alarms. The p-value obtained

