The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Backdoor Token Unlearning: Exposing and Defending Backdoors in Pretrained
Language Models
Peihai Jiang1 , Xixiang Lyu1 * , Yige Li2 * , Jing Ma1
1

Xidian University, China
Singapore Management University, Singapore
{xdjph, jing.ma}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, xxlv@mail.xidian.edu.cn, yigeli@smu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

2020) or more subtle features such as sentence styles (Qi
et al. 2021a). With the widespread adoption and deployment
of PLMs, defending against backdoor threats has become an
urgent challenge.
Existing backdoor defense methods in NLP generally fall
into three categories: backdoor detection (Lyu et al. 2024;
Liu et al. 2022; Xian et al. 2023), backdoor removal (Zhang
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021c), and anti-backdoor learning (Li
et al. 2021b; Zhu et al. 2022). Backdoor model detection
methods aim to identify whether a model or inputs contain
backdoors, while backdoor removal methods focus on purifying the backdoor triggers from the backdoored model.
Among them, anti-backdoor learning methods (Zhu et al.
2022; Li et al. 2021b) has become a widely adopted defense strategy as they allow the users to train a clean model
even on a poisoned dataset. For example, ABL (Li et al.
2021b) employs a two-stage gradient ascent technique to filter out and mitigate backdoor behaviors. Another approach,
MF (Zhu et al. 2022), limits the model’s learning capacity
by restricting the number of training epochs, thereby preventing the model from acquiring backdoors during training. However, these anti-backdoor learning methods often
lead to reduced model performance and exhibit instability across different scenarios. Therefore, how to effectively
defend against backdoor attacks during the model training
phase essentially deserves much attention.
Previous research has shown that backdoor learning can
be viewed as a dual-task problem, i.e. training the backdoored model on both clean and backdoor data (Li et al.
2023). In this paper, we reformulate backdoor learning from
model parameter perspective and identify two key properties: 1) backdoor learning induces significant differences between the embedding parameters of backdoor tokens and
clean tokens, where the backdoor tokens converge much
faster than clean ones; 2) the activation of backdoors is
highly dependent on backdoor token parameters in the embedding layers. Intuitively, if we can isolate backdoor token parameters at the level of word embedding dimensions
rather than across all model parameters, the backdoor information could be more effectively exposed and removed.
In this work, we propose a novel defense method
called Backdoor Token Unlearning (BTU) for efficient antibackdoor learning. Specifically, BTU operates in two stages:
backdoor token detection and dimensional fine-grained un-

Supervised fine-tuning has become the predominant method
for adapting large pretrained models to downstream tasks.
However, recent studies have revealed that these models are
vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where even a small number
of malicious samples can successfully embed backdoor triggers into the model. While most existing defense methods
focus on post-training backdoor defense, efficiently defending against backdoor attacks during training phase remains
largely unexplored. To address this gap, we propose a novel
defense method called Backdoor Token Unlearning (BTU),
which proactively detects and neutralizes trigger tokens during the training stage. Our work is based on two key findings: 1) backdoor learning causes distinctive differences between backdoor token parameters and clean token parameters in word embedding layers, and 2) the success of backdoor attacks heavily depends on backdoor token parameters.
The BTU defense leverages these properties to identify aberrant embedding parameters and subsequently removes backdoor behaviors using a fine-grained unlearning technique. Extensive evaluations across three datasets and four types of
backdoor attacks demonstrate that BTU effectively defends
against these threats while preserving the model’s performance on primary tasks.

Code — https://github.com/XDJPH/BTU

Introduction
Pretrained Language Models (PLMs) (Devlin et al. 2018;
Radford et al. 2019) have demonstrated remarkable performance across various tasks, such as sentiment analysis (Jim
et al. 2024), toxicity detection (Bonetti et al. 2023), and news
classification (Nkongolo Wa Nkongolo 2023). However, as
PLMs are increasingly fine-tuned for specific downstream
applications (Min et al. 2023), they have become vulnerable
to backdoor attacks (Liu et al. 2024; Cheng et al. 2023).
Typically, backdoor attacks inject malicious triggers into the
model during training. The backdoored model functions normally on clean tasks but exhibits an attack-desired target label when the trigger is presented. In Natural Language Processing (NLP), backdoor triggers can be designed as obvious elements like rare words (Kurita, Michel, and Neubig
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24285

