The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LIBA: Language Instructed Multi-granularity Bridge Assistant
for 3D Visual Grounding
Yuan Wang1,2 , Ya-Li Li1,2 , W U Eastman Z Y1,2 , Shengjin Wang1,2 *
1

2

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), China
wy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

informed decision-making of agents based primarily on the
3D world understandings.
Existing studies direct their efforts towards enhanced multimodal representations with multi-view images (Yang, Zhang,
and Luo 2021; Huang et al. 2022a), spatial relationships
of 3D objects (He et al. 2021; Bakr 2022; Cai et al. 2022),
fine-grained textual information (Wu et al. 2022; Feng et al.
2021; Bakr et al. 2023), and unified representations of 3D
point cloud and textual features (Zhu et al. 2023; Fu et al.
2024). Despite advancements, the granularity inconsistency
issue remains poorly addressed. As shown in Fig. 1(b), prior
efforts (Wu et al. 2022; Wang, Li, and Wang 2024) construct
language-irrelevant point cloud visual maps via post-feature
extraction, worsening the granularity inconsistency of point
clouds and texts. Further, point clouds exhibit inherent multiscale nature, providing holistic geometric details at different
levels. Existing methods (Zhao et al. 2021; Roh et al. 2022)
rely on complex multi-modal feature interaction. As outlined
in Fig. 1(a), they fuse point clouds and texts at a specific scale
and neglect multi-scale vision-text feature alignment—a prerequisite for enriching scene representations and contextual
semantics. Finally, current 3D-VG solutions fail to mimic
human reasoning system nor be well-interpretable, struggling
to understand ambiguities in referential language.
Toward granularity inconsistency, we propose a LanguageInstructed multi-granularity Bridge Assistant (LIBA), which
bridges 3D vision-text multi-granularity interaction and unleashes the abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) for
ground scene understanding with world knowledge. LIBA
tackles this issue from the following two viewpoints:
(1) How to establish a multi-granularity 3D vision-text feature alignment in a unified model? Extensive researches (Devlin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2023) confirm
that distinct layers of 3D vision and language models feature
hierarchical information. BERT-family models (Devlin et al.
2018; Liu et al. 2019) embed a rich hierarchy of linguistic
information, while 3D vision models (Qi et al. 2017) attend
hierarchical part-to-whole relationships. We thus advance
Dynamic Bridge Adapter (DBA) to perceive multi-modal
features actively during extraction and mitigate domain discrepancy of 3D vision-text features via multi-granularity interaction. DBA supports the top-down cross-modal alignment
of 3D vision-text representations across different semantic
hierarchies within pre-trained uni-modal encoders.

3D Vision Grounding (3D-VG) seeks to unravel referential
language and identify targets in 3D physical world. Prevailing
methods align with the 2D-VG’s pipeline to pinpoint the referred object in a categorical multi-modal reasoning manner.
However, the geometric complexities of 3D scenes and the
nuanced syntactic structures of language, exacerbates the granularity inconsistency of point cloud and text features, hindering the development of 3D-VG systems in complex scenarios.
Towards this issue, we propose LIBA, a Language-Instructed
multi-granularity Bridge Assistant tailored for 3D-VG task.
LIBA tackles this issue as follows. (1) How to establish a
multi-granularity 3D vision-text feature alignment in a unified model? We advance a bilateral Dynamic Bridge Adapter
(DBA) build multi-granularity interaction of 3D vision and language backnones during feature extraction. We further develop
the Language-aware Cross-scale Object Modulation (LCOM)
module to integrate multi-scale point cloud features modulated by language information. (2) After aligning multi-modal
features, how to fully harness language model’s knowledge to
bolster vision concepts understanding? A LLM-guided Hierarchical Query Selection (LLM-HQS) module incorporates
world knowledge of Large Language Model (LLM) to ground
the target referral via an Attribute-then-Relation reasoning
process. In this manner, our LIBA inherits reasoning prowess
and world knowledge of LLM to bridge point clouds and
texts at multiple granularities. Experiments on ScanRefer and
Nr3D/Sr3D benchmarks substantiate the superiority of our
LIBA, trumping state-of-the-arts by a considerable margin.

Introduction
Pinpointing object properties and relations in 3D physical
realm with natural utterances indicates a significant leap in advancing Embodied AI (Duan et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2022b),
a capability that empowers agents to comprehend human
directives in real-world contexts. Notably, 3D Vision Grounding (3D-VG) (Chen, Chang, and Nießner 2020; Wu et al.
2022; Luo et al. 2022) has garnered substantial attention as
crucial cross-modal 3D Vision-Language (3D-VL) perception task. The 3D-VG task aims to discern a designated object
in a 3D scene that corresponds to a provided text, facilitating
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8114

