The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Category Prompt Mamba Network for Nuclei Segmentation and Classification
Ye Zhang1, 2 , Zijie Fang3 , Yifeng Wang4 , Lingbo Zhang3 , Xianchao Guan1, 5 , Yongbing Zhang1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4
School of Science, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
5
Pengcheng Laboratory
zhangye94@stu.hit.edu.cn, ybzhang08@hit.edu.cn
(a) Convolution Network

Abstract

(c) State Space Model

split

✓ 𝑶(𝒏) Complexity ✗ Patch Relationship

(b) Transformer

✓ 𝑶(𝒏) Complexity ✗ Patch Relationship

(d) Category Prompt Mamba

…
✗ 𝑶(𝒏𝟐 ) Complexity

Decreasing
Sort
Decreasing
Sort
✓ 𝑶(𝒏) Complexity

…

Category 1

…

Category 2

…

Scan
Scan

Merging

…

…

Nuclei segmentation and classification provide an essential
basis for tumor immune microenvironment analysis. The previous nuclei segmentation and classification models require
splitting large images into smaller patches for training, leading to two significant issues. First, nuclei at the borders
of adjacent patches often misalign during inference. Second, this patch-based approach significantly increases the
model’s training and inference time. Recently, Mamba has
garnered attention for its ability to model large-scale images
with linear time complexity and low memory consumption.
It offers a promising solution for training nuclei segmentation and classification models on full-sized images. However, the Mamba orientation-based scanning method lacks account for category-specific features, resulting in sub-optimal
performance in scenarios with imbalanced class distributions. To address these challenges, this paper introduces a
novel scanning strategy based on category probability sorting, which independently ranks and scans features for each
category according to confidence from high to low. This
approach enhances the feature representation of uncertain
samples and mitigates the issues caused by imbalanced distributions. Extensive experiments conducted on four public
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches, delivering superior performance in nuclei
segmentation and classification tasks.

✓ Patch Relationship

Figure 1: The existing nuclei analysis framework. The images with black box represent current training samples, and
the images with red box do not participate in training. (a)
represents convolution network independently trains each
image; (b) represents Transformer structure has quadratic
computational complexity; (c) represents state space model
only considers the preceding samples; (d) is our proposed
category prompt network, which utilizes the classification
probability as a basis to guide the sequences sorting.
of pathological images, most existing nuclei analysis approaches require splitting these images into smaller, independent patches for training (Ronneberger, Fischer, and
Brox 2015; Chen et al. 2016), as illustrated in Fig.1 (a). This
patch-based training method presents two significant challenges. First, images often suffer from edge effect problems
during inference, where nuclei at the borders of adjacent
patches are misaligned. Second, when the distribution of nuclear categories is highly imbalanced within a single patch,
the performance of rare categories tends to deteriorate (Sirinukunwattana et al. 2016; Naylor et al. 2018). This decline
is primarily due to the insufficient training of rare categories,
stemming from their limited sample sizes.
To address the patch misalignment issue in large-scale
images, HoverNet (Graham et al. 2019) introduces a center feature clipping strategy to reduce the uncertainty associated with edge features. Similarly, DoNuSeg (Wang et al.
2024a) employs an overlapped sampling strategy to mitigate
edge effects. However, these approaches can merely alleviate misalignment; they do not fundamentally resolve the
issue and often lead to increased model training and inference times. In tackling the class imbalance problem, some

Introduction
With the advancements of whole-slide pathology image production and scanning technologies, pathological image analysis tasks represented by nuclei segmentation and classification (Ilyas et al. 2022; Oh and Jeong 2023; Zhang et al.
2024) play a more and more critical role in cancer diagnosis
(Kowal and Filipczuk 2014) and patient prognosis analysis
(Wang et al. 2022). The morphology and category of nuclei
can reflect the cellular differentiation degree and distribution
status, which provide valuable information for the tumor
micro-environment analysis (Zamanitajeddin et al. 2024).
Recent developments in deep learning have enabled automatic nuclei segmentation and classification (Doan et al.
2022; Pan et al. 2023). However, due to the large size
* Corresponding author: Yongbing Zhang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10284

