The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual Conditioned Motion Diffusion for Pose-Based Video Anomaly Detection
Hongsong Wang1,2 , Andi Xu3 , Pinle Ding3 , Jie Gui3,4,5 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast
University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Application, Supervision And Management (Southeast University), Ministry of
Education, China
5
Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 210000, China
{hongsongwang, andixu, pinleding, guijie}@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is essential for computer vision research. Existing VAD methods utilize either
reconstruction-based or prediction-based frameworks. The
former excels at detecting irregular patterns or structures,
whereas the latter is capable of spotting abnormal deviations
or trends. We address pose-based video anomaly detection
and introduce a novel framework called Dual Conditioned
Motion Diffusion (DCMD), which enjoys the advantages of
both approaches. The DCMD integrates conditioned motion
and conditioned embedding to comprehensively utilize the
pose characteristics and latent semantics of observed movements, respectively. In the reverse diffusion process, a motion transformer is proposed to capture potential correlations
from multi-layered characteristics within the spectrum space
of human motion. To enhance the discriminability between
normal and abnormal instances, we design a novel United
Association Discrepancy (UAD) regularization that primarily relies on a Gaussian kernel-based time association and a
self-attention-based global association. Finally, a mask completion strategy is introduced during the inference stage of the
reverse diffusion process to enhance the utilization of conditioned motion for the prediction branch of anomaly detection. Extensive experiments on four datasets demonstrate that
our method dramatically outperforms state-of-the-art methods and exhibits superior generalization performance.

Figure 1: Illustration of video anomaly detection with normal instances (green) and abnormal instances (red).

costly and time-consuming, making collecting all possible
abnormal samples impractical for fully supervised learning
approaches. Consequently, anomaly detection problems are
typically treated as One Class Classification (OCC) (2020).
Only normal data is utilized during model training, and data
that deviates significantly from the normal pattern is identified as an anomaly during testing (2021).
There has been a growing trend toward detecting abnormal events or behaviors by analyzing human poses extracted
from video frames (2023), as illustrated in Figure 1. Utilizing skeletons to depict human motions in videos is a
highly effective approach to protecting privacy and circumventing the limitations of appearance-based attributes. Besides privacy protection, skeletal features are compact, wellstructured, and highly descriptive of human motion (2019).
Existing VAD works are mainly categorized into
reconstruction-based and prediction-based methods.
Reconstruction-based methods (2021; 2020) first compress
the input data into a low-dimensional representation and
then recover the original data from this representation. By
comparing the reconstruction error between the original data
and the recovered data, anomalies such as irregular patterns
or structures in the data can be detected. Prediction-based
methods (2017) focus on predicting future frames or events

Code — https://github.com/guijiejie/DCMD-main

Introduction
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is an essential topic in
computer vision and security applications. Different from
human action understanding (2018; 2023; 2024; 2025),
VAD enables prompt identification of abnormal occurrences, such as human actions, accidents, and illnesses.
Anomalies are generally characterized as uncommon, unexpected, or unusual phenomena that exhibit significant deviations from normality. Conversely, normality is defined as
what is expected and regularly encountered. Detecting video
anomalies can be challenging as these events occur infrequently and belong to various categories. Labeling data is
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7700

