The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting Image De-Raining via Central-Surrounding Synergistic Convolution
Long Peng, Yang Wang* , Xin Di, PeizheXia, Xueyang Fu, Yang Cao, Zheng-Jun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China
longp2001@mail.ustc.edu.cn, ywang120@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Rainy images suffer from quality degradation due to the synergistic effect of rain streaks and accumulation. The rain
streaks are anisotropic and show a specific directional arrangement, while the rain accumulation is isotropic and
shows a consistent concentration distribution in local regions. This distribution difference makes unified representation learning for rain streaks and accumulation challenging,
which may lead to structure distortion and contrast degradation in the deraining results. To address this problem, a
central-surrounding mechanism inspired Synergistic Convolution (SC) is proposed to extract rain streaks and accumulation features simultaneously. Specifically, the SC consists
of two parallel novel convolutions: Central-Surrounding Difference Convolution (CSD) and Central-Surrounding Addition Convolution (CSA). In CSD, the difference operation
between central and surrounding pixels is injected into the
feature extraction process of convolution to perceive the direction distribution of rain streaks. In CSA, the addition operation between central and surrounding pixels is injected
into the feature extraction process of convolution to facilitate
the modeling of rain accumulation properties. The SC can be
used as a general unit to substitute Vanilla Convolution (VC)
in current de-raining networks to boost performance. To reduce computational costs, CSA and CSD in SC are merged
into a single VC kernel by our parameter equivalent transformation before inferencing. Evaluations of twelve de-raining
methods on nine public datasets demonstrate that our proposed SC can comprehensively improve the performance
of twelve de-raining networks under various rainy conditions without changing the original network structure or
introducing extra computational costs. Even for the current SOTA methods, SC can further achieve SOTA++ performance. The source codes will be publicly available.

Figure 1: (a) Models equipped with SC trained in the same
environment as VC exhibit the same inference cost but superior performance. (b) Under the boost of SC, twelve existing deraining methods have achieved comprehensive performance improvements without increasing computational
costs during inferencing.
rain is an essential pre-processing step for both human vision
and computer vision systems and has drawn much research
attention in recent years (Guo et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023b;
Wang, Ma, and Liu 2023; Chen et al. 2023a; Guo et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2023; Zou et al. 2022).
The effects of rain streaks and accumulation on the image
can be formulated as follows (Yang et al. 2017):
O = T ⊙ (B +

n
X

Si ) + (1 − T ) ⊙ A.

(1)

i

Introduction

where O denotes the captured rainy images. B denotes the
background. Si represents the rain-streak layer that has the
same direction distribution. A is the global atmospheric
light, and T is the atmospheric transmission. i indexes the
rain streak layer, and n is the maximum number of the
rain streak layers. The rain streaks are anisotropic and have
large variations in orientation, which cause structure distortion in the background. In contrast, the rain accumulation
is isotropic and has smooth variations across regions, which
narrows down the dynamic range of the image, especially

Images captured under rainy conditions often suffer from
quality degradation due to the effect of rain streaks and rain
accumulation, which will cause unpleasant visual perception
and hurt the performance of outdoor computer vision systems, such as video surveillance (Yang et al. 2022b) and object detection (He et al. 2017). Thus, restoring images from
* Yang Wang is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6470

