The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Probabilistic Forecasting of Irregularly Sampled Time Series with Missing Values
via Conditional Normalizing Flows
Vijaya Krishna Yalavarthi* 1 , Randolf Scholz* 1 , Stefan Born 2 , Lars Schmidt-Thieme 1
1

Information Systems and Machine Learning Lab, University of Hildesheim, Germany
2
Institute of Mathematics, TU Berlin, Germany
{yalavarthi, scholz, schmidt-thieme}@ismll.de,
born@math.tu-berlin.de
Abstract

models: a sorted invertible triangular attention layer, SITA,
parametrized by conditioning input to learn joint distributions, and an invertible non-linear activation function designed for flows, Shiesh, that is on and onto whole real
line. ProFITi consists of several invertible blocks build using SITA and Shiesh functions. Being a flow-based model,
ProFITi can learn any random conditional joint distribution,
while existing models (Schirmer et al. 2022; De Brouwer
et al. 2019; Biloš et al. 2021) learn only Gaussians.
Experiments on 4 real-world IMTS datasets, attest the superior performance of ProFITi. Our contributions are:

Probabilistic forecasting of irregularly sampled multivariate
time series with missing values is crucial for decision making
in various domains, including health care, astronomy, and climate. State-of-the-art methods estimate only marginal distributions of observations in single channels and at single timepoints, assuming a Gaussian distribution for the data. In this
work, we propose a novel model, ProFITi using conditional
normalizing flows to learn multivariate conditional distribution: joint distribution of the future values of the time series conditioned on past observations and specific channels
and timepoints, without assuming any fixed shape of the underlying distribution. As model components, we introduce
a novel invertible triangular attention layer and an invertible non-linear activation function on and onto the whole real
line. Through extensive experiments on 4 real-world datasets,
ProFITi demonstrates significant improvement, achieving an
average log-likelihood gain of 2.0 compared to the previous
state-of-the-art method.

1

1. Introduced ProFITi, a novel and, to the best of our
knowledge, first normalizing flow based probabilistic
forecasting model for predicting multivariate conditional
distributions of irregularly sampled time series with
missing values (Section 6).
2. Proposed a novel invertible triangular attention layer,
named SITA, which enables target variables to interact
and capture dependencies within a conditional normalizing flow framework (Section 4).
3. Proposed a novel non-linear, invertible, differentiable activation function on and onto the whole real line, Shiesh
(Section 5). This activation function can be used in normalizing flows.
4. Conducted experiments on 4 IMTS datasets for normalized joint negative loglikelihood. On average, ProFITi
provides a loglikelihood gain of 2.0 over the previously
best model (Section 7).

Introduction

Irregularly sampled multivariate time series with missing
values (IMTS) are common in various real-world scenarios
such as health, astronomy and climate. Accurate forecasting of IMTS is important for decision-making, but estimating uncertainty is crucial to avoid overconfidence. State-ofthe-art models applied to this task are Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE) based models (Schirmer et al. 2022;
De Brouwer et al. 2019; Biloš et al. 2021) which are 1)
computationally inefficient, and 2) offer only marginal likelihoods. In practice, joint or multivariate distributions are desired to capture dependencies and study forecasting scenarios. With joint distributions one can estimate the likelihood
of specific combinations of future variables ex. likelihood of
having rain and strong winds, which marginal or point forecast models cannot deliver.
For this, we propose a novel conditional normalizing
flow model called ProFITi, for Probabilistic Forecasting of
Irregularly sampled Multivariate Time series. ProFITi is designed to learn conditional joint distributions. We also propose two novel model components that can be used in flow

A detailed version of this work, along with additional experiments and proofs to lemmas, is available in the technical report (Yalavarthi et al. 2024b). Implementation: github.com/
yalavarthivk/ProFITi

2

Literature Review

There have been multiple works dealing point forecasting of
irregular time series (Yalavarthi et al. 2024a; Ansari et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2024). Very few models provide uncertainty quantification for such forecasts.
Probabilistic Forecasting Models for IMTS. Probabilistic IMTS forecasting often relies on variational inference
or predicting distribution parameters. Neural ODE models (Chen et al. 2018) combine probabilistic latent states

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21877

