The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motion-adaptive Transformer for Event-based Image Deblurring
Senyan Xu, Zhijing Sun, Mingchen Zhong, Chengzhi Cao, Yidi Liu, Xueyang Fu* , Yan Chen
University of Science and Technology of China
{syxu, sunzhijing, zmcsa24010071, chengzhicao, liuyidi2023}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu, eecyan}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

exposure, event cameras record per-pixel intensity changes
asynchronously at microsecond precision. This high temporal resolution and rich motion data have proven invaluable in
augmenting traditional deblurring methods, as demonstrated
in several research efforts (Maqueda et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2019; Pan et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2022, 2023).
Recent studies on event-based deblurring, such as those
by (Sun et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2025), treat
events as a distinct modality and use dual-branch encoders
to extract features from both events and images, followed by
various cross-modal fusion techniques. While these methods mark significant progress, they still face challenges that
limit their effectiveness in diverse and complex real-world
situations. Typically, these approaches focus predominantly
on the intensity information from events, neglecting the vital
spatial information that pinpoints motion areas. This spatial
motion information, which directly correlates with blur regions, has been exploited in certain conventional deblurring
methods to improve deblurring quality (Zhang, Xie, and Yao
2024; Kim et al. 2024). Furthermore, the reliance on CNN
architectures restricts their ability to utilize global features.
Unlike the convolution operation, Transformers are adept
at capturing non-local information (Vaswani et al. 2017) and
have been extensively utilized in various image restoration
tasks (Xiao et al. 2022a, 2024; Chen et al. 2023; Zhou et al.
2024), including deblurring (Zamir et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022; Kong et al. 2023). While standard Transformer architectures excel at modeling global relationships between
queries and keys, aiding in feature aggregation in image deblurring, the high-density visual information presents a challenge where the attention mechanism struggles to concentrate on the most relevant tokens without spatial guidance.
Additionally, when dealing with events, we note that due to
their inherent sparsity, many tokens from the key are irrelevant to those from the query, especially in scenarios with
limited relative movement. In these cases, the standard attention mechanism compromises the quality of latent representations during feature aggregation due to its inability to
discern relevant interactions. These limitations highlight the
necessity for more tailored attention strategies that can manage the unique aspects of sparse events and dense images.
In this paper, we introduce a new Motion-Adaptive Transformer (MAT) tailored for event-based image deblurring. At
the core of our architecture lies the Adaptive Motion Mask

Event cameras, which capture pixel-level brightness changes
asynchronously, provide rich motion information that is often missed during traditional frame-based camera exposures,
thereby offering fresh perspectives for motion deblurring. Although current approaches incorporate event intensity, they
neglect essential spatial motion information. Unlike their
CNN architectures, Transformers excel in modeling longrange dependencies but struggle with establishing relevant
non-local connections in sparse events and fail to highlight
significant interactions in dense images. To address these limitations, we introduce a Motion-Adaptive Transformer network (MAT) that utilizes spatial motion information to forge
robust global connections. The core design is an Adaptive
Motion Mask Predictor (AMMP) that identifies key motion
regions, guiding the Motion-Sparse Attention (MSA) to eliminate irrelevant event tokens and enabling the Motion-Aware
Attention (MAA) to focus on relevant ones, thereby enhancing long-range dependency modeling. Additionally, we
elaborately design a Cross-Modal Intensity Gating mechanism that efficiently merges intensity data across modalities
while minimizing parameter use. The learnable ExpansionControlled Spatial Gating further optimizes the transmission
of event features. Comprehensive testing confirms that our
approach sets a new benchmark in image deblurring, surpassing previous methods by up to 0.60dB on the GoPro dataset,
1.04dB on the HS-ERGB dataset, and achieving an average
improvement of 0.52dB across two real-world datasets.

Code — https://github.com/QUEAHREN/MAT

Introduction
Motion blur commonly arises from the relative motion between the camera and the scene during the exposure time of
frame-based cameras. Image deblurring, a complex inverse
problem, seeks to restore a sharp image from its blurred
counterpart. Recent strides in deep learning have markedly
enhanced traditional image deblurring techniques, as evidenced by various studies (Chen et al. 2021; Cho et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2022; Zamir et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022; Kong
et al. 2023; Peng et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024). Unlike conventional cameras, which fail to capture motion details during
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8942

