The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Creating Coherence in Federated Non-Negative Matrix Factorization
Sebastian Dalleiger, Aristides Gionis
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockhom, Sweden
sdall@kth.se, argioni@kth.se

areas that deal with large quantities of sensitive data, such as
healthcare, where Non-Negative Matrix Factorization (NMF)
is a prevalent algorithm. Extending NMF, Federated NMF
(FedNMF) aims to factorize a distributed matrix 𝑋 𝑗 ≈ 𝑈 𝑗 𝑉¯

Abstract
In many real-world applications, data is inherently decentralized, necessitating data analysis methods that prioritize privacy
while delivering interpretable results. Federated Non-Negative
Matrix Factorization (FedNMF) meets this requirement by factorizing latent components from distributed data that cannot
be freely shared among clients. A significant challenge in FedNMF arises when clients converge on different solutions due
to prolonged independent optimization, leading to drift and
incoherent models. While Federated Learning (FL) typically
mitigates drift through frequent synchronizations and strong
regularization, it often overlooks critical properties of NonNegative Matrix Factorization, such as permutation invariance.
As a result, solutions from FedNMF clients may be misidentified by FL drift as distinct, despite being equivalent. Using
an alignment-aware drift, we create coherence through proximal optimization and barycenter aggregation for FedNMF.
We analyze the computational complexity of our approach,
provide efficient heuristics, and ensure the convergence of
our algorithms. On a diverse set of real-world and synthetic
datasets, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods.

𝑛 ×𝑘

into a local set of basis matrices 𝑈 𝑗 ∈ R+ 𝑗 and a globallyshared coefficient matrix 𝑉¯ ∈ R+𝑘×𝑚 . To efficiently solve
this problem in parallel, we independently optimize local
auxiliary problems of the form 𝑋 𝑗 ≈ 𝑈 𝑗 𝑉 𝑗 and periodically
aggregate the results into a shared global matrix
𝑉¯ ← AGGREGATE (𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑐 ) .

This approach is effective when the objective remains relatively stable once we replace 𝑉 𝑗 with ¯
𝑉, i.e., 𝑈 𝑗 𝑉¯ ≈ 𝑈 𝑗 𝑉 𝑗 .
Whenever local matrices converge to the same solution,
aggregating such a coherent model is easy. However, if local
matrices diverge to different solutions, aggregating a global
coherent model is hard. Usually, as clients continue to update their local matrices, their matrices become increasingly
misaligned with the global state. We call this phenomenon
coefficient drift, which is often defined as the sum
𝑐
∑︁
∥𝑉 𝑗𝑡+𝜏 − 𝑉¯ 𝑡+𝜏 ∥ 2F

Replication Material — doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14501532

1

𝑗

Introduction

Uncovering hidden structure and relationships within distributed non-negative data is a prevalent challenge in various
domains, including life sciences (Xu et al. 2021), collaborative filtering systems (Yang et al. 2021), and topic modeling (Wang, Tong, and Shi 2020). In many instances, this
non-negative data is distributed across different devices, and
sharing raw data is restricted due to privacy concerns. For
instance, in life science, individual hospitals may possess
non-negative matrices representing patient-related information, and privacy regulations mandate that these matrices
cannot be shared directly.
Federated learning (FL) is a decentralized machinelearning paradigm that enables multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model while keeping their data local
and private. By allowing for efficient distributed optimization,
federated learning thus enables learning from sensitive data
and enhances privacy. Those are sought-after properties in
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
16135

of distances between the global 𝑉¯ and local 𝑉 𝑗 after 𝜏 client
optimization steps. A high drift imposes significant challenges during learning. First, a high drift significantly deteriorates the quality of the average model because it increases
variance. Second, a high drift drift slows convergence both
locally and globally, because synchronizations may lead to
substantial changes in the model’s coefficients. Third, a high
drift can result in the global model not fitting the local-data
distribution, as some clients may be overshadowed by the
majority. Finally, drift may be exacerbated when local models
are optimized independently for extended periods. Therefore,
preventing drift and thereby creating coherence is a core
aspect of efficient FL.
Generic techniques such as frequent modelsynchronization (McMahan et al. 2017), strong regularization
(Li et al. 2020; Yuan and Li 2022), and gradient control
(Karimireddy et al. 2020) might help with maintaining model
alignment and improve the overall client-server coherence.
Although these approaches are successful in the realm of
federated machine learning, standard federated learning

