The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoffeeBoost: Gradient Boosting Native Conformal Inference for Bayesian
Optimization
Yuanhao Lai1 * , Pengfei Zheng1 * † , Chenpeng Ji1 , Cheng Qiu1 ,
Tingkai Wang1 , Songhan Zhang1,2 , Zhengang Wang1 , Yunfei Du1
1
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{laiyuanhao,zhengpengfei18,jichenpeng,qiucheng4,wangtingkai,zhangsonghan2,wangzhengang,duyunfei5}@huawei.com,
222010549@link.cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Most prior work is grounded on Gaussian Process regression (GPR)-based surrogate model (Seeger 2004) to guide
exploration and exploitation. However, the inherent assumptions made by GPR, such as continuity, Gaussianity, and stationarity can severely limit their applicability to real-world
software configuration tuning (Van Aken et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2022) problems. System measurements are usually
high-dimensional (e.g., multiple hundreds), heterogeneous
with both discrete and continuous variables, and embedded
with non-stationary, heteroscedastic noises of any arbitrary
distribution, either of which can fail the learning and optimization process of GPR-based BO algorithms.
To address these limitations, various approaches have
been proposed to lift the restrictive assumptions made by
GPR-based BO, including the use of non-stationary kernels
(Heinonen et al. 2016; Martinez-Cantin 2015), multi-localsurrogates within trust regions (Eriksson et al. 2019), and
data warping techniques (Snoek et al. 2014; Cowen-Rivers
et al. 2022). Independently, other work tries to avoid the assumption pitfalls by replacing GPR with a wider spectrum
of machine learning models, such as random forest (RF)
used in SMAC (Lindauer et al. 2022) and gradient boosting decision trees (GBDT) (Friedman 2001) used in scikitoptimize (Head et al. 2021). The practicability of tree-based
BO schemes toward software system tuning is evaluated in
a recent large-scale experimental study (Zhang et al. 2022)
over cloud databases. Results show that the SMAC (Lindauer et al. 2022) significantly outperforms vanilla and advanced GPR-based BO variants.
This study follows the route of tree-based BO to further
drive the research of Bayesian optimization under relaxed
assumptions. We found that, though BO with random forest
surrogates (e.g., SMAC) prevails in building software system auto-tuners (Lindauer et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021; Curino
et al. 2020; Thornton et al. 2013), another stream of treebased models, i.e., gradient boosted decision trees, remains
relatively unexplored in BO. This can be attributed to the
challenges in uncertainty quantification for GBDTs, which
has long existed in the machine learning community.
Existing uncertainty estimation methods for GBDT such
as NGBoost (Duan et al. 2020) and PGBM (Sprangers,
Schelter, and de Rijke 2021), only account for data uncertainty (Gal et al. 2016) while neglecting knowledge uncer-

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a key technique for solving black-box optimization problems. This study extends the
scope of BO from conventional applications (e.g., AutoML
and robotics learning) to automated tuning of software systems. Despite GP (Gaussian Process) implementing a foundation formalism for exploitation and exploration in BO, its limited predictive power and unrealistic assumptions (e.g., continuity and Gaussianity) can severely affect its effectiveness
and efficiency in tuning complex software systems. To overcome these limitations, we propose a BO framework CoffeeBoost, which implements exploitation and exploration with a
GBDT-native distribution-free probabilistic surrogate model.
CoffeeBoost constructs surrogate models via stochastic gradient boosting ensembles (SGBE) and quantifies probabilistic
distributions via distribution-free conformal predictive systems. Moreover, CoffeeBoost leverages the residual paths in
SGBE to improve the local adaptiveness of the resulting predictive distributions in a GBDT-native manner. Across eight
auto-tuning benchmarks for database management systems
(DBMS), we evaluate CoffeeBoost and show its superior
learnability and optimizability against existing GP-based and
tree-ensemble-based BO schemes. Detailed analysis further
shows CoffeeBoost’s predictive distributions excel in both
coverage and tightness.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) has been widely applied to
solve sample-efficient black-box optimization problems in
various domains (Wang et al. 2023), including chemical
synthesis (Korovina et al. 2020; Wang and Dowling 2022),
hardware design (Ejjeh et al. 2022; Nardi, Koeplinger,
and Olukotun 2019), hyperparameter optimization (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012; Lindauer et al. 2022) and neural architecture search (Kandasamy et al. 2018; Ru et al.
2020; White, Neiswanger, and Savani 2021). Recent technical trends extend the use of BO towards software system
control, in particular, tuning software configurations to maximize performance and resource efficiency (Van Aken et al.
2017; Kanellis et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2022).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18017

