The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Objective Molecular Design Through Learning Latent Pareto Set
Yiping Liu1 * , Jiahao Yang1 * , Xuanbai Ren1 , Xinyi Zhang1 , Yuansheng Liu1 , Bosheng Song1 ,
Xiangxiang Zeng1† , Hisao Ishibuchi2
2

1
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China.
{yiping0liu, jiahaoyoung0520}@gmail.com, xzeng@foxmail.com

Abstract

Brown 2021), material science (Butler et al. 2018), and catalyst development (Wan, Duan, and Huang 2020). Influenced
by the rapid development of artificial intelligence, machine
learning has shown its powerful ability to assist in efficient
candidate discovery (Chen et al. 2021; Hoffman et al. 2022).
However, in practice, molecules often need to fulfill multiple
property requirements, e.g., drug molecules not only need to
bind efficiently to the target, but also need to have suitable
pharmacokinetic properties and low toxicity. In this context,
multi-objective molecular design is challenging. It aims to
discover the Pareto set of molecules, where improving one
objective inevitably entails compromising others.
Traditional approaches to multi-objective molecular design often involve simplifying multi-objective problems by
converting them into single-objective ones using specific
weightings (Abels et al. 2019; SV et al. 2022). While effective to some extent, these methods rely on human experts
for weighting. In general, weighting of multiple objectives
is difficult, and inappropriate weighting leads to inappropriate solutions. Other techniques focus on identifying the
Pareto set through a two-stage process: molecule sampling
and non-dominated sorting (Yasonik 2020; Verhellen 2022).
However, this approach can become prohibitively expensive
and time-consuming, especially in cases with multiple objectives and a large pool of molecules to consider. To improve sampling efficiency in multi-objective molecular design, Bayesian optimization has emerged as a powerful and
efficient method (Xie et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2022). Nevertheless, Bayesian optimization faces limitations when dealing
with high-dimensional spaces and high computational complexity associated with Gaussian process inference. These
challenges make it less suited for complex multi-objective
molecular design tasks.
Conventional multi-objective molecular design approaches often yield a limited Pareto set (i.e., a small
number of trade-off solutions), which may not align well
with decision-makers preferences. multi-objective molecular design problems may have a complicated Pareto set with
various trade-offs. Accessing this entire set can provide
significant advantages, enabling decision-makers to select
the most preferred solution and accelerating the molecular
design process. Recent advancements in this field, particularly Pareto set learning methods, aim to approximate the
entire Pareto set using learning models (Lin, Yang, and

Molecular design inherently involves the optimization of
multiple conflicting objectives, such as enhancing bioactivity and ensuring synthesizability. Evaluating these objectives often requires resource-intensive computations or physical experiments. Current molecular design methodologies
typically approximate the Pareto set using a limited number of molecules. In this paper, we present an innovative
approach, called Multi-Objective Molecular design through
Learning Latent Pareto Set (MLPS). MLPS initially utilizes
an encoder-decoder model to seamlessly transform the discrete chemical space into a continuous latent space. We then
employ local Bayesian optimization models to efficiently
search for local optimal solutions (i.e., molecules) within predefined trust regions. Using surrogate objective values derived from these local models, we train a global Pareto set
learning model to understand the mapping between direction vectors (called “preferences”) in the objective space and
the entire Pareto set in the continuous latent space. Both
the global Pareto set learning model and local Bayesian optimization models collaborate to discover high-quality solutions and adapt the trust regions dynamically. Our work
is an effective endeavor towards learning the Pareto set for
multi-objective molecular design, providing decision-makers
with the capability to fine-tune their preferences and thoroughly explore the Pareto set. Experimental results demonstrate that MLPS achieves state-of-the-art performance across
various multi-objective scenarios, encompassing diverse objective types and varying numbers of objectives. The effectiveness of MLPS was further validated through real-world
challenges in discovering antifungal peptides with low toxicity and high activity.

Code —
https://github.com/JiahaoYoung0520/MLPS/source
Extended version — https:
//github.com/JiahaoYoung0520/MLPS/extend-version

Introduction
Molecular design plays a pivotal role in a multitude of applications, including drug discovery (Meyers, Fabian, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19006

