The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Combinatorial Optimization for Stochastic Flexible Job Shop Scheduling
Problems
Igor G. Smit1, 2 , Yaoxin Wu2, 3 * , Pavel Troubil4 , Yingqian Zhang2, 3 , Wim P.M. Nuijten1, 2
1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven Artificial Intelligence Systems Institute, Eindhoven University of Technology
3
Department of Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences, Eindhoven University of Technology
4
Delmia R&D, Dassault Systèmes
i.g.smit@tue.nl, y.wu2@tue.nl, pavel.troubil@3ds.com, yqzhang@tue.nl, w.p.m.nuijten@tue.nl
2

Abstract

sitely, there is an abundance of uncertainty, leading to vulnerable plans produced by these optimization methods.
In recent years, increasing focus has been directed to
stochastic optimization methods. However, these methods
remain largely underrepresented, especially for more complex optimization problems such as the FJSP. Existing methods solving the stochastic FJSP, such as a simulationoptimization framework (Ghaedy-Heidary et al. 2024) or
a meta-heuristic approach including Monte-Carlo sampling
(Flores-Gómez, Borodin, and Dauzère-Pérès 2023) add significant computational complexity to already expensive approaches, while also being tailored to specific use-cases and
objectives, limiting their potential for adoption.
A recent branch of optimization technology is constituted
by neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) methods, leveraging deep (reinforcement) learning (DRL) to solve CO
problems (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021). They learn
high-quality optimization policies that fit a set of problem
instances, eliminating the need for handcrafted expert rules,
while also being efficient. Current NCO methods mainly target deterministic optimization, overlooking their practical
use in stochastic situations. It is highly beneficial to extend
NCO to the stochastic optimization domain.
Several existing works leverage learning-based methods
for stochastic routing or scheduling. However, these are generally focused on online or dynamic scenarios. Conversely,
in many practical cases, such as manufacturing plants, a
one-time schedule is needed in advance. Moreover, existing
methods only focus on implicitly learning stochastic dynamics through the Markov decision process (MDP). In stochastic optimization, on the contrary, the assumed distributions
can be explicitly considered, allowing for better plans.
We address these issues by a novel attention-based scenario processing module (SPM) that extends deterministic
NCO architectures to solve stochastic problems. The SPM,
which is expressive yet easily adaptable to different base
neural networks for different problems, effectively captures
the representation of stochastic scenarios to favorably intervene the solution policy. We embed SPM in a novel training
paradigm that can address various stochastic objectives and
offers high-quality yet fast solution policies, using a sampling strategy commonly found in stochastic optimization
methods. We combine SPM with an existing network archi-

Neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) has gained significant attention due to the potential of deep learning to efficiently solve combinatorial optimization problems. NCO has
been widely applied to job shop scheduling problems (JSPs)
with the current focus predominantly on deterministic problems. In this paper, we propose a novel attention-based scenario processing module (SPM) to extend NCO methods for
solving stochastic JSPs. Our approach explicitly incorporates
stochastic information by an attention mechanism that captures the embedding of sampled scenarios (i.e., an approximation of stochasticity). Fed with the embedding, the base
neural network is intervened by the attended scenarios, which
accordingly learns an effective policy under stochasticity. We
also propose a training paradigm that works harmoniously
with either the expected makespan or Value-at-Risk objective.
Results demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing
learning and non-learning methods for the flexible JSP problem with stochastic processing times on a variety of instances.
In addition, our approach holds significant generalizability to
varied numbers of scenarios and disparate distributions.

Code — https://github.com/ai-for-decision-makingtue/NCO-for-Stochastic-FJSP

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems are prevalent in
various application areas, posing significant challenges due
to their complex nature and computational intractability.
One critical CO problem is the flexible job shop scheduling problem (FJSP), which has wide applicability ranging from semiconductor manufacturing (Tamssaouet et al.
2022) to healthcare scheduling (Burdett and Kozan 2018)
and aluminum production (Zhang, Yang, and Zhou 2016).
Traditional approaches, such as constraint programming
(Baptiste, Pape, and Nuijten 2001; Col and Teppan 2022),
heuristics (Sels, Gheysen, and Vanhoucke 2012), or metaheuristics (Rooyani and Defersha 2019) have made great
progress in solving these problems. However, these methods
generally assume deterministic problems. In practice, oppo* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26678

