The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Transformer Based Line Segment Detection with Matched
Predicting and Re-ranking
Xin Tong, Shi Peng, Baojie Tian, Yufei Guo, Xuhui Huang, Zhe Ma *
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC
xin tong@pku.edu.cn, mazhe thu@163.com

Abstract
Classical Transformer-based line segment detection methods have delivered impressive results. However, we observe
that some accurately detected line segments are assigned
low confidence scores during prediction, causing them to be
ranked lower and potentially suppressed. Additionally, these
models often require prolonged training periods to achieve
strong performance, largely due to the necessity of bipartite matching. In this paper, we introduce RANK-LETR, a
novel Transformer-based line segment detection method. Our
approach leverages learnable geometric information to refine the ranking of predicted line segments by enhancing the
confidence scores of high-quality predictions in a posterior
verification step. We also propose a new line segment proposal method, wherein the feature point nearest to the centroid of the line segment directly predicts the location, significantly improving training efficiency and stability. Moreover,
we introduce a line segment ranking loss to stabilize rankings during training, thereby enhancing the generalization
capability of the model. Experimental results demonstrate
that our method outperforms other Transformer-based and
CNN-based approaches in prediction accuracy while requiring fewer training epochs than previous Transformer-based
models.

Ground
Truth

Ground
Truth

Bipartite
Matching

Known
Correspondence

Line
Prediction

Line
Prediction

Queries

Sorted
Queries

(a) Unmatched Predicting

(b) Matched Predicting

Figure 1: Comparison between unmatched and matched predicting in Transformer-based line segment detection. (a) In
unmatched predicting, predictions need to be matched with
ground truth online using bipartite matching. (b) In matched
predicting, each prediction is directly associated with a specific ground truth value, resulting in higher training efficiency and stability.

Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based methods
typically predict the centroid of a line segment along with
the offsets of its two endpoints relative to the centroid, taking
advantage of the translation invariance of convolution operations. In contrast, Transformer-based methods can directly
predict the two endpoints of a line segment. However, existing Transformer-based line segment detection methods employ Transformer encoder-decoder architecture, which requires online bipartite matching to define the loss function
during training. As a result, these methods often demand extensive training time to converge and depend on heavy pretraining or multi-stage fine-tuning to achieve optimal results.
To address this issue, we propose a novel matched prediction
strategy, where the matching correspondence between predictions and ground truths is predefined, as shown in Fig.1.
Specifically, the feature point closest to the centroid of a line
segment is responsible for predicting that line. The predictions are then ordered and can directly correspond to the
ground truth supervision signal.
Proposal-based methods typically assign a score to each
predicted line segment and rank them from highest to lowest, with the top-ranked segments chosen as the final predictions. In these methods, scores and locations are predicted simultaneously, making score prediction and location regres-

Introduction
Line segment detection is a fundamental and critical problem in computer vision. An accurate line segment detection
algorithm can significantly enable and enhance various computer vision applications, such as 3D reconstruction (Li, Liu,
and Zhou 2012; Langlois, Boulch, and Marlet 2019), camera calibration (Zhang et al. 2016; Nakano 2021), depth estimation (Zavala and Martinez-Carranza 2022), scene understanding (Hofer, Maurer, and Bischof 2017), object detection (Tang et al. 2022), and SLAM (Vakhitov and Lempitsky
2019; Gomez-Ojeda et al. 2019). Traditional line segment
detection algorithms directly utilize low-level information,
such as image gradients, for line segment detection. While
these algorithms offer fast detection speeds, they often result in fragmented line segments. In contrast, learning-based
methods can detect longer and more meaningful line segments.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7428

