The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improved Rates of Differentially Private Nonconvex-Strongly-Concave Minimax
Optimization
Ruijia Zhang * 1,2 , Mingxi Lei * 3 , Meng Ding 3 , Zihang Xiang 4 , Jinhui Xu 3 , Di Wang 4,5
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Johns Hopkins University
3
State University of New York at Buffalo
4
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology CEMSE
5
Center of Excellence for Generative AI, KAUST
Abstract

DP Minimax optimization is still in its early stages of development. Specifically, most of the previous work focuses on
the case where the loss is either (strongly)-convex-(strongly)concave (Yang et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Boob and
Guzmán 2024; Bassily, Guzmán, and Menart 2023; González,
Guzmán, and Paquette 2024; Zhou and Bassily 2024) or nonconvex but satisfying the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) condition
(Yang et al. 2022). However, compared to these settings, nonconvex minimax optimization is more widespread in deep
neural networks, and all these methods are based on stability
analysis and are hard to extend to the non-convex minimax
problem. Thus, there is still lacking understanding when the
loss is nonconvex, which motivates the study in this paper.

In this paper, we study the problem of (finite sum) minimax
optimization in the Differential Privacy (DP) model. Unlike
most of the previous studies on the (strongly) convex-concave
settings or loss functions satisfying the Polyak-Lojasiewicz
condition, here we mainly focus on the nonconvex-stronglyconcave one, which encapsulates many models in deep learning such as deep AUC maximization. Specifically, we first
analyze a DP version of Stochastic Gradient Descent Ascent
(SGDA) and show the utility bound in terms of the Euclidean
norm of the gradient for the empirical risk function. We then
propose a new method with less gradient noise variance and
improve the upper bound to the best-known result for DP
Empirical Risk Minimization with non-convex loss. We also
discussed several lower bounds of private minimax optimization. Finally, experiments on AUC maximization, generative
adversarial networks, and temporal difference learning with
real-world data support our theoretical analysis.

In recent years, minimax optimization has received great attention as it encompasses several basic machine learning and
deep learning models such as generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Creswell et al. 2018), deep
AUC maximization (Yang and Ying 2022), distributionally
robust optimization (Levy et al. 2020), and reinforcement
learning (Sutton 1988), which have been widely used in different applications such as biomedicine and healthcare (Ling
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022). The wide applications of minimax optimization also present privacy challenges in this
problem as they always involve data with sensitive information. Differential Privacy (DP), introduced by (Dwork et al.
2006), has gained widespread recognition as a method for
preserving privacy by adding a controlled amount of random noise to the data or query responses, thereby effectively
concealing the details of any individual.
Recently, DP (finite sum) minimax optimization has been
widely studied (see the related work section for details). However, compared to DP Empirical Risk Minimization (Wang,
Ye, and Xu 2017; Wang et al. 2021; Wang and Xu 2019b),

Recently, (Zhao et al. 2023) presented the first study on
DP temporal difference learning, which can be formalized
as a specific nonconvex-strong-concave minimax problem.
However, several challenges remain: First, compared to the
utility metrics of DP Empirical Risk Minimization, which always use first order or second order gradient of the objective
function (Wang, Chen, and Xu 2019; Wang and Xu 2019a,
2021), the metric in (Zhao et al. 2023) cannot directly measure the stationariness of a model in general, indicating that
it is hard to be explained whether the private model is good
or not. Moreover, their utility metric has not been widely
used in other related work for both minimax optimization
and reinforcement learning, making it hard to compare with
the non-private case and hard to use in general minimax optimization problems (see Theorem 5.2 in (Zhao et al. 2023)
for details). Second, although in the ideal case (Zhao et al.
2023) shows that their utility will be close to the l2 -norm
gradient of the objective function, they show a utility bound
d1/8
of Õ( (nϵ)
1/4 ), where d = max{d1 , d2 } with d1 and d2 are
model dimensions and n is the sample size. It still has a
d1/3
gap with the best-known result Õ( (nϵ)
2/3 ) for DP Empirical Risk Minimization with non-convex loss (Murata and
Suzuki 2023; Tran and Cutkosky 2022). Finally, their approach is only tailored for temporal difference learning, and
it is unknown whether it can be extended to general minimax
problems.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To address the aforementioned issues, this paper revisits
the DP minimax optimization problem in the nonconvexstrong-concave (NC-SC) setting, offering a more general and

Introduction

22524

