The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Two-stream Beats One-stream: Asymmetric Siamese Network
for Efficient Visual Tracking
Jiawen Zhu1 , Huayi Tang2 , Xin Chen1 , Xinying Wang1 , Dong Wang1 , Huchuan Lu1 *
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
jiawen@mail.dlut.edu.cn, huayit@seas.upenn.edu
{chenxin3131, wangxinying}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wdice, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn
2

𝑋𝑋

𝑍𝑍

𝑋𝑋

C

Share Weights Modulate
𝑍𝑍
𝑋𝑋

…

…

…

Interaction
Module

…

Efficient tracking has garnered attention for its ability to operate on resource-constrained platforms for real-world deployment beyond desktop GPUs. Current efficient trackers mainly
follow precision-oriented trackers, adopting a one-stream
framework with lightweight modules. However, blindly adhering to the one-stream paradigm may not be optimal, as
incorporating template computation in every frame leads to
redundancy, and pervasive semantic interaction between template and search region places stress on edge devices. In this
work, we propose a novel asymmetric Siamese tracker named
AsymTrack for efficient tracking. AsymTrack disentangles
template and search streams into separate branches, with template computing only once during initialization to generate
modulation signals. Building on this architecture, we devise
an efficient template modulation mechanism to unidirectional
inject crucial cues into the search features, and design an object perception enhancement module that integrates abstract
semantics and local details to overcome the limited representation in lightweight tracker. Extensive experiments demonstrate that AsymTrack offers superior speed-precision tradeoffs across different platforms compared to the current stateof-the-arts. For instance, AsymTrack-T achieves 60.8% AUC
on LaSOT and 224/81/84 FPS on GPU/CPU/AGX, surpassing HiT-Tiny by 6.0% AUC with higher speeds.

𝑍𝑍

…

Abstract

LaSOT AUC (%)

LaSOT AUC (%)

(a) Siamese network (b) One-stream network (c) Asymmetric Siamese network

(d) Speed on CPU (FPS)

(e) Speed on AGX (FPS)

Figure 1: AsymTrack vs. other frameworks and trackers.
(a)-(c) represent Siamese (two-stream) network, one-stream
network and our asymmetric Siamese network, respectively.
colors represent networks in initialization and inference phrases, respectively. Diagrams (d)&(e) display comparisons of speed-precision trade-offs on CPU and Jetson
AGX Xavier platforms. The parameters and FLOPs are represented by the area of circles in (d) and (e), respectively.

Introduction
As a long-standing fundamental topic, visual tracking aims
at pinpointing the position of a target object in video frames.
Promising advancements have been achieved, attributable
to increasingly powerful designs of deep models (He et al.
2016; Vaswani et al. 2017; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Diao
et al. 2024). However, in practical application scenarios, current high-performance trackers (Ye et al. 2022; Cui et al.
2022; Wei et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024;
Lin et al. 2024) often fail to meet the low computational
latency requirements, particularly on resource-constrained
platforms. Thus, designing efficient tracker is critical and recently attracts extensive research in industry and academia.
Mainstream efficient trackers can be broadly categorized
into two types: siamese (two-stream) networks (Yan et al.

2021b; Chen et al. 2022b; Blatter et al. 2023) and onestream networks (Kang et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b; Cui
et al. 2024). Efficient Siamese trackers build upon the success of the precision-oriented Siamese trackers (Li et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2021), where two symmetric branches with
shared parameters are utilized to extract features from template and search region, respectively. Subsequently, the designed interaction module performs feature correlation, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). A typical advantage of Siamese tracking pipeline is that the detached streams allow the model
to drop the template branch (except initialization) during
inference, thereby reducing unnecessary latency. More recently, state-of-the-art precision-oriented trackers (Ye et al.
2022; Cui et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023)

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10959

