The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Accurate Link Prediction for Edge-Incomplete Graphs via PU Learning
Junghun Kim, Ka Hyun Park, Hoyoung Yoon, U Kang
Seoul National University, South Korea
{bandalg97, kahyunpark, crazy8597, ukang}@snu.ac.kr

Main challenge of previous works

Abstract
Given an edge-incomplete graph, how can we accurately find
its missing links? The problem aims to discover the missing
relations between entities when their relationships are represented as a graph. Edge-incomplete graphs are prevalent in
real-world due to practical limitations, such as not checking
all users when adding friends in a social network. Addressing the problem is crucial for various tasks, including recommending friends in social networks and finding references in
citation networks. However, previous approaches rely heavily on the given edge-incomplete (observed) graph, making
it challenging to consider the missing (unobserved) links. In
this paper, we propose PULL, an accurate link prediction
method based on the positive-unlabeled (PU) learning. PULL
treats the observed edges in the training graph as positive examples, and the unconnected node pairs as unlabeled ones.
PULL prevents the model from blindly trusting the observed
graph by proposing latent variables for unconnected node
pairs, and leveraging the expected graph structure with respect to these variables. Extensive experiments on real-world
datasets show that PULL consistently outperforms the baselines for predicting links in edge-incomplete graphs.

True graph

Edge-incomplete

PULL (proposed)
PU-learning

Expected graph

U

?

U

P

U

?

0.9

U

P

U

0.7

P
Unobserved edges are hidden.
Existing works cannot propagate
information via unconnected node pairs

Treat observed edges as Positive( P )
and the rest as Unlabeled( U ) examples.
Then compute the expectation of graph

Figure 1: Main challenge of previous works. They cannot
consider the hidden unobserved edges in the given graph.
PULL treats the unconnected node pairs as unlabeled examples, and utilizes the expectation of graph structure.
mixed without labels. This misconception limits the model’s
ability to propagate information through unconnected node
pairs, which may potentially form edges, resulting in overreliance of a link predictor to the edge-incomplete graph.
Thus, it is important to consider the uncertainties of the
given graph to obtain accurate linking probabilities.
In this work, we propose PULL (PU-L EARNING - BASED
L INK PREDICTOR), an accurate link prediction method in
edge-incomplete graphs. To account for the uncertainties in
the given graph while training a link predictor, PULL exploits PU (Positive-Unlabeled) learning (see Related Works
for details). We treat the observed edges in the given graph
as positive examples and the unconnected node pairs, which
may contain hidden edges, as unlabeled examples. We then
construct an expected graph while proposing latent variables
for the unlabeled (unconnected) node pairs to consider the
hidden edges among them. This enables us to effectively
propagate information through the unconnected edges, improving the prediction accuracy. The main challenge of previous works and our approach is depicted in Figure 1.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Introduction
Given an edge-incomplete graph, how can we accurately
find the missing links among the unconnected node pairs?
Edge-incomplete graphs are easily encountered in realworld networks. In social networks, connections between
users can be missing since we do not check every user when
adding friends. In the context of citation networks, there may
be missing citations as we do not review all published papers for citation. In these scenarios, the objective is to find
uncited references in citation networks (Shibata, Kajikawa,
and Sakata 2012; Liu et al. 2019) or to recommend friends
in social networks (Wang et al. 2015; Daud et al. 2020).
The main limitation of previous works (Zhang et al. 2021;
Zhu et al. 2021; Chamberlain et al. 2023; Ucar 2023) for link
prediction is that they assume the unconnected edges in the
given graph as true negative examples. In link prediction, the
complete set of true unconnected edges are not given. The
given graph contains only a subset of ground-truth edges,
while the other node pairs remain unlabeled; i.e., true unconnected edges and the unobserved ground-truth edges are

• Method. We propose PULL, an accurate link prediction
method in graphs. PULL effectively overcomes the primary limitation of previous methods, specifically their
heavy reliance on the provided edge-incomplete graph.
• Theory. We theoretically analyze PULL, including the

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17877

