The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Political Actor Agent: Simulating Legislative System for Roll Call Votes Prediction
with Large Language Models
Hao Li, Ruoyuan Gong, Hao Jiang*
Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072 China
whulh@whu.edu.cn, GongRuoyuan@whu.edu.cn, jh@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

2004; Kraft, Jain, and Rush 2016). Recently, some studies
have employed heterogeneous information graphs to represent legislators, bills, and contextual knowledge, including
complex relationships between party affiliations, lobbying
(Davoodi, Waltenburg, and Goldwasser 2020), and assets
(Feng et al. 2022, 2021; Mou et al. 2024). These studies
then use heterogeneous graph neural networks to generate
embeddings for nodes within the graph and predict voting
outcomes. Both approaches embed legislators and bills into
a vector space and use neural networks or similarity measures to predict results.
However, the aforementioned embedding-based methods
exhibit several limitations: 1. Limitations of predefined
features: The model’s training relies solely on predefined
features, preventing natural extension to new, untrained relationships. 2. Volume of training data: Most models depend
on large datasets to achieve optimal performance, which is
not feasible in real-world scenarios, such as predicting votes
of newly elected legislators. 3. Interpretability of predictions: Predictions based on embeddings lack interpretability,
particularly in providing insights in a manner understandable to humans.
To address these challenges, we have turned our attention
to the accomplishments of agent research based on Large
Language Models (LLMs) (Wang et al. 2024). With designed profile, planning, and action modules, LLM agents
can exhibit intelligent decision-making behaviors. Some
studies have applied LLM Agents in fields such as economics (Kim et al. 2024; Zhou et al. 2024a), social simulation (Mou, Wei, and Huang 2024; Chuang et al. 2024; Dai
et al. 2024), and voting decision-making (Yang et al. 2024;
Majumdar, Elkind, and Pournaras 2024a). As shown in figure 1, by reframing the problem of modeling political actors
as constructing political agents, we introduce deeper insights
into this field.
Specifically, we designed the Political Actor Agent (PAA)
based on a role-playing architecture (Li et al. 2023), which
offers several advantages: 1. Scalable Politician Profile:
Each agent is equipped with a scalable profile. This profile
is more flexible and easier to manage compared to manually designed relational rules. 2. Multi-view Planning:
From various views, such as the delegate and trustee views
(Alexander 2019), the PAA can formulate different voting plans. Decision-making reasons understandable to hu-

Predicting roll call votes through modeling political actors
has emerged as a focus in quantitative political science and
computer science. Widely used embedding-based methods
generate vectors for legislators from diverse data sets to predict legislative behaviors. However, these methods often contend with challenges such as the need for manually predefined features, reliance on extensive training data, and a lack
of interpretability. Achieving more interpretable predictions
under flexible conditions remains an unresolved issue. This
paper introduces the Political Actor Agent (PAA), a novel
agent-based framework that utilizes Large Language Models
to overcome these limitations. By employing role-playing architectures and simulating legislative system, PAA provides
a scalable and interpretable paradigm for predicting roll call
votes. Our approach not only enhances the accuracy of predictions but also offers multi-view, human-understandable
decision reasoning, providing new insights into political actor
behaviors. We conducted comprehensive experiments using
voting records from the 117-118th U.S. House of Representatives, validating the superior performance and interpretability
of PAA. This study not only demonstrates PAA’s effectiveness but also its potential in political science research.

Introduction
Legislative actions, such as proposing, reviewing, and voting
on bills, enable political actors to influence national and societal development. Modeling these actors has emerged as an
interdisciplinary focus within quantitative political science
and computer science. The representations obtained from
modeling political actors are applied to downstream tasks
such as roll-call vote prediction (Feng et al. 2022; Mou et al.
2021), and political stance prediction (Feng et al. 2021; Li
and Goldwasser 2019).
In this paper, we primarily focus on the problem of
predicting legislators’ roll call votes.With voting records,
bill texts, and background knowledge, there are two main
approaches to modeling political actors. The ideal point
model, one of the most widely used methods for roll call
vote prediction, represents legislators and bills as points in
one or multiple dimensions (Clinton, Jackman, and Rivers
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

388

