The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Symbolic Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
Xin Li 1 , Chengli Zhao 1† , Xue Zhang 1† , Xiaojun Duan 1
1

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan 410073, China
li xin@nudt.edu.cn, chenglizhao@nudt.edu.cn, xuezhang@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

(Benner, Gugercin, and Willcox 2015; Li et al. 2020b,a).
This model should be capable of approximating the operator
mapping from the parameter functions to the system states.
In most cases, we can only obtain the experimentally measured data from complex systems without prior knowledge
of the underlying dynamical equations. Thus, data-driven
methods are becoming increasingly important, including
the autoregressive model (Navarro-Moreno 2008), recurrent neural networks (Van Houdt, Mosquera, and Nápoles
2020; Cho et al. 2014; Zhu, Li, and Lin 2023; De Brouwer
et al. 2019), graph neural networks (Di Giovanni et al.
2022; Pilva and Zareei 2022; Liu et al. 2022), and neural
ODEs (NODEs) (Chen et al. 2018; Holt, Qian, and van der
Schaar 2022; Finlay et al. 2020; Biloš et al. 2021). In addition, recent work has shown that introducing physical priors can significantly enhance the learning performance of
neural networks (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019;
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2019; Cranmer et al. 2020). For instance, the PDE-NET proposed by Long et al. (Long et al.
2018; Long, Lu, and Dong 2019) utilizes the special convolution kernels to represent potential spatial derivative terms
and adopts the idea of sparse identification to learn the
nonlinear dynamics (SINDy) (Wu and Zhang 2019; Rudy
et al. 2016). The message-passing PDE solvers (MP-PDE)
proposed by Brandstetter et al. (Brandstetter, Worrall, and
Welling 2022) leverages a combination of traditional numerical methods to predict PDE systems. However, these methods often model only a specific system and require retraining
when environmental parameters change.
In recent years, neural operators have gained significant
attention (Kovachki et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021; Jin, Meng,
and Lu 2022; Chen et al. 2023; Xiong et al. 2023). Among
them, the Deep Operator Network (DeepONet, DON) (Lu,
Jin, and Karniadakis 2019) and Fourier Neural Operator
(FNO) (Li et al. 2020c) are two of the most prominent
works. These methods encode the input function at fixed
sample points and use a dedicated neural network architecture to directly predict the system state. Compared to traditional methods, these methods solve parametric dynamics systems faster and improve prediction accuracy during
testing due to their grid-independent nature. However, they
lack interpretability, do not explain dynamics well, and cannot utilize physical priors. Furthermore, they require a large
amount of training data and have limited extrapolation capa-

Differential equations are widely used to describe complex
dynamical systems with evolving parameters in nature and
engineering. Effectively learning a family of maps from the
parameter function to the system dynamics is of great significance. In this study, we propose a novel learning framework
of symbolic continuous-depth neural networks, termed Symbolic Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (SNODEs), to
effectively and accurately learn the underlying dynamics of
complex systems. Specifically, our learning framework comprises three stages: initially, pre-training a predefined symbolic neural network via a gradient flow matching strategy;
subsequently, fine-tuning this network using Neural ODEs;
and finally, constructing a general neural network to capture
residuals. In this process, we apply the SNODEs framework
to partial differential equation systems through Fourier analysis, achieving resolution-invariant modeling. Moreover, this
framework integrates the strengths of symbolism and connectionism, boasting a universal approximation theorem while
significantly enhancing interpretability and extrapolation capabilities relative to state-of-the-art baseline methods. We
demonstrate this through experiments on several representative complex systems. Therefore, our framework can be further applied to a wide range of scientific problems, such as
system bifurcation and control, reconstruction and forecasting, as well as the discovery of new equations.

Introduction
Complex dynamical systems, typically expressed as ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or partial differential
equations (PDEs), are integral to scientific research and
engineering applications across a wide range of domains
(Wang, Lai, and Grebogi 2016; Brunton and Kutz 2022; Devaney 2021). However, these systems are often subject to environmental changes during their evolution, which can lead
to temporal and spatial variations in internal parameters or
external perturbations (Wang, Wang, and Perdikaris 2021).
This yields significant challenges when exploring the underlying dynamic mechanisms and predicting the behavior of
the system in new scenarios. To address this issue, we aim
to construct a surrogate model from observed data generated
by parametric dynamic systems and the parameter functions
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18511

