The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Walking the Web of Concept-Class Relationships in Incrementally Trained
Interpretable Models
Susmit Agrawal, Deepika Vemuri, Sri Siddarth Chakaravarthy P, Vineeth N. Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
{ai22mtech12002, ai22resch11001}@iith.ac.in, {sri.siddarth, vineethnb}@cse.iith.ac.in

Abstract
Concept-based methods have emerged as a promising direction to develop interpretable neural networks in standard supervised settings. However, most works that study them in
incremental settings assume either a static concept set across
all experiences or assume that each experience relies on a
distinct set of concepts. In this work, we study conceptbased models in a more realistic, dynamic setting where new
classes may rely on older concepts in addition to introducing
new concepts themselves. We show that concepts and classes
form a complex web of relationships, which is susceptible to
degradation and needs to be preserved and augmented across
experiences. We introduce new metrics to show that existing concept-based models cannot preserve these relationships
even when trained using methods to prevent catastrophic forgetting, since they cannot handle forgetting at concept, class,
and concept-class relationship levels simultaneously. To address these issues, we propose a novel method - MuCIL- that
uses multimodal concepts to perform classification without
increasing the number of trainable parameters across experiences. The multimodal concepts are aligned to concepts provided in natural language, making them interpretable by design. Through extensive experimentation, we show that our
approach obtains state-of-the-art classification performance
compared to other concept-based models, achieving over 2×
the classification performance in some cases. We also study
the ability of our model to perform interventions on concepts,
and show that it can localize visual concepts in input images,
providing post-hoc interpretations.

Figure 1: Illustration of our setting. Concepts introduced in
an experience are shared among classes from other experiences. MuCIL focuses on the difficult challenge of capturing and preserving this web of class-concept relationships
over multiple experiences.

{whiskers, four legs, pointy ears, sociable} as key semantic
attributes that help make a prediction cat on a given image.
But with the recent growth of incremental model learning,
a pertinent question arises – can the abovementioned model
be adapted later to identify golden retriever in addition to
cat? The two classes share some common concepts such as
{four legs, sociable}, while having discriminative concepts
such as {whiskers, pointy ears} in case of cat and {golden
fur, floppy ears} in case of golden retriever. Incrementally
learning such concept-based models with newer classes as
well as concepts forms the key focus of this work.
Teaching neural network models about new distinctive
concepts (e.g. golden fur) of new classes (e.g. dog), while
reusing previously known concepts (four legs, sociable) is
a highly nontrivial problem. While concept-based models
have seen a range of efforts in recent years, there has been
very little work in incrementally learning such models. The
limited existing efforts either assume that all new classes
share the same pool of attributes as older ones (Marconato
et al. 2022), or have independent non-overlapping attribute
sets (Rymarczyk et al. 2023). In this work, we propose a

Code — https://github.com/Susmit-A/MuCIL
Appendix — https://susmit-a.github.io/misc/appendix.pdf

1

Introduction

Concept-based models have gained the attention of the computer vision community in recent years (Kim et al. 2023;
Margeloiu et al. 2021; Barker et al. 2023; Koh et al. 2020),
as a means of interpreting the output prediction in terms of
learned or human-defined atomic interpretable ‘concepts’.
These models attempt to predict the target class generally
as a weighted linear combination of meaningful concepts.
For example, such a model may identify the concept set
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15320

