The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Promptable Representation Distribution Learning and Data Augmentation for
Gigapixel Histopathology WSI Analysis
Kunming Tang1,2 , Zhiguo Jiang1,2,3 , Jun Shi4 , Wei Wang5,6 , Haibo Wu5,6 , Yushan Zheng1 *
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center on Biomedical Engineering, School of Engineering Medicine, Beihang University
2
Image Processing Center, School of Astronautics, Beihang University
3
Tianmushan Laboratory
4
School of Software, Hefei University of Technology
5
Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of USTC
6
Intelligent Pathology Institute, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China
{tkm2000,jiangzg,yszheng}@buaa.edu.cn, juns@hfut.edu.cn, weiwang@hmfl.ac.cn, wuhaibo@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

Extract features for these patches; and 3) Aggregate these
features to make a prediction for the entire WSI. Data augmentation serves as an effective expanding data strategy for
training deep models (Chen et al. 2020a). It is also important
in the domain of histopathology WSI analysis. As shown in
Figure 1(a), if we draw a parallel to the process used for
natural images, data augmentation for WSI should ideally
be performed continuously after the WSI patching stage and
before the patch-level feature extraction stage. However, for
efficiency, the first two stages are generally conducted only
once during the entire training process (Lu et al. 2021; Shao
et al. 2021). This leads to the inapplicability of traditional
image augmentation techniques, thereby inspiring the shift
towards performing data augmentations directly in feature
space.
To achieve data augmentation for WSI, several studies
have proposed using generative methods (Dai et al. 2024;
Zaffar et al. 2022) or Mixup techniques (Yang et al. 2022;
Chen and Lu 2023; Gadermayr et al. 2023) to create data
augmentations in feature space, as illustrated in Figure 1(b).
However, these methods either introduce additional computational costs due to the need for training another parameterized model or cause a loss of semantic information. Additionally, the augmented results generated by these methods
often lack control, in contrast to data augmentations applied
directly in image space where changes are more visually intuitive and easier to manage. Currently, there lacks data augmentation methods to meet the unique demands of gigapixel
image analysis that are not only computationally efficient
but also preserve control.
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach named
promptable representation distribution learning (PRDL) to
address the challenges associated with patch-level representation learning and WSI-level data augmentation in
histopathological WSI analysis. Within this framework, a
representation distribution estimator is designed and trained
during self-supervised representation learning. As shown in
Figure 1(c), this estimator is capable of predicting a distribution of potential representation augmentations for each
patch. After patch-level feature extraction, each patch within
a WSI is represented as an individual distribution rather than

Gigapixel image analysis, particularly for whole slide images
(WSIs), often relies on multiple instance learning (MIL). Under the paradigm of MIL, patch image representations are extracted and then fixed during the training of the MIL classifiers for efficiency consideration. However, the invariance of
representations makes it difficult to perform data augmentation for WSI-level model training, which significantly limits
the performance of the downstream WSI analysis. The current data augmentation methods for gigapixel images either
introduce additional computational costs or result in a loss of
semantic information, which is hard to meet the requirements
for efficiency and stability needed for WSI model training. In
this paper, we propose a Promptable Representation Distribution Learning framework (PRDL) for both patch-level representation learning and WSI-level data augmentation. Meanwhile, we explore the use of prompts to guide data augmentation in feature space, which achieves promptable data augmentation for training robust WSI-level models. The experimental results have demonstrated that the proposed method
stably outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/lazytkm/PRDL

Introduction
Histopathology whole slide image (WSI) classification (Lu
et al. 2021; Shao et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022; Zheng et al.
2023) is increasingly popular in computer-aided pathological diagnosis, presenting unique challenges to the field of
computer vision (Chen et al. 2022; Nakhli et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2022b). Unlike conventional natural images, WSIs
have massive image resolutions, often reaching up to billions
of pixels. To tackle the gigapixel problem, a variety of methods within this domain employ multiple instance learning
(MIL) frameworks (Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling 2018; Li,
Li, and Eliceiri 2021; Campanella et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2022a) to address the specific needs of WSI analysis.
Within the MIL framework, WSI analysis is usually divided into three phases: 1) Divide a WSI into patches; 2)
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7247

