The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ParseCaps: An Interpretable Parsing Capsule Network
for Medical Image Diagnosis
Xinyu Geng1 , Jiaming Wang1 , Xiaolin Huang2 , Fanglin Chen1 , Jun Xu1 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Shanghai Jiaotong University
{22s153095, 21s153144}@stu.hit.edu.cn, xiaolinhuang@sjtu.edu.cn, chenfanglin@gmail.com, xujunqgy@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

sule vector’s length represents the presence probability of
specific entity in the input image, and its direction encodes
the captured features (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017).
Each dimension of the capsule vector, termed an instantiation parameter, represents the direction of the capsule, conferring inherent physical meanings. So, it holds potential for
concept interpretability, as each corresponds to a humanunderstandable and meaningful concept.
Existing CapsNets face challenges to assign clear meaning to instantiation parameters; however, integrating a parsetree-like structure could map part-to-whole relationships
similarly to human cognitive processes (Sabour, Frosst, and
Hinton 2017), thereby enhancing concept interpretability. In
this structure, each node is a capsule, and active capsules select parent capsules from the upper layer through routing.
Because (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017) does not adhere
to a strict tree structure where each child node connects to
only one parent node, it is referred to as parse-tree-like. The
top layer features a single “global capsule” that provides a
comprehensive view of the entire image, encapsulating entities and their hierarchical relationships. This allows each instantiation parameter to align with an interpretable and conceptually meaningful image entity. The parse tree provides
a carrier for interpretability through the global capsule.
Coupled with loss constraints, they create a capsule network with concept interpretability.
However, the current implementation of parse tree faces
challenges. First, it lacks a suitable routing algorithm that
supports the parse-tree-like structure. Dynamic routing process tends to create a fully connected structure between subcapsules and parent capsules (Jeong, Lee, and Kim 2019),
which undermines the desired selective connection essential
for clear hierarchical relationships. Additionally, although
existing attention routing sparsifies the coupling coefficients
between capsules (Geng et al. 2024), it does not see the importance of instantiation parameters within capsules, which
adversely affects the global capsule’s instantiation parameters. Moreover, certain CapsNet layers contradict the parse
tree by increasing the number of capsules without correspondingly enhancing their dimension (Rajasegaran et al.
2019; Choi et al. 2019). They fail to concentrate features
of entire image into a global capsule; instead, as the number of capsules increases, features become more dispersed,
leading to redundancy in feature representation and a diluted

Deep learning has excelled in medical image classification,
but its clinical application is limited by poor interpretability. Capsule networks, known for encoding hierarchical relationships and spatial features, show potential in addressing this issue. Nevertheless, traditional capsule networks often underperform due to their shallow structures, and deeper
variants lack hierarchical architectures, thereby compromising interpretability. This paper introduces a novel capsule
network, ParseCaps, which utilizes the sparse axial attention
routing and parse convolutional capsule layer to form a parsetree-like structure, enhancing both depth and interpretability. Firstly, sparse axial attention routing optimizes connections between child and parent capsules, as well as emphasizes the weight distribution across instantiation parameters
of parent capsules. Secondly, the parse convolutional capsule
layer generates capsule predictions aligning with the parse
tree. Finally, based on the loss design that is effective whether
concept ground truth exists or not, ParseCaps advances interpretability by associating each dimension of the global capsule with a comprehensible concept, thereby facilitating clinician trust and understanding of the model’s classification results. Experimental results on three medical datasets show
that ParseCaps not only outperforms other capsule network
variants in classification accuracy and robustness, but also
provides interpretable explanations, regardless of the availability of concept labels.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods of medical image classification provide consistent, rapid predictions that often exceed human
in detecting subtle abnormalities. However, obtaining extensive, high-quality datasets is challenging, and poor interpretability limits their clinical application. Capsule networks
(CapsNets) have shown potential to enhance interpretability
by maintaining hierarchical relationships and spatial orientations within images (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017; Hinton, Sabour, and Frosst 2018). They also improve classification accuracy by capturing relationships between disease
markers and normal anatomical structures (Akinyelu et al.
2022; Ribeiro et al. 2022; Patrick et al. 2022). CapsNets utilize vectors called capsules to replace neurons. Each cap* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3122

