The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generative Medical Segmentation
Jiayu Huo1 * , Xi Ouyang2 , Sébastien Ourselin1 , Rachel Sparks1
1

School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences (BMEIS),
King’s College London, London, UK
2
Shanghai United Imaging Intelligence Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China
jiayu.huo@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract

Inaugural deep learning models designed for medical image segmentation, such as UNet (Ronneberger, Fischer, and
Brox 2015) and its various adaptations (Ruan et al. 2023;
Ibtehaz and Kihara 2023), have significantly advanced the
field of medical imaging analysis. These early deep learning
image segmentation models leverage convolution kernels to
learn local patch representations from large amounts of labeled data. Despite their successes, models based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) often have a large number of trainable parameters which can introduce challenges
in model training and increase the likelihood of overfitting
when training datasets are small. Additionally, the limited
receptive field of the convolution kernel makes it difficult
for CNN-based models to learn global context information
that can provide important guidance during image segmentation. Moreover, CNN-based models struggle with generalizing to unseen domains, leading to potentially substantial performance drops when the test dataset distribution is
shifted from the training dataset distribution.
The Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021)
has recently been presented as a powerful alternative to
CNN-based segmentation models in medical imaging analysis. ViT can capture global semantic information that the
convolution kernel is unable to represent. Transformer-based
segmentation models, such as UCTransNet (Wang et al.
2022a) and Swin-Unet (Cao et al. 2022), leverage the transformer architecture to represent images as sequences of
patches, enabling the model to learn relationships across the
entire image. However, transformer-based models are required to be trained on very large datasets to achieve optimal performance, which can be a major bottleneck given the
scarcity of such datasets in the medical field. Additionally,
the high computational costs needed for the multi-head attention module pose practical challenges for real-time applications and deployment in environments with limited computational resources. Furthermore, due to the large number
of parameters in transformer-based models, there is an increased risk of overfitting when training on small datasets
with subsequent challenges of poor generalization to out-ofdomain datasets under such conditions.
Generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013), are often adopted as data augmentation techniques to improve

Rapid advancements in medical image segmentation performance have been significantly driven by the development of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers (ViTs). These models follow discriminative pixelwise classification learning paradigm and often have limited
ability to generalize across diverse medical imaging datasets.
In this manuscript, we introduce Generative Medical Segmentation (GMS), a novel generative approach to perform
image segmentation. GMS employs a robust pre-trained vision foundation model to extract latent representations for
images and corresponding ground truth masks, followed by
a lightweight model that learns a mapping function from the
image to the mask in the latent space. Once trained, the model
can generate estimated segmentation masks using the pretrained vision foundation model to decode the predicted latent mask representation back into image space. The design
of GMS leads to fewer trainable parameters in the model, reducing the risk of overfitting and enhancing its generalization
capability. Our experimental analysis across five open-source
datasets in different medical imaging domains demonstrates
GMS outperforms existing discriminative and generative segmentation models. Furthermore, GMS is able to generalize
well across datasets of the same imaging modality from different centers. Our experiments suggest GMS offers a scalable and effective solution for medical image segmentation.

Code — https://github.com/King-HAW/GMS

Introduction
Image segmentation plays a crucial role in the field of medical image analysis enabling automated, precise delineation
of anatomical and pathological structures. Automated segmentation enables clinicians to obtain detailed visualizations
and quantitative assessments of lesions and other structural
anomalies, facilitating computer-aided diagnosis, treatment
planning, and monitoring disease progression, thereby enhancing the precision and efficacy of therapeutic interventions and improving patient outcomes (Al-Dhabyani et al.
2020; Tschandl, Rosendahl, and Kittler 2018; Jha et al.
2021).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3851

