The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Convergence Rate in Nonlinear Two-Time-Scale Stochastic Approximation
with State (Time)-Dependence
Zixi Chen1 , Yumin Xu1 , Ruixun Zhang1,2,3,4 *
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Center for Statistical Science, Peking University
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analysis and Applications, Peking University
4
Laboratory for Mathematical Economics and Quantitative Finance, Peking University
chenzixi22@stu.pku.edu.cn, xuyumin@pku.edu.cn, zhangruixun@pku.edu.cn
where {ξk } and {ψk } are martingale differences with decreasing sequences of αk and βk . It fits a dynamical system:

Abstract
The nonlinear two-time-scale stochastic approximation is
widely studied under conditions of bounded variances in
noise. Motivated by recent advances that allow for variability linked to the current state or time, we consider state- and
time-dependent noises. We show that the Lyapunov function
exhibits polynomial convergence rates in both cases, with
the rate of polynomial delay depending on the parameters
of state- or time-dependent noises. Notably, if the state noise
parameters fully approach their limiting value, the Lyapunov
function achieves an exponential convergence rate. We provide two numerical examples to illustrate our theoretical findings in the context of stochastic gradient descent with PolyakRuppert averaging and stochastic bilevel optimization.

1

ẋ = −f (x, y),
(2)
ẏ = −g(x, y).
The goal of a stochastic two-time-scale approximation
is to control the sequence so that it converges to a goal
(x∗ , y ∗ ). Because the two variables xk and yk interact with
each other, their convergence behavior differs from that of a
single variable. Typically, to ensure the convergence across
both fast and slow scales, the learning rates αk and βk are
chosen to satisfy αk ≫ βk (Konda and Tsitsiklis 2004). Under certain assumptions, they are set to a special polynomial order of magnitude, as discussed in Doan (2022). With
stricter conditions on functions f and g, the ratio of αk and
βk can be fixed, leading to convergence degenerating into a
single-time-scale scenario (Shen and Chen 2022).
It is subtle to determine the relationship between two
timescales and their learning rates αk and βk . Our work
seeks an explicit relationship between the choice of order of magnitude under certain conditions. Moreover, in
many applications, the stochastic term is not bounded. We
achieve a faster convergence rate ranging from O k −2/3

to O (k −∞ )—and even an exponential rate of O e−ϵk in
certain cases—with different state noise parameters δij and
time noise parameters γi . Here O(·) indicates that the term
is dominated by c × · with constant c as k → ∞.

Introduction

Stochastic approximation (SA) was initially introduced by
Robbins and Monro (1951) to find the root of an unobserved function operator. Specifically, it aims to approximate the solution of f (x) = 0 under noisy observations
f (xk ) + ξk . This method has been widely adopted in different areas including stochastic optimization, machine learning, and reinforcement learning (RL); see, for example, Sutton, Szepesvári, and Maei (2008); Ermoliev (2009); Borkar
(2009); Sutton et al. (2009); Pham (2010); Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal (2018); Xu, Zou, and Liang (2019); Lan
(2020); Wu et al. (2020); Khodadadian et al. (2022).
Traditional single-time-scale SA faces challenges in complex applications, and the two-time-scale SA was proposed
by Ermoliev (1983) and developed by Borkar (1997) to manage complex processes with both linear and nonlinear update functions. We define the fast-scale as xk ∈ Rd1 and
the slow-scale as yk ∈ Rd2 , with unknown update functions f : Rd1 × Rd2 → Rd1 and g : Rd1 × Rd2 → Rd2 .
f (xk , yk ) + ξk and g(xk , yk ) + ψk represent their noisy
observations, respectively. We consider the following twotime-scale process:
xk+1 − xk = −αk [f (xk , yk ) + ξk ],
yk+1 − yk = −βk [g(xk , yk ) + ψk ],

Motivating Applications
Two-time-scale SA is widely adopted in many algorithms
because it can precisely describe the relation between variables and achieve fast convergence. We are motivated by two
algorithms, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with PolyakRuppert averaging and stochastic bilevel optimization.
SGD with Polyak-Ruppert averaging. In order to minimize a function f with only noisy observations of its gradient, Ruppert (1988) and Polyak and Juditsky (1992) introduced SGD with Polyak-Ruppert averaging where

(1)

xk+1 − xk = −αk (∇F (xk ) + ξk ),
yk+1 − yk = −βk (yk − xk ).

* Corresponding author

(3)

This algorithm has the form of two-time-scale SA (1) with
f (x, y) = ∇F (x) and g(x, y) = y − x.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15993

