The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mamba YOLO: A Simple Baseline for Object Detection with State Space Model
∗

†

†

Zeyu Wang1,2,* , Chen Li1,2, , Huiying Xu1,2, , Xinzhong Zhu1,2,3, , Hongbo Li3
2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, Zhejiang, 311231, China
Research Institute of Hangzhou Artificial Intelligence, Zhejiang Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 311231, China
3
Beijing Geekplus Technology Co, Ltd, Beijing, 100101, China
{14797857499,LilSodaChen,xhy,zxz}@zjnu.edu.cn, jason.li@geekplus.com

Abstract

Mamba YOLO-L

Driven by the rapid development of deep learning technology, the YOLO series has set a new benchmark for realtime object detectors. Additionally, transformer-based structures have emerged as the most powerful solution in the field,
greatly extending the model’s receptive field and achieving significant performance improvements. However, this improvement comes at a cost as the quadratic complexity of the
self-attentive mechanism increases the computational burden
of the model. To address this problem, we introduce a simple yet effective baseline approach called Mamba YOLO.
Our contributions are as follows: 1) We propose that the
ODMamba backbone introduce a State Space Model (SSM)
with linear complexity to address the quadratic complexity of
self-attention. Unlike the other Transformer-base and SSMbase method, ODMamba is simple to train without pretraining. 2) For real-time requirement, we designed the macro
structure of ODMamba, determined the optimal stage ratio
and scaling size. 3) We design the RG Block that employs
a multi-branch structure to model the channel dimensions,
which addresses the possible limitations of SSM in sequence
modeling, such as insufficient receptive fields and weak image localization. This design captures localized image dependencies more accurately and significantly. Extensive experiments on the publicly available COCO benchmark dataset
show that Mamba YOLO achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to previous methods. Specifically, a tiny version of Mamba YOLO achieves a 7.5% improvement in mAP
on a single 4090 GPU with an inference time of 1.5 ms.

Mamba YOLO-B

Mamba YOLO-T

Figure 1: Comparisons of the real-time object detecors on
the MSCOCO dataset. The object detection method based on
SSM achieves the best trade-off between performance and
computations.

Code — https://github.com/HZAI-ZJNU/Mamba-YOLO

of object detection, CNNs (Ren et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016)
and Transformer structures (Carion et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2022) are predominantly used. While CNNs and their series of improvements offer fast execution speeds while ensuring accuracy, they suffer from poor image correlation.
To address this issue, researchers have introduced ViTs into
the field of object detection, such as the DETR series (Carion et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020), which leverages the powerful global modeling capabilities of self-attention. With
hardware advancements, the increased memory computation
brought about by this structure does not pose too much of a
problem. However, in recent years, more work (Liu et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023) has begun to rethink how to design CNNs to make models faster, and more
practitioners are becoming dissatisfied with the quadratic
complexity of Transformer structures. They are starting to

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has rapidly advanced, particularly in the field of computer vision, where a series
of powerful architectures have achieved impressive performance. From Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
(Huang et al. 2017; Tan and Le 2020; Liu et al. 2022) to
Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Liu et al. 2021; Shi 2023),
the application of various structures has demonstrated their
strong potential in computer vision. In the downstream task
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8205

