The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Layered-Parameter Perturbation for
Zeroth-Order Optimization of Optical Neural Networks
Hiroshi Sawada1 , Kazuo Aoyama1 , Masaya Notomi2
1

Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Japan
2
Basic Research Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Japan
hrsh.sawada@ntt.com, kazuo.aoyama@ntt.com, masaya.notomi@ntt.com

two pairs of a phase shifter (PS) with a phase parameter θ
and a beam splitter (BS). A nonlinear module may also have
parameters. The programmability (or trainability) of ONNs
is achieved by adjusting such parameters.
A major approach to training NNs in general is to compute the gradient of a loss function with respect to parameters. And the backpropagation algorithm (Bishop 2006; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) is very common to compute the gradient. However, for training ONNs, we cannot
accurately compute the gradient by backpropagation. This
is because each ONN circuit implemented on a chip has
its own fabrication variations (Fang et al. 2019; Banerjee,
Nikdast, and Chakrabarty 2023). As shown in the bottom
area of Fig. 1, let us model such variations by errors from
ideal component characteristics, such as splitting angle errors γ ∈ R (Mikkelsen, Sacher, and Poon 2014; Vadlamani,
Englund, and Hamerly 2023) and attenuation-phase errors
ζ ∈ C. We may be able to use backpropagation with an ONN
model simulated on an ordinary computer, with (Zheng et al.
2023; Sawada, Aoyama, and Ikeda 2024) or without modeling these errors, for an early stage of training. However, it
is not a good idea to rely only on such imperfect gradients
obtained from the backpropagation until the final stage of
training, where accurate control of the parameters is of great
importance.
As the perfect information inside an ONN chip is not
precisely observable, black-box optimization methods have
been applied to ONN training, including particle swarm optimization (Zhang et al. 2019), covariance matrix adaptation
evolution strategy (CMA-ES) (Chen et al. 2022; Lupo et al.
2023), and zeroth-order (ZO) optimization (Shen et al. 2017;
Zhou et al. 2020; Gu et al. 2020, 2021; Bandyopadhyay et al.
2022). Among these methods, ZO optimization (Liu et al.
2020) has become a major approach as (Gu et al. 2020) has
experimentally shown that ZO optimization was superior to
particle swarm optimization. We continue to focus on ZO
optimization not only because of the shown superiority but
also because it computes the (approximate) gradient of a loss
function like backpropagation and is expected to scale to an
ONN with a large number of parameters.
ZO optimization randomly perturbs the parameters to
search for better values. The random parameter perturbations are generally sampled from a normal distribution
N (0, I) with an identity covariance matrix I (Liu et al. 2020;

Abstract
Optical neural networks (ONNs) have attracted great attention due to their low power consumption and high-speed processing. When training an ONN implemented on a chip with
possible fabrication variations, the well-known backpropagation algorithm cannot be executed accurately because the
perfect information inside the chip cannot be observed. Instead, we employ a black-box optimization method such as
zeroth-order (ZO) optimization. In this paper, we first discuss
how ONN parameters should be perturbed to search for better values in a black-box manner. Conventionally, parameter
perturbations are sampled from a normal distribution with an
identity covariance matrix. This is plausible if the parameters are not interrelated in a module, like a linear module of
an ordinary neural network. However, this is not the best way
for ONN modules with layered parameters, which are interrelated by optical paths. We then propose to perturb the parameters by a normal distribution with a special covariance matrix computed by our novel method. The covariance matrix
is designed so that the perturbations appearing at the module output caused by the parameter perturbations become as
isotropic as possible to uniformly search for better values. Experimental results show that the proposed method using the
special covariance matrix significantly outperformed conventional methods.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in a wide variety of tasks at the ever-increasing
cost of their size and power consumption. In this regard,
optical neural networks (ONNs) are expected to be one of
the promising systems due to their intrinsic characteristics
of low power consumption and high-speed processing (Shen
et al. 2017; Fang et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2021; Ashtiani,
Geers, and Aflatouni 2022). An ONN is implemented on a
programmable optical circuit based on silicon photonics. It
processes complex-valued analog signals with coherent light
(Carolan et al. 2015; Bogaerts et al. 2020). Figure 1 shows
the structure of an ONN, which consists of linear and nonlinear modules as well as an ordinary NN. A linear module
in an ONN typically comprises an array of Mach-Zehnder
interferometers (MZIs) connected by waveguides (Reck and
Zeilinger 1994; Clements et al. 2016). The MZI consists of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20292

