The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3D Denoisers are Good 2D Teachers:
Molecular Pretraining via Denoising and Cross-Modal Distillation
Sungjun Cho1 , Dae-Woong Jeong2 , Sung Moon Ko2 , Jinwoo Kim3 ,
Sehui Han2 , Seunghoon Hong3 , Honglak Lee2 , Moontae Lee2,4
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
LG AI Research
3
KAIST
4
University of Illinois Chicago
sungjuncho@cs.wisc.edu, dw.jeong@lgresearch.ai, sungmoon.ko@lgresearch.ai, jinwoo-kim@kaist.ac.kr,
hansse.han@lgresearch.ai, seunghoon.hong@kaist.ac.kr, honglak@lgresearch.ai, moontae.lee@lgresearch.ai
Abstract

in natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2018; Brown
et al. 2020) and computer vision (He et al. 2020; Bachmann et al. 2022) onto molecular graphs with proxy objectives developed to instill useful knowledge into neural networks with unlabeled data. But existing 2D graph-based pretraining frameworks face a fundamental challenge: while the
model is trained to learn representations that are invariant
under various data augmentations, augmenting 2D graphs
can catastrophically disrupt its topology, which renders the
model unable to fully recover labels from augmented samples (Trivedi et al. 2022). As a result of this limitation, recent work has shown that existing 2D pretraining approaches
do not show statistically meaningful performance improvements in downstream tasks (Sun 2022).
As an alternative, recent work have proposed incorporating 3D information to the pretraining objective, leveraging
large unlabeled datasets of 3D conformers, or point clouds
of atoms floating in the physical space. While a natural task
would be to reconstruct the input conformer, this may not induce generalizable knowledge as each conformer only represents a single local minima in a distribution of 3D configurations. On the other hand, the force field that controls the
overall stabilization process provides significant chemical
information that can be used across many different molecular properties (Mezey 2001). This naturally translates to pretraining via denoising conformers under perturbations, an
approach that has shown state-of-the-art performance in diverse molecular property prediction benchmarks (Zaidi et al.
2022; Liu, Guo, and Tang 2022).
Despite great performance, a model trained with denoising requires conformers downstream as well, and obtaining accurate conformers require expensive quantum
mechanical computations. While there exist many rulebased (Riniker and Landrum 2015; Landrum 2016) as well
as deep learning-based approaches (Ganea et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2022; Jing et al. 2022) for generating conformers, previous work have shown that existing methods fail to generate conformers quickly and accurately enough to be used in
a large scale (Stärk et al. 2022).
In light of such limitations, we propose D&D (Denoiseand-Distill), a self-supervised molecular representation
learning framework that enjoys the best of both worlds. Fig-

Pretraining molecular representations from large unlabeled
data is essential for molecular property prediction due to the
high cost of obtaining ground-truth labels. While there exist various 2D graph-based molecular pretraining approaches,
these methods struggle to show statistically significant gains
in predictive performance. Recent work have thus instead
proposed 3D conformer-based pretraining under the task
of denoising, leading to promising results. During downstream finetuning, however, models trained with 3D conformers require accurate atom-coordinates of previously unseen
molecules, which are computationally expensive to acquire at
scale. In this paper, we propose a simple solution of denoiseand-distill (D&D), a self-supervised molecular representation learning method that pretrains a 2D graph encoder by
distilling representations from a 3D denoiser. With denoising followed by cross-modal knowledge distillation, our approach enjoys use of knowledge obtained from denoising as
well as painless application to downstream tasks with no access to 3D conformers. Experiments on real-world molecular property prediction datasets show that the graph encoder
trained via D&D can infer 3D information based on the 2D
graph and shows superior performance and label-efficiency
against previous methods.

Introduction
Molecular property prediction has gained much interest
across the machine learning community, leading to breakthroughs in various applications such as drug discovery (Guvench 2016; Kanakaveti et al. 2017) and material design (Suh et al. 2020; Pyzer-Knapp, Li, and Aspuru-Guzik
2015; Schmidt et al. 2019; Pyzer-Knapp et al. 2022). As
molecules can be represented as a 2D graph with nodes
and edges representing atoms and covalent bonds, many
graph neural networks have been developed with promising results (Duvenaud et al. 2015; Defferrard, Bresson, and
Vandergheynst 2016; Bruna et al. 2013; Coley et al. 2017;
Scarselli et al. 2009; Jin et al. 2018). However, achieving
high precision requires accurate ground-truth property labels
which are very expensive to obtain. This limitation has motivated adaptation of self-supervised pretraining widely used
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

110

