The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Stop Diverse OOD Attacks: Knowledge Ensemble for Reliable Defense
Zhenbo Shi1,2,3,4 , Xiaoman Liu1,2 , Yuxuan Zhang1 , Shuchang Wang1 , Rui Shu1 , Zhidong Yu1,4,* ,
Wei Yang1,2,4,* , Liusheng Huang1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou, China
3
Laboratory for Advanced Computing and Intelligence Engineering, Wuxi, China
4
Hefei National Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
* yuzd@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qubit@ustc.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Enhancing defense through model ensemble is an emerging
trend, where the challenge lies in how to use ensemble knowledge to counter Out-of-Distribution (OOD) attacks. In this
paper, we propose the Reliable Defense Ensemble (REE) to
address this issue. REE optimizes the ensemble knowledge
of models through aggregation and enhances multidimensional robust performance through collaboration. It employs
the Dynamic Synergy Ampliﬁcation for weight allocation
and strategy adjustment. Furthermore, we design a new Kernel Anomaly Smoothing Detection Module, which detects
anomalous attacks using a smoothing feature function based
on Gaussian kernel mean embedding and a multi-layer feedback structure. Particularly, we build a framework that uses
reinforcement learning to iteratively ﬁne-tune the parameters
of inter-model communication and consensus. Extensive experimental results show that REE outperforms current state-ofthe-art methods by a large margin in defending against OOD
attacks.

Introduction
Background and Related Work. Deep learning is developing rapidly (Ge, Fu, and Zha 2022; Ge et al. 2024; Shi
et al. 2022), but the emergence of adversarial attacks poses
huge challenges. As Szegedy et al. (2013) proved that even
imperceptible perturbations in the input can mislead a model.
Papernot et al. (2016) further exploits the adversarial saliency
between input features and output values, which cause misclassiﬁcation with slight modiﬁcations. In the study of defense strategies, Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy (2014) ﬁrst
propose adversarial training and put forward new ideas for
model robustness. However, as Tramèr et al. (2017) highlight,
the adaptive and continuously evolving nature of attacks necessitates more sophisticated and resilient defense strategies.
Understanding the vulnerable parts of models and designing
new defense strategies is critical to maintaining the integrity
and trustworthiness of AI systems.
Distribution anomalies pose a strong robustness challenge
to the model. While poisoning attacks typically affect the
training phase, and our work centers on inference-stage defenses, research on poisoning defense has indeed provided
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20436

valuable insights for our approach. BagFlip (Zhang, Albarghouthi, and D’Antoni 2022) combines bagging and noise technology to combat trigger-free and backdoor attacks, and uses
the Neyman–Pearson lemma to calculate the authentication
radius. In response to the problem that NLP models are vulnerable to backdoor attacks, Shen et al. (2022) proposed
an optimization method to reverse the backdoor trigger, as
well as a dynamic temperature scaling and rollback mechanism. Random Transformation defense (RT) uses a differentiable method to resist adversarial attacks, and utilizes transfer attacks and the random optimization algorithm (Sitawarin,
Golan-Strieb, and Wagner 2022). Ho and Vasconcelos (2022)
proposed an image classiﬁcation adversarial defense DISCO
based on local implicit functions, which performs projection
and conditional modeling on local manifolds. In addition,
current integrated defense approaches remain vulnerable to
new, cleverly crafted attack vectors that can dynamically
deceive defense strategies. For example, these works (Seligmann et al. 2024; Croce et al. 2022) have conducted extensive
and in-depth research on ensemble models.
Adaptive defense is considered an important step to combat
the limitations of static defense, Croce et al. (2022) evaluated
nine different adaptive defense methods, showing that their
performance relative to static defense often does not significantly improve, and sometimes even decreases the robustness of the model. Model stealing attack gradient redirection
(GRAD2) (Mazeika, Li, and Forsyth 2022) can maintain high
security while maintaining service quality for normal users.
In reinforcement learning, Bharti et al. (2022) proposed provable defense methods against backdoor strategies, using the
concept of safe subspaces to eliminate the impact of backdoor
triggers. Considering the impact of different normalization
layers on attack migration performance, Dong et al. (2022)
designed Random Normalization Aggregation (RNA) based
on this. This method forms a huge random space by aggregating multiple normalization methods to increase the difﬁculty
of being attacked in a white-box setting.
LeadFL (Zhu, Roos, and Chen 2023) focuses on solving
the problem of resisting model poisoning attacks in federated
learning, and introduces regularization on the client side to
face sudden and highly changing malicious attack patterns.
This mechanism can be used in conjunction with any existing server-side defense strategy, and was compared with
algorithms such as SparseFed, Multi-Krum, and Bulyan un-

