The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unlocking the Power of Patch: Patch-Based MLP for Long-Term Time Series
Forecasting
Peiwang Tang1, 2 , Weitai Zhang1, 2
1

2

iFLYTEK Research, Hefei, China
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
tpw@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zwt2021@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

finance (Patton 2013), electricity (Zhou et al. 2021), and
transportation (Yin and Shang 2016).
Multivariate Time Series (MTS) consist of multiple variables recorded at the same time point, where each dimension may represent an individual univariate time series or be
considered as a signal with multiple channels. With the advancement of deep learning, a number of models have been
developed to enhance the performance of MTS forecasting (Borovykh, Bohte, and Oosterlee 2017; Bai, Kolter, and
Koltun 2018; Liu et al. 2020). In particular, recent models
based on the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) architecture
have demonstrated significant potential in capturing longterm dependencies (Radford et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2018).
In recent years, Transformers have emerged as a leading architecture in time series forecasting (Lim et al. 2021; Liu
et al. 2022b; Shen et al. 2023), initially applied in the field
of Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Radford et al. 2019;
Brown et al. 2020) and subsequently expanded to other domains such as Computer Vision (CV) (Liu et al. 2021b; Feichtenhofer et al. 2022) through the adaptation of the Patch
method, becoming a versatile framework.
Originally, these models utilized a channel mixing approach (Li et al. 2023b), which involves projecting vectors
from different channels recorded at the same time point into
an embedding space and blending the information (Zhou
et al. 2021; Tang and Zhang 2023) ,and many models adopt
the idea of time series decomposition (Wu et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023). Nonetheless, recent studies
have shown that a channel independence model might be
more effective (Nie et al. 2022; Han, Ye, and Zhan 2023).
Channel independence means that each input token contains
information from only one channel, and intuitively, the models treat the MTS as separate univariate series for individual processing. These studies suggest that for LTSF tasks,
an emphasis on channel independence may be more effective than channel mixing strategies (Gong, Tang, and Liang
2023).
Moreover, the effectiveness of Transformers in LTSF
tasks has been challenged by a reconsideration of the MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP) (Zeng et al. 2023; Ekambaram
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023), whose surprisingly simple architecture has outperformed all previous Transformer models. This raises a compelling question: Are Transformers effective for LTSF tasks? In response to this skepticism, recent

Recent studies have attempted to refine the Transformer
architecture to demonstrate its effectiveness in Long-Term
Time Series Forecasting (LTSF) tasks. Despite surpassing
many linear forecasting models with ever-improving performance, we remain skeptical of Transformers as a solution for
LTSF. We attribute the effectiveness of these models largely
to the adopted Patch mechanism, which enhances sequence
locality to an extent yet fails to fully address the loss of
temporal information inherent to the permutation-invariant
self-attention mechanism. Further investigation suggests that
simple linear layers augmented with the Patch mechanism
may outperform complex Transformer-based LTSF models.
Moreover, diverging from models that use channel independence, our research underscores the importance of crossvariable interactions in enhancing the performance of multivariate time series forecasting. The interaction information
between variables is highly valuable but has been misapplied
in past studies, leading to suboptimal cross-variable models. Based on these insights, we propose a novel and simple Patch-based MLP (PatchMLP) for LTSF tasks. Specifically, we employ simple moving averages to extract smooth
components and noise-containing residuals from time series
data, engaging in semantic information interchange through
channel mixing and specializing in random noise with channel independence processing. The PatchMLP model consistently achieves state-of-the-art results on several real-world
datasets. We hope this surprising finding will spur new research directions in the LTSF field and pave the way for
more efficient and concise solutions. Code is available at:
https://github.com/TangPeiwang/PatchMLP

Introduction
Long-term Time Series Forecasting (LTSF) is a critical area
of research in the fields of statistics and machine learning,
aimed at using historical data to predict the future of one or
more variables over a certain period (Oreshkin et al. 2019;
Gong, Tang, and Liang 2023; Lin et al. 2023). Time series data are organized in chronological order and reveal underlying dynamic patterns, be they cyclical or non-cyclical
(Cryer 1986). Such forecasts play a vital role in various sectors, including biomedicine (Liu et al. 2018), economics and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12640

