The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-View 3D Human Pose Estimation with Weakly Synchronized Images
Ling Li1 , Ruiwen Gu1 , Chongyang Wang3 , Junliang Xing2 , Xinchun Yu1 , Xiao-Ping Zhang1 *
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
China, Shenzhen
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
liling22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, grw23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, mvrjustid@gmail.com, jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn,
yuxinchun@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, xpzhang@ieee.org
Abstract

usually expensive and unsuitable for outdoor use. Camerabased clock synchronization is an alternative solution. The
challenge with this approach lies in the need to establish a
unified protocol between cameras, leading to higher development costs. Additionally, camera clock synchronization
relies on the stability of the WiFi signal, and fluctuations
in the WiFi signal can significantly affect synchronization
accuracy. Ideally, multi-view models should be able to eliminate the dependency on synchronization to promote broader
application of MHPE methods.
Some recent studies have begun exploring ways to eliminate the need for hardware synchronization devices in
MHPE (Wu et al. 2019; Yin et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2024).
Earlier researchers explored a technical approach that first
obtained time differences between different views based on
synchronization algorithms to align inputs from different
views for temporally estimated pose. These studies used
synchronized MHPE datasets like Human3.6M (Ionescu
et al. 2013) to generate desynchronized data between views,
which were then used to train models to estimate the time
differences between different views (Yin et al. 2022). However, this method can only achieve integer multiples of interframe time differences, meaning image frames can only be
shifted by whole frames and cannot obtain fractional frame
time differences. In practical applications, the errors caused
by the intra-frame intervals are still significant.
Furthermore, the difficulty of eliminating inter-frame interval errors is not severe and can usually be easily eliminated using methods such as clapperboard or timer methods. The challenge lies in removing intra-frame errors, as
synchronized data only allows for moving whole frames at
a time, limiting the input’s diversity. Liu et al. collected the
IFID dataset containing inter-frame and intra-frame time differences to support research on this task (Liu et al. 2024).
However, the IFID dataset lacks information on human pose.
In human pose estimation, existing MHPE datasets are generally collected using hardware-level synchronization devices, resulting in a lack of weakly synchronized datasets
and corresponding algorithms.
Increasing the frame rate is another simple method for addressing shifts between cameras. As the camera frame rate
increases, the errors caused by intra-frame intervals are continuously reduced. However, the cost of cameras also increases significantly. Essentially, this strategy cannot resolve

Multi-view 3D human pose estimation (MHPE) is an important research task in computer vision. To maintain consistency during the data collection, hardware synchronization devices are commonly used to connect cameras, ensuring that images from different views are captured simultaneously. However, synchronizing with extra devices has two apparent limitations: the hardware is i) usually expensive and ii)
less flexible for deployment in outdoor open scenarios. Suppose the model can improve its tolerance for the time differences in multi-view image capture. In that case, the difficulty and cost of deployment will be greatly reduced, and
MHPE will become more widespread. In this paper, we try to
answer how to build a model that performs pose estimation
directly using “weakly synchronized images” from multiple
views, where the captured images shift from each other within
a frame. To this end, we introduce a new multi-view 3D
human pose estimation task given weakly synchronized image inputs. Apart from existing well-synchronized datasets,
we present the first weakly synchronized dataset comprising 800k images. Thereon, we propose SyncDiffPose, a novel
model based on the diffusion method for pose estimation to
denoise the error in such data. By combining simple synchronization strategies, e.g., the timer method, our approach can
perform pose estimation without hardware calibration.

Introduction
In recent years, computer vision tasks have made rapid
progress (Chen et al. 2024a; Qian et al. 2024; Chen et al.
2024b; Sun 2024; Sun et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024a,b; Ling
et al. 2024a). As an essential task, multi-view 3D human
pose estimation has critical sports and art motion analysis applications (Li and Meng 2022; Li et al. 2023, 2024;
Xu et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2022, 2024a; Jin et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2024b; Ling et al. 2024b). We use images from
different views as input and predict 3D coordinates of human joints. Existing MHPE methods typically require camera synchronization during data collection to ensure temporal consistency between views. The most common method
for synchronizing multi-view images is to use a unique device that connects the cameras for hardware-level synchronized capturing. However, such synchronization devices are
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author

4833

