The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PokerBench: Training Large Language Models to
Become Professional Poker Players
Richard Zhuang1 , Akshat Gupta1 * , Richard Yang1 , Aniket Rahane1 , Zhengyu Li2 ,
Gopala Anumanchipalli1
1
University of California Berkeley, 110 Sproul Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Georgia Institute of Technology, 225 North Avenue NW, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
{richardzhuang0412,akshat.gupta,ryang3881,aniketarahane,gopala}@berkeley.edu, {brian.li}@gatech.edu
2

Abstract

of mind (Hu et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024; Kosinski 2023).
Poker is one such game that requires the above-described
complex skill set.
Poker is an example of an incomplete information game
(Harsanyi 1995) where a player has complete information
about their own holdings, but incomplete information about
the holdings of their opponents. The game requires a player
to make strategic decisions based on their estimation of the
opponent’s holdings by accounting for their actions, style of
play, game situation, and possible future outcomes (Gupta
2023). This requires a complex combination of skills including math, reasoning, memory, long-term and short-term
planning, and strategy, as well as a deep understanding of
game theory and player behavior and psychology. Thus, the
development of LLMs in game-playing settings like poker
can potentially unlock higher cognitive capabilities in these
models.
Existing AI systems for poker, commonly called poker
“solvers”, play “game theory optimal” poker and have been
shown to have superhuman performance (Brown et al. 2019;
Brown and Sandholm 2019, 2018). Yet, these solvers have
several limitations. (i) Firstly, poker solvers can take a long
time to produce solutions for a spot1 , thus making them unusable for real-time use. (ii) Secondly, poker solvers are only
able to calculate solutions for a limited and discrete set of
scenarios, since the game tree in poker2 can become unmanageably large. The game tree explosion also limits the use of
solvers in multi-player settings. (iii) Thirdly, poker solvers
do not necessarily provide the most profitable strategies in
poker. Solvers are trained to play game theory optimal poker,
which means they are trained to be unexploitable. However,
being game theory optimal also means that these solvers do
not take further advantage when their opponents are playing
imperfectly. (iv) Finally, the solutions or strategies presented
by solvers are abstract and not always interpretable which
makes it hard to group and study these strategies.
With these limitations in mind and the growing cognitive
capabilities of large language models, we explore the use
of LLMs as poker solvers. Using LLMs for poker immediately allows for overcoming the disadvantages of traditional

We introduce P OKER B ENCH - a benchmark for evaluating
the poker-playing abilities of large language models (LLMs).
As LLMs excel in traditional NLP tasks, their application to
complex, strategic games like poker poses a new challenge.
Poker, an incomplete information game, demands a multitude
of skills such as mathematics, reasoning, planning, strategy,
and a deep understanding of game theory and human psychology. This makes Poker the ideal next frontier for large
language models. P OKER B ENCH consists of a comprehensive compilation of 11,000 most important scenarios, split
between pre-flop and post-flop play, developed in collaboration with trained poker players. We evaluate prominent models including GPT-4, ChatGPT 3.5, and various Llama and
Gemma series models, finding that all state-of-the-art LLMs
underperform in playing optimal poker. However, after finetuning, these models show marked improvements. We validate P OKER B ENCH by having models with different scores
compete with each other, demonstrating that higher scores
on P OKER B ENCH lead to higher win rates in actual poker
games. Through gameplay between our fine-tuned model and
GPT-4, we also identify limitations of simple supervised finetuning for learning optimal playing strategy, suggesting the
need for more advanced methodologies for effectively training language models to excel in games. P OKER B ENCH thus
presents a unique benchmark for a quick and reliable evaluation of the poker-playing ability of LLMs as well as a comprehensive benchmark to study the progress of LLMs in complex
game-playing scenarios.

Introduction
As large language models (LLMs) become exceedingly
better at performing traditional natural language processing tasks (Wang et al. 2018, 2019; Radford et al. 2019;
Brown et al. 2020), they are now evaluated on more complicated tasks like recalling world knowledge (Hendrycks
et al. 2020), reasoning (Talmor et al. 2018) and the ability to
mathematics (Cobbe et al. 2021). A natural next evaluation
setting for the ever-growing capabilities of these models is
“game-playing” - a setting that requires not just the ability to
do math and reasoning, but also planning, decision-making,
and a deeper understanding of opponent behavior and state

1

A “spot” in poker is an intermediate point within a game
Here we refer to Texas No-Limit Hold’em version of poker.
This version of poker is also the focus of our paper.

* Correspondence to: akshat.gupta@berkeley.edu

2

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26175

