The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Neighborhood Modeling via Node-Subgraph Contrastive
Learning for Graph-Based Fraud Detection
Zhizhi Yu1 , Chundong Liang1,2 , Xinglong Chang1,3 , Dongxiao He1 , Di Jin1 * , Jianguo Wei1 *
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan, Hebei, China
3
Qijia Youdao Network Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd., Beijing, China
{yuzhizhi, liangchundong, changxinglong, hedongxiao, jindi, jianguo}@tju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Fraud detection that aims to discern frauds from the majority of benigns has become an increasingly prominent research field. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
been widely applied in graph-based fraud detection due to
their outstanding data analysis and mining capabilities. However, owing to the inherent homophily-heterophily mixture
and class imbalance of fraud graphs, most GNNs with homophily assumption inevitably suffer from local abnormal
signal loss during information propagation, posing significant
challenges in situations where frauds are rare and valuable.
To address the aforementioned issues, we present a novel dynamic neighborhood modeling via node-subgraph contrastive
learning for graph-based fraud detection, dubbed DCL-GFD.
Specifically, we first design a node abnormality estimation
module from the perspective of feature, which analyses the
likelihood of a node belonging to fraud or benign by comparing the feature similarity between the target node and its corresponding subgraph. We then present a dynamic neighborhood modeling mechanism guided by the abnormal probability of a node to adaptively group and aggregate neighborhood
information. By this means, the target node can effectively
aggregate the neighbor information from the perspective of
fraud or benign, thereby preserving as much fraud characteristics that occupy minority population as possible. Extensive
experiments across four real-world fraud detection datasets
demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our proposed
DCL-GFD over state-of-the-art baselines.

Figure 1: A toy example of fraud graph with homophilyheterophily mixture and class imbalance.
to distinguish whether a target node is fraud or benign. For
example, by closely analyzing financial transaction graphs,
we can detect potential suspicious patterns and thus identify frauds, e.g., nodes that exhibit frequent large transactions with multiple different accounts.
Along with the lastest advances of graph neural networks
(GNNs) in graph representation learning, a great quantity
of GNNs with diverse architectures have paved a new way
for discriminating frauds (Wang et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2023).
Typical GNNs are usually based on the homophily assumption (Wang et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021), where node embeddings are obtained through feature propagates along graph
topology. However, fraud detection scenarios (see an example in Figure 1) are essentially a mixture of homophily
and heterophily (Gao et al. 2023a; Zhuo et al. 2024). That
is, fraud nodes are typically submerged themselves in benign communities through structural or feature camouflage
to mitigate suspiciousness, exhibiting heterophily, while the
context surrounding benign nodes exhibits homophily. This
makes existing GNNs inevitably suffer from local abnormal
signal loss during information propagation, thereby compromising their ability to precisely distinguish frauds. More importantly, class imbalance is commonly present in the domain of fraud detection (Wang et al. 2023), leading GNNs to
primarily capture the patterns and characteristics of benign
nodes. That is to say, compared to a large number of benign
nodes, it is of great importance to preserve the patterns and
characteristics of fraud nodes that are rare and informative.
Several algorithms and models have been designed to diminish the impact of homophily-heterophily mixture and
class imbalance during information propagation. For example, from the perspective of spectral domain, it has been attempted to associate graph anomalies with high frequency

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet economy and
beyond networks, various types of fraud activities have increased significantly, such as deceptive comments, illicit bitcoin transactions and malicious websites, making the detection of such activities a crucial research area in both
academia and industry. In recent years, graph-based fraud
detection approaches (Zhang et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2023;
Dong et al. 2024) have become a promising development by
modeling the entities as nodes and the corresponding interactions between entities as edges. In this way, fraud detection can be considered as a binary node classification task
(Tang et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2024), whereby the objective is
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13115

