The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

More Text, Less Point: Towards 3D Data-Efficient Point-Language Understanding
Yuan Tang1, * , Xu Han1, * , Xianzhi Li1,† , Qiao Yu1 , Jinfeng Xu1 ,
Yixue Hao1 , Long Hu1 , Min Chen2
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
South China University of Technology,
{yuan tang, xhanxu, xzli, qiaoyu epic, yixuehao, hulong}@hust.edu.cn, jinfengxu.edu@gmail.com, minchen@ieee.org

GreenPLM-0 (Ours)

Abstract
Enabling Large Language Models (LLMs) to comprehend the
3D physical world remains a significant challenge. Due to the
lack of large-scale 3D-text pair datasets, the success of LLMs
has yet to be replicated in 3D understanding. In this paper, we
rethink this issue and propose a new task: 3D Data-Efficient
Point-Language Understanding. The goal is to enable LLMs to
achieve robust 3D object understanding with minimal 3D point
cloud and text data pairs. To address this task, we introduce
GreenPLM, which leverages more text data to compensate
for the lack of 3D data. First, inspired by using CLIP to align
images and text, we utilize a pre-trained point cloud-text encoder to map the 3D point cloud space to the text space. This
mapping leaves us to seamlessly connect the text space with
LLMs. Once the point-text-LLM connection is established,
we further enhance text-LLM alignment by expanding the
intermediate text space, thereby reducing the reliance on 3D
point cloud data. Specifically, we generate 6M free-text descriptions of 3D objects, and design a three-stage training
strategy to help LLMs better explore the intrinsic connections
between different modalities. To achieve efficient modality
alignment, we design a zero-parameter cross-attention module
for token pooling. Extensive experimental results show that
GreenPLM requires only 12% of the 3D training data used by
existing state-of-the-art models to achieve superior 3D understanding. Remarkably, GreenPLM also achieves competitive
performance using text-only data.

GPT-4o mini
Point-Bind LLM

54.57

42.16
+3.46

+24.79

38.70

29.78 +27.89
26.68

Cls. (Avg)
point cloud input

Cap. (S-Bert)
original mesh
(only for reference)

original mesh
(only for reference)

It doesn't have numeric buttons,
how can I control it ?
Control is managed through a touchsensitive surface, allowing for
intuitive navigation and interaction.
Who was the first to propose not to
use physical buttons?
The concept of not using physical
buttons was proposed by Steve Jobs,
the co-founder of Apple Inc.
Besides the touch phone, what else
does he propose ?

Introduction

Steve Jobs also proposed the creation
of a tablet, which would offer a
larger screen and more versatile
functionality compared to traditional
phones.

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have
revolutionized natural language processing, demonstrating
emergent intelligence and exceptional capabilities in language understanding and generation (OpenAI 2023; Yang
et al. 2024; Dubey et al. 2024). However, LLMs are blind
to the 3D physical world because they lack the ability to
capture and understand 3D objects. Solving this challenging
multimodal 3D-language understanding task could benefit
many applications, such as autonomous driving, robotics and
embodied AI (Driess et al. 2023; Fu et al. 2024).

49.40

+2.92 +2.72
46.48 46.68

27.29

The spoiler is designed to improve
aerodynamics and stability at high
speeds, enhancing the car's
performance.

Code — https://github.com/TangYuan96/GreenPLM

PointLLM
MiniGPT-3D

+14.87

What is the function of its spoiler ?

point cloud input

GreenPLM (Ours)
60.08
+10.95 +11.06
49.13 49.02

GreenPLM-0 (Text-only)

Cls. (Avg)
point cloud input

Cap. (S-Bert)
original mesh
(only for reference)

Does it require electricity ?
No, it does not require
electricity as it is a manual
bicycle.
point cloud input

original mesh
(only for reference)

Why does it have 4 propellers ?
The four propellers allow the drone
to have better stability and control
during flight.
Based on its flight stability, which
industries can it be applied to ?
Its flight stability makes it suitable
for various industries such as real
estate, agriculture, and media .
How to use drones to real estate?
In real estate, drones can be used to
capture aerial views of properties,
providing potential buyers with a
comprehensive understanding of the
property's layout and surroundings.
GreenPLM (Limited 3D Data 90K)

Figure 1: We propose GreenPLM, which expands the text
space to reduce the need for 3D data. GreenPLM achieves
strong 3D understanding using just 12% of the 3D data or
even with text-only data.
Inspired by CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), multimodal large
language models (MLLMs) can map different modality inputs to a text space closer to LLMs using pre-trained multimodal encoders, enabling LLMs to understand data beyond

* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7284

