The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Separating the Wheat from the Chaff: Spatio-Temporal Transformer with
View-interweaved Attention for Photon-Efficient Depth Sensing
Letian Yu1 , Jiaxi Yang1 , Bo Dong2,∗ , Qirui Bao1 , Yuanbo Wang1 ,
Felix Heide3 , Xiaopeng Wei1,∗ , Xin Yang1, *
1

Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
2
Cephia AI
3
Princeton University
{letianyu, 1612000589, wangyuanbo}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, 517542583@qq.com, bo.dong@cephia.ai,
fheide@cs.princeton.edu, {xpwei, xinyang}@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

SPAD sensor

Time-resolved imaging is an emerging sensing modality that
has been shown to enable advanced applications, including remote sensing, fluorescence lifetime imaging, and even
non-line-of-sight sensing. Single-photon avalanche diodes
(SPADs) outperform relevant time-resolved imaging technologies thanks to their excellent photon sensitivity and superior temporal resolution on the order of tens of picoseconds.
The capability of exceeding the sensing limits of conventional cameras for SPADs also draws attention to the photonefficient imaging area. However, photon-efficient imaging under degraded conditions with low photon counts and low
signal-to-background ratio (SBR) still remains an inevitable
challenge. In this paper, we propose a spatio-temporal transformer network for photon-efficient imaging under low-flux
scenarios. In particular, we introduce a view-interweaved attention mechanism (VIAM) to extract both spatial-view and
temporal-view self-attention in each transformer block. We
also design an adaptive-weighting scheme to dynamically adjust the weights between different views of self-attention in
VIAM for different signal-to-background levels. We extensively validate and demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the simulated Middlebury dataset and a specially
self-collected dataset with real-world-captured SPAD measurements and well-annotated ground truth depth maps.

Pulsed Laser

Light pulses emitted
into the scene

Scene Statue David Peng et. al. [2022]

GT Depth Map

(a) Imaging Process of SPAD Hardware System

Ours

(b) Visual Examples

Figure 1: (a) Single-photon depth sensing system, which
contains a pulsed laser source, a TCSPC module and a SPAD
sensor and measures a spatio-temporal photon histogram
when photons are emitted by the pulsed laser into the scene
and reflected back to the SPAD sensor. (b) Our approach
can extract spatio-temporal correlations and outperform the
state-of-the-art algorithms for depth sensing tasks in realworld applications.

avalanche diodes (SPADs). SPADs are single-photon sensitive devices working in active depth sensing due to their
high sensitivity to individual photons and ability to record
time-tagged photon arrivals with picosecond timing resolution (Rochas 2003). By employing a pulsed laser with picosecond duration, a single photon depth sensing system illuminates the targets with abundant pulses and collects the
scattered photons to the SPAD detector. A spatio-temporal
histogram is then constructed via the time-of-arrival of multiple collected photons to infer the target depth in a timeof-flight format. The histogram approximates the amounts
of the returning photons and enables recovery distance, reflectance, and 3D geometry.
However, robustly sensing depth from raw photon histograms under degraded conditions remains a significant
challenge. The back-reflected signal photons are weak
and contaminated with strong noise photons from ambient light, resulting in low photon counts and low signalto-background ratio (SBR). This phenomenon brings severe
distortions into the raw single-photon measurements, leading to poor depth reconstruction quality, especially in long-

Introduction
Time-resolved imaging, or the time-tagging of the optical
response of a scene to transient illumination, allows it to
exceed the sensing boundaries beyond conventional framebased intensity imaging and analyze the temporal information of light transport. Time-resolved measurements provide superior temporal resolutions and rich temporal cues
for scene understanding and are engaged in practical applications, e.g., health care and life sciences (e.g. fluorescence
lifetime imaging), robotics and autonomous driving, military defenses, and even non-line-of-sight imaging or ”looking around a corner” (Velten et al. 2012) .
A notable approach available for recording time-resolved
measurements is the emerging technology of single-photon
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9626

