The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LCGC: Learning from Consistency Gradient Conflicting for Class-Imbalanced
Semi-Supervised Debiasing
Weiwei Xing1 , Yue Cheng 1 , Hongzhu Yi 1 ,
Xiaohui Gao , Xiang Wei 1 * , Xiaoyu Guo 1 , Yuming Zhang 3 , Xinyu Pang 4
2

1

School of Software Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
School of Computing, Newcastle University
4
School of Science, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{wwxing, yuecheng, hongzhuyi, xiangwei, guoxiaoyu}@bjtu.edu.cn, gaitxh@foxmail.com
y.zhang361@newcastle.ac.uk, candypxy@163.com
2

Abstract
Classifiers often learn to be biased corresponding to the classimbalanced dataset, especially under the semi-supervised
learning (SSL) set. While previous work tries to appropriately
re-balance the classifiers by subtracting a class-irrelevant image’s logit, but lacks a firm theoretical basis. We theoretically analyze why exploiting a baseline image can refine
pseudo-labels and prove that the black image is the best
choice. We also indicated that as the training process deepens,
the pseudo-labels before and after refinement become closer.
Based on this observation, we propose a debiasing scheme
dubbed LCGC, which Learning from Consistency Gradient
Conflicting, by encouraging biased class predictions during
training. We intentionally update the pseudo-labels whose
gradient conflicts with the debiased logits, representing the
optimization direction offered by the over-imbalanced classifier predictions. Then, we debiased the predictions by subtracting the baseline image logits during testing. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that LCGC can significantly improve the prediction accuracy of existing CISSL models on
public benchmarks.

Figure 1: Visualization of sensitive maps produced by the
FixMatch model and CDMAD at the image. Left-to-right:
original input image, visualization of sensitive maps produced by the FixMatch, CDMAD. The lightness of the sensitive map indicates how much attention the models pay to
a particular area of the input image. The sensitive maps obtained by CDMAD have less noise.

Introduction
The predictions of an ideal unbiased classifier are attributed
to class-relevant features of the input images. In real cases,
however, such an ideal classifier can hardly be obtained due
to the dataset selection biases and imbalances, the complexity of the real world, or other peculiarities (Bengio et al.
2020). That’s why classifiers trained on a class-imbalanced
set may fail to make trustworthy predictions, which is even
more pronounced in semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Chen
et al. 2023).
Essentially, when there is training with imbalanced data,
the accuracy of the model drops mainly caused by the spurious correlation between the irrelevant features and category
labels, i.e. the classifier output logits are biased attributes
towards the majority class of class-dependent features. Taking the task of recognizing animal categories as an example, as shown in Figure 1, the sensitive map obtained after
vanilla FixMatch gives certain attention to class-irrelevant

background features, while the debias model directs its attention more towards class-relevant features. This results in
the latter having less background noise.
To address this issue, a few algorithms (Oh, Kim, and
Kweon 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Schmutz, HUMBERT, and
Mattei 2023; Lee and Kim 2024) have been proposed for
classifier debiasing under class-imbalanced SSL (CISSL)
settings. The basic idea of classifier debiasing is to regularize the response bias generated by the biased classification
head to achieve the balance effect (Wei and Gan 2023; Wang
et al. 2023a; Zhu et al. 2024). Such a training strategy alleviates the bias caused by the imbalanced dataset to a certain
extent. However, they need to design complex network variants, such as adding classification heads (Lee, Shin, and Kim
2021), designing causal balancers (Wang et al. 2022; Li et al.
2024; Tao et al. 2024), etc. An immediate idea is whether
there is a way to measure the bias of the classifier in a minimally expensive way and to perform post-hoc logit adjustment on the response bias generated by the biased classifi-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21697

