The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Prototype Replay for Class Incremental Semantic Segmentation
Guilin Zhu1 , Dongyue Wu1 , Changxin Gao1 * , Runmin Wang2 , Weidong Yang1 , Nong Sang1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University
{gzhu, dongyue wu, cgao, Yangwd, nsang}@hust.edu.cn, runminwang@hunnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Class incremental semantic segmentation (CISS) aims to segment new classes during continual steps while preventing
the forgetting of old knowledge. Existing methods alleviate catastrophic forgetting by replaying distributions of previously learned classes using stored prototypes or features.
However, they overlook a critical issue: in CISS, the representation of class knowledge is updated continuously through incremental learning, whereas prototype replay methods maintain fixed prototypes. This mismatch between updated representation and fixed prototypes limits the effectiveness of
the prototype replay strategy. To address this issue, we propose the Adaptive prototype replay (Adapter) for CISS in
this paper. Adapter comprises an adaptive deviation compensation (ADC) strategy and an uncertainty-aware constraint
(UAC) loss. Specifically, the ADC strategy dynamically updates the stored prototypes based on the estimated representation shift distance to match the updated representation of old
class. The UAC loss reduces prediction uncertainty, aggregating discriminative features to aid in generating compact
prototypes. Additionally, we introduce a compensation-based
prototype similarity discriminative (CPD) loss to ensure adequate differentiation between similar prototypes, thereby enhancing the efficiency of the adaptive prototype replay strategy. Extensive experiments on Pascal VOC and ADE20K
datasets demonstrate that Adapter achieves state-of-the-art results and proves effective across various CISS tasks, particularly in challenging multi-step scenarios.

Figure 1: Performance comparison of prior works on the
Pascal VOC 2012 challenging multi-step overlapped scenarios, where contains the small classes in the initial step and
long-term incremental steps.

to accommodate the new data while the old shared weights
are disrupted.
Intuitive methods (Cha et al. 2021; Maracani et al. 2021)
attempted to alleviate catastrophic forgetting by replaying
a few past images, but this suffer from storage burdens
and privacy concerns. Previous CISS methods (Michieli and
Zanuttigh 2019; Yang et al. 2022) utilized knowledge distillation (KD) to reduce catastrophic forgetting. However,
these methods overlook the fact that the proportion of pixels
belonging to new classes is higher than that of previously
learned classes during the incremental steps, which leads
to bias in the classifiers. Recent work (Chen et al. 2023)
properly addressed this problem by replaying the distributions of old-class in the new-class classifiers, based on the
efficient storage of representative prototypes and necessary
statistics. However, the distributions replayed by static prototypes only represent the representation of previous models, neglecting the representation deviation between incremental models due to the updated shared weights.

Code — https://github.com/zhu-gl-ux/Adapter

Introduction
The class incremental semantic segmentation (CISS) models learn all classes through multiple steps. During each step,
models focus on different classes with corresponding labels.
When completing the all steps, the trained models are expected to grasp not only with the original classes but also
with the newly introduced ones. A common challenge observed in other incremental visual tasks (Rebuffi et al. 2017;
Shmelkov, Schmid, and Alahari 2017) is catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). This occurs when the
model learns a new task, the network weights are fine-tuned
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10932

