The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Integrating Low-Level Visual Cues for Enhanced Unsupervised Semantic
Segmentation
Yuhao Qing1 , Dan Zeng2 , Shaorong Xie1 , Kaer Huang3 , Yueying Wang1 *
1

School of Mechatronic Engineering and Automation, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
3
Lenovo, Building 1, No.10 Xibeiwang East Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100085, China
qingyuhao@shu.edu.cn, dzeng@shu.edu.cn, srxie@shu.edu.cn, huangke1@lenovo.com, wyy676@126.com
2

Abstract
Unsupervised semantic segmentation algorithms aim to identify meaningful semantic groups without annotations. Recent approaches leveraging self-supervised transformers as
pre-training backbones have successfully obtained high-level
dense features that effectively express semantic coherence.
However, these methods often overlook local semantic coherence and low-level features such as color and texture. We propose integrating low-level visual cues to complement highlevel visual cues derived from self-supervised pre-training
branches. Our findings indicate that low-level visual cues provide a more coherent recognition of color-texture aspects,
ensuring the continuity of spatial structures within classes.
This insight led us to develop IL2Vseg, an unsupervised
semantic segmentation method that leverages the complementation of low-level visual cues. The core of IL2Vseg is
a spatially-constrained fuzzy clustering algorithm based on
color affinities, which preserves the intra-class affinity of
spatially-adjacent and similarly-colored pixels in low-level
visual cues. Additionally, to effectively couple low-level and
high-level visual cues, we introduce a feature similarity loss
function to optimize the feature representation of fused visual cues. To further enhance consistent feature learning,
we incorporate contrast loss functions based on color invariance and luminosity invariance, which improve the learning of features from different semantic categories. Extensive
experiments on multiple datasets, including COCO-Stuff27, Cityscapes, Potsdam, and MaSTr1325, demonstrate that
IL2Vseg achieves state-of-the-art results.

Image

clustering
features

Pretraining
features

Image

clustering Pretraining
features
features

Figure 1: The visualization results of the high-level visual
cues (clustered features) and low-level visual cues (pretrained features)
the scalability and applicability of supervised methods, especially when annotated data is scarce or unavailable. Therefore, exploring unsupervised semantic segmentation methods offers a potential solution to these challenges.
Traditional clustering-based methods, such as kmeans(Na, Xumin, and Yong 2010) and Gaussian Mixture
Models (GMM)(Reynolds et al. 2009), are relatively simple
and easy to implement. Their principles are well understood,
and the results can be interpreted. However, these traditional
methods rely on manually created features, are sensitive
to initial conditions and hyperparameters, and may fail to
capture complex high-level semantic information in images,
leading to suboptimal segmentation results. Additionally,
clustering-based methods typically process pixels independently, with poor consideration of spatial relationships
and contextual information, resulting in fragmented and
incoherent segmentation outcomes.
Recently, unsupervised semantic segmentation methods
based on self-supervised pre-trained visual backbones have
garnered significant attention. TransFGU(Yin et al. 2022)
was the first to acquire rich information about high-level
structured semantic concepts from large-scale visual data in
a self-supervised learning manner and use this information
as a priori to discover potential semantic categories in the
target dataset. STEGO(Hamilton et al. 2022) decomposed
the problem into learning the representation and learning the
segmentation header, using patch-level feature representations learned from a self-supervised pre-trained model, and
made substantial progress in unsupervised segmentation results. Additionally, HP, Smooseg, and EAGLE(Kim et al.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a crucial task in computer vision,
aiming to segment an image into different regions where
each pixel is assigned a specific semantic label. Due to its
pixel-level image segmentation, it has a wide range of applications in automated driving, medical imaging, agricultural
monitoring, environmental mapping, and other fields.
Existing supervised methods have achieved significant results, but they rely heavily on a large number of annotated
masks. Obtaining annotated data is both time-consuming
and expensive, as pixel-level annotation of images requires
substantial manpower and expertise. This reliance restricts
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6603

