The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DSRC: Learning Density-Insensitive and Semantic-Aware Collaborative
Representation Against Corruptions
Jingyu Zhang1,2 * , Yilei Wang1∗ , Lang Qian1 , Peng Sun3 , Zengwen Li4† ,
Sudong Jiang4 , Maolin Liu4 , Liang Song1,2†
2

1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Innovation Platform for Academicians of Hainan Province, Haikou, Hainan, China
3
Duke Kunshan University, Suzhou, China
4
Chongqing Changan Automobile Co., Ltd. Chongqing, China
{jingyuzhang22, yileiwang23}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
As a potential application of Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X)
communication, multi-agent collaborative perception has
achieved significant success in 3D object detection. While
these methods have demonstrated impressive results on standard benchmarks, the robustness of such approaches in
the face of complex real-world environments requires additional verification. To bridge this gap, we introduce the
first comprehensive benchmark designed to evaluate the robustness of collaborative perception methods in the presence
of natural corruptions typical of real-world environments.
Furthermore, we propose DSRC, a robustness-enhanced
collaborative perception method aiming to learn Densityinsensitive and Semantic-aware collaborative Representation
against Corruptions. DSRC consists of two key designs:
i) a semantic-guided sparse-to-dense distillation framework, which constructs multi-view dense objects painted by
ground truth bounding boxes to effectively learn densityinsensitive and semantic-aware collaborative representation;
ii) a feature-to-point cloud reconstruction approach to better fuse critical collaborative representation across agents.
To thoroughly evaluate DSRC, we conduct extensive experiments on real-world and simulated datasets. The results
demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art collaborative perception methods in both clean and corrupted
conditions.

Clean

Beam Missing

Snow

Motion Blur

Figure 1: Visualization of typical corruption types in our
benchmark. Point cloud from different agents are shown in
different colors.
field of view. Recent researches (Wang et al. 2020; Xu et al.
2022b; Hu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2024a) have drawn
widespread attention to collaborative perception, particularly in autonomous driving. Notably, LiDAR sensors have
emerged as a primary focus of state-of-the-art collaborative
perception methods (Xu et al. 2022a; Yang et al. 2023; Li
et al. 2021) because of their convenient information fusion
advantages.
Collaborative perception methods must operate reliably in
different geographical locations and different natural environments to ensure the safety of autonomous driving. While
some works (Xu et al. 2022a; Wang et al. 2023a,c; Gu et al.
2023) achieve efficient multi-agent feature fusion through
well-designed mechanisms to enhance performance within
a single domain, the methods often fail in scenarios outside
of clean evaluation sets. Natural corruptions like adverse
weather and sensor malfunctions cause issues such as occlusion, signal attenuation, and unpredictable reflections in LiDAR data, leading to loss or misinterpretation of perceptual
information. Furthermore, LiDAR’s inherent limitations in
capturing color and texture details hinder its generalization
capability. Corruption-induced beam loss or data jitter exacerbates semantic perception difficulties, such as object shape
and density. These impairments not only affect each agent’s
ability to accurately perceive the surrounding environment

Code — https://github.com/Terry9a/DSRC

Introduction
Perceiving environment accurately is crucial to ensure the
driving safety of autonomous vehicles. With recent advancements in Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication technology and intelligent transportation systems, multi-agent
collaborative perception has emerged as a promising solution. By exchanging perceptual information, agents can
achieve a comprehensive understanding of their surroundings and overcome limitations inherent in single-agent perception, such as limited perception range and obstructed
* Equal contributions.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9942

