The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neurons to Words: A Novel Method for Automated Neural Network
Interpretability and Alignment
Lukas-Santo Puglisi1 , Fabio Valdés2 , Jakob Johannes Metzger3
1

Independent Researcher
FernUniversität in Hagen
3
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine
lsanpuglisi@gmail.com, fabio.valdes@fernuni-hagen.de, jakob.metzger@mdc-berlin.de
2

Abstract

and drug discovery. For instance, the information stored in
the weights and activations used by a convolutional neural
network to automatically detect gastric cancer in endoscopic
images (Hirasawa et al. 2018) could provide insights into the
distinguishing features of cancerous versus non-cancerous
tissue. By making these features human-interpretable, researchers may identify biomarkers or gain insights into disease progression, potentially leading to more targeted treatment approaches. The contributions of this paper are as follows:

Recent years have witnessed an increase in the parameter size
of frontier AI models by multiple orders of magnitude. This
trend is driven by empirical observations, known as scaling
laws, which show that model performance scales with model
size, dataset size, and computational power. Motivated by
this, researchers are training ever-larger models in pursuit of
unlocking new capabilities. However, the growing complexity of these models makes understanding their inner workings
increasingly challenging. Interpretability is crucial not only in
fields like medicine and biotechnology, where understanding
the internals of these models could lead to new insights but
also in super alignment, where it is the goal to ensure that
AI is aligned and acts according to human values and interests. We present a generic, scalable first-of-its-kind method
for automatically interpreting neural networks. In a proof-ofconcept study we establish the viability of converting neural
network activations - here for the first layer of a Convolutional Neural Network - into human-readable language. Additionally, we propose modifications to scale this method for
understanding neural networks of any size. In anticipation of
more capable large language models, this method could enable the monitoring of their internal mechanisms and decisions.

1

• We introduce a novel technique for interpreting neural networks, automatically translating neural activations
into human-readable language.
• We demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed method
on synthetic data and the MNIST dataset (LeCun, Cortes,
and Burges 2010).
• We deliver a method that is generic and scalable, thus,
capable of interpreting neural networks of any architecture and parameter size given sufficient computational resources.
Section 2 outlines the limitations of current interpretability methods and presents the principal motivation, the semisupervised learning paradigm, for our method. Applying this
paradigm to the field of neural network interpretability, section 3 provides a detailed overview of the novel method.
Section 4 evaluates the results. Section 5 proposes several
avenues of research to extend this method.

Introduction

With the advent of powerful deep learning systems, neural
network interpretability has gained prominence. It allows us
to understand and trust the decisions made by these powerful systems while deploying them in real-world applications
and high-stakes settings. In this vein, superalignment is a
fundamental problem in which human evaluators seek to direct superhuman model and determine if its behavior corresponds with human intentions, even in cases where humans
may not fully grasp the outputs of these systems (Burns et al.
2023). A concern is that such superhuman models could
try to deceive humans by presenting arguments or solutions
that superficially align with human logic but are skewed to
achieve the AI’s objectives (Burns et al. 2023). On a related
note, advances in AI interpretability could also lead to breakthroughs in research area that heavily relies on vast quantities of data, such as genomics, genetics, medical imaging,

2

Related Work

(Shahroudnejad 2021) categorizes traditional neural interpretability techniques into visualization techniques, attribution methods, and surrogate modeling. Visualization techniques, such as feature and saliency maps, highlight regions
in the input data that significantly influence the model’s output (Shahroudnejad 2021). Attribution methods like layerwise relevance propagation (Montavon et al. 2019) and
DeepLIFT (Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017) assign importance scores to input features, attempting to explain model predictions. Surrogate models involve constructing simpler, more interpretable models that approximate the predictions of neural networks (Messalas, Kanellopoulos, and Makris 2019). According to (Räuker et al.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27591

