The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DAMPER: A Dual-Stage Medical Report Generation Framework with
Coarse-Grained MeSH Alignment and Fine-Grained Hypergraph Matching
Xiaofei Huang1 , Wenting Chen2 * , Jie Liu2 , Qisheng Lu1 , Xiaoling Luo1 , Linlin Shen1,3,4 *
1

Computer Vision Institute, College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
2450101014@mails.szu.edu.cn,{wentichen7-c, jilu.ee}@my.cityu.edu.hk,qishenglu85@gmail.com,{lluo,llshen}@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
Medical report generation is crucial for clinical diagnosis
and patient management, summarizing diagnoses and recommendations based on medical imaging. However, existing work often overlook the clinical pipeline involved in report writing, where physicians typically conduct an initial
quick review followed by a detailed examination. Moreover,
current alignment methods may lead to misaligned relationships. To address these issues, we propose DAMPER, a dualstage framework for medical report generation that mimics
the clinical pipeline of report writing in two stages. In the first
stage, a MeSH-Guided Coarse-Grained Alignment (MCG)
stage that aligns chest X-ray (CXR) image features with medical subject headings (MeSH) features to generate a rough
keyphrase representation of the overall impression. In the second stage, a Hypergraph-Enhanced Fine-Grained Alignment
(HFG) stage that constructs hypergraphs for image patches
and report annotations, modeling high-order relationships
within each modality and performing hypergraph matching to
capture semantic correlations between image regions and textual phrases. Finally,the coarse-grained visual features, generated MeSH representations, and visual hypergraph features
are fed into a report decoder to produce the final medical report. Extensive experiments on public datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of DAMPER in generating comprehensive
and accurate medical reports, outperforming state-of-the-art
methods across various evaluation metrics.

Figure 1: (a) Represents the previous research works on finegrained alignment. (b) Our research work on fine-grained
alignment in this paper. (c) The motivation for our approach:
Mimicking the real process of physicians writing reports.

Introduction
tomatic algorithms for medical report generation have been
widely studied. Some methods (Shin et al. 2016; Yuan et al.
2019) directly map input chest X-ray (CXR) images to medical reports using CNNs and RNNs, while others focus on
effective image-text alignment to facilitate report generation. The latter methods believe that cross-modal disparity between images and texts may affect the mapping from
CXR images to reports. They primarily rely on two types
of alignment: coarse-grained and fine-grained alignment.
Coarse-grained alignment methods (Yang et al. 2023; Chen
et al. 2024b,c) align entire image features with whole report
features, whereas fine-grained alignment methods (Qin and
Song 2022; Yang et al. 2023) aim to match specific image
regions with corresponding descriptions in the report. However, these methods still face two main challenges when using alignment for report generation.

Medical reports are essential for highlighting clinical findings and summarizing diagnoses and recommendations,
which are crucial for clinical decision-making and patient
management. However, the rise in medical imaging has
made traditional manual report generation time-consuming
and error-prone, potentially affecting patient safety. Therefore, automated medical report generation techniques have
become increasingly important (Cao et al. 2023).
With the widespread application of deep learning in the
medical field, advancements have also been made in various tasks such as medical visual question answering (Huang
and Gong 2024), rectal cancer diagnosis (Zhang et al. 2024),
clinical decision making (Liu et al. 2024a) and retinal disease detection (Luo et al. 2023, 2024; Xu et al. 2024). Au* Corresponding Authors

3769

