The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Dynamic Duo of Collaborative Masking and Target for Advanced
Masked Autoencoder Learning
Shentong Mo
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Masked autoencoders (MAE) have recently succeeded in
self-supervised vision representation learning. Previous work
mainly applied custom-designed (e.g., random, block-wise)
masking or teacher (e.g., CLIP)-guided masking and targets. However, they ignore the potential role of the selftraining (student) model in giving feedback to the teacher
for masking and targets. In this work, we present to integrate Collaborative Masking and Targets for boosting Masked
AutoEncoders, namely CMT-MAE. Specifically, CMT-MAE
leverages a simple collaborative masking mechanism through
linear aggregation across attentions from both teacher and
student models. We further propose using the output features from those two models as the collaborative target of
the decoder. Our simple and effective framework pre-trained
on ImageNet-1K achieves state-of-the-art linear probing and
fine-tuning performance. In particular, using ViT-base, we
improve the fine-tuning results of the vanilla MAE from
83.6% to 85.7%.

Introduction
Masked autoencoders (MAE) (He et al. 2021) have recently achieved advanced success in learning meaningful visual representations for many downstream tasks, e.g., image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. Meanwhile, researchers also introduced diverse masking pipelines to show the effectiveness of masked modeling in learning meaningful representations from video (Tong
et al. 2022; Feichtenhofer et al. 2022), audio (Huang et al.
2022), and MRI/CT scans (Chen et al. 2023).
Exploring masking strategies (i.e., pretext tasks) and supervision targets is critical for MAE (He et al. 2021) to capture meaningful features during pre-training. In this work,
we aim to simultaneously improve the powerfulness of
the pre-text task and target in MAE-based pre-training on
images for self-supervised vision representation learning,
which boosts the performance of several downstream tasks
compared to MAE (He et al. 2021) and DINO (Caron et al.
2021), as shown in Figure 1.
Early works (Bao, Dong, and Wei 2021; Atito, Awais,
and Kittler 2021; He et al. 2021) on masked image modeling (MIM) mainly applied custom-designed (i.e., random,

Figure 1: Comparison of our CMT-MAE with MAE and
DINO on pre-trained ViT-B/16. Our method significantly
outperforms previous baselines in terms of all downstream
tasks.

block-wise, square-wise) masking during pre-training. For
instance, BEiT (Bao, Dong, and Wei 2021) used a blockwise masking strategy to reconstruct discrete tokens of
masked image patches for pre-training transferrable visual
representations. To simplify masked image encoding, the
seminal work, MAE (He et al. 2021) directly reconstructed
missing pixels of 75% masked patches. MaskFeat (Wei et al.
2022a) studied five different types of features as supervision targets and observed that Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG) with local contrast normalization achieved the
best performance. SimMIM (Xie et al. 2022) applied a large
masked patch size to randomly mask the input image, where
RGB values of raw pixels are recovered by a one-layer prediction head.
Recent researchers (Li et al. 2021b; Shi et al. 2022; Wei
et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2022) started to leverage a teacher network or adversarial learning to generate the mask and su-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19484

