The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Feature Denoising Diffusion Model for Blind Image Quality Assessment
Xudong Li1 , Yan Zhang1 * , Yunhang Shen2 , Ke Li2 , Runze Hu3 , Xiawu Zheng1 , Sicheng Zhao4
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
3
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
4
BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{lxd761050753, bzhy986, shenyunhang01, tristanli.sh, hrzlpk2015}@gmail.com,
zhengxiawu@xmu.edu.cn, schzhao@tsinghua.edu.cn
Mos: 48.69

Abstract
Blind Image Quality Assessment (BIQA) aims to evaluate
image quality in line with human perception, without reference benchmarks. Currently, deep learning BIQA methods
typically depend on using features from high-level tasks for
transfer learning. However, the inherent differences between
BIQA and these high-level tasks inevitably introduce noise
into the quality-aware features. In this paper, we take an initial step toward exploring the diffusion model for feature denoising in BIQA, namely Perceptual Feature Diffusion for
IQA (PFD-IQA), which aims to remove noise from qualityaware features. Specifically, 1) we propose a Perceptual Prior
Discovery and Aggregation module to establish two auxiliary
tasks to discover potential low-level features in images that
are used to aggregate perceptual textual prompt conditions
for the diffusion model. 2) we propose a Perceptual Conditional Feature Refinement strategy, which matches noisy features to predefined denoising trajectories and then performs
exact feature denoising based on textual prompt conditions.
By incorporating a lightweight denoiser and requiring only
a few feature denoising steps (e.g., just five iterations), our
PFD-IQA framework achieves superior performance across
eight standard BIQA datasets, validating its effectiveness.

1

Semantic Feature

T Denoising Steps

Denoised Feature

...
Mos: 60.95

Initial Noise

Denoising Step 1

48.06 ( 11.63 )

Figure 1: Top Image: the sample image. Bottom Images:
Before and after diffusion denoising, the feature map significantly refines, effectively pinpointing areas with visible
image quality degradation. The initial semantic focus is on
“human”, but after denoising, attention notably shifts to the
fuzzy region (the yellow region with the crowd and arms),
aligning more closely with Mean Opinion Scores (MOS).

2023). Ideally, these features should capture both low-level
distortions and high-level content (Zhao et al. 2023a). However, incorporating synthetic distortions as data augmentation (Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019) during pre-training for
classification tasks may reduce the model’s sensitivity to image degradation (Zhang et al. 2023; Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019), causing the model to overemphasize high-level
semantics while neglecting critical low-level details (Li et al.
2024a). For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the baseline model
emphasizes high-level information, such as the “human” in
the red box, but overlooks low-level details like blur and geometric distortion in the yellow box, resulting in inaccurate
quality predictions. Thus, not all pre-trained semantic features are beneficial; some may introduce quality-irrelevant
noise, requiring careful filtering to improve BIQA.
Our motivation is illustrated in Fig. 1. We propose treating pre-trained semantic features as noise-corrupted qualityaware features and removing this noise with the help of diffusion models (DMs) (Rombach et al. 2022; Clark and Jaini
2024) which are particularly effective in recovering target
data distribution from noisy input (Ye and Xu 2024). This

Introduction

Image Quality Assessment (IQA) methods aim to match the
human perception of image distortions (Wang et al. 2004).
As a crucial low-level visual task, reliable IQA models are
important for image-driven applications. Objective IQA includes Full-Reference IQA (Shi and Lin 2020), ReducedReference IQA (Tao et al. 2009), and Blind IQA (BIQA).
As reference images are often unavailable, BIQA gains attention for tasks like image restoration (Banham and Katsaggelos 1997) and super-resolution (Dong et al. 2015).
Deep neural network-based BIQA models have made notable advancements (Bosse et al. 2017; Li et al. 2024b).
These methods often utilize a straightforward training strategy, which includes pre-training on the large-scale ImageNet domain (Deng et al. 2009) and then fine-tuning on
the IQA task to extract quality-aware features (Qin et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5004

