The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Dynamic Similarity by Bidirectional Hierarchical Sliding Semantic
Probe for Efficient Text Video Retrieval
Yang Liu1,2 , Shudong Huang1,2 * , Deng Xiong3 , Jiancheng Lv1,2
1

2

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Chengdu, China
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
liuyyy111@gmail.com, huangsd@scu.edu.cn, dxiong@stevens.edu, lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn
Abstract

…

Video

Text-video retrieval is a foundation task in multi-modal research which aims to align texts and videos in the embedding space. The key challenge is to learn the similarity between videos and texts. A conventional approach involves directly aligning video-text pairs using cosine similarity. However, due to the disparity in the information conveyed by
videos and texts, i.e., a single video can be described from
multiple perspectives, the retrieval accuracy is suboptimal.
An alternative approach employs cross-modal interaction to
enable videos to dynamically acquire distinct features from
various texts, thus facilitating similarity calculations. Nevertheless, this solution incurs a computational complexity of
O(n2 ) during retrieval. To this end, this paper proposes a
novel method called Bidirectional Hierarchical Sliding Semantic Probe (BiHSSP), which calculates dynamic similarity between videos and texts with O(n) complexity during
retrieval. We introduce a hierarchical semantic probe module that learns semantic probes at different scales for both
video and text features. Semantic probe involves a sliding
calculation of the cross-correlation between semantic probes
at different scales and embeddings from another modality,
allowing for dynamic similarity computation between video
and text descriptions from various perspectives. Specifically,
for text descriptions from different angles, we calculate the
similarity at different locations within the video features and
vice versa. This approach preserves the complete information
of the video while addressing the issue of unequal information between video and text without requiring cross-modal
interaction. Additionally, our method can function as a plugand-play module across various methods, thereby enhancing
the corresponding performance. Experimental results demonstrate that our BiHSSP significantly outperforms the baseline.

Text

A man is giving the
plastic cover to the
lady.

A
man
collects
money from a group
of people.

(a) Video and text convey different amounts of information
Video Features

Match

Match

Text 1 Probe
Slide
Text 2 Probe

(b) Our methods compute similarity without cross-interaction

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the information unequal problem
between videos and texts, in this case, video contain more
information than texts. (b) Taking text to video as an example, we illustrate how our method dynamically calculates
similarity.

text-video retrieval (TVR), a fundamental aspect of multimodal learning, has garnered considerable attention due to
the rapid expansion of short video platforms. TVR focuses
on retrieving semantically relevant videos based on userprovided textual queries. The primary challenge in TVR
arises from the disparate initial distributions of multiple unimodal features, necessitating an effective method for calculating the similarity between video and text in order to accurately identify semantically related video-text pairs.
The field of visual-language learning has recently witnessed significant advancements, largely driven by the success of contrastive learning techniques (He et al. 2020), such
as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021). These techniques project image and text features into a shared latent space by leveraging
the cosine similarity (dot product) of image-text pairs. This
cross-modal contrastive approach enables networks to learn
discriminative video-language representations, prompting
many researchers to incorporate CLIP into the TVR task.

Introduction
Representation learning that integrates both visual and linguistic modalities offers significant potential for a wide
range of cross-modal tasks (Liu et al. 2022b), including
image-text matching (Qin et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2018; Liu
et al. 2023b; Qin et al. 2024), text-video retrieval (Liu et al.
2019; Gabeur et al. 2020; Bain et al. 2021), and videoquestion answering(Lei et al. 2018). Among these tasks,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5667

