The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GenHMR: Generative Human Mesh Recovery
Muhammad Usama Saleem1 , Ekkasit Pinyoanuntapong1 , Pu Wang 1 , Hongfei Xue1 , Srijan Das1 ,
Chen Chen2
1

University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA
2
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
{msaleem2, epinyoan, pwang13, hxue2, sdas24}@charlotte.edu, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Human mesh recovery (HMR) is crucial in many computer
vision applications; from health to arts and entertainment.
HMR from monocular images has predominantly been addressed by deterministic methods that output a single prediction for a given 2D image. However, HMR from a single image is an ill-posed problem due to depth ambiguity and occlusions. Probabilistic methods have attempted to address this by
generating and fusing multiple plausible 3D reconstructions,
but their performance has often lagged behind deterministic
approaches. In this paper, we introduce GenHMR, a novel
generative framework that reformulates monocular HMR as
an image-conditioned generative task, explicitly modeling
and mitigating uncertainties in the 2D-to-3D mapping process. GenHMR comprises two key components: (1) a pose
tokenizer to convert 3D human poses into a sequence of discrete tokens in a latent space, and (2) an image-conditional
masked transformer to learn the probabilistic distributions of
the pose tokens, conditioned on the input image prompt along
with randomly masked token sequence. During inference, the
model samples from the learned conditional distribution to
iteratively decode high-confidence pose tokens, thereby reducing 3D reconstruction uncertainties. To further refine the
reconstruction, a 2D pose-guided refinement technique is proposed to directly fine-tune the decoded pose tokens in the latent space, which forces the projected 3D body mesh to align
with the 2D pose clues. Experiments on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that GenHMR significantly outperforms stateof-the-art methods.

Figure 1: State of the art (SOTA) methods, HMR2.0 (Goel
et al. 2023) and TokenHMR (Dwivedi et al. 2024), leverage
vision transformers to recover 3D human mesh from a single image. The errors, highlighted by red circles, reveal the
limitations of these SOTA approaches in handling unusual
poses or ambiguous scenarios. Our method, GenHMR, overcomes these challenges by explicitly modeling and mitigating uncertainties in the 2D-to-3D mapping process, resulting
in more accurate and robust 3D pose reconstructions in such
complex scenarios.

Project Website — https://m-usamasaleem.github.io/
publication/GenHMR/GenHMR.html

data (Tian et al. 2023). To address these challenges, recent
efforts have been focusing on two methods: (1) deterministic
HMR and (2) probabilistic HMR. Both methods face critical
limitations.
Deterministic methods, as the dominant approach for
HMR, are designed to produce a single prediction for a given
2D image. These methods estimate the shape and pose parameters of 3D body model either by regressing from 2D
image features extracted from deep neural networks (Choi
et al. 2022; Kocabas et al. 2021; Kanazawa et al. 2018)
or by directly optimizing the parametric body model by
fitting it to 2D image cues, such as 2D keypoints (Bogo
et al. 2016; Pavlakos et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020), silhouettes
(Omran et al. 2018), and part segmentations (Lassner et al.
2017). Recent deterministic HMR models, utilizing vision

Introduction
Recovering 3D human mesh from monocular images is an
essential task in computer vision, with applications spanning diverse fields, such as character animation for video
games and movies, metaverse, human-computer interaction,
and sports performance optimization. However, recovering
3D human mesh from monocular images remains challenging due to inherent ambiguities in lifting 2D observations to
3D space, flexible body kinematic structures, complex intersections with the environment, and insufficient annotated 3D
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6749

