The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Thinking Racial Bias in Fair Forgery Detection: Models, Datasets and Evaluations
Decheng Liu1 * , Zongqi Wang2 * , Chunlei Peng1† , Nannan Wang1 , Ruimin Hu1 , Xinbo Gao3
1
Xidian University, Xi’an, China
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
dchliu@xidian.edu.cn, zq-wang24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, clpeng@xidian.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn,
hrm1964@163.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Detectors with severe racial bias can lead to significant social impact. These detectors might disproportionately label
faces from a particular racial group as fake, thereby indicating discrimination towards this particular racial group.
Therefore, when a detector is ready for deployment, evaluating and analyzing its fairness is a crucial process. However, although there is extensive available research about the
fairness in machine learning to draw upon (Agarwal et al.
2018; Agarwal, Dudı́k, and Wu 2019; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Tian et al. 2024; Shen et al. 2024), evaluating
the fairness in face forgery detection systems remains difficult. This is due to several distinct differences between face
forgery detection and other deep learning tasks.
This work aims to fill the gap in research on racial fairness
in face forgery detection by proposing an accurate, comprehensive and credible fairness evaluation system. To achieve
this goal, we analyze the shortcomings of existing evaluation components (i.e. dataset and metric), and our corresponding solutions. (1) Dataset. Existing face forgery detection datasets have a limited number of subjects. We find
performance fluctuations significantly across subjects, so
individual fairness may overshadow group fairness, which
will make the evaluation results inaccurate. It also can be
found that different forgery approaches have different fairness levels, limited forgery approaches will lead to a noncomprehensive result. Otherwise, undefined ethnicity (faces
from two ethnicities are swapped) will lead to an inaccurate result. (2) Metric. We also propose two issues (Bias
Offset and Aggregation Distortion) that will cause deceptive results. Bias Offset arises because existing fairness metrics typically use overall average accuracy for calculations
instead of assessing each forgery method separately. This
way may obscure some biases as different forgery methods
may have different privileged races. Aggregation Distortion
arises because detectors often show significant utility variations across different forgery techniques. Even if two forgery
methods exhibit the same bias, detectors with lower utility
can be more unfair. Treating each forgery method as equal
will lead to unreliable results.
To tackle these problems, we firstly introduce the Fair
Forgery Detection (FairFD) dataset for racial bias evaluation, which contains the largest scale subjects, and
incorporates diverse forgery approaches including Face
Swapping: FaceSwap (Kowalski 2016), SimSwap (Chen

Due to the successful development of deep image generation technology, forgery detection plays a more important
role in social and economic security. Racial bias has not been
explored thoroughly in the deep forgery detection field. In
the paper, we first contribute a dedicated dataset called the
Fair Forgery Detection (FairFD) dataset, where we prove
the racial bias of public state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods.
Different from existing forgery detection datasets, the selfconstructed FairFD dataset contains a balanced racial ratio and diverse forgery generation images with the largestscale subjects. Additionally, we identify the problems with
naive fairness metrics when benchmarking forgery detection models. To comprehensively evaluate fairness, we design novel metrics including Approach Averaged Metric and
Utility Regularized Metric, which can avoid deceptive results. We also present an effective and robust post-processing
technique, Bias Pruning with Fair Activations (BPFA), which
improves fairness without requiring retraining or weight updates. Extensive experiments conducted with 12 representative forgery detection models demonstrate the value of the
proposed dataset and the reasonability of the designed fairness metrics. By applying the BPFA to the existing fairest
detector, we achieve a new SOTA. Furthermore, we conduct
more in-depth analyses to offer more insights to inspire researchers in the community.

Introduction
Face forgery refers to the creation of fake images or videos
of a person’s face using conventional techniques or deep
learning methods. These forgeries can be used to spread
misinformation, commit fraud, or even blackmail people.
There are numerous methods are proposed for detecting face
forgery (Rossler et al. 2019; Afchar et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2020; Tan and Le 2019; Nguyen, Yamagishi, and Echizen
2019; Li and Lyu 1811; Li et al. 2020a; Dang et al. 2020;
Ni et al. 2022; Cao et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2023a; Qian et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2021; Luo et al. 2021). Although an increasing number of advanced face forgery detection technologies
are being developed, the racial fairness of these detectors is
consistently overlooked by researchers (Masood et al. 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5379

