The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Riemann-based Multi-scale Attention Reasoning Network for Text-3D Retrieval
Wenrui Li1 , Wei Han1 , Yandu Chen1 , Yeyu Chai1 , Yidan Lu1 , Xingtao Wang12 * , Xiaopeng Fan123
1 Harbin Institute of Technology
2 Harbin Institute of Technology Suzhou Research Institute
3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
liwr@stu.hit.edu.cn; 2021111641@stu.hit.edu.cn; 2021111473@stu.hit.edu.cn; 23S136130@stu.hit.edu.cn
24S103311@stu.hit.edu.cn; xtwang@hit.edu.cn; fxp@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the challenges in acquiring paired Text-3D data and
the inherent irregularity of 3D data structures, combined representation learning of 3D point clouds and text remains
unexplored. In this paper, we propose a novel Riemannbased Multi-scale Attention Reasoning Network (RMARN)
for text-3D retrieval. Specifically, the extracted text and point
cloud features are refined by their respective Adaptive Feature Refiner (AFR). Furthermore, we introduce the innovative Riemann Local Similarity (RLS) module and the Global
Pooling Similarity (GPS) module. However, as 3D point
cloud data and text data often possess complex geometric
structures in high-dimensional space, the proposed RLS employs a novel Riemann Attention Mechanism to reflect the intrinsic geometric relationships of the data. Without explicitly
defining the manifold, RMARN learns the manifold parameters to better represent the distances between text-point cloud
samples. To address the challenges of lacking paired text3D data, we have created the large-scale Text-3D Retrieval
dataset T3DR-HIT, which comprises over 3,380 pairs of text
and point cloud data. T3DR-HIT contains coarse-grained indoor 3D scenes and fine-grained Chinese artifact scenes, consisting of 1,380 and over 2,000 text-3D pairs, respectively.
Experiments on our custom datasets demonstrate the superior
performance of the proposed method.

Figure 1: Directly calculating the cosine similarity between
two vectors may result in vectors with different meanings
at different positions having the same similarity. However,
in Riemannian geometry, vector movement conforms to the
properties of the manifold, which can mitigate this problem.

faces challenges, mainly due to the difficulty of obtaining
paired text-3D data and the inherent irregularity of 3D data
structures.
Due to the fundamentally different characteristics of text
and point cloud data, projecting features into a traditional
Euclidean space and comparing them using cosine similarity have significant limitations. This approach fails to adequately capture the complex structures and semantic information inherent in the data, limiting the retrieval model’s accuracy and depth of content understanding. To better distinguish the spatial structures of text data and point cloud data,
we introduce Riemannian geometry for projecting and aligning cross-modal data features, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Riemannian geometry is particularly effective in handling point
cloud data with complex geometric and topological structures, enabling a more accurate representation of the layered
nature of point clouds. Since both point cloud and text features are sequences, they can be viewed as fields on specific manifolds. By projecting text and point cloud data onto
different manifolds and learning their intrinsic structures on
low-dimensional Riemannian manifolds, we can better preserve local information and more accurately represent the
complex geometric structures of 3D point cloud data. This

Code — https://github.com/liwrui/RMARN

Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval has attracted significant attention due
to its effectiveness in aligning multimodal features (Li et al.
2024a, 2023c). With the recent advancements in applications
such as AR/VR and the metaverse, the efficient alignment
and processing of point cloud data have become increasingly
crucial. Unlike 2D data (such as text) (Tang et al. 2024a; Li
et al. 2024b; Chen et al. 2025, 2022), 3D scene data (point
clouds) (Chu et al. 2024) provides richer spatial information
and is less susceptible to occlusion. Research into Text-3D
retrieval, which captures the associations between 3D data
and textual descriptions, holds significant potential for the
future management and utilization of large-scale 3D data resources. However, the development of this fundamental task
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18485

