The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Coherent Object Flow for Multi-Object Tracking
Zikai Song1 , Run Luo2 , Lintao Ma1 , Ying Tang1 , Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen3 , Junqing Yu1 , Wei Yang1 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
3
La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
{skyesong, mltdml, t ying, yjqing, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn, r.luo@siat.ac.cn, phoebe.chen@latrobe.edu.cn
2

t+(T-2)

t+1

t

Abstract

t+(T-1)

…

Multi-object tracking is a challenging vision task that requires simultaneous reasoning about object detection and object association. Conventional solutions use frame as the basic unit and typically rely on a motion predictor that exploits the appearance features to associate detected candidates, leading to insufficient adaptability to long-term associations. In this study, we propose a section-based multi-object
tracking approach that integrates a temporal coherent Object
Flow Tracker (OFTrack), capable of achieving simultaneous
multi-frame tracking by treating multiple consecutive frames
as the basic processing unit, denoted as a “section”. Our OFTrack boosts the optical flow to the object flow by employing object perception and section-based motion estimation
strategies. Object perception adopts object-aware sampling
and scale-aware correlation to enable precise target discrimination. Motion estimation models the correlation of different
objects in multi-frames via specialized temporal-spatial attention to achieve robust association in very long videos. Additionally, to address the oscillation of unpredictable trajectories in multi-frame estimation, we have designed temporal
coherent enhancement including the trajectory masking pretraining and the smoothing constraint on trajectory curves.
Comprehensive experiments on several widely used benchmarks demonstrate the superior performance of our approach.

Input section (length=T)

Backbone
Flow head

t

Det head

t+(T-2)

t+1

t+(T-1)

…
Output section

Figure 1: OFTrack jointly reasons detection and tracking
through a detection head (det head) and a motion estimation
head (flow head). The flow head shares the same backbone
with the det head and enables simultaneous tracking of target objects across multiple frames within a section.

Introduction

paradigm (Bewley et al. 2016) first detects objects in individual frames using detectors and then relies on a motion
tracker to associate the detected objects between consecutive frames. Typically, the motion tracker is a Kalman filter (Bishop, Welch et al. 2001) or its modifications, which
predicts the trajectories based on previous states. It performs
well for smooth and linear motion patterns, but can easily
fail in the presence of complex motions and object scale
change. One-stage object query network paradigm (Zeng
et al. 2022) is a recent research trend that mainly extend
the DETR (Carion et al. 2020) for MOT. They adopt the
query-based scheme, represent each target object as a query,
and force to regress the same instance across frames. These
approaches perform implicit inter-frame target association,
discard the motion process and can not inherit well from the
skills of motion operations (Zhang et al. 2022), culminating
in diminished association ability and inferior performances.
In this work, we introduce a new-design temporal coherent object flow tracker (OFTrack), that uses multiple con-

Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a challenging vision problem and has many real-world applications (Zhou, Yu, and
Yang 2023; Song et al. 2022, 2024; Ye et al. 2024), such
as video surveillance, autonomous driving, and etc. The primary objective of MOT is to identify and track numerous
objects of interest in dynamic scenes and to maintain their
identities across successive frames. The challenge stems
from inherent complexities (Song et al. 2023), including the
intricate association in crowded scenes, the visual resemblance between targets, and complex motion patterns.
To address the problems, existing MOT approaches predominantly adhere to two distinct strategies: the two-stage
tracking-by-detection methods and the one-stage object
query network methods. Two-stage tracking-by-detection
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6978

