The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Template-Driven LLM-Paraphrased Framework for Tabular
Math Word Problem Generation
Xiaoqiang Kang1,2, * , Zimu Wang1,2, * , Xiaobo Jin1 , Wei Wang1 , Kaizhu Huang3 , Qiufeng Wang1,†
1

School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
2
University of Liverpool
3
Duke Kunshan University
{Xiaoqiang.Kang23, Zimu.Wang19}@student.xjtlu.edu.cn, Qiufeng.Wang@xjtlu.edu.cn
Question: Lola measured the length of
each scarf in the clothing store. How
many scarves are at least 82
centimeters?

Abstract
Solving tabular math word problems (TMWPs) has become a
critical role in evaluating the mathematical reasoning ability
of large language models (LLMs), where large-scale TMWP
samples are commonly required for fine-tuning. Since the collection of high-quality TMWP datasets is costly and timeconsuming, recent research has concentrated on automatic
TMWP generation. However, current generated samples usually suffer from issues of either correctness or diversity. In
this paper, we propose a Template-driven LLM-paraphrased
(TeLL) framework for generating high-quality TMWP samples with diverse backgrounds and accurate tables, questions,
answers, and solutions. To this end, we first extract templates
from existing real samples to generate initial problems, ensuring correctness. Then, we adopt an LLM to extend templates
and paraphrase problems, obtaining diverse TMWP samples.
Furthermore, we find the reasoning annotation is important
for solving TMWPs. Therefore, we propose to enrich each solution with illustrative reasoning steps. Through the proposed
framework, we construct a high-quality dataset TabMWPTeLL by adhering to the question types in the TabMWP
dataset, and we conduct extensive experiments on a variety
of LLMs to demonstrate the effectiveness of TabMWP-TeLL
in improving TMWP-solving performance.

Stem

Leaf

8 0, 2, 2, 3, 6, 7

9 0, 0

Stem

Leaf

6 2, 3, 5, 6

7 3, 3

Solution: Find the row with stem 8.
Count all the leaves greater than or
equal to 2.Count all the leaves in the
row with stem 9. You counted 7 leaves.
(a) Original Sample

Question:
Lola measured the length of each scarf
in the clothing store. How many
scarves are at least 82 centimeters?
Stem

Question: Lola measured the length of
each scarf in the clothing store. How
many scarves have a minimum of 66
centimeters?

Leaf

8 1, 2, 2, 3, 6, 7

Solution: Find the row with stem 6.
Count all leaves greater than 6. […]
(b) LLM-based Generation
Question: A research team recorded
the ages of participants in a health
study. How many participants are at
least 50 years old?

Stem

Leaf

5 1, 3, 4

6 1, 1, 2, 7

Solution: Find the row with stem 8.
Count all the leaves greater than or
equal to 2. […]

Solution:
1. Identify Relevant Stems: […]
2. Analyze the Leaves: For stem 5,
count […] For stem 6, […] 4 leaves.
3. Aggregate the Counts: 3 + 4 = 7.

(c) Template-based Generation

(d) Ours with Illustrative Solution

9 0, 0

Figure 1: Illustration of an original TMWP sample and the
generated samples with LLMs, templates, and ours with an
illustrative solution. (Notes: “Stem” means the first digit,
and “Leaf” means the last digit in stem-leaf plots).

Code — https://github.com/Jason8Kang/TELL
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15594

Introduction

mainly categorizing template-based (Williams 2011; Polozov et al. 2015), rewriting-based (Koncel-Kedziorski et al.
2016), neural network-based (Liyanage and Ranathunga
2020; Liu et al. 2021), and LLM-based (Luo et al. 2023;
Tang et al. 2024) methods. Despite the progress, existing
methods still face three major challenges for tabular data:
(1) Lack of correctness. Generation-based methods, like
rewriting-based and LLM-based methods, misunderstand
the meaning of the questions due to the hallucination problem (Zhang et al. 2023) and thus get wrong answers. As
shown in Figure 1(b), the LLM-generated solution calculates leaves greater than 66 but ignores the case equal to
66, which is inconsistent with the requirements of the question. (2) Lack of diversity in problems. Because all problems are generated from abstract templates (Williams 2011),
template-based methods have limited diversity. As shown in
Figure 1(c), the generated problem simply replaces some

The rise of large language models (LLMs) has achieved unprecedented success in a variety of reasoning tasks (Peng
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024); however, solving math word problems (MWPs), particularly based on heterogeneous tabular and textual data is still challenging for
LLMs (Lu et al. 2023b; Zheng et al. 2023). For various complex MWPs, training models usually require a large amount
of data, but the collection and annotation of MWPs are usually costly and time-consuming, resulting in the scarcity of
public tabular MWP datasets.
To mitigate the data issue, numerous studies have explored the ability to automatically generate MWP samples,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24303

