The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DELTA: Pre-Train a Discriminative Encoder for Legal Case Retrieval via
Structural Word Alignment
Haitao LI1,2 Qingyao AI1,2 Xinyan HAN1,2 , Jia CHEN3 , Qian DONG1,2 , Yiqun LIU1,2 * ,
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Institute for Internet Judiciary, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Xiaohongshu Inc
liht22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

2021) propose Lawformer based on Longformer. Li et al. (Li
et al. 2023a) developed a structure-aware framework named
SAILER which utilizes structural information in legal cases
to better pretrain the text encoder.
Despite their success, existing pre-trained retrieval models for legal case retrieval are far from being perfect due to
several problems. One particularly significant issue is their
incapability of discriminating key legal facts, which are crucial for determining case relevance, from other texts that
simply describe case background and unimportant facts. As
highlighted in prior research (Ma et al. 2021; Shao et al.
2023), the relevance determination in legal case retrieval is
complex and fundamentally different from general search
relevance. Unlike open-domain retrieval which mostly relies
on keyword matching or text semantic similarity, legal case
relevance focuses more on the identification of key facts that
are crucial for case decisions. Existing pre-trained models
focus on constructing better representations that capture the
text semantics of individual case documents. However, in the
legal domain, better semantic representation vectors do not
always lead to better discrimination of legal relevance if the
representations focus on capturing facts that are unimportant
from legal perspectives.
To address this issue, we propose a novel framework called DELTA, which stands for Pre-training a
Discriminative Encoder for Legal Case ReTrieval via Structural Word Alignment. Inspired by SAILER, we further
delve into the knowledge implied between different structures of legal case documents to pre-train the encoder.
Specifically, DELTA employs an encoder-decoder architecture to achieve an in-depth understanding of legal cases and
effective extraction of key information. Besides employing
shallow decoders to create a bottleneck for the [CLS] token
and generate high-quality textual representations, DELTA
also incorporates the Structural Word Alignment (SWA) task
to identify key facts by “translating” the Fact section to the
legal analysis and decisions in the Reasoning section. Furthermore, DELTA enhances the alignment between the case
representation and its key factual information in the semantic space. This alignment is achieved by pulling the case
representation closer to the key facts while simultaneously
pushing it away from background information within the
case document. The whole algorithm not only enhances the
discriminative ability of the representation models from the

Recent research demonstrates the effectiveness of using pretrained language models for legal case retrieval. Most of the
existing works focus on improving the representation ability for the contextualized embedding of the [CLS] token and
calculate relevance using textual semantic similarity. However, in the legal domain, textual semantic similarity does not
always imply that the cases are relevant enough. Instead, relevance in legal cases primarily depends on the similarity of
key facts that impact the final judgment. Without proper treatments, the discriminative ability of learned representations
could be limited since legal cases are lengthy and contain numerous non-key facts. To this end, we introduce DELTA, a
discriminative model designed for legal case retrieval. The
basic idea involves pinpointing key facts in legal cases and
pulling the contextualized embedding of the [CLS] token
closer to the key facts while pushing away from the non-key
facts, which can warm up the case embedding space in an unsupervised manner. To be specific, this study brings the word
alignment mechanism to the contextual masked auto-encoder.
First, we leverage shallow decoders to create information bottlenecks, aiming to enhance the representation ability. Second, we employ the deep decoder to enable “translation” between different structures, with the goal of pinpointing key
facts to enhance discriminative ability. Comprehensive experiments conducted on publicly available legal benchmarks
show that our approach can outperform existing state-of-theart methods in legal case retrieval. It provides a new perspective on the in-depth understanding and processing of legal
case documents.

Code — https://github.com/CSHaitao/DELTA

Introduction
Legal case retrieval, which focuses on retrieving relevant
cases for a query case, is essential for supporting legal reasoning and decision-making (Shao et al. 2020; Li et al.
2023a,b). In recent years, neural retrieval models constructed with pre-trained language models (PLM), which are
capable of capturing the latent semantics of text documents,
have attracted significant attention in the field of legal case
retrieval (Su et al. 2024). For instance, Xiao et al (Xiao et al.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27072

