The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evaluate with the Inverse:
Efficient Approximation of Latent Explanation Quality Distribution
Carlos Eiras-Franco1
Anna Hedström2,3,5 , Marina M.-C. Höhne4,5
1
Universidade da Coruña. CITIC
UMI Lab, Leibniz Institute of Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy e.V. (ATB)
3
BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data
4
Data Science Department, Leibniz Institute of Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy e.V. (ATB)
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Potsdam
carlos.eiras.franco@udc.es
2

Abstract

an explanation can still be assessed by comparing it relative
to other explanations with the use of quality measures. Commonly, XAI evaluation methods yield numerical fitness measures that indicate the degree to which an explanation adheres to a certain criterion. However, these numerical values
do not provide insight into an explanation’s standing relative
to the spectrum of possible explanations. In this study, we
introduce a method that quantifies the quality of attributionbased explanation methods by efficiently estimating how an
explanation’s quality compares to the rest of the potential explanations. Despite its apparent simplicity, our evaluations
using various sanity checks demonstrate that this strategy
enhances the reliability of quality metrics.
While other studies have employed different notions of
randomness to compare or evaluate explanation methods
(Bommer et al. 2023; Samek et al. 2017; Adebayo et al.
2018), these approaches are often more computationally
intensive and yield less favorable results. The proposed
method is independent of the specific dataset, model, task,
and, importantly, of the quality metric used.
The main contributions of this paper include:

Obtaining high-quality explanations of a model’s output enables developers to identify and correct biases, align the system’s behavior with human values, and ensure ethical compliance. Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) practitioners
rely on specific measures to gauge the quality of such explanations. These measures assess key attributes, such as how
closely an explanation aligns with a model’s decision process (faithfulness), how accurately it pinpoints the relevant
input features (localization), and its consistency across different cases (robustness). Despite providing valuable information, these measures do not fully address a critical practitioner’s concern: how does the quality of a given explanation compare to other potential explanations? Traditionally,
the quality of an explanation has been assessed by comparing it to a randomly generated counterpart. This paper introduces an alternative: the Quality Gap Estimate (QGE). The
QGE method offers a direct comparison to what can be viewed
as the ‘inverse’ explanation, one that conceptually represents
the antithesis of the original explanation. Our extensive testing across multiple model architectures, datasets, and established quality metrics demonstrates that the QGE method is
superior to the traditional approach. Furthermore, we show
that QGE enhances the statistical reliability of these quality
assessments. This advance represents a significant step toward a more insightful evaluation of explanations that enables
a more effective inspection of a model’s behavior.

1

• The introduction of the Quality Gap Estimate (QGE),
a novel evaluation strategy that renders existing quality
metrics more informative by aiding in the determination
of an explanation’s quality relative to alternatives with a
limited increase of computational requirements.

Introduction

Model output explanations play a crucial role in AI alignment by enhancing transparency, understandability, and
trustworthiness in AI systems. In most contexts related to explainability, ground-truth explanations are unavailable (Dasgupta, Frost, and Moshkovitz 2022; Hedström et al. 2023).
This absence inherently complicates the task of evaluating
explanations. Consequently, efforts to evaluate explanations
vary widely, ranging from assessing the robustness of explanations to noise, their complexity, and their localization, to
evaluating how faithfully an explanation represents the underlying model.
Although it is not possible to develop a metric based on
verified ground truth, a crucial insight is that the adequacy of

• A redefinition of the problem of assessing the superiority of an explanation over its alternatives as a sampling
problem, which generalizes the conventional method of
comparison with a random explanation.
• An assessment of the applicability of QGE across a wide
array of established quality metrics, evaluating its impact
on various dimensions including faithfulness, localization, and robustness.
• The presentation of experimental findings that demonstrate an enhancement in the statistical reliability of existing quality metrics through the application of QGE, providing XAI practitioners with more reliable interpretation tools.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27258

