The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Active Geospatial Search for Efficient Tenant Eviction Outreach
Anindya Sarkar1 , Alex DiChristofano3 , Sanmay Das2 , Patrick J. Fowler34 ,
Nathan Jacobs1 , Yevgeniy Vorobeychik1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, USA
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, George Mason University
3
Division of Computational & Data Sciences, Washington University in St. Louis, USA
4
Brown School at Washington University in St. Louis, USA
Abstract

While one way to mitigate the risks and consequences of
evictions is through policy, a complementary approach canvasses households at risk of eviction to provide resources
to help tenants avoid it. For example, providing information
about the availability of effective legal representation can
be instrumental, as far fewer tenants than landlords have legal representation in eviction proceedings (Desmond 2016).
Legal representation for renters has a significant impact,
reducing the likelihood of eviction warrants and possessory judgments while also imposing smaller monetary judgments (Cassidy and Currie 2023; Greiner, Pattanayak, and
Hennessy 2013).In addition, subsidies that help low-income
tenants with utility payments (HHS 2023), along with lowincome housing programs such as Section 8 vouchers (HUD
2023), can improve their ability to pay rent and avoid eviction. Proactively providing information about these programs can thus also significantly mitigate eviction risk.
Canvassing tenants at risk of eviction, however, is labor intensive. Canvassers working individually or in teams
struggle to reach the vast number of low-income housing
units behind on rent. It is, consequently, crucial to make efficient use of such limited resources to provide the maximum
benefit possible. However, another important challenge is
that we do not know, a priori, the risk of eviction for any
given household. We can use past data to learn a predictive
model for eviction risk, as demonstrated by Mashiat et al.
(2024). However, such predictions can rapidly become stale,
and data we can use to train is not equally available everywhere. Thus, we need to effectively use a limited canvassing
budget to identify at-risk households while improving the
quality of predictions we make in identifying such households. This ultimately necessitates effectively trading off exploration, which allows us to improve predictions of households likely to be evicted and exploitation aimed at reaching
the most at-risk households.
We introduce a novel active geospatial search (AGS)
framework to model this problem. In AGS, an agent (e.g.,
canvasser) has a limited budget C that can be used to query
a series of locations (rental units, buildings) embedded in a
geographical area. Each query returns a signal whether or
not the location has a target property (an impending eviction, high eviction risk, etc), but incurs a cost which may depend on the previous query (for example, representing travel
time between two locations). The goal in AGS is to find a

Tenant evictions threaten housing stability and are a major
concern for many cities. An open question concerns whether
data-driven methods enhance outreach programs that target
at-risk tenants to mitigate their risk of eviction. We propose a novel active geospatial search (AGS) modeling framework for this problem. AGS integrates property-level information in a search policy that identifies a sequence of rental
units to canvas to both determine their eviction risk and provide support if needed. We propose a hierarchical reinforcement learning approach to learn a search policy for AGS that
scales to large urban areas containing thousands of parcels,
balancing exploration and exploitation and accounting for
travel costs and a budget constraint. Crucially, the search
policy adapts online to newly discovered information about
evictions. Evaluation using eviction data for a large urban
area demonstrates that the proposed framework and algorithmic approach are considerably more effective at sequentially
identifying eviction cases than baseline methods.

Introduction
Evictions can have a profound impact on tenants, causing
instability in the rental market and exacerbating the already
significant crisis of affordable housing and homelessness in
many large urban areas. While the response to the COVID19 pandemic in the United States was to impose moratoria on evictions at federal, state, and local levels, these have
now been lifted. Moreover, most of the $46 billion allocated
in housing assistance for low-income households through
the Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA) program has now
been spent. As a result, eviction rates in the US are rising,
with an average of 3.6 million eviction cases filed annually
(Gromis et al. 2022; Marçal, Fowler, and Hovmand 2023).
Eviction concerns are especially acute due to the inequitable
impact on marginalized communities. Female, Black, and
families with children disproportionately experience eviction (Collinson et al. 2022; Graetz et al. 2023). Exposure to
unstable and substandard housing can be particularly hard
on children, leading to developmental effects that can follow them for the rest of their lives (Desmond, Gershenson,
and Kiviat 2015).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28340

