The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning via
In-Sample Sequential Policy Optimization
Zongkai Liu1, 3 , Qian Lin1 , Chao Yu1, 2 * , Xiawei Wu1 , Yile Liang4 , Donghui Li4 , Xuetao Ding4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Shanghai Innovation Institute, Shanghai, China
4
Meituan, Beijing, China
{liuzk, linq67}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

In comparison to the single-agent counterpart, offline
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has received
relatively less attention. Under the multi-agent setting, it not
only faces the challenges inherent to offline RL but also encounters common MARL issues, such as difficulties in coordination and large joint-action spaces (Zhang, Yang, and
Başar 2021). These issues cannot be simply resolved by
combining state-of-the-art offline RL solutions with modern multi-agent techniques (Yang et al. 2021). In fact, due
to the increased number of agents and the offline nature of
the problem, these issues become even more challenging.
For example, under the offline setting, even if each agent selects an in-sample action, the resulting joint action may still
be OOD. Additionally, in cooperative MARL, agents need
to consider both their own actions and the actions of other
agents in order to determine their contributions to the global
return for high overall performance. Thus, under offline settings, discovering and learning cooperative joint policies
from the dataset poses a unique challenge for offline MARL.
To address the aforementioned issues, recent works have
developed specific offline MARL algorithms. These approaches generally integrate the conservatism principle
into the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) framework, such as value decomposition structures (Yang et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2022; Matsunaga et al.
2023; Shao et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023), which is developed under the Individual-Global-Max (IGM) assumption.
Although these approaches have demonstrated successes in
certain offline multi-agent tasks, they still exhibit several
limitations. For example, due to the inherent limitations of
the IGM principle, algorithms that utilize value decomposition structures may struggle to find optimal solutions because of constraints in their representation capabilities, and
can even lead to the selection of OOD joint actions, as we
show in the Proposed Method section.
In this work, we propose a principled approach to tackle
OOD joint actions issue. By introducing a behavior regularization into the policy learning objective and derive
the closed-form solution of the optimal policy, we develop a sequential policy optimization method in an entirely
in-sample learning manner without generating potentially
OOD actions. Besides, the sequential update scheme used
in this method enhances both the representation capabil-

Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) is an
emerging field that aims to learn optimal multi-agent policies
from pre-collected datasets. Compared to single-agent case,
multi-agent setting involves a large joint state-action space
and coupled behaviors of multiple agents, which bring extra
complexity to offline policy optimization. In this work, we revisit the existing offline MARL methods and show that in certain scenarios they can be problematic, leading to uncoordinated behaviors and out-of-distribution (OOD) joint actions.
To address these issues, we propose a new offline MARL algorithm, named In-Sample Sequential Policy Optimization
(InSPO). InSPO sequentially updates each agent’s policy in
an in-sample manner, which not only avoids selecting OOD
joint actions but also carefully considers teammates’ updated
policies to enhance coordination. Additionally, by thoroughly
exploring low-probability actions in the behavior policy, InSPO can well address the issue of premature convergence to
sub-optimal solutions. Theoretically, we prove InSPO guarantees monotonic policy improvement and converges to quantal response equilibrium (QRE). Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method compared to current
state-of-the-art offline MARL methods.

Code — https://github.com/kkkaiaiai/InSPO/

Introduction
Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a rapidly evolving field that aims to learn optimal policies from precollected datasets without interacting directly with the environment (Figueiredo Prudencio, Maximo, and Colombini 2024). The primary challenge in offline RL is the issue of distributional shift (Yang et al. 2021), which occurs
when policy evaluation on out-of-distribution (OOD) samples leads to the accumulation of extrapolation errors. Existing research usually tackles this problem by employing conservatism principles, compelling the learning policy to remain close to the data manifold through various data-related
regularization techniques (Yang et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2022;
Matsunaga et al. 2023; Shao et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19068

