The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RUNA: Object-level Out-of-Distribution Detection via Regional Uncertainty
Alignment of Multimodal Representations
Bin Zhang* 1,2 , Jinggang Chen* 1 , Xiaoyang Qu†2 , Guokuan Li1 ,
Kai Lu†1 , Jiguang Wan1 , Jing Xiao2 , Jianzong Wang2
Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd, Shenzhen, China
{binz2398, chen.jinggang98, quxiaoy}@gmail.com, liguokuan@hust.edu.cn,
{kailu, jgwan}@hust.edu.cn, xiaojing661@pingan.com, jzwang@188.com
Abstract

Object
Detector

Enabling object detectors to recognize out-of-distribution
(OOD) objects is vital for building reliable systems. A primary obstacle stems from the fact that models frequently do
not receive supervisory signals from unfamiliar data, leading
to overly confident predictions regarding OOD objects. Despite previous progress that estimates OOD uncertainty based
on the detection model and in-distribution (ID) samples, we
explore using pre-trained vision-language representations for
object-level OOD detection. We first discuss the limitations of
applying image-level CLIP-based OOD detection methods to
object-level scenarios. Building upon these insights, we propose RUNA, a novel framework that leverages a dual encoder
architecture to capture rich contextual information and employs a regional uncertainty alignment mechanism to distinguish ID from OOD objects effectively. We introduce a fewshot fine-tuning approach that aligns region-level semantic
representations to further improve the model’s capability to
discriminate between similar objects. Our experiments show
that RUNA substantially surpasses state-of-the-art methods in
object-level OOD detection, particularly in challenging scenarios with diverse and complex object instances.

Infer
Car 99%

Motorcycle

∝ Pedestrian
Car
Traffic sign

Adapt

In-distribution
Concept Space 𝐶𝐶𝜏𝜏

Motorcycle
89%

𝐶𝐶𝜏𝜏

𝐶𝐶𝜋𝜋

∝

1

Pre-trained
CLIP

Pre-trained
OOD
Concept Space 𝐶𝐶𝜋𝜋 Alarm
ID (Car)

OOD
Pedestrian
94%

a) Over-confident Predictions

OOD

b) OOD Calibrations

Figure 1: Object detectors in the open world tend to make
erroneous decisions when facing unknown objects, threatening machine learning system security. To mitigate this, we
adapt knowledge-rich vision-language representations into
the ID concept space for object-level OOD detection.

in neural networks tending to abnormally generate overconfident predictions when semantic shifts occur within the
samples (Hein, Andriushchenko, and Bitterwolf 2019), as
shown in Figure 1. In object-level OOD detection, a line of
prior works (Du et al. 2022a,c,b; Wu and Deng 2023; Wu,
Deng, and Liu 2024) design additional modules to be integrated into the training process of detectors, leveraging the
model’s inherent uncertainty. Meanwhile, some estimationbased methods directly learning from training data (Lee
et al. 2018b; Tack et al. 2020a; Sun et al. 2022) are also
introduced into this domain as alternative solutions.
In recent years, advancements in contrastive multimodal
pre-training methods, including ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021),
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), BLIP (Li et al. 2022) and InternVL (Chen et al. 2024b), have provided a novel perspective for detecting out-of-distributions. With extensive prior
knowledge, vision-language (VL) representations can transferably detect distributional shifts in downstream imagelevel classification tasks given the ID textual class labels
(Esmaeilpour et al. 2022; Ming et al. 2022). This observation prompts us to delve further: if this pre-trained alignment
capability can be adapted to measure the regional uncertainty for individual objects, we would effortlessly unlock

Introduction
Identifying out-of-distribution (OOD) objects is vital for object detectors to safely deploy in an open-world environment. Most current models work in a closed-world environment, matching objects to the pre-defined in-distribution
(ID) labels. Nevertheless, when deployed in an open-world
environment, they acknowledge the possibility of encountering objects from unknown categories, which should not be
naively assigned to any ID labels. It poses a risk to the security of object detection models. In high-stakes applications
like autonomous driving, failure to detect OOD objects can
lead to severe accidents (Nitsch et al. 2021). We can mitigate this risk if unknown objects are detected and the human
driver is alerted to take control.
The susceptibility to OOD inputs stems from insufficient knowledge about unknowns during training. It results
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26418

