The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decomposing and Fusing Intra- and Inter-Sensor Spatio-Temporal Signal for
Multi-Sensor Wearable Human Activity Recognition
Haoyu Xie1 , Haoxuan Li2 , Chunyuan Zheng3 , Haonan Yuan4 , Guorui Liao1 , Jun Liao1 , Li Liu1, *
1

School of Big Data and Software Engineering, Chongqing University, China
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University, China
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
{haoyuxie,guoruiliao}@stu.cqu.edu.cn, {hxli,cyzheng}@stu.pku.edu.cn, yuanhn@buaa.edu.cn,
{liaojun,dcsliuli}@cqu.edu.cn
Abstract

Sensor 3

Inter-Sensor

Modality Variables

Wearable Human Activity Recognition (WHAR) is a prominent research area within ubiquitous computing. Multi-sensor
synchronous measurement has proven to be more effective
for WHAR than using a single sensor. However, existing
WHAR methods use shared convolutional kernels for indiscriminate temporal feature extraction across each sensor variable, which fails to effectively capture spatio-temporal relationships of intra-sensor and inter-sensor variables. We propose the DecomposeWHAR model consisting of a decomposition phase and a fusion phase to better model the relationships between modality variables. The decomposition creates
high-dimensional representations of each intra-sensor variable through the improved Depth Separable Convolution to
capture local temporal features while preserving their unique
characteristics. The fusion phase begins by capturing relationships between intra-sensor variables and fusing their features at both the channel and variable levels. Long-range
temporal dependencies are modeled using the State Space
Model (SSM), and later cross-sensor interactions are dynamically captured through a self-attention mechanism, highlighting inter-sensor spatial correlations. Our model demonstrates superior performance on three widely used WHAR
datasets, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art models
while maintaining acceptable computational efficiency.

…

Sensor 2

…

Sensor 1

…

Motion
Sensors

Intra-Sensor

Modality Variables

Figure 1: Intra- and Inter-Sensor Variables in WHAR.

tical for applications in healthcare and sports. WHAR can
be classified as a multivariate time series classification problem. The multivariate aspect arises from the various modalities and axes of sensor variables. A typical motion sensor
might include a 3-axis accelerometer, a 3-axis gyroscope,
and a 3-axis magnetometer, resulting in a 9-variable time series data sample.
In WHAR, there are two types of variable relationships:
Intra- and Inter-Sensor Modality Variables in Figure 1.
Intra-sensor variables refer to different variables within the
same sensor, while inter-sensor variables refer to variables
from various sensors located at different positions on the human body. Failing to disentangle these relationships while
extracting features will lead to sub-optimal performance.
The first key challenge in WHAR is to capture local and
global temporal features of Intra-Sensor Modality Variables while handling the intricate relationships between
these diverse variables. Previous studies mainly include two
types of approaches. The first type of approach, exemplified
by DeepConvLSTM (Ordóñez and Roggen 2016) and Attend and Discriminate (Abedin et al. 2021), utilizes shared
convolutional kernels to capture local temporal patterns
within each variable, followed by Long Short-Term Memory

Introduction
Human Activity Recognition (HAR) methods can be categorized into vision-based, environment-based, and wearable sensor-based approaches. Vision-based HAR leverages
video data but is restricted by lighting conditions and camera coverage. Environment-based HAR uses ambient sensors such as sound or WiFi, though it faces limitations in
location and often struggles with accuracy.
Wearable Human Activity Recognition (WHAR), however, involves attaching sensors directly to the body. This approach offers continuous, direct measurement of motion, is
less affected by environmental factors, and is versatile across
different settings. It benefits from the use of readily available devices like smartphones and watches, making it prac* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14441

