The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-View Referring Multi-Object Tracking
Sijia Chen, En Yu, Wenbing Tao*
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{sijiachen, yuen, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

Task of Cross-view Referring Multi-Object Tracking (CRMOT)

Abstract
Referring Multi-Object Tracking (RMOT) is an important
topic in the current tracking field. Its task form is to guide the
tracker to track objects that match the language description.
Current research mainly focuses on referring multi-object
tracking under single-view, which refers to a view sequence
or multiple unrelated view sequences. However, in the singleview, some appearances of objects are easily invisible, resulting in incorrect matching of objects with the language description. In this work, we propose a new task, called Crossview Referring Multi-Object Tracking (CRMOT). It introduces the cross-view to obtain the appearances of objects
from multiple views, avoiding the problem of the invisible appearances of objects in RMOT task. CRMOT is a more challenging task of accurately tracking the objects that match the
language description and maintaining the identity consistency
of objects in each cross-view. To advance CRMOT task, we
construct a cross-view referring multi-object tracking benchmark based on CAMPUS and DIVOTrack datasets, named
CRTrack. Specifically, it provides 13 different scenes and
221 language descriptions. Furthermore, we propose an endto-end cross-view referring multi-object tracking method,
named CRTracker. Extensive experiments on the CRTrack
benchmark verify the effectiveness of our method.

Language Description:
A man in a black coat and
blue trousers, carrying a blue Cross
bag and holding a book.
-view

Making the
Network for correct judgment.
CRMOT task I find the target by
cross-views.

Language Description:
Single
A man in a black coat and
-view
blue trousers, carrying a blue
bag and holding a book.

Network for
RMOT task

Making the
incorrect
judgment. I do
not find the target.

Task of Referring Multi-Object Tracking (RMOT)

Figure 1: The difference between CRMOT and RMOT. The
CRMOT task introduces the cross-view to obtain the appearances of objects from multiple views, avoiding the problem
that the appearances are easily invisible in the RMOT task.

trousers, carrying a blue bag and holding a book.”, the network for the RMOT task will predict all target trajectories
corresponding to that language description. Current research
mainly focuses on the RMOT task under the single-view,
which refers to a view sequence or multiple unrelated view
sequences. However, in the single-view, some appearances
of the objects are easily invisible, causing the network for
the RMOT task to incorrectly match objects with the finegrained language description.
To overcome the limitation of the single-view, we propose
a new task called Cross-view Referring Multi-Object Tracking (CRMOT). It introduces the cross-view, which refers to
different views with large overlapping areas, to obtain the
appearances of objects from multiple views, thereby avoiding the problem that the appearances of objects are easily
invisible in the RMOT task. CRMOT is a more challenging
task of accurately tracking the objects that match the language description and maintaining the identity (ID) consistency of the objects in each cross-view. As illustrated in Figure 1, we can observe that the network for the RMOT task
makes the incorrect judgment when some appearances of the
objects are invisible in the single-view of the RMOT task. In
contrast, in the cross-views of the CRMOT task, the appearance of the objects can be fully captured, so that the network

Dataset, Code — https://github.com/chen-si-jia/CRMOT

Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is one of the most challenging tasks in computer vision. It is widely used in fields
such as autonomous driving (Li et al. 2024b), video surveillance (Yi et al. 2024), and smart transportation (Bashar et al.
2022). Existing MOT methods have already demonstrated
effectiveness in addressing most visual generic scenarios.
However, when it comes to multimodal contexts, i.e., visionlanguage scenarios, traditional MOT methods face significant challenges and limitations. To solve this problem, the
task of Referring Multi-Object Tracking (RMOT) was recently proposed. The form of this task is to guide the tracker
to track the objects that match the language description.
For example, if the input “A man in a black coat and blue
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2204

