The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sequential Conditional Transport on Probabilistic Graphs
for Interpretable Counterfactual Fairness
Agathe Fernandes Machado1 , Arthur Charpentier1 , Ewen Gallic2
1

Université du Québec à Montréal
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, AMSE, Marseille, France
fernandes machado.agathe@courrier.uqam.ca, charpentier.arthur@uqam.ca, ewen.gallic@univ-amu.fr
2

Abstract

Following Kilbertus et al. (2017), it is possible to suppose
that the protected attribute s could actually affect some explanatory variables x in a non-discriminatory way. In Charpentier, Flachaire, and Gallic (2023), the outcome y was “having a surgical intervention” during childbirth in the U.S.,
s was the mother’s ethnic origin (“Black,” or not) and x
included factors such as “weight of the baby at birth.” If
Black mothers undergo less surgery because they tend to
have smaller babies, there is no discrimination per se. At
the very least, it should be fair, when assessing whether
hospitals have discriminatory policies, to account for that
difference in baby weights. Such a variable is named “resolving variable” in Kilbertus et al. (2017). Using heuristic notations, the “ceteris paribus CATE” E[Y ⋆ (1)|X =
x] − E[Y ⋆ (0)|X = x] should become a “mutatis mutandis CATE”. For some individual (s = 0, x), this indicator would be E[Y ⋆ (1)|X = x⋆ (1)] − E[Y ⋆ (0)|X = x],
as coined in Charpentier, Flachaire, and Gallic (2023), to
quantify discrimination, where fictitious individual (s =
1, x⋆ (1)) is a “counterfactual” version of (s = 0, x).

In this paper, we link two existing approaches to derive counterfactuals: adaptations based on a causal graph, and optimal
transport. We extend “Knothe’s rearrangement” and “triangular transport” to probabilistic graphical models, and use this
counterfactual approach, referred to as sequential transport, to
discuss fairness at the individual level. After establishing the
theoretical foundations of the proposed method, we demonstrate its application through numerical experiments on both
synthetic and real datasets.

Code — https://github.com/fer-agathe/sequential transport
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03425

1

Introduction

Most applications concerning discrimination and fairness
are based on “group fairness” concepts (as introduced in
Hardt, Price, and Srebro (2016); Kearns and Roth (2019), or
Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan (2023)). However, in many
cases, fairness should be addressed at the individual level
rather than globally. As claimed in Dwork et al. (2012),
“we capture fairness by the principle that any two individuals who are similar with respect to a particular task
should be classified similarly.” The concept of “counterfactual fairness” was formalized in Kusner et al. (2017),
addressing questions such as “had the protected attributes
of the individual been different, other things being equal,
would the decision had remain the same?” Such a statement
has clear connections with causal inference, as discussed
in Pearl and Mackenzie (2018). Formally, consider observations {si , xi , yi }, where s is a binary protected attribute
(e.g., s ∈ {0, 1}), and x is a collection of legitimate features
(possibly correlated with s). The model output is y, which is
analyzed to address “algorithmic fairness” issues. Following
Rubin (2005), let y ⋆ (s) denote the potential outcome of y if
s is seen as a treatment. With these notations, counterfactual fairness is achieved for individual (s, x) if the average
“treatment effect,” conditional on x (or “CATE”) is zero,
i.e., E[Y ⋆ (1) − Y ⋆ (0)|X = x] = 0. This quantity could be
termed “ceteris paribus CATE” since all x’s are supposed to
remain unchanged for both treated and non-treated.

Two recent approaches have been proposed to assess
counterfactual fairness using this mutatis mutandis approach. On the one hand, Plečko and Meinshausen (2020)
and Plečko, Bennett, and Meinshausen (2024) used causal
graphs (DAGs) to construct counterfactuals and assess the
counterfactual fairness of outcomes y based on variables
(s, x, y). In network flow terminology, s acts as a “source”
(only outgoing flow, or no parents), while y is a “sink”
(only incoming flow). On the other hand, Black, Yeom,
and Fredrikson (2020), Charpentier, Flachaire, and Gallic
(2023) and De Lara et al. (2024) used optimal transport
(OT) to construct counterfactuals. Moreover, using counterfactual reasoning to achieve fair machine learning (ML)
models has been notably studied (Ma et al. 2023; Robertson
et al. 2024). For evaluation, while De Lara et al. (2024) provided a theoretical framework, its implementation is challenging (except in the Gaussian case), and usually hard
to interpret. Here, we combine the two approaches, using
OT within a causal graph structure. The idea is to adapt
“Knothe’s rearrangement” (Bonnotte 2013), or “triangular
transport” (Zech and Marzouk 2022a,b), to a general probabilistic graphical model on (s, x, y), rather than a simplistic
s → x1 → x2 → · · · → xd → y. The concept of “conditional OT” has been recently discussed in Bunne, Krause,

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19358

