The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic-Width Speculative Beam Decoding for LLM Inference
Zongyue Qin, Zifan He, Neha Prakriya, Jason Cong, Yizhou Sun
University of California Los Angeles, CA, USA
{qinzongyue, zifanhe, nehaprakriya, cong, yzsun}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

et al. 2023), Llama-3 (AI@Meta 2024), and PALM (Anil
et al. 2023), have demonstrated remarkable performance
across a wide range of real-world tasks, including text generation, summarization, and translation. However, the autoregressive nature of these models, where tokens are generated
one at a time, leads to slow inference speeds and high computational costs. As the size and complexity of LLMs continue to increase, the demands on computational resources
and energy consumption during inference have become major concerns, limiting their scalability and accessibility.
Speculative decoding has emerged as a promising technique to accelerate LLM inference by leveraging a smaller
auxiliary model to generate draft tokens. These tokens are
then validated by the large model, resulting in a significant
reduction in inference time. The primary advantage of speculative decoding is its ability to maintain the same quality
of output as multinomial sampling while achieving a 1-2×
speed-up. However, multinomial sampling itself is limited
to generating a single sequence based on local optimality.
This limitation makes it susceptible to returning suboptimal
results, as it lacks the diversity that could be achieved by
considering multiple candidate sequences simultaneously.
Motivated by the need to improve the output quality,
we explore the integration of speculative decoding with
beam sampling, a technique that maintains multiple candidate sequences (beams) at each step to enhance the diversity
and quality of the generated output. This fusion, however,
presents several challenges. First, while previous studies focused on obtaining a single token from the large model distribution given draft tokens from the smaller model, our approach requires generating multiple tokens (beams) simultaneously, which necessitates a new verification scheme. Second, determining the optimal number of beams is critical:
too many beams can lead to inefficiency due to a high rejection rate, while too few beams may result in under-utilization
of the small model’s potential and low effectiveness. Third,
efficiently verifying multiple draft sequences in parallel requires a technique that can process and validate multiple
beams concurrently. Fourth, addressing the additional memory cost of storing multiple key-value caches is crucial to
enable LLMs to use beam sampling in practice.
To address these challenges, we propose dynamic-width
speculative beam decoding (DSBD) that combines speculative decoding with beam sampling through a series of inno-

Large language models (LLMs) based on transformer architecture have shown outstanding performance across numerous real-world tasks. However, the autoregressive nature of
these models makes the inference process slow and costly.
Speculative decoding has emerged as a promising solution,
leveraging a smaller auxiliary model to draft future tokens,
which are then validated simultaneously by the larger model,
achieving a speed-up of 1-2×. Although speculative decoding matches the same distribution as multinomial sampling,
multinomial sampling itself is prone to suboptimal outputs,
whereas beam sampling is widely recognized for producing
higher-quality results by maintaining multiple candidate sequences at each step. This paper explores the novel integration of speculative decoding with beam sampling. However,
there are four key challenges: (1) how to generate multiple
sequences from the larger model’s distribution given draft sequences from the small model; (2) how to dynamically optimize the number of beams to balance efficiency and accuracy;
(3) how to efficiently verify the multiple drafts in parallel; and
(4) how to address the extra memory costs inherent in beam
sampling. To address these challenges, we propose dynamicwidth speculative beam decoding (DSBD). Specifically, we
first introduce a novel draft and verification scheme that generates multiple sequences following the large model’s distribution based on beam sampling trajectories from the small
model. Then, we introduce an adaptive mechanism to dynamically tune the number of beams based on the context,
optimizing efficiency and effectiveness. Besides, we extend
tree-based parallel verification to handle multiple trees simultaneously, accelerating the verification process. Finally, we
illustrate a simple modification to our algorithm to mitigate
the memory overhead of beam sampling. Experimental results show that our approach achieves a 1.5-1.9× speed-up
and 1.8-2.5× lower energy consumption compared to beam
sampling, with no loss in downstream performance. Moreover, it can produce significantly higher-quality outputs than
speculative decoding, while maintaining similar time, memory, and energy costs. In summary, our method offers a more
efficient and effective inference process for LLMs.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language models based on transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017), such as GPT-4 (Achiam
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25056

