The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SAP: Corrective Machine Unlearning with Scaled Activation Projection for Label
Noise Robustness
Sangamesh Kodge, Deepak Ravikumar, Gobinda Saha, Kaushik Roy
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
skodge@purdue.edu, dravikum@purdue.edu, gsaha@purdue.edu, kaushik@purdue.edu

Abstract
Label corruption, where training samples are mislabeled due
to non-expert annotation or adversarial attacks, significantly
degrades model performance. Acquiring large, perfectly labeled datasets is costly, and retraining models from scratch
is computationally expensive. To address this, we introduce
Scaled Activation Projection (SAP), a novel SVD (Singular
Value Decomposition)-based corrective machine unlearning
algorithm. SAP mitigates label noise by identifying a small
subset of trusted samples using cross-entropy loss and projecting model weights onto a clean activation space estimated
using SVD on these trusted samples. This process suppresses
the noise introduced in activations due to the mislabeled samples. In our experiments, we demonstrate SAP’s effectiveness
on synthetic noise with different settings and real-world label
noise. SAP applied to the CIFAR dataset with 25% synthetic
corruption show upto 6% generalization improvements. Additionally, SAP can improve the generalization over noise robust training approaches on CIFAR dataset by ∼ 3.2% on
average. Further, we observe generalization improvements of
2.31% for a Vision Transformer model trained on naturally
corrupted Clothing1M.

Figure 1: Sources of label noise - Intentional/Unintentional
Errors.

While deep learning models exhibit robustness to a certain
degree of label noise, they are not immune to label noise, as
demonstrated in (Steinhardt, Koh, and Liang 2017).
Corrective Machine Unlearning (Goel et al. 2024) is
emerging as a promising solution to the aforementioned
challenge, with the objective of reducing the impact of mislabeled data by manipulating the trained model. A vast majority of unlearning algorithms (Triantafillou et al. 2024) require knowledge of which samples are mislabeled to partition the data into the retain set and the forget set. It is challenging to distinguish between mislabeled samples and hard
to learn samples (Garg, Ravikumar, and Roy 2024). This
presents a major challenge to deploy machine unlearning algorithms for tackling label noise.
This work introduces SAP, a novel algorithm based on
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to improve model
generalization in the presence of label noise. Notably, our
approach achieves this improvement with a single update to
the model weights. SAP leverages a small set of samples
identified as having low cross-entropy loss. These samples
are hypothesized to be correctly labeled and form a “clean”
subset. We utilize this clean subset and SVD to compute
an update for the model weights. This update involves estimating a clean activation space and projecting the model
weights onto this space. This projection aims to suppress activations corresponding to potentially corrupted activations,
improving model performance on unseen data. As SAP relies on the estimated clean subset (or retain set), we avoid
explicitly detecting mislabeled data, which can be more difficult to obtain.
In order to visualize the effectiveness of SAP, we trained a
network for binary classification task on clean training data

Code — https://github.com/sangamesh-kodge/SAP.git
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08618

Introduction
Deep learning models have revolutionized various fields like
natural language processing and computer vision, largely
due to the availability of massive datasets. However, the
very scale of these datasets presents a challenge: guaranteeing accurate labeling as shown in Figure 1. Recent studies
(Northcutt, Athalye, and Mueller 2021), have exposed the
significant presence of labeling errors in widely used benchmarks. These errors can be unintentional, arising from human error (Sambasivan et al. 2021) or in recent times automated labeling using Large Language models (Wang et al.
2024; Pangakis and Wolken 2024). Alternatively, they can
be deliberate, introduced through attacks like data poisoning (Schwarzschild et al. 2021; Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov
2012; Jagielski et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2017, 2022). Regardless of origin, these errors degrade model performance.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17930

