The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Real-Time Calibration Model for Low-Cost Sensor in Fine-Grained Time Series
Seokho Ahn1 , Hyungjin Kim1 , Sungbok Shin2 * , Young-Duk Seo1†
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 22212, South Korea
2
Team Aviz, Inria, Université Paris-Saclay, Saclay, France
sokho0514@inha.edu, flslzk@inha.edu, sungbok.shin@inria.fr, mysid88@inha.ac.kr

Abstract

constraints (Section 3). Recent research has utilized time series prediction for calibrating low-cost sensors, but practical IoT systems face limitations in their effective use. Researchers have adopted time series prediction methods for
low-cost sensor calibration (Zhang et al. 2023; Ahn et al.
2024; Narayana et al. 2024) as both rely on similar time
series regression models (Narayana et al. 2024; Toner and
Darlow 2024). This, together with deep learning and linearbased approaches, has led to improved calibration accuracy,
but there is a tradeoff — an improvement in one factor leads
to a setback in others (Zhang et al. 2023; Ahn et al. 2024;
Narayana et al. 2024). Addressing all three of the factors
mentioned above in tandem is not a trivial issue.
To bridge this research gap, we propose T ESLA
(Transformer for effective sensor calibration utilizing
logarithmic-binned attention) to address all of these challenges for IoT systems. T ESLA reduces the attention bottleneck in transformers through logarithmic binning (Section 4.3), which couples more past tokens while retaining recent ones in a log scale. T ESLA also employs multiview embedding (Section 4.2) and feature-wise aggregation
(Section 4.4) to preserve both local and global time series patterns, using only a single sensor. T ESLA operates
as quickly as linear-based models and can be integrated
into low-tech systems, offering higher accuracy than deep
learning-based models to balance the tradeoffs. Experimental results demonstrate that T ESLA successfully achieves this
balance, efficiently managing calibration speed, energy usage, and accuracy.
To sum up, our contributions are:

Precise measurements from sensors are crucial, but data is
usually collected from low-cost, low-tech systems, which
are often inaccurate. Thus, they require further calibrations. To that end, we first identify three requirements for
effective calibration under practical low-tech sensor conditions. Based on the requirements, we develop a model
called T ESLA, Transformer for effective sensor calibration
utilizing logarithmic-binned attention. T ESLA uses a highperformance deep learning model, Transformers, to calibrate and capture non-linear components. At its core, it employs logarithmic binning to minimize attention complexity.
T ESLA achieves consistent real-time calibration, even with
longer sequences and finer-grained time series in hardwareconstrained systems. Experiments show that T ESLA outperforms existing novel deep learning and newly crafted linear
models in accuracy, calibration speed, and energy efficiency.

1

Introduction

Externalizing data latent in our world (Elmqvist 2023) can
increase our awareness of previously unknown situations.
For example, air pollution is a pervasive issue often overlooked due to its invisibility, and increased awareness can
help us avoid potential dangers. Sensors from various IoT
devices are used to capture real-time information from our
surroundings. To take well-informed, suitable actions about
our environments, it is integral to obtain accurate data from
sensors. But oftentimes, these sensors exist in the form of
low-spec computing devices, and these devices are sometimes not accurate (Ray 2022). To address this matter, there
have been attempts to improve the quality of data coming from these low-tech devices using naı̈ve linear- and
machine learning-based calibration methods (Concas et al.
2021; Aula et al. 2022; Villanueva et al. 2023).
We identify three key requirements that must be addressed
to develop an effective, and practical calibration model: (1)
handling fine-grained sensor type, (2) ensuring consistency
in real-time calibration, and (3) accommodating hardware

• We identify three challenges that have to be addressed to
achieve accuracy on par with high-quality sensors within
practical IoT systems.
• We propose a model called T ESLA to address all of these
challenges for low-cost sensor calibration.
• Experiments with real-world benchmarks show that
T ESLA outperforms the baseline deep learning and newly
designed linear models in most cases.

* The work was done while the author was affiliated with the

University of Maryland, College Park.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

Related Works

We present the related work from two perspectives: low-cost
sensor calibration and short-term time series prediction.
3

