The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MHBench: Demystifying Motion Hallucination in VideoLLMs
Ming Kong1 , Xianzhou Zeng1 , Luyuan Chen2 , Yadong Li3 , Bo Yan3 , Qiang Zhu1, ✉
1
Zhejiang University,
Beijing Information Science and Technology University,
3
Ant Group
{zjukongming, xzzeng, zhuq}@zju.edu.cn; chenly@bistu.edu.cn; {liyadong.lyd, lengyu.yb}@antgroup.com
2

Abstract
Does the video show the process of opening a book?

Similar to Language or Image LLMs, VideoLLMs are also
plagued by hallucination issues. Hallucinations in videos not
only manifest in the spatial dimension regarding the perception of the existence of visual objects (static) but also the
temporal dimension influencing the perception of actions and
events (dynamic). This paper introduces the concept of Motion Hallucination for the first time, exploring the hallucination phenomena caused by insufficient motion perception
capabilities in VideoLMMs, as well as how to detect, evaluate, and mitigate the hallucination. To this end, we propose the first benchmark for assessing motion hallucination
MHBench, which consists of 1,200 videos of 20 different
action categories. By constructing a collection of adversarial triplet types of videos (original/antonym/incomplete), we
achieve a comprehensive evaluation of motion hallucination.
Furthermore, we present a Motion Contrastive Decoding
(MotionCD) method, which employs bidirectional motion
elimination between the original video and its reverse playback to construct an amateur model that removes the influence of motion while preserving visual information, thereby
effectively suppressing motion hallucination. Extensive experiments on MHBench reveal that current state-of-the-art
VideoLLMs significantly suffer from motion hallucination,
while the introduction of MotionCD can effectively mitigate
this issue, achieving up to a 15.1% performance improvement. We hope this work will guide future efforts in avoiding
and mitigating hallucinations in VideoLLMs.

Yes

action

antonym
action

Yes

no action

Yes
(a)
action

antonym action

static

1

0.5

0

(b)

Benchmark, Code and Appendix —
https://github.com/xzhouzeng/MHBench

Figure 1: Illustration and preliminary evaluation results for
VideoLLMs’ motion context understanding ability in adversarial scenarios. a) shows an example of the tripleadversarial video group. b) presents the performance of 11
advanced VideoLLM models on this adversarial group.

Introduction
Language-Vision Large Models (LVLMs) achieve rapid
progress by aligning visual information with textual representation space, which has extended to more challenging
text-visual tasks, such as video understanding (Yin et al.
2023; Caffagni et al. 2024; Liang et al. 2024).
Hallucination has been recognized as a prominent concerns that impact the reality and applicability of LVLMs
across domains (Liu et al. 2024a; Li et al. 2023c). One of
the most critical issues is the factuality hallucination regarding the object’s appearance, such as identifying what objects

are present in the image? (Lovenia et al. 2023) However,
in video understanding, the factuality hallucination also exists in the temporal dimension, making equally significant
of detecting and mitigating hallucinations about the actions/events equally important, such as determining what actions
are performed by the person in the video.
With the continuous emergence of video large language
models, recently proposed video understanding benchmarks
have attempted to include action-related evaluation tasks
such as recognition, prediction, and sequence (Li et al. 2024;

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4401

