The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Focus on Local: Finding Reliable Discriminative Regions for
Visual Place Recognition
Changwei Wang1,3 , Shunpeng Chen2 , Yukun Song2 , Rongtao Xu4 , Zherui Zhang2 , Jiguang
Zhang4 , Haoran Yang5 , Yu Zhang5 , Kexue Fu1,3 , Shide Du6 , Zhiwei Xu7 ,
Longxiang Gao1,3, * , Li Guo2 , Shibiao Xu2
1

Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of Education, Shandong Computer
Science Center, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computing Power Internet and Service Computing, Shandong Fundamental
Research Center for Computer Science
4
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Tongji University
6
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
7
Shandong University
gaolx@sdas.org
Abstract

94
93

80
78

Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is aimed at predicting the
location of a query image by referencing a database of geotagged images. For VPR task, often fewer discriminative local regions in an image produce important effects while mundane background regions do not contribute or even cause
perceptual aliasing because of easy overlap. However, existing methods lack precisely modeling and full exploitation of
these discriminative regions. In this paper, we propose the
Focus on Local (FoL) approach to stimulate the performance
of image retrieval and re-ranking in VPR simultaneously by
mining and exploiting reliable discriminative local regions in
images and introducing pseudo-correlation supervision. First,
we design two losses, Extraction-Aggregation Spatial Alignment Loss (SAL) and Foreground-Background Contrast Enhancement Loss (CEL), to explicitly model reliable discriminative local regions and use them to guide the generation of
global representations and efficient re-ranking. Second, we
introduce a weakly-supervised local feature training strategy
based on pseudo-correspondences obtained from aggregating
global features to alleviate the lack of local correspondences
ground truth for the VPR task. Third, we suggest an efficient
re-ranking pipeline that is efficiently and precisely based on
discriminative region guidance. Finally, experimental results
show that our FoL achieves the state-of-the-art on multiple VPR benchmarks in both image retrieval and re-ranking
stages and also significantly outperforms existing two-stage
VPR methods in terms of computational efficiency.

76

+5.0

+1.3

90
89

74
72

88
87
86

70
68

98

98
96

92
91

+3.8

97

94

96

92

95

90

94

88

+1.9

93

86

(a)

Discriminative Region Guided Reranking (ours)

Dense Matching Based Re-ranking

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The results show that our FoL achieves state-ofthe-art performance in the image retrieval phase alone and
significantly outperforms recent methods after re-ranking.
(b) Our FoL proposes to do local matching only in the discriminative region, which not only improves the accuracy of
re-ranking but also greatly improves the efficiency.

Code — https://github.com/chenshunpeng/FoL

Introduction
Visual Place Recognition (VPR), also known as visual geolocalization (Berton, Masone, and Caputo 2022a), is used
* Longxiang Gao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

to retrieve images of the most similar locations from geotagged databases to estimate the rough geographic loca7536

