The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalization of Graph Neural Networks is Robust to Model Mismatch
Zhiyang Wang1 , Juan Cerviño2 , Alejandro Ribeiro1
1

University of Pennsylvania
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
zhiyangw@seas.upenn.edu, jcervino@mit.edu, aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu
2

Abstract

testing error) in deep learning theory (Kawaguchi, Kaelbling, and Bengio 2022). Recent works have focused on
proving the generalization bounds of GNNs without any dependence on the underlying model responsible for generating the graph data (Scarselli, Tsoi, and Hagenbuchner 2018;
Garg, Jegelka, and Jaakkola 2020; Verma and Zhang 2019).
Generalization analysis on graph classification is studied in
a series of works when graphs are drawn from random limit
models (Ruiz, Chamon, and Ribeiro 2023; Maskey et al.
2022; Maskey, Kutyniok, and Levie 2024; Levie 2024). In
(Wang, Cervino, and Ribeiro 2024), the authors study the
generalization of GNNs over graphs generated from an underlying manifold on both node and graph levels. These
works assume that the training and testing graphs are generated from the same underlying model. In practice, there
are inevitable scenarios with generative model mismatch between testing and training graphs (Li et al. 2022). Hence, it is
of crucial to demonstrate the generalization ability of GNNs
remains robust to generative model mismatch. This would
provide a promising assurance that GNNs can maintain outstanding generalizable performance even in noisy environments.
The model mismatch may stem from disturbances during
the graph generation process from the manifold. Moreover,
the underlying manifold model is prone to undergo alternations and fluctuations in practical situations. While we take
into account the underlying model mismatches, they can be
interpreted as perturbations within the generated graph domain. Figure 1a displays the original manifold and a graph
derived from it. Figure 1b illustrates a mismatched manifold,
which leads to edge perturbations in the generated graph.
Figure 1c shows the interpretation of perturbed manifold
function values, resulting in node feature perturbations in
the generated graph.
We prove that the generalization of GNNs is robust to
model mismatches based on the convergence of GNNs on
generated graphs to neural networks on the manifold model
(Wang, Ruiz, and Ribeiro 2024a), combined with the stability of the Manifold Neural Networks (MNNs) under manifold deformations (Wang, Ruiz, and Ribeiro 2024b). Implementing low-pass and integral Lipschitz continuous filters
(Definition 2) allows us to bound the generalization gap under model mismatches. This bound decreases with the number of nodes in the training graph and increases with both

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated their effectiveness in various tasks supported by their generalization
capabilities. However, the current analysis of GNN generalization relies on the assumption that training and testing data
are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d). This imposes limitations on the cases where a model mismatch exists when generating testing data. In this paper, we examine
GNNs that operate on geometric graphs generated from manifold models, explicitly focusing on scenarios where there
is a mismatch between manifold models generating training and testing data. Our analysis reveals the robustness of
the GNN generalization in the presence of such model mismatch. This indicates that GNNs trained on graphs generated
from a manifold can still generalize well to unseen nodes
and graphs generated from a mismatched manifold. We attribute this mismatch to both node feature perturbations and
edge perturbations within the generated graph. Our findings
indicate that the generalization gap decreases as the number
of nodes grows in the training graph while increasing with
larger manifold dimension as well as larger mismatch. Importantly, we observe a trade-off between the generalization
of GNNs and the capability to discriminate high-frequency
components when facing a model mismatch. The most important practical consequence of this analysis is to shed light on
the filter design of generalizable GNNs robust to model mismatch. We verify our theoretical findings with experiments
on multiple real-world datasets.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Sandryhaila and Moura
2013; Kipf and Welling 2017; Gama et al. 2019), as a deep
learning model on graphs, have been unarguably one of
the most recognizable architectures when processing graphstructured data. GNNs have achieved notable performances
in numerous applications, such as recommendation systems
(Wu et al. 2022), protein structure predictions (Yin et al.
2023), and multi-agent robotic control (Gosrich et al. 2022).
These outstanding results of GNNs depend on their empirical performances when predicting over unseen testing data.
This is evaluated in theory with statistical generalization
analysis, which quantifies the difference between the empirical risk (i.e. training error) and the statistical risk (i.e.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21402

