The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AutoSGNN: Automatic Propagation Mechanism Discovery for Spectral Graph
Neural Networks
Shibing Mo1,2 , Kai Wu1 , Qixuan Gao2 , Xiangyi Teng2 * , Jing Liu1,2
1
School of Artifcial Intelligence, Xidian University
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University
msb@stu.xidian.edu.cn, kwu@xidian.edu.cn, gaoqx@stu.xidian.edu.cn, tengxiangyi@xidian.edu.cn,
neouma@mail.xidian.edu.cn
2

Cora

Abstract
In real-world applications, spectral Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) are powerful tools for processing diverse types of
graphs. However, a single GNN often struggles to handle
different graph types—such as homogeneous and heterogeneous graphs—simultaneously. This challenge has led to the
manual design of GNNs tailored to specific graph types, but
these approaches are limited by the high cost of labor and
the constraints of expert knowledge, which cannot keep up
with the rapid growth of graph data. To overcome these challenges, we propose AutoSGNN, an automated framework
for discovering propagation mechanisms in spectral GNNs.
AutoSGNN unifies the search space for spectral GNNs by
integrating large language models with evolutionary strategies to automatically generate architectures that adapt to various graph types. Extensive experiments on nine widely-used
datasets, encompassing both homophilic and heterophilic
graphs, demonstrate that AutoSGNN outperforms state-ofthe-art spectral GNNs and graph neural architecture search
methods in both performance and efficiency.

Cornell

80

Citeseer

60
40

Texas
GTFGNAS
F2GNN
Genetic-GNN
SANE
APPNP
SquirrelGPRGNN
FAGCN
BernNet
JacobiConv
NFGNN
GCN Chameleon
ChebNet
AutoSGNN

Code — https://github.com/Explorermomo/AAAI2025AutoSGNN
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12483

20

PubMed

Computer

Photo

Figure 1: Radar chart of AutoSGNN and other spectral
GNNs on 9 datasets.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become central to
machine learning, with recent advancements dividing them
into spatial-based (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017)
and spectral-based (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016a) approaches. Spectral-based methods focus on creating advanced spectral graph filters for effective graph embedding, and have a explicit and explainable propagation
mechanism for graphs, effectively characterizing the key
features during the learning process.
Many traditional spectral GNNs assume homogeneity
(McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001; Von Luxburg
2007), where interconnected nodes typically belong to the
same category or share similar attributes. However, realworld graphs often exhibit significant heterogeneity, such
as protein structure networks (Fout et al. 2017) that show

stronger heterophilic connections between different types of
amino acids. GNNs designed with the homogeneity assumption may struggle to perform well on such heterogeneous
graphs (Mao et al. 2024a,b). Thus, the generalization ability
of spectral GNNs is tested, and we find that a single spectral GNN is difficult to adapt to different graph data (see
Figure 1, the advantageous application scenarios of different neural networks have differences). However, the current
different spectral GNNs are manually designed to adapt to
particular scenarios. Automatic and efficient GNN configuration schemes are urgently needed to reduce labor costs.
To solve this issue, in the past five years, many Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) methods specifically designed
for GNN neural architecture search (GNN-NAS) have been
proposed (Liu and Liu 2023; Huan, Quanming, and Weiwei 2021). GNN-NAS can be summarized as a combinatorial optimization problem. Limited by the quantity and quality of SGNNs designed by current experts, it is difficult to

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19493

