The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Training-free Synthetic Data Selection Method for Semantic Segmentation
Hao Tang1 , Siyue Yu2 , Jian Pang1 , Bingfeng Zhang1 *
1

China University of Petroleum (East China)
2
XJTLU
{haotang, jianpang}@s.upc.edu.cn, siyue.yu@xjtlu.edu.cn, Bingfeng.Zhang@upc.edu.cn

Ⅰ

Ⅰ

Abstract
Training semantic segmenter with synthetic data has been
attracting great attention due to its easy accessibility and
huge quantities. Most previous methods focused on producing large-scale synthetic image-annotation samples and then
training the segmenter with all of them. However, such a
solution remains a main challenge in that the poor-quality
samples are unavoidable, and using them to train the model
will damage the training process. In this paper, we propose a training-free Synthetic Data Selection (SDS) strategy with CLIP to select high-quality samples for building
a reliable synthetic dataset. Specifically, given massive synthetic image-annotation pairs, we first design a Perturbationbased CLIP Similarity (PCS) to measure the reliability of
synthetic image, thus removing samples with low-quality images. Then we propose a class-balance Annotation Similarity Filter (ASF) by comparing the synthetic annotation with
the response of CLIP to remove the samples related to lowquality annotations. The experimental results show that using
our method significantly reduces the data size by half, while
the trained segmenter achieves higher performance.

Ⅱ

Ⅲ

Ⅳ

Segmenter
(a)

Patches

1

2

3

4

4

1

2

3

Text-to-image Similarity

Mixed

Original

Synthetic Images and Annotations
1

0.8

SDS
Ⅰ

Ⅱ Ⅲ Ⅳ

Ⅱ
Ⅳ

0.6

Ⅰ

Ⅲ

Segmenter

0.4

(b)

0.2
0

Oringinal

Mixed

Selected Images and Annotations

Figure 1: Comparison of synthetic data training methods. (a)
Previous methods use all the synthetic data to train a segmenter. (b) Our training-free synthetic data selection method
(SDS) selects higher-quality samples to train the segmented,
where we select images with significant text-to-image similarity differences before and after mixed image patches.

Code — https://github.com/tanghao2000/SDS
2020; Rombach et al. 2022) have achieved astonishing textto-image synthesis ability. Such models are also utilized
in sample generation for semantic segmentation and can
be divided into two pipelines: mask-to-image (Xue et al.
2023; Yang et al. 2024) and image-to-mask (Wu et al. 2023;
Nguyen et al. 2024). The mask-to-image pipeline can ensure
the accuracy of annotations, but time-consuming with manual annotations. Instead, the image-to-mask method does
not need human annotation at all, providing a more efficient pipeline. For example, DiffuMask (Wu et al. 2023) and
Dataset-Diffusion (Nguyen et al. 2024), which effectively
generate abundant pairs of synthetic images and annotations. Specifically, DiffuMask (Wu et al. 2023) leverages the
cross-attention mapping text to image and trains the Affinity
Net (Ahn and Kwak 2018) to extend text-driven image synthesis to semantic mask generation. Furthermore, DatasetDiffusion (Nguyen et al. 2024) makes innovations based on
DiffuMask. It rewrites prompts by a large language mode
(LLM), generating realistic images and simultaneously producing corresponding segmentation masks. Note that after
generating massive samples, these methods use all the samples to train the segmenter.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer
vision (Chen et al. 2017a; He et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2017). Its goal is to assign semantic labels to each
pixel in an image, which is crucial for applications such as
autonomous driving (Liu et al. 2020), semantic editing (Ling
et al. 2021), and medical image segmentation (Ronneberger,
Fischer, and Brox 2015).
With the increasing demand for large-scale datasets in
semantic segmentation tasks, the use of synthetic data
has attracted widespread attention from researchers. Previous researchers utilize Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Creswell et al. 2018) and their variants, like
DatasetGAN (Zhang et al. 2021) and BigDatasetGAN (Li
et al. 2022) to effectively generate synthetic dataset, thereby
reducing manual annotation. In recent years, Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7229

