The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Anomaly Detection of Irregular Sequences in Ct-Echo Model Space
Ao Chen, Xiren Zhou* , Huanhuan Chen*
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
chenao57@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhou0612@ustc.edu.cn, hchen@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Fitting suitable
models to represent
original sequences

Efficient anomaly detection of irregular sequences, especially those characterized by non-uniform sampling from discontinuous operations or unreliable sensors, presents challenges across various fields. In response, this paper introduces
irregular-sequence classification in “Ct-Echo Model Space”.
A novel Continuous-time Echo Network (Ct-Echo) is proposed to fit irregular sequences, efficiently capturing their inherent dynamic characteristics. Ct-Echo utilizes the “Echo”
mechanism, where history information influences the current
state and diminishes over time, and employs Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) to construct continuous-time transition of hidden states. Each sequence is individually fitted
via Ct-Echo to derive a readout model. These fitted models, capturing the dynamic characteristics of the original data,
serve as representations of the corresponding sequences, thus
mapping the original data from the data space to the Ct-Echo
model space. Anomaly detection is further performed in this
model space, evaluating differences between models rather
than directly on the original sequences. Our method enhances
real-time processing and lessens reliance on the amount of labeled training data, as demonstrated by experimental studies.

Data Space

Model Space

Figure 1: The MBM represents each data instance with a
model that is suitably fitted to capture the dynamical characteristic inherent in the original data instance, which further
serves as the data representation for further classification.

ity in time-sensitive scenarios. Besides, ODE-based methods, such as ODE-RNN (Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud
2019) and Neural Controlled Differential Equations (Neural CDE) (Kidger et al. 2020; Jhin, Lee, and Park 2023),
have proven effective for handling irregular sequences
through continuous-time networks. Nevertheless, existing
ODE-based methods grapple with high computational complexity and extensive network parameters, hindering their
applicability in real-time or data-scarce tasks.
Recently, Model-Based Methods (MBMs) have emerged
as promising solutions for anomaly detection in sequential data (Chen et al. 2023). MBMs, as Figure 1, represent
each data instance through a suitably fitted model that captures the data-inherent dynamic characteristics. This representation marks a transformation from data-space processing to model-space analysis. Representing original data
with dynamic-captured models enables the application of
learning algorithms to the models rather than the original data (Chen et al. 2013). MBMs have proven computational efficiency and reduced data dependency across various time-series classification and anomaly detection tasks
(Chen, Zhou, and Chen 2024; Liu, Zhou, and Chen 2024).
However, existing models (e.g. Echo-State-Network(ESN)based) used for data fitting and representation maintain a
uniform approach to state updates across time steps, failing
to handle data with irregular sampling or missing values.
Addressing the above considerations, this paper proposes
to conduct anomaly detection of irregular sequences within
“Ct-Echo Model Space”. The Continuous-Time Echo Network (Ct-Echo) is introduced to fit irregular sequences, efficiently capturing the data-inherent dynamic characteris-

Introduction
Anomaly detection of sequential data typically involves determining whether a collected sequence is normal or belongs to a specific type of anomaly. Traditional techniques
for anomaly detection often presuppose consistent and regular sampling intervals, an assumption that is not universally
applicable. For example, sensor data collected from mechanical equipment could exhibit irregular sampling or missing
values, stemming from fluctuating operational conditions or
sensor malfunctions. Such irregular sequences, characterized by observations at non-uniform intervals, present significant analytical challenges (Chowdhury et al. 2023).
Common methods address such irregularities through resampling or interpolation (Sterne et al. 2009), leading to
information loss and potential distortion of original signals. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have also been
introduced into such tasks (Che et al. 2018), but tend
to be computationally intensive, limiting their applicabil* Corresponding Authors: Xiren Zhou, Huanhuan Chen.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15731

