The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural-Symbolic Collaborative Distillation:
Advancing Small Language Models for Complex Reasoning Tasks
Huanxuan Liao1,2 , Shizhu He1,2 * , Yao Xu1,2 , Yuanzhe Zhang4 , Kang Liu1,2,3 , Jun Zhao1,2
1

The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
4
National Science Library, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
liaohuanxuan2023@ia.ac.cn {yao.xu, shizhu.he, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

high computational costs and expensive API calls required
for LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT and LLaMA3-70B), enhancing
Small Language Models (SLMs, e.g., ≤ 7B) to handle complex reasoning efficiently is more practical and crucial for
large-scale deployment.
To meet the practical needs mentioned above, many research efforts (Magister et al. 2023; Hsieh et al. 2023; Li
et al. 2024b) in recent years have proposed the transfer of
reasoning capabilities from teacher LLMs to student SLMs
through CoT distillation (shown in the middle of Figure 1).
Specifically, LLMs generate high-quality rationales, which
are then utilized to fine-tune SLMs. This CoT distillation
enhances the performance of SLMs in many tasks that require complex reasoning abilities such as arithmetic (Cobbe
et al. 2021) and symbolic reasoning (Wei et al. 2022).
Despite some progress in CoT distillation, significant
challenges persist that limit the performance of SLMs in
complex reasoning tasks: 1) Inconsistency in Capabilities
between Teacher and Student Models: Existing methods
often ignore the gap between the knowledge modeling and
complex reasoning capabilities of LLMs and SLMs. Due
to fewer parameters, student models struggle to acquire the
comprehensive knowledge necessary for complex reasoning tasks (Kang et al. 2023). As illustrated in Figure 1, an
SLM trained with traditional CoT distillation fails to solve
hard questions that the teacher model can handle effectively.
2) Difficulty in Modeling Sparse Specialized Knowledge:
Neural knowledge distillation faces challenges in representing sparse and specialized knowledge due to the limited
parameter space of distilled SLMs. In complex reasoning
tasks, particularly with hard questions, specialized knowledge may contradict general knowledge (e.g., velocity superposition in relative motion). This sparse and specialized
knowledge is hard to model in small-scale models, significantly impacting the SLM’s performance on challenging
questions and deteriorating its ability to handle unseen tasks.
In this paper, we argue that complex reasoning tasks require both general knowledge (e.g., numerical addition) and
specialized knowledge (e.g., relative displacement). It can
be simply understood as follows: the former refers to what
SLMs can effectively model and is primarily used for answering high-frequency, easy questions, while the latter in-

In this paper, we propose Neural-Symbolic Collaborative
Distillation (NesyCD), a novel knowledge distillation method
for learning the complex reasoning abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs, e.g., >13B). We argue that complex reasoning tasks are difficult for Small Language Models (SLMs, e.g., ≤ 7B), as these tasks demand not only general cognitive abilities but also specialized knowledge, which
is often sparse and difficult for these neural-based SLMs to
effectively capture. Therefore, NesyCD distills the general
capabilities and specialized knowledge in LLMs in different ways. On the one hand, we distill only general abilities
from teacher LLMs into the student SLMs of parameterized
neural networks. On the other hand, for the specialized abilities and uncommon knowledge of a complex reasoning task,
we employ a symbolic knowledge distillation approach to
obtain and store the specialized knowledge within a symbolic knowledge base (KB). By decoupling general and specialized capabilities, the proposed NesyCD can achieve superior performance cost-effectively, utilizing smaller models
and blending parameterized neural networks with symbolic
KB. Moreover, the specialized KB generalizes well and is
comprehended and manipulated by humans. Our experiments
show that NesyCD significantly boosts SLMs’ complex reasoning performance on in-domain (BBH, GSM8K) and outof-domain (AGIEval, ARC) datasets. Notably, our approach
enabled the LLaMA3-8B and Qwen2-7B to surpass GPT-3.5turbo in performance and come close to matching LLaMA370B, despite the latter having 9× more parameters.

Code — https://github.com/Xnhyacinth/NesyCD
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.13203

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) (Yang et al. 2024) excel in various complex reasoning tasks such as mathematical (Yu et al. 2023a), commonsense (Zhao, Lee, and Hsu
2023) and symbolic reasoning (Suzgun et al. 2022) with
In-Context Learning (ICL) (Ye et al. 2023) and Chain-ofThought (CoT) Prompting (Kaplan et al. 2020). Due to the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24567

