The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Robust Prototype-Based Network with Interpretable RBF Classifier Foundations
Sascha Saralajew,1 Ashish Rana,1 Thomas Villmann,2 and Ammar Shaker1
1 NEC Laboratories Europe, Germany
2 University of Applied Sciences Mittweida, Germany

{sascha.saralajew, ashish.rana, ammar.shaker}@neclab.eu, villmann@hs-mittweida.de

Abstract
Prototype-based classification learning methods are known
to be inherently interpretable. However, this paradigm suffers from major limitations compared to deep models, such
as lower performance. This led to the development of the socalled deep Prototype-Based Networks (PBNs), also known
as prototypical parts models. In this work, we analyze these
models with respect to different properties, including interpretability. In particular, we focus on the Classification-byComponents (CBC) approach, which uses a probabilistic
model to ensure interpretability and can be used as a shallow or deep architecture. We show that this model has several shortcomings, like creating contradicting explanations.
Based on these findings, we propose an extension of CBC that
solves these issues. Moreover, we prove that this extension
has robustness guarantees and derive a loss that optimizes
robustness. Additionally, our analysis shows that most (deep)
PBNs are related to (deep) RBF classifiers, which implies
that our robustness guarantees generalize to shallow RBF classifiers. The empirical evaluation demonstrates that our deep
PBN yields state-of-the-art classification accuracy on different
benchmarks while resolving the interpretability shortcomings
of other approaches. Further, our shallow PBN variant outperforms other shallow PBNs while being inherently interpretable
and exhibiting provable robustness guarantees.

1

Motivation and Context

Two principal streams exist in the field of explainable machine learning: (1) post-processing methods (post-hoc approaches) that try to explain the prediction process of an
existing model, such as LIME and SHAP (see Marcinkevičs
and Vogt 2023, for an overview), and (2) the design of machine learning methods with inherently interpretable prediction processes (Rudin 2019). While the former could create
non-faithful explanations due to only approximating the output distribution of a black box model without explaining
its internal logic, it is claimed that inherently interpretable
methods always generate faithful explanations (Rudin 2019).
According to Molnar (2022), a model is called interpretable
if its behavior and predictions are understandable to humans.
Moreover, when the provided explanations lead to a correct
interpretation of the model, this interpretation enriches the
user (or developer) with an understanding of how the model
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20273

works, how it can be fixed or improved, and whether it can
be trusted (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016).
A well-known category of interpretable models for classification tasks is (shallow) Prototype-Based Networks (PBN)
such as LVQ (e. g., Biehl, Hammer, and Villmann 2016).
These models are interpretable because (1) the learned classspecific prototypes1 are either from the input space or can
be easily mapped to it; belonging to the input space helps
summarize the differentiating factors of the input data and
provides trusted exemplars for each class, (2) the dissimilarity
computations are given by human comprehensible equations
such that differences between inputs and learned prototypes
can be understood, (3) the classification rule based on the
dissimilarities is intelligible (e. g., winner-takes-all principle);
see Bancos et al. (2020) for an interpretability application. Despite being interpretable, these models also face limitations:
(1) The number of parameters becomes large on complex
data since the prototypes are class-specific and are defined in
the input space.2 (2) The classification performance is behind
that of deep neural architectures as the dissimilarity functions and the classification rules are straightforward to ensure
interpretability (Villmann, Bohnsack, and Kaden 2017).
To fix these limitations, researchers investigated the integration of prototype-based classification heads with deep
neural feature extractors to build deep interpretable PBNs
and designed numerous architectures such as ProtoPNet
(Chen et al. 2019), ProtoPool (Rymarczyk et al. 2022),
CBC (Classification-By-Components; Saralajew et al. 2019),
and PIPNet (Nauta et al. 2023). The generated results of
these models are impressive as they achieve state-of-the-art
classification accuracy on fine-grained image classification,
and some show a good performance in rejecting Out-OfDistribution (OOD) examples (e. g., PIPNet). The high-level
structure of these models follows the same principles (see
Fig. 1): (1) embedding of the input data in a latent space by
a Neural Network (NN), denoted as feature extractor backbone; (2) measuring the dissimilarity (or similarity) between
the embedding and the latent prototypes; (3) prediction computation after aggregating the dissimilarities by a shallow
1 Usually, prototypes are class-specific, and components, centers,

or centroids are class-unspecific.
2A ResNet50 on ImageNet has 26 M parameters, whereas an
LVQ model with one prototype per class has 150 M.

