The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Through the Dual-Prism: A Spectral Perspective on Graph Data
Augmentation for Graph Classifications
Yutong Xia1* , Runpeng Yu1* , Yuxuan Liang2† ,
Xavier Bresson1 , Xinchao Wang1† , Roger Zimmermann1
1
National University of Singapore
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{yutong.xia,r.yu}@u.nus.edu; yuxliang@outlook.com; {xaviercs,xinchao,dcsrz}@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

Though promising, these augmentation methods are challenged by three key issues as follows. (1) Graph Property
Distortion. Before the era of deep learning, graph properties, e.g., graph connectivity and diameter, served as vital
features for classification for decades (Childs et al. 2009).
While now they seem to be ignored, many aforementioned
contemporary augmentation methods appear to sidestep this
tradition and overlook the graph properties. For instance,
an example graph from the IMDB-BINARY dataset (Morris
et al. 2020) and its augmented graph via DropEdge are illustrated in Figures 1a and 1b, respectively. The polar plot in
Figure 1e shows the properties of these graphs, where each
axis represents a distinct property. It is evident that DropEdge significantly alters the original graph’s properties, as indicated by the stark difference between the shapes of the
orange (original) and blue (augmented) pentagons. (2) Limited Structural Impact. The majority of existing methods’
localized alterations do not capture the broader relationships
and structures within the graph, limiting their utility. Consider a social network graph, where removing an edge affects just the immediate node and does little to alter the
overall community structure. We thus ask: Can we design
more property-retentive and structure-aware data augmentation techniques for GNNs?

Graph Neural Networks have become the preferred tool to
process graph data, with their efficacy being boosted through
graph data augmentation techniques. Despite the evolution of
augmentation methods, issues like graph property distortions
and restricted structural changes persist. This leads to the
question: Is it possible to develop more property-conserving
and structure-sensitive augmentation methods? Through a
spectral lens, we investigate the interplay between graph
properties, their augmentation, and their spectral behavior,
and observe that keeping the low-frequency eigenvalues
unchanged can preserve the critical properties at a large scale
when generating augmented graphs. These observations inform our introduction of the Dual-Prism (DP) augmentation
methods, including DP-Noise and DP-Mask, which retain
essential graph properties while diversifying augmented
graphs. Extensive experiments validate the efficiency of our
approach, providing a new and promising direction for graph
data augmentation.

Code & Appendix — https://github.com/yu-rp/DualPrism

Introduction
Graph structures, modeling complex systems through nodes
and edges, are ubiquitous across various domains, including social networks (Newman, Watts, and Strogatz 2002),
bioinformatics (Yi et al. 2022), and transportation systems
(Jin et al. 2023a). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2016a) elegantly handle this relational information for tasks like accurate predictions. Their capabilities are
further enhanced by graph data augmentation techniques,
which artificially diversify the dataset via strategic manipulations, thereby improving the performance and generalization of GNNs. Graph data augmentation has progressed
from early random topological modifications, e.g. DropEdge (Rong et al. 2019) and DropNode (Feng et al. 2020),
to sophisticated learning-centric approaches like InfoMin
(Suresh et al. 2021). Furthermore, techniques inspired by
image augmentation’s mixup principle (Zhang et al. 2017)
have emerged as prominent contenders (Verma et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2021; Guo and Mao 2021).

Through the Dual-Prism: A Spectral Lens. Graph data
augmentation involves altering components of an original
graph. These modifications, in turn, lead to changes in the
graph’s spectral frequencies (Ortega et al. 2018). Recent research highlighted the importance of the graph spectrum: it
can reveal critical graph properties, e.g., connectivity and radius (Chung 1997; Lee, Gharan, and Trevisan 2014). Additionally, it also provides a holistic summary of a graph’s intrinsic structure (Chang et al. 2021), providing a global view
for graph topology alterations. Building on this foundation,
a pivotal question arises: Could the spectral domain be the
stage for structure-aware and property-retentive augmentation efforts? Drawing inspiration from dual prisms—which
filter and reconstruct light based on spectral elements—can
we design a polarizer to shed new light on this challenge?
With this in mind, we use spectral graph theory, aiming to
answer the following questions: 1) Can a spectral approach
to graph data augmentation preserve essential graph properties effectively? 2) How does spectral-based augmentation impact broader graph structures? 3) How does spectral-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Y. Xia and R. Yu contributed equally to this work.
†
Y. Liang and X. Wang are the corresponding authors.

21635

