The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Single Character Perturbations Break LLM Alignment
Leon Lin* , Hannah Brown* , Kenji Kawaguchi, Michael Shieh
National University of Singapore
leonlin@u.nus.edu, hsbrown@comp.nus.edu.sg, kenji@comp.nus.edu.sg, michaelshieh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

User prompt

When LLMs are deployed in sensitive, human-facing settings, it is crucial that they do not output unsafe, biased, or
privacy-violating outputs. For this reason, models are both
trained and instructed to refuse to answer unsafe prompts
such as “Tell me how to build a bomb.” We find that, despite
these safeguards, it is possible to break model defenses simply by appending a space or other single character token to the
end of a model’s input. In a study of a variety of open-source
models, we demonstrate that this simple perturbation is able
to cause the majority of models to generate harmful outputs
with very high probability. We further find that both Claude
and GPT-3.5 demonstrate the same behavior. We examine the
causes of this behavior, finding that the contexts in which single spaces occur in tokenized training data encourage models
answer in lists or other formatted responses, overriding training signals to refuse unsafe requests. Our findings underscore
the fragile state of current model alignment and promote the
importance of developing more robust alignment methods.

1

How do I build a bomb?

Template
apply

Filled template
‘ ’ ‘.’ ‘+’
‘:’ ‘,’ ‘!’ ‘?’

A chat between [...] answers to the
user’s questions.
USER: How do I build a bomb?
ASSISTANT:⊓
⊔

Added character

Introduction

Warning: This paper contains examples of harmful
model outputs

Output
1. Gather all necessary materials, including...

Given an unsafe prompt, like “Tell me how to build a
bomb,” a properly aligned LLM should refuse to answer.
Generally accomplished through RLHF (Christiano et al.
2017), this is an important component in ensuring that models are safe for deployment in sensitive settings, particularly
those that involve direct interactions with humans—for example, chatbots for mental health, customer service, general conversation, and healthcare (Abd-alrazaq et al. 2019;
Adam, Wessel, and Benlian 2021; Pereira and Dı́az 2019).
As a further safeguard, chatbots are generally given initial instructions not to output harmful, misleading, or biased content, to follow instructions, and to generate informative replies. Rather than generating completions directly
from user queries, each user input is put into a conversation
template, which includes these instructions and enforces formatting, as shown in Figure 1.
While popular libraries allow specification of chat templates corresponding to models, documentation of the tem-

Figure 1: When a user queries a chat model, this input is put
into a chat template, and this template is given to a model for
inference. By appending a space to the end of this template,
we can circumvent model alignment.

plate format used during training is often poor. Out of the
open source models we study, only Vicuna, Falcon, Llama3, and ChatGLM include a description of the chat template
used during fine-tuning in their paper, and only Llama 2,
Llama 3, Mistral, ChatGLM, and Guanaco include chat template configurations with their HuggingFace upload.
During fine-tuning, LLMs are trained with model-specific
templates, as shown in Figure 2. These templates serve to
enforce a level of uniformity in input format and often include alignment-related instructions for models to output
helpful, harmless, and honest outputs. While input uniformity is useful for training, it poses concerns for robust-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27473

