The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Codec Does Matter: Exploring the Semantic Shortcoming of Codec for Audio
Language Model
Zhen Ye1 , Peiwen Sun1 , Jiahe Lei3 , Hongzhan Lin4 ,
Xu Tan2 , Zheqi Dai5 , Qiuqiang Kong5 , Jianyi Chen1 ,
Jiahao Pan1 , Qifeng Liu1 , Yike Guo1* , Wei Xue1*
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Microsoft
3
University of Science and Technology Beijing
4
Hong Kong Baptist University
5
Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract

Audio codecs (Zeghidour et al. 2021) have emerged as
a critical technique for audio LLMs, bridging the gap between continuous audio waveforms and token-based language models. By discretizing high-rate audio signals into
a finite set of tokens, these codecs enable the application of
LLM architectures to audio data, leveraging the successes of
textual LLMs.
However, prior research on audio codecs has primarily
focused on achieving lower compression rates and higher
reconstruction quality (Kumar et al. 2024; Défossez et al.
2022; Yang et al. 2023a). Meanwhile, many efforts in audio generation have concentrated on enhancing model architecture, scaling, or leveraging larger datasets. For instance, AudioLM (Borsos et al. 2023) adopts a two-stage
pipeline that models the acoustic token in an autoregressive way conditioned on the semantic token. VALL-E (Wang
et al. 2023), the first TTS framework to leverage large, diverse, and multi-speaker speech data, demonstrates strong
in-context learning capabilities similar to GPT-3, treating
TTS as a language modeling task on audio codecs. MusicGen (Copet et al. 2024) generates music using a single-stage
transformer LM alongside efficient token interleaving patterns. Similarly, UniAudio (Yang et al. 2023b) scaled up to
165K hours of audio and 1B parameters, utilizing LLM techniques to generate tokens for various types of audio, including speech, sounds, music, and singing, given different input
conditions.
While these works have shown success in developing audio language models, they all rely on the acoustic codecs
such as Encodec (Défossez et al. 2022) or Soundstream
(Zeghidour et al. 2021) for audio tokenization and detokenization. However, these acoustic codecs were originally designed for audio compression rather than for audio
language models. This misalignment means the design may
not be optimal for audio language modeling.
To design a better audio codec for Audio LLMs, we drew
inspiration from the initial purpose of LLMs such as GPT,
which were designed to process text. These models focus
on understanding and generating natural language, which is
inherently rich in semantics. Motivated by this, we assume
that a better audio tokenizer should encapsulate rich semantic information to facilitate an easy understanding of audio

Recent advancements in audio generation have been significantly propelled by the capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs). The existing research on audio LLM has primarily focused on enhancing the architecture and scale of audio
language models, as well as leveraging larger datasets, and
generally, acoustic codecs, such as EnCodec, are used for audio tokenization. However, these codecs were originally designed for audio compression, which may lead to suboptimal performance in the context of audio LLM. Our research
aims to address the shortcomings of current audio LLM
codecs, particularly their challenges in maintaining semantic
integrity in generated audio. For instance, existing methods
like VALL-E, which condition acoustic token generation on
text transcriptions, often suffer from content inaccuracies and
elevated word error rates (WER) due to semantic misinterpretations of acoustic tokens, resulting in word skipping and errors. To overcome these issues, we propose a straightforward
yet effective approach called X-Codec. X-Codec incorporates
semantic features from a pre-trained semantic encoder before
the Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ) stage and introduces
a semantic reconstruction loss after RVQ. By enhancing the
semantic ability of the codec, X-Codec significantly reduces
WER in speech synthesis tasks and extends these benefits to
non-speech applications, including music and sound generation. Our experiments in text-to-speech, music continuation,
and text-to-sound tasks demonstrate that integrating semantic
information substantially improves the overall performance
of language models in audio generation. The code and model
have been released.

Introduction
In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) such as
GPT (Brown et al. 2020) have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in modeling complex, high-dimensional data
across various domains, including text and image generation
(Zhao et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024a). Inspired by these successes, there has been significant interest (Agostinelli et al.
2023; Borsos et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Yang et al.
2023b) in exploring the application of LLMs to audio generation.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25697

