The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual-Level Precision Edges Guided Multi-View Stereo
with Accurate Planarization
Kehua Chen, Zhenlong Yuan, Tianlu Mao* , Zhaoqi Wang
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chenkehua23s,yuanzhenlong21b,ltm,zqwang}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
The reconstruction of low-textured areas is a prominent research focus in multi-view stereo (MVS). In recent years,
traditional MVS methods have performed exceptionally well
in reconstructing low-textured areas by constructing plane
models. However, these methods often encounter issues such
as crossing object boundaries and limited perception ranges,
which undermine the robustness of plane model construction. Building on previous work (APD-MVS), we propose the
DPE-MVS method. By introducing dual-level precision edge
information, including fine and coarse edges, we enhance the
robustness of plane model construction, thereby improving
reconstruction accuracy in low-textured areas. Furthermore,
by leveraging edge information, we refine the sampling strategy in conventional PatchMatch MVS and propose an adaptive patch size adjustment approach to optimize matching cost
calculation in both stochastic and low-textured areas. This additional use of edge information allows for more precise and
robust matching. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the ETH3D and Tanks & Temples benchmarks. Notably, our method outperforms all published methods on the
ETH3D benchmark.

Figure 1: Comparison with the SOTA traditional methods
and learning-based methods. Our method achieves the best
F1 -score on ETH3D and the best recall on Tanks & Temples.

ization capabilities and lower memory consumption compared to learning-based methods. Additionally, there has
been more research in recent traditional MVS methods addressing the low-textured issue. Recent mainstream methods
are based on PatchMatch (PM), which matches fixed-size
patch in the reference image with patches in the source images using a plane hypothesis (including depth and normal).
Since fixed-size patch struggle to extract appropriate feature
information in low-textured areas, many works have further
extended and optimized this method. For example, (Liao
et al. 2019; Xu and Tao 2019) leverage multi-scale information, while others (Xu and Tao 2020) use triangular plane
priors to guide plane hypotheses in low-textured areas. (Xu
et al. 2022) combines these approaches to enhance reconstruction performance. Subsequent methods (Zhang et al.
2022; Tian et al. 2023) refine the construction of triangular planes, while others (Romanoni and Matteucci 2019;
Kuhn, Lin, and Erdler 2019) employ image segmentation
and RANSAC algorithm to determine plane models.
One notable method, APD-MVS (Wang et al. 2023), introduces adaptive patch deformation. This method classifies
pixels into reliable and unreliable based on matching ambiguity. For each unreliable pixel, it searches for a number
of reliable pixels in the surrounding area. The RANSAC algorithm is then used to estimate the best-fitting plane from
these reliable pixels, selecting the most fitting ones as anchors to assist in the matching of unreliable pixel. Compared
to previous methods, this approach is more flexible and significantly enhances the robustness of the plane model.

Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is a classical computer vision task
aimed at reconstructing the dense 3D geometry of objects
or scenes from images taken from multiple viewpoints. This
technique has significant applications in areas such as cultural heritage preservation, virtual reality, augmented reality, and autonomous driving. In recent years, MVS methods
has advanced significantly, benefiting from diverse datasets
(Schops et al. 2017; Knapitsch et al. 2017) and various algorithms (Wang et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024) , leading to substantial improvements in reconstruction performance. Despite these advancements, MVS still faces challenges in handling low-textured and stochastic textured areas.
MVS methods can be roughly categorized into traditional methods (Galliani, Lasinger, and Schindler 2015;
Schönberger et al. 2016; Xu and Tao 2019) and learningbased methods (Yao et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2020). Traditional methods have the advantages of stronger general* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2105

