The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Label-Efficient Data Augmentation with Video Diffusion Models for Guidewire
Segmentation in Cardiac Fluoroscopy
Shaoyan Pan1 * , Yikang Liu2 , Lin Zhao2 , Eric Z. Chen2 , Xiao Chen2 , Terrence Chen2 , Shanhui Sun2
1

Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
United Imaging Intelligence, Boston, MA, USA
pshaoya@emory.edu, {yikang.liu, lin.zhao01, zhang.chen, xiao.chen01, terrence.chen, shanhui.sun}@uii-ai.com
2

Abstract

Accurate and sufficient annotated data are essential for
training guidewire segmentation models, but labeling thin
and elongated guidewires is both error-prone and laborintensive. To address this challenge, this paper proposes a
method to generate synthetic videos paired with guidewire
masks as augmented data, aimed at enhancing the performance of downstream segmentation models (Fig. 1). We
trained a generative diffusion model (DM) on a small labeled
dataset along with a larger unannotated dataset, enabling the
generation of multiple annotated fluoroscopy videos with
varying backgrounds and wire appearances from a given semantic wire mask.
In medical data synthesis, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) encounter challenges such as unstable training and limited video fidelity
and diversity, particularly due to the complex distribution of
medical images and small dataset sizes. Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Song et al. 2020) have shown promise in generating diverse
medical images (Yu et al. 2023; Du et al. 2023; Pan et al.
2023b). Similarly, video DDPMs (Blattmann et al. 2023b,a;
Ho et al. 2022) demonstrate potential in synthesizing medical videos conditioned on semantic contents (Lugmayr et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022; Du et al. 2023).
However, our task of synthesizing fluroscopy videos for
data augmentation in wire segmentation poses unique challenges and specific requirements. Firstly, it is challenging
to acquire fluoroscopy images/videos at the scale of natural ones, and annotating wires in numerous videos is almost
impractical. Therefore, it is beneficial to minimize the labeling effort while preserving the fidelity and variability of
the synthesized videos. Secondly, since guidewires are extremely thin (typically 2-3 pixels wide) and tend to be occluded by other objects or noise, detection often relies on
the contrast between fast-moving guidewires and the slowermoving background, which needs to be reflected in synthesized videos. Thirdly, the nuanced and varied appearance of
wires against complex backgrounds in fluoroscopy videos
requires a conditioning approach that accurately captures
wire masks and generates diverse wire appearances. Inadequate representation of these masks compromises the fidelity
and variability of wire depiction in the synthesized videos,
reducing their value for segmentation tasks.
We propose a label-efficient data augmentation method

The accurate segmentation of guidewires in interventional
cardiac fluoroscopy videos is crucial for computer-aided navigation tasks. Although deep learning methods have demonstrated high accuracy and robustness in wire segmentation,
they require substantial annotated datasets for generalizability, underscoring the need for extensive labeled data to enhance model performance. To address this challenge, we propose the Segmentation-guided Frame-consistency Video Diffusion Model (SF-VD) to generate large collections of labeled fluoroscopy videos, augmenting the training data for
wire segmentation networks. SF-VD leverages videos with
limited annotations by independently modeling scene distribution and motion distribution. It first samples the scene distribution by generating 2D fluoroscopy images with wires positioned according to a specified input mask, and then samples the motion distribution by progressively generating subsequent frames, ensuring frame-to-frame coherence through
a frame-consistency strategy. A segmentation-guided mechanism further refines the process by adjusting wire contrast,
ensuring a diverse range of visibility in the synthesized image. Evaluation on a fluoroscopy dataset confirms the superior quality of the generated videos and shows significant improvements in guidewire segmentation.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.16050

Introduction
Guidewires are frequently used in interventional surgeries
to navigate blood vessels and guide other medical devices, such as catheters, stents, or balloons, to precise locations within the body. Guidewire segmentation in X-ray
fluroscopy videos is a critical task in computer-aided cardiac interventional procedures. It often serves as a prerequisite for functions such as 4D guidewire reconstruction (Vöth
et al. 2023) and the co-registration of angiography and intravascular ultrasound images (Prasad et al. 2016). This task
is inherently challenging due to factors such as image noise,
complex scenes, projective foreshortening, object occlusion,
rapid guidewire motion, and the thin, elongated shape of the
guidewire.
* The work conducted by the first author was carried out during
an internship at United Imaging Intelligence.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6308

