The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TNCSE: Tensor’s Norm Constraints for Unsupervised Contrastive Learning of
Sentence Embeddings
Tianyu Zong1 , Bingkang Shi2 , Hongzhu Yi1 , Jungang Xu1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zongtianyu20, shibingkang20, yihongzhu23}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
xujg@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract

introduces margin for contrastive learning, EDFSE(Zong
and Zhang 2023) employs the data augmentation strategy
for multilingual round-trip translation(RTT) and ensemble
learning, and RankCSE(Liu et al. 2023), the current SOTA
method, employs knowledge distillation of naive BERT-like
models with existing checkpoints.
Although the above approaches have demonstrated in different directions that fine-tuning based on InfoNCE can further optimize SimCSE, they have all neglected an essential
drawback of an InfoNCE with cosine similarity as a metric,
i.e., cosine similarity can only measure the angle between
the embedding representations of a pair of sentences and ignores the critical attribute of module of the embedding representations. In fact, if the embedding representations of two
sentences have similar angles in the high-dimensional space,
but the difference in the module is significant, their semantics may still be very different, and the cosine similarity only
cannot differentiate the semantic difference between these
two sentences. Based on this intuitionistic phenomenon, it is
necessary to introduce the difference in the module between
the representations to optimize SimCSE further.
Meanwhile, ensemble learning has been shown to improve sentence embedding representations’ quality significantly. For example, EDFSE uses six SimCSE-BERTs that
have been fine-tuned by multilingual RTT data augmentation as submodels and directly sums the outputs of the
six submodels to obtain an ensemble model, but such a
large union brings a huge inference overhead; RankCSE,
on the other hand, uses the ensemble learning of two existing checkpoints as ground-truth to distill the knowledge of a
naive BERT-like model. So, is it possible to introduce norm
constraints on sentence embedding representations into ensemble learning, and the model can train autonomously
without relying on other checkpoints of the same type?
The answer is yes, and in this paper, we propose a new
and intuitive training objective: for a pair of positive samples of the embedding tensor, the cosine similarity between
them should be high, and both norms should be similar. In
other words, the alignment between positive samples should
constrain the embedding’s angle and modulus simultaneously. In terms of model structure, the multi-encoder structure can model richer sample features from multiple spaces
compared to a single encoder. Considering the inference
cost, we ensemble two encoders that have been unsupervised

Unsupervised sentence embedding representation has become a hot research topic in natural language processing.
As a tensor, sentence embedding has two critical properties: direction and norm. Existing works have been limited
to constraining only the orientation of the samples’ representations while ignoring the features of their module lengths.
To address this issue, we propose a new training objective
that optimizes the training of unsupervised contrastive learning by constraining the module length features between positive samples. We combine the training objective of Tensor’s
Norm Constraints with ensemble learning to propose a new
Sentence Embedding representation framework, TNCSE.
We evaluate seven semantic text similarity tasks, and the results show that TNCSE and derived models are the current
state-of-the-art approach; in addition, we conduct extensive
zero-shot evaluations, and the results show that TNCSE outperforms other baselines.

Code — https://github.com/tianyuzong/TNCSE

Introduction
Unsupervised sentence embedding representations have always been a research focus in natural language processing. In recent years, with the proposal of excellent pretrained language models such as BERT(Devlin et al. 2019),
RoBERTa(Liu et al. 2019), Sentence-BERT(Reimers and
Gurevych 2019), and so on, many works have been done
to optimize further the quality of sentence embedding representations based on them. Sentence embedding for unsupervised contrastive learning represented by SimCSE(Gao,
Yao, and Chen 2021) has attracted extensive research interest, which uses InfoNCE(van den Oord, Li, and Vinyals
2018) as the loss function, the dropout function of BERTlike models as the positive sample generation method, other
samples in the batch as the soft-negative samples, and cosine similarity as the semantic similarity metric function
for the unsupervised training; on this basis, ESimCSE(Wu
et al. 2022b) introduces near-antonym data augmentation,
InfoCSE(Wu et al. 2022a) introduces auxiliary networks and
adds masked language models, ArcCSE(Zhang et al. 2022)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26192

