The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bounded Rationality Equilibrium Learning in Mean Field Games
Yannick Eich, Christian Fabian, Kai Cui, Heinz Koeppl
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Technische Universität Darmstadt
{yannick.eich, heinz.koeppl}@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Mean field games (MFGs) tractably model behavior in large
agent populations. The literature on learning MFG equilibria typically focuses on finding Nash equilibria (NE), which
assume perfectly rational agents and are hence implausible
in many realistic situations. To overcome these limitations,
we incorporate bounded rationality into MFGs by leveraging
the well-known concept of quantal response equilibria (QRE).
Two novel types of MFG QRE enable the modeling of large
agent populations where individuals only noisily estimate the
true objective. We also introduce a second source of bounded
rationality to MFGs by restricting the agents’ planning horizon. The resulting novel receding horizon (RH) MFGs are
combined with QRE and existing approaches to model different aspects of bounded rationality in MFGs. We formally
define MFG QRE and RH MFGs and compare them to existing equilibrium concepts such as entropy-regularized NE.
Subsequently, we design generalized fixed-point iteration and
fictitious play algorithms to learn QRE and RH equilibria.
After a theoretical analysis, we give different examples to evaluate the capabilities of our learning algorithms and outline
practical differences between the equilibrium concepts.

Introduction
Learning equilibria in multi-agent games is of great practical
interest but hard to scale to many agents (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009; Deng et al. 2023). Mean field
games (MFGs) allow scaling to arbitrarily many exchangeable agents at fixed complexity. MFGs are of recent interest
as a tractable method to learn approximate equilibria of rational, selfish agents (Guo et al. 2019; Cui and Koeppl 2021;
Xie et al. 2021; Laurière et al. 2022; Anahtarci, Kariksiz,
and Saldi 2023). Thus, MFGs are applied in various settings
ranging from finance to engineering (Djehiche, Tcheukam,
and Tembine 2017; Achdou et al. 2020; Carmona 2020).
A common concept in multi-agent learning is the Nash
equilibrium (NE), where each player’s strategy is optimal
given others’, leading to no incentive for agents to change
strategies. The optimality notion inherent in NE assumes full
rationality of the individual agents.
However, in many real-world situations individuals may
not behave perfectly rational due to limited information proCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13796

cessing capabilities, psychological factors, social considerations or other factors. Deviations from perfect rationality
are described by the fundamental concept of bounded rationality (Simon 1955, 1979; Kahneman and Tversky 1982;
Selten 1990; Gigerenzer and Selten 2002; Kahneman 2013).
Bounded rationality implies that for many real-world scenarios NE are insufficient due to their rigorous perfect rationality
assumption. Instead of NE, we require a more realistic equilibrium concept accounting for partially irrational agents.
A popular game-theoretic approach to modeling bounded
rationality of agents are quantal response equilibria (QRE)
(McKelvey and Palfrey 1995, 1998) which are used, e.g.,
in economics (Breitmoser, Tan, and Zizzo 2010), robust RL
(Reddi et al. 2024) and for efficient NE approximation (Gemp,
Marris, and Piliouras 2024). Intuitively, in a QRE agents
perceive rewards perturbed by noise and act optimally with
respect to these perturbed rewards. In our work, we extend
QRE to the domain of MFGs to model the behavior of a large
number of agents who deviate from perfect rationality.
Meanwhile, on the control-theoretic side, a common approximately optimal control method is model predictive control (MPC) (Kouvaritakis and Cannon 2016), also known as
receding horizon control. To further enhance modeling of
bounded rationality in MFGs, we incorporate a receding horizon method, where agents make decisions based on a limited
future time horizon, reflecting more realistic decision-making
processes. In contrast to MPC-based variants of MFGs such
as (Inoue et al. 2021), we analyze the resulting novel receding horizon equilibria and instead focus on learning such
equilibria, in a discrete-time setting.
Beyond realism, introducing bounded rationality yields
possible tractability advantages. NE computation for MFGs
can be hard, motivating the search for alternative equilibrium
notions. We show that under certain assumptions, QRE can
be computed using a fixed-point iteration (FPI). Moreover,
QRE solutions can be seen as NE approximations with arbitrarily accurate design (Eibelshäuser and Poensgen 2019).
Recently, different equilibria have been introduced as NE approximations in MFGs (Cui and Koeppl 2021). We compare
QRE with these equilibria theoretically and empirically and
provide a new algorithm to compute QRE which extends to
these equilibria. For receding horizon equilibria, we develop
novel algorithms effective in theory and practice.
Our main contributions are:

