The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Common Sense Bias Modeling for Classification Tasks
Miao Zhang1 * , Zee Fryer2 , Ben Colman2 , Ali Shahriyari2 , Gaurav Bharaj2
1

New York University
Reality Defender Inc.
miaozhng@nyu.edu, {zee, ben, ali, gaurav}@realitydefender.ai
2

Classiﬁcation target: Kite

Abstract
Machine learning model bias can arise from dataset composition: correlated sensitive features can distort the downstream classification model’s decision boundary and lead to
performance differences along these features. Existing debiasing works tackle the most prominent bias features, such
as colors of digits or background of animals. However, realworld datasets often include a large number of feature correlations that intrinsically manifest in the data as common
sense information. Such spurious visual cues can further reduce model robustness. Thus, domain practitioners desire a
comprehensive understanding of correlations and the flexibility to address relevant biases. To this end, we propose a
novel framework to extract comprehensive biases in image
datasets based on textual descriptions, a common sense-rich
modality. Specifically, features are constructed by clustering
noun phrase embeddings with similar semantics. The presence of each feature across the dataset is inferred, and their
co-occurrence statistics are measured, with spurious correlations optionally examined by a human-in-the-loop module. Downstream experiments show that our method uncovers novel model biases in multiple image benchmark datasets.
Furthermore, the discovered bias can be mitigated by simple
data re-weighting to de-correlate the features, outperforming
state-of-the-art unsupervised bias mitigation methods.

92.4% images with “person” label
Accuracy: 0.979

7.6% images without “person”
Accuracy: 0.947

CSBD reasons two feature clusters:
many kites, kite flying, colorful kites, …

Correlation: 0.102
individuals, guys, so many people, …

Figure 1: Spurious features are everywhere: Objects which
co-occur frequently with the target can affect model prediction, for example, kites and people in MS-COCO. Spurious
features like this are of multiple types and may cause different downstream biases. Our method aims to discover a comprehensive list of them based on common sense descriptions,
and treat biases which have not been explored in literature.

or by model gradient (Ahn, Kim, and Yun 2023). We observe that most approaches have only tackled limited bias
types with prominent and delicate features, like the color of
digits, the background of animals (Nam et al. 2020; Sagawa
et al. 2019), or the gender of the person doing certain activities (Zhao et al. 2017). It remains to be an open question
whether more general image features, including those coarse
and subtle ones in a dataset will correlate with the target feature in an unwanted way and affect model predictions. For
example, small objects like a keyboard nearby a cat, a person
nearby a kite which we discover to compose short-cut learning (Figure 1), have been overlooked for bias modeling.
These observations suggest to enrich bias signals, and we
propose to model with additional data modalities, specifically text descriptions of images. Differentiating to labels,
descriptions can cover a wider range of features that humans
perceive (with respect to whole dataset instead of individual data samples as descriptions can be noisy). We show
by experiments that debiasing based on supervision from
description-derived bias obtains state-of-the-art results.
“Common sense reasoning” by natural language (Lake

Introduction
Computer vision has been deployed with dramatically more
diverse data (both realistic and generative) in recent years,
which has drawn attention to data cleaning and bias reduction (Torralba and Efros 2011). One common bias is due to
the frequent co-occurrence of target features with context
features (illustrated in Figure 1), that downstream task models may rely on to make predictions even though the relationship is not robust and generalizable (Singh et al. 2020;
Basu, Babu, and Pruthi 2023; Wang et al. 2024).
Current unsupervised algorithms detect bias informed by
model performance. For example, to separate samples aligning with and conflict to bias in model latent space (Sohoni
et al. 2020; Krishnakumar et al. 2021; Ahn, Kim, and Yun
2023; Li, Hoogs, and Xu 2022; Seo, Lee, and Han 2022),
* This work was completed during an internship at Reality Defender Inc.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9994

