The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Normalize Then Propagate: Efficient Homophilous Regularization for Few-shot
Semi-Supervised Node Classification
Baoming Zhang1 , Mingcai Chen2 , Jianqing Song1 , Shuangjie Li1 , Jie Zhang1 , Chongjun Wang1 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
zhangbm@smail.nju.edu.cn, chenmc@njupt.edu.cn, {sjq, shuangjieli}@smail.nju.edu.cn, guyuexiao95@gmail.com,
chjwang@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

classification loss function that relies on the representations
of labeled nodes (Kipf and Welling 2017).
However, in numerous real-world scenarios of semisupervised learning, obtaining a substantial amount of accurate labels for training can be challenging due to the laborintensive data annotation (Li et al. 2019b). Furthermore, in
the problem of semi-supervised node classification with limited labeled nodes (Ding et al. 2022), the scarcity of labeled
nodes per class not only exacerbates that GNNs are prone
to overfitting, but also magnifies additional challenge. Recent studies (Ma et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2020; Tang et al.
2020) have shown that GNNs exhibit certain biases originating from the perspective of graph topology. Ma, Deng,
and Mei (2021) study the subgroup generalization of GNNs
and find that the shortest path distance to labeled nodes can
also affect the GNNs’ performance. Specifically, Han et al.
(2024) uncover the label position bias, which indicates that
the node closer to the labeled nodes tends to perform better.
Considering the citation networks Cora and Citeseer (Planetoid split) (Yang, Cohen, and Salakhudinov 2016), the label
signal is only relevant to 61.4% and 32.8% of the nodes,
respectively, in the case of two-layer GNN. When only a
few nodes are labeled, it exacerbates label position bias, as
a larger number of nodes lack adequate label information
during message passing.
To mitigate the problem of overfitting due to limited labels, a straightforward idea is to enlarge the receptive field
of aggregation by incorporating additional representations
from unlabeled high-order nodes into the calculation of the
classification loss. Unfortunately, most of the existing GNNs
have been designed with shallow architectures primarily due
to the over-smoothing issue (Zhou et al. 2021). With the
increasing of GNN layers, the Dirichlet energy converge
to zero (Cai and Wang 2020). As a result, node representations become increasingly similar, blurring the distinction between different classes. Moreover, high-order neighbor aggregation further increases the complexity of message
passing and may fail to acquire information from remote
nodes on another connected component.
An example on a two-layer GNN (Kipf and Welling 2017)
is shown in Figure 1. The receptive field of classification loss
solely focuses on the labeled node and its two-hop neighbors (loss-relevant nodes). We refer to nodes that do not participate in loss calculation as remote nodes. Previous works

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable ability in semi-supervised node classification. However,
most existing GNNs rely heavily on a large amount of labeled data for training, which is labor-intensive and requires
extensive domain knowledge. In this paper, we first analyze
the restrictions of GNNs generalization from the perspective of supervision signals in the context of few-shot semisupervised node classification. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel algorithm named NormProp, which utilizes the homophily assumption of unlabeled nodes to generate additional supervision signals, thereby enhancing the
generalization against label scarcity. The key idea is to efficiently capture both the class information and the consistency
of aggregation during message passing, via decoupling the
direction and Euclidean norm of node representations. Moreover, we conduct a theoretical analysis to determine the upper
bound of Euclidean norm, and then propose homophilous regularization to constraint the consistency of unlabeled nodes.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that NormProp achieve
state-of-the-art performance under low-label rate scenarios
with low computational complexity.

1

Introduction

Graphs are powerful data structures that allow us to easily
express various relationships (i.e., edges) between objects
(e.g., nodes). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Defferrard,
Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018) are a family of machine learning
models specifically designed to model non-Euclidean graph
data. Modern GNNs have emerged as the forefront approach
for acquiring representations at various levels within graphs,
encompassing node-level (Kipf and Welling 2017; Klicpera,
Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2019), edge-level (Zhang and
Chen 2018), and graph-level tasks (Ying et al. 2018; Han
et al. 2022). A typical GNN model usually follows the message passing framework (Gilmer et al. 2017), which mainly
contains two operators: feature transformation and feature
propagation. In semi-supervised node classification settings
(Zhu and Ghahramani 2002), only a subset of nodes have
labels, and the parameters of the GNN are trained using the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13170

