The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DriveGazen: Event-Based Driving Status Recognition Using Conventional Camera
Xiaoyin Yang, Xin Yang
Dalian University of Technology
tooyoungalex@outlook.com, xinyang@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

Driver state and behavior are crucial to traffic safety. Factors such as the driver’s attention level, driving condition,
and fatigue directly impact their perception and response to
road situations. Developing effective technologies to identify and monitor driver states has become a significant research direction in traffic safety. However, predicting driver
states from conventional RGB images is a challenging task;
spatial and temporal cues from driving conditions can be
adversely affected by head posture and partial occlusion.
Existing facial recognition models for classifying driving

states in RGB frames are built on complex CNN-based models, such as ResNet 50, Transformer, and Inception-based
methods. Different lighting conditions and fast user movements make driver state recognition more complicated, and
despite cumbersome large network enhancement modules,
driver state recognition from RGB images remains difficult and fragile. We will introduce a novel wearable driver
state recognition prototype where users only need to wear
a pair of glasses (DG3). Mobile wearable devices can provide stronger feature capture under rapid head movements
while offering high resolution for capturing more spatial
features and higher temporal resolution for capturing more
temporal features. Even though this device provides a stable fixed view of both eyes and traditional camera technology is mature and low-cost, estimating driver states from
eye features still faces unique challenges.A key issue is that
traditional cameras cannot effectively resolve temporal information under limited lighting conditions. These temporal features are not only crucial for driver state recognition but also important for inferring more informative spatial features. For example, while the eye sockets are major
spatial cues, they provide less information for driving state
classification. In contrast, subtle movements related to facial units, such as raising the outer eyebrows and squinting,
provide stronger cues for eye-based driving state recognition. To address these challenges, we designed the DriveGazen method, which first generates realistic synthetic dynamic visual sensor (DVS) events from video frames and
employs the Attention Driving State Network (ADSN) to
combine the best features of events and intensity frames,
guiding asynchronous event-based driver state recognition
with spatial texture cues from the corresponding intensity
frames.To train our lightweight eye-based driving state network (ADSN) and stimulate research on event-based eye
driver state recognition, we collected a new eye-based event
driving state (DriveGaze) dataset. We validated our method
on the DriveGaze dataset and demonstrated state-of-the-art
driver state recognition capabilities, achieving a significant
improvement of 3% in both WAR and UAR compared to the
second-best method.
Specifically, our work makes the following five contributions:

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• A novel real-time driver state recognition method based
on low-cost conventional camera;

We introduce a wearable driving status recognition device
and our open-source dataset, along with a new real-time
method robust to changes in lighting conditions for identifying driving status from eye observations of drivers. The core
of our method is generating event frames from conventional
intensity frames, and the other is a newly designed Attention
Driving State Network (ADSN). Compared to event cameras,
conventional cameras offer complete information and lower
hardware costs, enabling captured frames to encode rich spatial information. However, these textures lack temporal information, posing challenges in effectively identifying driving
status. DriveGazen addresses this issue from three perspectives. First, we utilize video frames to generate realistic synthetic dynamic vision sensor (DVS) events.Second, we adopt
a spiking neural network to decode pertinent temporal information. Lastly, ADSN extracts crucial spatial cues from corresponding intensity frames and conveys spatial attention to
convolutional spiking layers during both training and inference through a novel guide attention module to guide the feature learning and feature enhancement of the event frame. We
specifically collected the Driving Status (DriveGaze) dataset
to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Additionally, we validate the superiority of the DriveGazen on the
Single-eye Event-based Emotion (SEE) dataset. To the best of
our knowledge, our method is the first to utilize guide attention spiking neural networks and eye-based event frames generated from conventional cameras for driving status recognition.Please refer to our project page and supplementary materials for more details.

Introduction

9283

