The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TCAM-Diff: Triplane-Aware Cross-Attention Medical Diffusion Model
Zhenkai Zhang, Krista A. Ehinger, Tom Drummond
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
zhenkai.zhang@student.unimelb.edu.au, {kris.ehinger, tom.drummond}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

tion (Shue et al. 2023; Ntavelis et al. 2023), medical image
synthesis (Kwon, Han, and Kim 2019; Pinaya et al. 2022;
Khader et al. 2022b), video generation (Wang et al. 2023),
and speech synthesis (Liu, Guo, and Yu 2023).
However, despite substantial progress, existing generative
techniques (Segato et al. 2020; Chong and Ho 2021; Pinaya
et al. 2022; Khader et al. 2022b) often fail to deal with
3D medical data, such as CT and MRI, particularly when
it comes to maintaining high resolution and anatomical accuracy due to the prohibitive memory footprint these entail.
(Kwon, Han, and Kim 2019; Pinaya et al. 2022; Khader et al.
2022b) propose methods that utilize autoencoders to compress 3D medical volumes into a latent space, followed by
training with latent generative models to reduce the memory
footprint required for processing such data. However, due
to the inherent limitations of the autoencoder architecture,
including loss of critical detail during compression and the
dual-step encoding-decoding process, these models still face
challenges when dealing with high-resolution medical data.
To address this issue, we propose a novel approach that
utilizes a latent diffusion generative model operating on a
triplane representation (Chan et al. 2022) to learn complex
structures within 3D medical data effectively. Additionally,
in the process of learning triplane representations, we utilize the decoder-only architecture, which significantly reduces memory usage, allowing the model to handle higherresolution medical data more efficiently. This is particularly
advantageous because the diffusion model focuses solely on
the decoding process. Furthermore, while previous applications of triplane representations have been limited to modeling the surfaces of 3D objects (Chan et al. 2022; Shue et al.
2023), our work demonstrates that this approach can also effectively represent dense volumes, such as medical datasets.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized.
• We introduce a decoder-only autoencoder that decodes
latent triplane representations (Chan et al. 2022) into
dense 3D volumes using iterative backpropagation. Our
approach outperforms baseline models like VAE-GAN
(Pinaya et al. 2022) and VQ-GAN (Khader et al. 2022b)
in reconstruction quality, with equivalent latent dimensions. Additionally, our model reduces memory usage
during training, allowing for the processing of higher resolution images compared to baseline models.
• Our method introduces a novel diffusion model named

We introduce TCAM-Diff, a novel 3D medical image generation model that reduces the memory requirements to encode
and generate high-resolution 3D data. This model utilizes a
decoder-only autoencoder method to learn triplane representation from dense volume and leverages generalization operations to prevent overfitting. Subsequently, it uses a triplaneaware cross-attention diffusion model to learn and integrate
these features effectively. Furthermore, the features generated by the diffusion model can be rapidly transformed into
3D volumes using a pre-trained decoder module. Our experiments on three different scales of medical datasets, BrainTumour 128 × 128 × 128, Pancreas 256 × 256 × 256, and Colon
512×512×512, demonstrate outstanding results. We utilized
MSE and SSIM to assess reconstruction quality and leveraged
the Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (W-GAN)
critic to assess generative quality. Comparisons with existing
approaches show that our method gives better reconstruction
and generation results than other encoder-decoder methods
with similar sized latent spaces.

Introduction
The development of generative models has revolutionized
numerous fields, ranging from natural language processing
to image synthesis. These models not only enhance data diversity by generating synthetic examples of rare classes, improving classifier robustness, but also facilitate conditional
generation. This allows for the creation of data constrained
to match specific measurements, offering plausible interpretations and expanding the analytical capabilities across various applications.
Recently, diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)
have gained attention for their ability to generate highquality realistic data by effectively modeling complex distributions. Their flexibility and robustness make them suitable for a wide range of applications. Building on this, latent diffusion models (LDM) (Rombach et al. 2022) extend
these capabilities by operating in a lower-dimensional latent
space, which reduces computational complexity and broadens their applicability to more diverse and complex tasks,
such as image superresolution (Zhao et al. 2023), text-toimage generation (Rombach et al. 2022), 3D object generaCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22732

