The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A PIRL: Deep Reinforcement Learning for REST API Fuzzing
Myles Foley12 , Sergio Maffeis1
1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London
2
The Alan Turing Institute
m.foley20@imperial.ac.uk, sergio.maffeis@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

or following some predefined heuristics. A common criterion to practically estimate performance is code coverage.
However, as only a small portion of code contains bugs, it
can lead to a high number of executed tests.
Black-box testing has been applied to automatically generate test cases for REST APIs (Atlidakis et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2022). While this has lead to improvements in REST
API testing, such approaches lack targeted search strategies,
or do not harness contextual information. This limits the potential of frameworks due to the unique behaviour of endpoints, their diversity, and varying schema requirements. As
a result software testing models can be inefficient, requiring
a very large number of test cases to find bugs.
Recent research used attention-based neural networks to
predict mutations in test cases (Lyu, Xu, and Ji 2023). This is
a promising approach for REST API testing. Yet, current solutions often only use simplistic feedback from HTTP status
codes to determine success, while the main body of HTTP
responses is either discarded, or only used for populating
data when testing (Corradini et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2022).
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown potential in automated testing, and has been successful learning policies to
test compilers (Li et al. 2022a) and web applications (Lee,
Wi, and Son 2022; Zheng et al. 2021). These works have
demonstrated that using off-the-shelf RL methods such as
Deep Q-Networks (DQN) (2015) and Proximal Policy Optimisation (PPO) (2017) can harness feedback to find more
bugs, and improve efficiency. However, similar to REST API
testing, RL-based software testing often uses simple heuristics as feedback (Lee, Wi, and Son 2022; Li et al. 2022a),
which may fail to fully capture the subtleties of the problem. While work from Kim et al. (2023) has shown that RL
can find bugs in REST APIs, it suffers from the same issue:
not harnessing contextual information for feedback. The key
challenge to do so arises from the variation across different APIs and the diversity in individual endpoint responses.
Yet, if the information-rich data structure can be used for test
case generation, it could provide valuable feedback. To address this challenge, we develop a novel deep RL agent that
mutates HTTP requests to find bugs in REST APIs.
Our RL problem formulation uses a transformer architecture we pre-train to harness JSON and natural language in
the HTTP responses, providing feedback to facilitate adaptation to operations after training. We then introduce a Markov

REST APIs have become key components of web services.
However, they often contain logic flaws resulting in server
side errors or security vulnerabilities. HTTP requests are used
as test cases to find and mitigate such issues. Existing methods to modify requests, including those using deep learning, suffer from limited performance and precision, relying
on undirected search or making limited usage of the contextual information. In this paper we propose A PIRL, a fully automated deep reinforcement learning tool for testing REST
APIs. A key novelty of our approach is the use of feedback
from a transformer module pre-trained on JSON-structured
data, akin to that used in API responses. This allows A PIRL to
learn the subtleties relating to test outcomes, and generalise to
unseen API endpoints. We show A PIRL can find significantly
more bugs than the state-of-the-art in real world REST APIs
while minimising the number of required test cases. We also
study how reward functions, and other key design choices,
affect learnt policies with a thorough ablation study.

1

Introduction

REpresentational State Transfer (REST) APIs have become
the standard way to interact with Web services and resources. They are used by organisations such as Amazon,
Google, and OpenAI to integrate with a wide array of systems, processes, and resources. These APIs consist of operations, specified by a Uniform Resource Locator (URL) accessible by the Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP), and a
series of associated parameters. Atlidakis et al. (2019) show
bugs in these operations are typically hard to find, due to the
complex interactions, and diversity of APIs. Some bugs have
security implications that result in the extraction of information or data manipulation, as summarised in the OWASP API
Security Top 10. Hence, it is crucial to test the robustness of
REST APIs using sophisticated techniques.
Automated software testing finds bugs or vulnerabilities
in an application by detecting abnormal behaviour. This automated process can be referred to as fuzz testing (fuzzing),
security testing, or robustness testing. For REST APIs testing, this involves creating new HTTP request test cases or
mutating existing templates. Often, this is done at random
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

191

