The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MM-Tracker: Motion Mamba for UAV-platform Multiple Object Tracking
Mufeng Yao1 * , Jinlong Peng2 * , Qingdong He2 , Bo Peng3 , Hao Chen1 , Mingmin Chi1† , Chao Liu1† ,
Jon Atli Benediktsson4†
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
3
Shanghai Ocean University
4
University of Iceland
mfyao21@m.fudan.edu.cn, jeromepeng@tencent.com, yingcaihe@tencent.com,bpeng@shou.edu.cn,
22210240115@m.fudan.edu.cn, mmchi@fudan.edu.cn, chaoliu20@.fudan.edu.cn,benedikt@hi.is
Abstract

Frame t

Multiple object tracking (MOT) from unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platforms requires efficient motion modeling.
This is because UAV-MOT faces both local object motion and
global camera motion. Motion blur also increases the difficulty of detecting large moving objects. Previous UAV motion modeling approaches either focus only on local motion
or ignore motion blurring effects, thus limiting their tracking performance and speed. To address these issues, we propose the Motion Mamba Module, which explores both local and global motion features through cross-correlation and
bi-directional Mamba Modules for better motion modeling.
To address the detection difficulties caused by motion blur,
we also design motion margin loss to effectively improve
the detection accuracy of motion blurred objects. Based on
the Motion Mamba module and motion margin loss, our
proposed MM-Tracker surpasses the state-of-the-art in two
widely open-source UAV-MOT datasets.

Score:0.9
Score:0.1
Without Motion Margin

Frame t+1
Local
Information
Missed
Score:0.8
Score:0.9
With Motion Margin
Clear Objects

Code — https://github.com/YaoMufeng/MMTracker
Global Scan matched

Motion Blurred Objects

Introduction
Figure 1: Advantages of our MM-Tracker. Left: a global
camera motion was experienced during frame t and t + 1,
our global scan matched the object that the local correlation
missed. Right: with our motion margin loss, the detection
score of motion-blurred object is increased.

Multiple object tracking (MOT) aims to identify objects in
a given video and is widely used in computer vision (Luo
et al. 2021; Kalake, Wan, and Hou 2021), including applications in autonomous driving (Geiger et al. 2013), humancomputer interaction (Chandra et al. 2015), and pedestrian
tracking (Peng et al. 2020b; Meinhardt et al. 2022). A typical MOT approach consists of two primary stages: detection
and association (Shuai et al. 2021). The detection stage identifies all objects in each frame, while the association stage
matches objects across consecutive frames to establish complete trajectories for each object (Liu et al. 2022a). Recently,
MOT in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platforms has attracted extensive research interest. Compared with conventional MOT (Dendorfer et al. 2020), MOT in UAV view
faces more challenges. Firstly, both the ground object motion and the aerial camera motion exist in the UAVMOT

task, posing a challenge for the tracker to follow the object
accurately. Secondly, the severe motion blur (Kurimo et al.
2009) caused by camera motion will significantly increase
the difficulty of object detection.
Kalman filtering and its various variants are very commonly used motion modeling schemes (Bewley et al. 2016;
Cao et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023). However, the Kalman filtering scheme is a non-learning algorithm, which can only make pre-assumptions about the motion (e.g., assume linear motion), therefore, the accuracy
is limited in camera motion scenes. Several studies (Shuai
et al. 2021; Zhou, Koltun, and Krähenbühl 2020; Yao et al.
2023) propose learning-based motion modeling, but most of

*

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9409

