The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reverse Distribution Based Video Moment Retrieval for Effective Bias Elimination
Lingdu Kong1 , Xiaochun Yang1 * , Tieying Li1 , Bin Wang1,2,3 , Xiangmin Zhou4
1

Northeastern University, China
National Frontiers Science Center for Industrial Intelligence and Systems Optimization, China
3
Key Laboratory of Data Analytics and Optimization for Smart Industry (Northeastern University),
Ministry of Education, China
4
RMIT University, Australia
2210707@stu.neu.edu.cn, {yangxc, binwang}@mail.neu.edu.cn, tieying@stumail.neu.edu.cn, xiangmin.zhou@rmit.edu.au
2

Abstract
Video Moment Retrieval (VMR) aims to identify a temporal
segment in an untrimmed video that best matches a given textual query. Bias in VMR is a critical issue, where the model
achieves favorable results even if disregarding the video input. Existing evaluation methods, such as Resplitting, have attempted to address bias by creating out-of-distribution (OOD)
datasets. However, these methods provide an incomplete definition of bias and do not quantify bias. To this end, we provide
a comprehensive definition of bias in VMR, encompassing
both data bias and model bias. Besides, our evaluation metrics can analyze the magnitude of these biases better. To address both data and model biases comprehensively, we introduce Reverse Distribution based VMR (ReDis-VMR). This
novel approach dynamically generates datasets with inverse
distributions tailored to different models based on Gaussian
kernel estimation. As a result, it enables a more accurate evaluation of model performance. Building on ReDis-VMR, we
further propose the Dynamic Expandable Adjustment (DEA)
pipeline. DEA incrementally expands the model structure to
enhance its focus on video and text features, and it incorporates a fair loss to minimize the influence of concentrated data
distributions. The experiments on bias ratio demonstrate that
our ReDis method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
bias elimination, while the results on moment retrieval confirm the effectiveness of our DEA framework across three
evaluation methods, two datasets, and three baselines.

(a) train set

data
bias

model
bias
(b) test set
(c) candidate

Query: person walking across the room to open a cabinet door.

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: An example of data bias and model bias: (a) Distribution of the train set and its highest confidence segments.
(b) Distribution of the test set and the ground truth. (c)
Model’s candidates and their highest confidence segments.

VMR are often overlooked. Due to the similarity of concentrated distributions of temporal segments in existing training
and testing datasets, models can achieve favorable results
even when overlooking video inputs (Otani et al. 2020).
Existing methods (Yang et al. 2021; Liu, Qu, and Hu
2022; Wang et al. 2023; Yin et al. 2023) primarily verify
the generalization ability of models without bias by evaluating on resplitted datasets (Yuan et al. 2021). The resplitting
method modifies the training and test data based on the distribution of the original training set and test set, transforming
them into datasets with out-of-distribution (OOD) distributions. This resplitting method primarily addresses data bias,
which refers to the phenomenon where a model achieves favorable results due to the similarity between the distributions
of the training set and the test set. However, in addition to
data bias, we identified the presence of model bias, which is
equally important and warrants attention. Model bias refers
to the similarity between the distribution of the model’s candidate set and the distribution of the test set, leading to a
predictive tendency in the model. As a result, the model can
achieve favorable results even without training. Nevertheless, a VMR model should be capable of predicting any temporal segment without such predictive tendencies.

Code — https://github.com/NoobKLD/ReDis-VMR

Introduction
Video Moment Retrieval (VMR), as a downstream task in
video content understanding, has recently garnered significant attention from researchers (Gao et al. 2017; Hendricks
et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2019; Hahn et al. 2020;
Wang, Huang, and Wang 2019). The objective of VMR is
to identify a temporal segment in an untrimmed video that
best matches a textual query. Researchers typically focus on
designing models to obtain improved fusion representations
of video and text (Zhang et al. 2020b; Cui et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2020a; Gao et al. 2017; Hendricks et al. 2017; Liu et al.
2018; Lu et al. 2019). It is worth noting that the biases in
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11959

