The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploiting Symmetries in MUS Computation
Ignace Bleukx1 , Hélène Verhaeghe1,2 , Bart Bogaerts1,3 , Tias Guns1
1

KU Leuven, Dept. of Computer Science; Leuven.AI, Celestijnenlaan 200A, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
2
UCLouvain, ICTEAM, Place Sainte Barbe 2, 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
3
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Dept. of Computer Science, Pleinlaan 9, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
ignace.bleukx@kuleuven.be, helene.verhaeghe@uclouvain.be, bart.bogaerts@kuleuven.be, tias.guns@kuleuven.be

Abstract

In some cases, it can be useful to not just compute a single
MUS but to enumerate a collection of MUSes or even all of
them, as some MUSes may be easier understood by a user
than others. Many algorithms for computing a set of MUSes
rely on the “seed-and-shrink” paradigm (Bendı́k and Cerná
2020), where variants of the MARCO-algorithm are among
the most popular techniques (Liffiton et al. 2016). MUScomputation and enumeration techniques have been discussed extensively (Marques-Silva and Mencı́a 2020; Gupta,
Genc, and O’Sullivan 2021).
A prime concern for MUS computation and enumeration
techniques is efficiency, especially for large problems, as
checking if a valid assignment exists for a set of constraints
can already be NP-hard (Biere et al. 2021). In practice, many
techniques exist to speed up solving, e.g., by exploiting the
problem structure. One of these, which has barely been studied in the context of MUS computation, is the exploitation
of symmetries in the problem formulation.
Many real-world problems exhibit some kind of (variable and/or value) symmetry. For example, packing items
into equivalent trucks, assigning shifts to equivalent workers or scheduling tasks on equivalent machines. Such symmetries can slow down combinatorial solvers, as they might
have to consider all symmetric alternatives to an assignment.
Solvers can exploit symmetries to prune the search space
and/or speed up the search (Gent, Petrie, and Puget 2006;
Sakallah 2021). Symmetry exploitation techniques are either static or dynamic. Static techniques involve adding symmetry breaking constraints to the specification before starting the solver. Dynamic techniques exploit the symmetries
during search, e.g., by automatically learning symmetric
clauses (Devriendt et al. 2012; Chu et al. 2014; Mears et al.
2014; Devriendt, Bogaerts, and Bruynooghe 2017), by modifying their branching behaviour (Fahle, Schamberger, and
Sellmann 2001; Sabharwal 2005) or by generating symmetry breaking constraints during the solvers’ execution (Metin
et al. 2018). Furthermore, several tools exist for automatically detecting symmetries in the constraint specifications
for a variety of input formats (Drescher, Tifrea, and Walsh
2011; Devriendt et al. 2016; Caudenberg and Bogaerts 2022;
Anders, Brenner, and Rattan 2024).
While symmetry-handling has extensively been studied
for methods solving constraint satisfaction or optimization
problems, they have barely been studied in the context

In eXplainable Constraint Solving (XCS), it is common to
extract a Minimal Unsatisfiable Subset (MUS) from a set of
unsatisfiable constraints. This helps explain to a user why a
constraint specification does not admit a solution. Finding
MUSes can be computationally expensive for highly symmetric problems, as many combinations of constraints need
to be considered. In the traditional context of solving satisfaction problems, symmetry has been well studied, and effective
ways to detect and exploit symmetries during the search exist. However, in the setting of finding MUSes of unsatisfiable
constraint programs, symmetries are understudied. In this paper, we take inspiration from existing symmetry-handling
techniques and adapt well-known MUS-computation methods to exploit symmetries in the specification, speeding-up
overall computation time. Our results display a significant reduction of runtime for our adapted algorithms compared to
the baseline on symmetric problems.

Code — github.com/ML-KULeuven/SymmetryMUS
Extended version — arxiv.org/pdf/2412.13606

1

Introduction

The field of eXplainable Constraint Solving (XCS) is a subfield of eXplainable AI (XAI) focused on explaining the solutions, or lack thereof, of constraint (optimization) problems. Explaining why a set of constraints does not admit a
solution is often done through a Minimal Unsatisfiable Subset (MUS), i.e., an irreducible subset of the constraints rendering the problem unsatisfiable. This subset of constraints
is then easier for a user to analyze than the full problem.
MUSes are also used for debugging constraint models (Leo
and Tack 2017), including minimization of faulty models
when fuzz testing (Paxian and Biere 2023), explaining why
an objective value is optimal (Bleukx et al. 2023) or to
explain why a fact follows from the constraints (Bogaerts,
Gamba, and Guns 2021). MUS computation techniques are
well-studied and well-known in the XAI literature. Frequently used algorithms can be classified into shrinking1
methods (Marques-Silva 2010); divide-and-conquer algorithms like QuickXplain (Junker 2001) and implicit-hittingset based methods (Ignatiev et al. 2015).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
sometimes called destructive or deletion-based

11122

