The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Conformal Control for Time Series Forecasting
Ruipu Li, Alexander Rodrı́guez
University of Michigan
liruipu@umich.edu, alrodri@umich.edu

Abstract
We introduce a neural network conformal prediction method
for time series that enhances adaptivity in non-stationary environments. Our approach acts as a neural controller designed
to achieve desired target coverage, leveraging auxiliary multiview data with neural network encoders in an end-to-end manner to further enhance adaptivity. Additionally, our model is
designed to enhance the consistency of prediction intervals in
different quantiles by integrating monotonicity constraints and
leverages data from related tasks to boost few-shot learning
performance. Using real-world datasets from epidemics, electric demand, weather, and others, we empirically demonstrate
significant improvements in coverage and probabilistic accuracy, and find that our method is the only one that combines
good calibration with consistency in prediction intervals.

Project page — https://github.com/complex-ai-lab/ncc

Introduction
Quantifying uncertainty in predictions is crucial for various
practical applications. Rigorous frameworks are necessary
to assess the reliability of these predictions and inform highstakes decisions, such as hospital resource allocation during
epidemics or planning energy supply for cities (Gawlikowski
et al. 2023). Among these frameworks, conformal prediction (CP) (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer 2005; Shafer and
Vovk 2008) stands out for its ability to provide a theoretical coverage guarantee under mild distribution assumptions.
However, the guarantee often breaks down in time series
forecasting due to temporal dependencies and distribution
shifts inherent in time series data. To address these challenges, multiple methods have been proposed, each making specific assumptions about the time series, such as stationarity (Oliveira et al. 2024), dependence structures (Xu
and Xie 2023), or exchangeable data and forecasting strategies (Stankeviciute, M Alaa, and van der Schaar 2021). Another line of work (Gibbs and Candes 2021), which we refer
to as ‘conformal control’, circumvents those assumptions by
adopting a control perspective in an online setting, where
prediction intervals dynamically adapt to coverage errors to
achieve a desired target coverage. Based on this, several variations have been introduced to refine the controller logic and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18439

enhance adaptivity (Angelopoulos, Candes, and Tibshirani
2024; Zaffran et al. 2022; Bhatnagar et al. 2023).
Despite these advancements, significant gaps remain between current CP methods and the demands of real-world
applications. For instance, the epidemic forecasting initiatives
hosted by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) in response to diseases such as Ebola (Viboud et al.
2018; Johansson et al. 2019), influenza (Reich et al. 2019;
Mathis et al. 2024), and COVID-19 (Cramer et al. 2022)
highlight these challenges. Because these predictions inform
critical policymaking decisions, the CDC requires forecasters to provide a comprehensive view of future possibilities.
Consequently, submissions must include different confidence
levels that adherence to distributional consistency (Reich
et al. 2019; Cramer et al. 2022), which prohibits crossing
prediction intervals. Failure to meet these standards makes
forecasts invalid for CDC acceptance. Conformal control
methods do not guarantee this because of disjoint calibration
for each confidence level and our experiments revealed that
some of them fail to provide valid forecasts as low as 0% of
cases. In addition, forecasting teams are encouraged to utilize
any relevant datasets, and previous work has demonstrated
the effectiveness of leveraging multi-view datasets from heterogeneous sources (Rodrı́guez et al. 2021; Qian, Alaa, and
van der Schaar 2020) and across multiple modalities (Deng
et al. 2020; Kamarthi et al. 2022). For example, distribution
shifts driven by human behavior can be anticipated by analyzing digital surveys and mobility data (Rodrı́guez et al. 2024).
However, CP methods often underutilize the auxiliary information, which could better inform adaptivity mechanisms
and improve calibration. Moreover, high-stakes applications
like epidemic forecasting require readiness to address emerging outbreaks, such as recent cases of H5N1 and measles,
where data is scarce. This underscores the need to enhance
the few-shot learning capabilities of current CP methods.
In response to these challenges, we propose integrating
recent ideas from conformal control with advances in deep
learning. Our method, Neural Conformal Control for Time
Series Forecasting (NCC), incorporates control-inspired loss
functions to enable the neural network to function as a predictive controller. This approach offers a flexible, end-to-end
learning framework for conformal prediction using neural
networks without losing the theoretical guarantee on coverage. We summarize our main contributions as follows.

