The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reference-Based Post-OCR Processing with LLM for
Precise Diacritic Text in Historical Document Recognition
Thao Do, Dinh Phu Tran, An Vo, Daeyoung Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, South Korea
{thaodo, phutx2000, an.vo, kimd}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

third party seals, termite bites and bleed-through. Digitization and preservation of historical texts create substantial social impact, especially as social science researchers and heritage offices struggle to reliably collect and retrieve the data
needed for their work, research, and education activities.
Several projects (Gooding, Terras, and Warwick 2013)
digitize these aged books by capturing page images to preserve them electronically. The next step is to transcribe images for text-based storage and later text mining, which
is also a time-consuming process. Many earlier industrial
tools and modern AI models were developed for this purpose. However, the precision and quality of the text generated automatically remain inadequate for uncommon languages. So, proofreading and manual modifications are necessary following these processes. To alleviate this issue, researchers leveraged the well-known task of spelling check
from office text editing to correct post-OCR texts similarly.
Some are based on statistical approaches to offer a list of
candidates for replacing words, while recent methods offer
full-text (e.g., paragraph) transformation based on the context and distribution the model was trained on beforehand
(Hládek, Staš, and Pleva 2020).
Nevertheless, the kind of self-sufficient spell correction
model has some limitations. Let’s take the letter ‘a’ in Vietnamese, it has 17 variants with diacritics, the same is true
for their ‘o’. So, “con ga” could have 18 × 18 combinations
(assuming consonants are correct) and 10 of them are meaningful. Therefore, one limitation of the standalone spell correction model is that it heavily depends on OCR capability
because the more errors are made (vowels, consonants, diacritics), the more combinations and candidates are created
(Hládek, Staš, and Pleva 2020). This leads to a lesser chance
of generating correct text. The second problem especially
comes with seq2seq style models, which were trained on recent corpus. Those trained sets have a different distribution
(modern contents) compared with the distribution of classical contents where archaic, obsolete vocabulary and oldfashioned grammar exist. Some tried to directly train from
suitable distribution but with the cost of annotation data.
By chance, we discovered that, before recent advancements in AI, from the 1990s, readers and preservation enthusiasts made efforts to digitize aged books in electronic form.
Ebook makers usually focus on the main content of the book
as it is the final form fitting on ebook readers which pro-

Extracting fine-grained OCR text from aged documents in diacritic languages remains challenging due to unexpected artifacts, time-induced degradation, and lack of datasets. While
standalone spell correction approaches have been proposed,
they show limited performance for historical documents due
to numerous possible OCR error combinations and differences between modern and classical corpus distributions. We
propose a method utilizing available content-focused ebooks
as a reference base to correct imperfect OCR-generated
text, supported by large language models. This technique
generates high-precision pseudo-page-to-page labels for diacritic languages, where small strokes pose significant challenges in historical conditions. The pipeline eliminates various types of noise from aged documents and addresses issues
such as missing characters, words, and disordered sequences.
Our post-processing method, which generated a large OCR
dataset of classical Vietnamese books, achieved a mean grading score of 8.72 on a 10-point scale. This outperformed the
state-of-the-art transformer-based Vietnamese spell correction model, which scored 7.03 when evaluated on a sampled
subset of the dataset. We also trained a baseline OCR model
to assess and compare it with well-known engines. Experimental results demonstrate the strength of our baseline model
compared to widely used open-source solutions. The resulting dataset will be released publicly to support future studies.

Dataset — https://github.com/thaodod/VieBookRead

1

Introduction

Optical character recognition (OCR) utilizing deep learning
methodologies for pervasive languages, such as English, has
attained great performance for digitizing book-form documents, and the research community focus has thus transitioned to new challenges. Conversely, for languages replete
with diacritics, such as Vietnamese (67 diacritic letters),
Slavic (25 letters), Czech (19 letters) (Stankevičius et al.
2022), hopes of similar performance remain unrealized. The
problem becomes challenging when these tiny strokes of diacritics faded in historical documents like books or newspapers, and several background problems emerge such as
ripped, taped or obscured words, smeared inks, watermarks,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27951

