The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TSVC: Tripartite Learning with Semantic Variation Consistency for Robust
Image-Text Retrieval
Shuai Lyu1 , Zijing Tian2 , Zhonghong Ou3 * , Yifan Zhu1 , Xiao Zhang1 , Qiankun Ha1 , Haoran Luo1 ,
Meina Song1
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
School of Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{Lxb savior, tianzj, zhonghong.ou, yifan zhu, xiao20010420}@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval maps data under different modality via
semantic relevance. Existing approaches implicitly assume
that data pairs are well-aligned and ignore the widely existing annotation noise, i.e., noisy correspondence (NC). Consequently, it inevitably causes performance degradation. Despite attempts that employ the co-teaching paradigm with
identical architectures to provide distinct data perspectives,
the differences between these architectures are primarily
stemmed from random initialization. Thus, the model becomes increasingly homogeneous along with the training process. Consequently, the additional information brought by
this paradigm is severely limited. In order to resolve this problem, we introduce a Tripartite learning with Semantic Variation Consistency (TSVC) for robust image-text retrieval. We
design a tripartite cooperative learning mechanism comprising a Coordinator, a Master, and an Assistant model. The
Coordinator distributes data, and the Assistant model supports the Master model’s noisy label prediction with diverse
data. Moreover, we introduce a soft label estimation method
based on mutual information variation, which quantifies the
noise in new samples and assigns corresponding soft labels.
We also present a new loss function to enhance robustness
and optimize training effectiveness. Extensive experiments on
three widely used datasets demonstrate that, even at increasing noise ratios, TSVC exhibits significant advantages in retrieval accuracy and maintains stable training performance.

Figure 1: Illustration of semantic variance consistency
guided sample filtering. We use Mutual Information (MI) to
calculate the level of noise between anchor pair and new
pair. We primarily consider the MI variation among sample
pairs ∆P , images ∆I , and texts ∆T . The smaller the variation is, the cleaner we consider the pair to be.

To address noisy correspondences in cross-modal matching, existing studies mainly focus on two aspects: noisy sample label estimation (Ma et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024b)
and loss function adjustment (Hu et al. 2021; Shi et al.
2024). Noisy sample label estimation primarily involves reestimating and adjusting the labels of noisy samples by exploring the latent relationships within the dataset. The loss
function adjustment aims to enhance model robustness by
designing new loss functions. Recent studies have increasingly focused on the estimation of noisy sample labels.
Accurately estimating soft corresponding labels for noisy
data has always been a big challenge for noise-robust crossmodal matching. Previous studies (Yang et al. 2024; Zhao
et al. 2024b) have made efforts by employing the rate of similarity changes to quantify noise content. Yang et al. (Yang
et al. 2023) leverage the inherent similarity between the two
modalities to assign pseudo labels. Nevertheless, they fail to
consider other crucial data relationships and features, thus
limiting their ability to identify complex noise. On the other
hand, some studies (Zheng, Awadallah, and Dumais 2021;
Zhang, Li, and Ye 2024) mainly rely on the memory effect
of Deep Neural Networks (DNN) (Zhang et al. 2021), which
tends to prioritize learning simple patterns rather than noisy

Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval (Anderson et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019)
aims to accurately associate and align data from different
modalities, e.g., images and texts. As a key technology in the
field of multi-modality, it has been widely applied in both
industry and academia. In classification tasks, noise labels
(Yan et al. 2023; Iscen et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2022) generally
refer to labeling errors. In cross-modal matching tasks, however, noise labels pertain to alignment errors in paired data,
also known as noise correspondence. Consequently, a large
fraction of existing noise-robust learning methods (Zhong
et al. 2024) designed for classification cannot be directly applied for cross-modal matching tasks.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19269

