The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BeFA: A General Behavior-driven Feature Adapter for
Multimedia Recommendation
Qile Fan1 * , Penghang Yu1 * , Zhiyi Tan1 , Bing-Kun Bao3 , Guanming Lu1, 2 †
1

School of Communications and Information Engineering,
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
2
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing and Communication Technology, Nanjing, China
3
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
b21011331@njupt.edu.cn, 2022010201@njupt.edu.cn, tzy@njupt.edu.cn, bingkunbao@njupt.edu.cn, lugm@njupt.edu.cn
Abstract
Encoder

Multimedia recommender systems focus on utilizing behavioral information and content information to model user preferences. Typically, it employs pre-trained feature encoders to
extract content features, then fuses them with behavioral features. However, pre-trained feature encoders often extract features from the entire content simultaneously, including excessive preference-irrelevant details. We speculate that it may result in the extracted features not containing sufficient features
to accurately reflect user preferences. To verify our hypothesis, we introduce an attribution analysis method for visually
and intuitively analyzing the content features. The results indicate that certain items’ content features exhibit the issues
of information drift and information omission, reducing
the expressive ability of features. Building upon this finding, we propose an effective and efficient general Behaviordriven Feature Adapter (BeFA) to tackle these issues. This
adapter reconstructs the content feature with the guidance of
behavioral information, enabling content features accurately
reflecting user preferences. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the adapter across all multimedia
recommendation methods.

I like this Cheongsam.
Its design attracts me!

Park：

0.94

Brown:

0.87

Women：

0.63

Crimson:

0.57

Boot:

0.13

Cheongsam: 0.11

The user prefers the
product images that
were shot in the park.

Figure 1: Illustration of content features that do not accurately reflect the users’ preferences. Excessive irrelevant information hinders the recommender system’s ability to effectively model the users’ true preferences.

tionships between modalities through the use of contrastive
learning, thereby obtaining a powerful representation. BM3
(Zhou et al. 2023c) utilizes a dropout strategy to construct
multiple views and reconstructs the interaction graph, incorporating intra- and inter-modality contrastive loss to facilitate effective representation learning. MICRO (Zhang et al.
2022) and MGCN (Yu et al. 2023) maximize the mutual information between content features and behavioral features
with a self-supervised auxiliary task, and have achieved excellent performance. Despite the good progress made in utilizing content and behavioral information more effectively,
a crucial yet easily overlooked problem arises: Are content
features obtained from pre-trained encoders containing
sufficient features to reflect user preferences? Intuitively,
multimedia content inherently exhibits the characteristic of
low informational value density, where a significant portion
of the presented information may be irrelevant to the users’
focus (Zhou et al. 2023a). Pre-trained feature encoders extract information from the entire content simultaneously,
which can result in content features that do not truly reflect
the users’ preferences (as shown in Figure 1). Fusing these
irrelevant content features with behavioral features may mislead user preference modeling, resulting in suboptimal recommendation performance.

Introduction
Recommender systems have gained widespread adoption
across various domains, aiming to assist users in discovering
information that aligns with their preferences (Parchas et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2017). In the case of multimedia platforms,
the abundance of data resources provides recommender systems with increased opportunities to accurately model user
preferences (Zhou et al. 2023a).
Existing multimedia recommendation methods typically
involves two main steps (Yuan et al. 2023; Zhou et al.
2023a). First, a pre-trained feature encoder is employed
to capture content features from diverse modalities. Subsequently, these content features are fused with behavioral
features to obtain user preference representations. Recently,
researchers have focused on enhancing the quality of these
representations through self-supervised learning. For instance, SLMRec (Tao et al. 2023) investigates potential rela* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11634

