The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GenPlan: Generative Sequence Models as Adaptive Planners
Akash Karthikeyan, Yash Vardhan Pant
University of Waterloo, Canada
{a9karthi, yash.pant}@uwaterloo.ca

Train Demonstration - Simple

Abstract
Sequence models have demonstrated remarkable success
in behavioral planning by leveraging previously collected
demonstrations. However, solving multi-task missions remains a significant challenge, particularly when the planner
must adapt to unseen constraints and tasks, such as discovering goals and unlocking doors. Such behavioral planning
problems are challenging to solve due to: a) agents failing
to adapt beyond the single task learned through their reward
function, and b) inability to generalize to new environments,
e.g., those with walls and locked doors, when trained only in
planar environments. Consequently, state-of-the-art decisionmaking methods are limited to missions where the required
tasks are well-represented in the training demonstrations and
can be solved within a short (temporal) planning horizon. To
address this, we propose GenPlan: a stochastic and adaptive
planner that leverages discrete-flow models for generative sequence modeling, enabling sample-efficient exploration and
exploitation. This framework relies on an iterative denoising
procedure to generate a sequence of goals and actions. This
approach captures multi-modal action distributions and facilitates goal and task discovery, thereby generalizing to outof-distribution tasks and environments, i.e., missions not part
of the training data. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method through multiple simulation environments. Notably,
GenPlan outperforms state-of-the-art methods by over 10%
on adaptive planning tasks, where the agent adapts to multitask missions while leveraging demonstrations from singlegoal-reaching tasks.

Test Environments - Harder

High

(a) Adaptation to harder tasks.

Energy

Low

(b) Iterative refinement.

Figure 1: Overview. GenPlan is a generative, multi-step
planner that optimizes energy landscape to adapt to complex
tasks and iteratively refine long-horizon missions. Goals are
highlighted in yellow, and distractors are marked in red.

generate multi-step trajectories, exploring to locate goals
while avoiding getting stuck, unblocking paths, and navigating around walls to complete the mission.
Learning such behaviors from demonstrations is challenging and often requires a diverse dataset that accurately represents the necessary tasks. This is much harder for longhorizon tasks, where the correct order of subtasks is critical
(e.g., collecting a key before unlocking a door).
Reinforcement learning via Supervised Learning
(RvS) (Emmons et al. 2022) simplifies traditional Reinforcement Learning (RL) by using a behaviour cloning (BC)
objective and framing RL as sequence modeling, where
actions are sequentially predicted based on next best action.
However, this approach often struggles in order-critical
multi-task missions, as generated plans can suffer from
locally optimal decisions, resulting in global dead-ends,
or accumulate errors without accounting for mistakes in
previous actions (Lambert, Pister, and Calandra 2022).
Thus, a categorical distribution is better suited for capturing abstracted sequence planners (Lee et al. 2024), as
it enables clustering of different modes and provides interpretable predictions of subtask orders. More recently, generative modeling-based works allow conditional sequence-

Code — https://github.com/CL2-UWaterloo/GenPlan

1

GoTo Green Box and Gray Key

Introduction

An intelligent autonomous agent must be adaptable to new
tasks at runtime beyond those encountered during training.
This is crucial for operating in complex environments that
may introduce distractors (i.e., objects the agent has not seen
before) and have multiple novel goals.
Example 1 Consider a task where an agent is initially
trained on a simple single-goal-reaching task in a planar
environment. During evaluation, the agent must adapt to
complex environments with walls, locked doors, and multiple goals, as illustrated in figure 1A. The planner must
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17797

