The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Aligning Language Models Using Follow-up Likelihood as Reward Signal
1

2

3,4,5

Chen Zhang , Dading Chong , Feng Jiang *
6
4
6
1,3,4
Chengguang Tang , Anningzhe Gao , Guohua Tang , Haizhou Li
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Peking University, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, China
5
University of Science and Technology of China, China
6
Tencent AI Lab, China
chen zhang@u.nus.edu, jeffreyjiang@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

How can I explain quantum
theory to a five year old?

In natural human-to-human conversations, participants often
receive feedback signals from one another based on their
follow-up reactions. These reactions can include verbal responses, facial expressions, changes in emotional state, and
other non-verbal cues. Similarly, in human-machine interactions, the machine can leverage the user’s follow-up utterances as feedback signals to assess whether it has appropriately addressed the user’s request. Therefore, we propose using the likelihood of follow-up utterances as rewards to differentiate preferred responses from less favored ones, without relying on human or commercial LLM-based preference
annotations. Our proposed reward mechanism, “Follow-up
Likelihood as Reward” (FLR), matches the performance of
strong reward models trained on large-scale human or GPT-4
annotated data on 8 pairwise-preference and 4 rating-based
benchmarks. Building upon the FLR mechanism, we propose
to automatically mine preference data from the online generations of a base policy model. The preference data are subsequently used to boost the helpfulness of the base model
through direct alignment from preference (DAP) methods,
such as direct preference optimization (DPO). Lastly, we
demonstrate that fine-tuning the language model that provides follow-up likelihood with natural language feedback
significantly enhances FLR’s performance on reward modeling benchmarks and effectiveness in aligning the base policy
model’s helpfulness.

1

Quantum theory is a fundamental
theory in physics that ......
You are not following
my instruction.

(a) Negative follow-up utterance from the user.
How can I explain quantum
theory to a five year old?
Imagine you have a magical toy box
that can create any toy ......
Thank you for your help.

(b) Positive follow-up utterance from the user.

Figure 1: Followup Examples.

Zhao et al. 2023b; Ethayarajh et al. 2024). All these techniques heavily rely on high-quality SFT or preference data,
but collecting such data through human efforts is extremely
expensive.
Lately, there has been a growing trend in the selfevolution of LLMs. This process allows the models to autonomously obtain, improve, and learn from their own generated experiences (Tao et al. 2024), reducing the need for
costly human supervision. For instance, Yuan et al. (2024)
introduces self-rewarding language models, starting with
bootstrapping instructions from a base policy model to generate candidate responses. The model then employs “LLMas-a-Judge” prompting (Zheng et al. 2023a) to evaluate its
own outputs, creating a collection of self-curated preference
data. The data are then used to align the language model
through directed preference optimization (Rafailov et al.
2023). In a similar vein, many recent works (Xu et al. 2023c;
Gulcehre et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024b; Guo et al. 2024; Li
et al. 2024c; Zhang et al. 2024b, inter alia) explore using online generations of language models for self-improvement
in an iterative manner. At the core of these works is an automated procedure for response quality annotation, which uti-

Introduction

The recent development of large language models (LLMs)
has revolutionized the field of natural language processing (Zhao et al. 2023a). Many chat-based LLMs are trained
to align a large-scale pretrained language model to human
preferences using techniques such as supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) (Wei et al. 2022; Chung et al. 2022), reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al.
2017; Ziegler et al. 2019; Ouyang et al. 2022), or direct
alignment from preferences (DAP) (Rafailov et al. 2023;
*

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25832

