The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Replicating Electoral Success
Kiran Tomlinson1,2 , Tanvi Namjoshi1,3 , Johan Ugander4 , Jon Kleinberg1
1

Cornell University
Microsoft Research
3
Princeton University
4
Stanford University
kitomlinson@microsoft.com, namjoshi@princeton.edu, jugander@stanford.edu, kleinberg@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

complexity and study simple models. The literature around
this topic traces its roots to Hotelling (1929) and Downs
(1957). In the Hotelling–Downs model, candidates compete
for election in a one-dimensional policy space. Under the assumption that voters prefer candidates with closer policies,
two rational office-seeking candidates will adopt the policy
of the median voter, since any other position receives strictly
fewer votes. Thus, the central prediction of the Hotelling–
Downs model is that we should expect two competing candidates to espouse near-identical moderate policies. However, this is not what we observe in modern democracies:
countries using plurality often have two dominant parties
with markedly different policies (Poole and Rosenthal 1984;
Grofman 2004; Riker 1982). Decades of research have attempted to reconcile this observed policy divergence with
the intuitive arguments of Hotelling and Downs (Grofman
2004; Osborne 1995; Palfrey 1984; Wittman 1983).
The majority of this work has assumed that candidates
are rational and able to make strategically optimal decisions.
However, the growing literature on bounded rationality (Simon 1955, 1979) and decision-making heuristics (Tversky
and Kahneman 1974), as well as the complexity of elections,
casts doubt on whether this is likely in practice. In a notable
exception to the literature, Bendor et al. (2011) argue that
heuristics play a crucial role in electoral strategy:

A core tension in the study of plurality elections is the clash
between the classic Hotelling–Downs model, which predicts
that two office-seeking candidates should cater to the median voter, and the empirical observation that democracies
often have two major parties with divergent policies. Motivated in part by this tension, we introduce a dynamic model
of candidate positioning based on a simple bounded rationality heuristic: candidates imitate the policy of previous winners. The resulting model is closely connected to evolutionary replicator dynamics. For uniformly-distributed voters, we
prove in our model that with k = 2, 3, or 4 candidates
per election, any symmetric candidate distribution converges
over time to the center. With k ≥ 5 candidates per election, however, we prove that the candidate distribution does
not converge to the center and provide an even stronger nonconvergence result in a special case with no extreme candidates. Our conclusions are qualitatively unchanged if a small
fraction of candidates are not winner-copiers and are instead
positioned uniformly at random in each election. Beyond our
theoretical analysis, we illustrate our results in extensive simulations; for five or more candidates, we find a tendency towards the emergence of two clusters, a mechanism suggestive
of Duverger’s Law, the empirical finding that plurality leads
to two-party systems. Our simulations also explore several
variations of the model, where we find the same general pattern: convergence to the center with four or fewer candidates,
but not with five or more. Finally, we discuss the relationship between our replicator dynamics model and prior work
on strategic equilibria of candidate positioning games.

Campaigns are of chess like complexity—worse,
probably: instead of a fixed board, campaigns are
fought out on stages that can change over time, and
new players can enter the game. Hence, cognitive constraints (e.g., the inability to look far down the decision tree, to anticipate your opponent’s response to
your response to their response to your new ad) inevitably matter. [...] Thus, political campaigns, like
military ones, are filled with trial and error. A theme
is tried, goes badly (or seems to), and is dropped. [...]
In short, there are good reasons for believing that the
basic properties of experiential learning—becoming
more likely to use something that has worked in the
past and less likely to repeat something that has
failed—hold in presidential campaigns. (Bendor et al.
2011, emphasis ours)

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17109
Code — https://github.com/tomlinsonk/pluralityreplicator-dynamics

Introduction
In a democracy, election outcomes determine the trajectory
of public policy. A central question in the study of elections
is therefore whether we can model which policies are electorally successful. However, elections are extremely complex, with layered interactions between voters, candidates,
and the incentives that guide them. To understand the principles governing elections, it is valuable to pare down this

Our model. In this paper, we introduce a model of candidate positioning based on such a heuristic: candidates

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14167

