The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-view Evidential Learning-based Medical Image Segmentation
Chao Huang1 , Yushu Shi1 , Waikeung Wong*2,3 , Chengliang Liu4 , Wei Wang1 , Zhihua Wang5 , Jie
Wen* 6
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
School of Fashion and Textiles, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design, Hong Kong
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
huangch253@mail.sysu.edu.cn, shiysh8@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk, liucl1996@163.com,
wangwei29@mail.sysu.edu.cn, zhihua.wang@my.cityu.edu.hk, wenjie@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

Rahman and Marculescu 2023) obtained promising performance and significant improvement in disease diagnosis.
In order to facilitate the extraction of domain-specific
knowledge, previous methods (Heidari et al. 2023; Roy et al.
2023) need to be trained on specific medical image datasets.
In fact, these methods adopt the single view-based medical image segmentation framework, which extracts information for segmentation from a perspective of the original input. However, the single view-based framework restricts the
scope of encoded knowledge for the model. Although some
methods achieve information augmentation by introducing
multi-scale representation learning (Zhan et al. 2023), they
fail to consider multiple scales to balance the distribution of
feature weights. Consequently, existing methods still cannot
effectively explore sufficient information to overcome the
generalization bottleneck caused by the limited embedded
knowledge scope of the single view-based framework.
Drawing inspiration from biological cognitive mechanisms, visual information from different views (e.g., different observation and viewing angles) can be mutually correlated and complementary (Liu et al. 2022). Consequently,
multi-view learning can be adopted to as a solution to overcome the generalization bottleneck. In fact, there are several
works (Liu et al. 2024a) have attempted to achieve medical
image segmentation based on multi-view learning. Despite
achieving superior performance compared to single-view
methods, these methods still exhibit limitations. Specifically, current multi-view methods are still trained on limited
datasets. They remain incapable of extracting effective generalizable knowledge.
Recently, vision foundation models such as SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023) and CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) have been
extensively applied to various vision tasks (Awais et al.
2023) and achieved remarkable success. These vision foundation models have strong feature extraction and zero-shot
transfer capabilities, since they are usually trained on large
scale datasets. Thus, vision foundation models can extract
richer and generalizable information (Frintrop, Rome, and
Christensen 2010). However, vision foundation models cannot extract domain-specific knowledge if directly applied
to medical images segmentation due to domain differences
(Zhang, Shen, and Jiao 2024). Thus, it is necessary to

Medical image segmentation provides useful information
about the shape and size of organs, which is beneficial for
improving diagnosis, analysis, and treatment. Despite traditional deep learning-based models can extract domainspecific knowledge, they face a generalization bottleneck due
to the limited embedded knowledge scope. Vision foundation
models have been demonstrated to be effective in extracting generalizable knowledge, but they cannot extract domainspecific knowledge without fine-tuning. In this work, we
propose a novel multi-view evidential learning-based framework, which can extract both domain-specific and generalizable knowledge from multi-view features by combining
the advantages of traditional and vision foundation models.
Specifically, a novel multi-view state space model (MV-SSM)
is designed to extract task-related knowledge while removing redundant information within multi-view features. The
proposed MV-SSM utilizes Mamba, a state space model, to
model cross-view contextual dependencies between domainspecific and generalizable features. Additionally, evidential
learning is adopted to quantify the segmentation uncertainty
of the model for boundary. In special, variational Dirichlet is
introduced to characterize the distribution of the result probabilities, parameterized with collected evidence to quantify
uncertainty. As a result, the model can reduce the segmentation uncertainties of boundaries by optimizing the parameters
of the Dirichlet distribution. Experimental results on three
datasets show that our method obtains superior segmentation
performance.

Introduction
Medical image segmentation is a critical component of
computer-aided diagnosis, which plays a pivotal role in relative applications. It can provide useful information about
the shape and size of organs, which is beneficial for improving diagnosis, analysis, and treatment. In recent years, deep
learning techniques have been extensively applied to medical image segmentation and have achieved remarkable success (Qureshi et al. 2023). These methods (Butoi et al. 2023;
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17386

