The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Guided Real Image Dehazing Using YCbCr Color Space
Wenxuan Fang1 , Junkai Fan1 , Yu Zheng1 , Jiangwei Weng1 , Ying Tai2 , Jun Li1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China.
{wenxuan fang, junkai.fan, yuzheng, wengjiangwei, junli}@njust.edu.cn, yingtai@nju.edu.cn

YCbCr

Abstract

RGB

Image dehazing, particularly with learning-based methods,
has gained significant attention due to its importance in realworld applications. However, relying solely on the RGB color
space often fall short, frequently leaving residual haze. This
arises from two main issues: the difficulty in obtaining clear
textural features from hazy RGB images and the complexity
of acquiring real haze/clean image pairs outside controlled
environments like smoke-filled scenes. To address these issues, we first propose a novel Structure Guided Dehazing
Network (SGDN) that leverages the superior structural properties of YCbCr features over RGB. It comprises two key
modules: Bi-Color Guidance Bridge (BGB) and Color Enhancement Module (CEM). BGB integrates a phase integration module and an interactive attention module, utilizing the
rich texture features of the YCbCr space to guide the RGB
space, thereby recovering clearer features in both frequency
and spatial domains. To maintain tonal consistency, CEM further enhances the color perception of RGB features by aggregating YCbCr channel information. Furthermore, for effective supervised learning, we introduce a Real-World WellAligned Haze dataset, which includes a diverse range of
scenes from various geographical regions and climate conditions. Experimental results demonstrate that our method surpasses existing state-of-the-art methods across multiple realworld smoke/haze datasets.

4-th

MB-Talyor

AIPNet

Ours

(b) Comparison of different dehazing approaches

Figure 1: Visual comparison of different color spaces: (a)
RGB features degrade, blurring textures, while YCbCr is
less affected by fog and shows clearer textures. (b) RGB
models (e.g., MB-Taylor) leave residual haze, YCbCr models (e.g., AIPNet) distort colors. Our approach removes
heavy fog while preserving color accuracy.

Introduction
Image dehazing aims to remove the blurring effect caused
by atmospheric particles such as haze and smoke in images
and improve image quality, which has important application
value in object detection (Zhao et al. 2024), image segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2023) and object tracking (Hu et al.
2023, 2024). The formation of foggy images can usually be
modeled using an Atmospheric Scattering Model (ASM):
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(x)(1 − t(x)),

8-th
29-th
(a) Visual features of different color spaces

methods (Li et al. 2017, 2021) use deep networks to estimate
physical parameters and apply Eq. (1) to restore clean images. Additionally, some methods (Zhang et al. 2023; Chen,
He, and Lu 2024) focus on learning a mapping model from
hazy to clean images in a supervised manner, offering an
end-to-end dehazing solution. Despite their promising results on synthetic haze datasets, they face two major challenges in real-world haze scenes.
Firstly, most mapping models based on the RGB color
space perform suboptimally in real-world foggy conditions
because fog blurs textures within RGB features, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). For instance, MB-Taylor (Qiu et al. 2023) (Fig.
1(b)) attempts to extract features and remove degradation
in the RGB space but still leaves significant residual haze.
However, we have observed that YCbCr features are less affected by fog and provide clearer image textures (Fig. 1(a)).

(1)

where I(x) and J(x) represent the observed foggy image
and clean image, and A(x) and t(x) are the global atmospheric light and transmission map, respectively. The transmission map t(x) = e−βd(x) is determined by the scattering coefficient β and the scene depth d(x). Many dehazing
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2906

