The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generative Video Diffusion for Unseen Novel Semantic Video Moment Retrieval
Dezhao Luo1 , Shaogang Gong1 * , Jiabo Huang2 , Hailin Jin3 , and Yang Liu4,5 *
1

Queen Mary University of London
2
Sony AI
3
Adobe Research
4
WICT, Peking University
5
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{dezhao.luo, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk, raymond.huang@sony.com, hljin@adobe.com, yangliu@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

task is challenging because it requires extracting semantic
associations between visual and textual data with precise
time locations. Annotating VMR datasets requires indexing temporal video moments with corresponding sentences
and distinguishing them from contextual moments within
the video, which is a more intricate and less scalable process compared to labelling image-text or video-text pairs.
Due to the lack of large-scale video moment-text datasets,
VMR models are struggling to learn generalisable novel
moment-text associations beyond the training source domains, resulting in an inferior cross-domain adaptation
where training and testing data display biases. In contrast
to the biases in the moment location or length (Hao et al.
2022), we tackle a more intricate challenge: semantic biases
across domains, where the semantic in the testing domain
is novel to the training domain. By ‘novel’, it means novel
text vocabularies and their corresponding video moments
both unseen in source domain training. Comparing to previous methods employing co-training strategies on both source
and target datasets (Cai, Huang, and Gong 2022), and other
methods (Nam et al. 2021) creating pseudo moment-text
associations by generating textual descriptions for a target
video, we propose a more scalable and accessible approach
to learning generalisable VMR to unseen novel semantics by
exploring target domain sentences describing new semantics
only, without any videos from the target domain.
Recent successes in generative diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023b) have demonstrated
the power of hypothesising new holistic videos with text
prompts. To benefit novel semantic VMR, a potential approach is to generate videos conditioned on both source
video moments and a target sentence of novel semantics/concepts. However, there are several non-trivial challenges
in synthesising a meaningful visual hypothesis for a VMR
video displaying the same subject performing different actions in a similar environment (background). The first challenge lies in regulating the generation of a video moment based on novel semantics referenced in a target domain sentence while retaining other contextual information
intact. Existing text conditioned video generation (Wang
et al. 2023b) or editing methods (Wu et al. 2023) lack specific constraints or image conditioned methods (Jiang et al.
2024), leading towards inaccurate subject details (shown in
Table 6, Fig. 3 and the Supplementary). This highlights the

Video moment retrieval (VMR) aims to locate the most likely
video moment(s) corresponding to a text query in untrimmed
videos. Training of existing methods is limited by the lack
of diverse and generalisable VMR datasets, hindering their
ability to generalise moment-text associations to queries containing novel semantic concepts (unseen both visually and
textually in a training source domain). For model generalisation to novel semantics, existing methods rely heavily on
assuming to have access to both video and text sentence pairs
from a target domain in addition to the source domain pairwise training data. This is neither practical nor scalable. In
this work, we introduce a more generalisable approach by
assuming only text sentences describing new semantics are
available in model training without having seen any videos
from a target domain. To that end, we propose a Fine-grained
Video Editing framework, termed FVE, that explores generative video diffusion to facilitate fine-grained video editing from the seen source concepts to the unseen target sentences consisting of new concepts. This enables generative
hypotheses of unseen video moments corresponding to the
novel concepts in the target domain. This fine-grained generative video diffusion retains the original video structure and
subject specifics from the source domain while introducing
semantic distinctions of unseen novel vocabularies in the target domain. A critical challenge is how to enable this generative fine-grained diffusion process to be meaningful in optimising VMR, more than just synthesising visually pleasing
videos. We solve this problem by introducing a hybrid selection mechanism that integrates three quantitative metrics to
selectively incorporate synthetic video moments (novel video
hypotheses) as enlarged additions to the original source training data, whilst minimising potential detrimental noise or unnecessary repetitions in the novel synthetic videos harmful
to VMR learning. Experiments on three datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of FVE to unseen novel semantic video moment retrieval tasks.

Introduction
Given an untrimmed video and a sentence query, video moment retrieval (VMR) aims to locate the most relevant video
moment(s) semantically corresponding to the query. This
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5847

