The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Loss-Resilient Image Coding for Unstable Satellite Networks
Hongwei Sha, Muchen Dong, Quanyou Luo, Ming Lu* , Hao Chen, Zhan Ma
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University
{hongweisha,dmc,luoquanyou}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {minglu, chenhao1210, mazhan}@nju.edu.cn

②

ket
pac

①
②

③

t
cke
pa

Pixel
error

0.02bpp 20.94dB

0.34bpp 22.09dB

0.35bpp 27.33dB

0.02bpp 20.96dB

0.30bpp 28.11dB

Ours

0.02bpp 20.84dB

ProgDTD

Color
deviation

Packet Loss

1

①

pack
et

①

JPEG2000

Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) satellite communication
demonstrates significant advantages in emergency short burst
data services. However, unstable satellite networks, particularly those with frequent packet loss, present a severe challenge to accurate image transmission. To address it, we
propose a loss-resilient image coding approach that leverages end-to-end optimization in learned image compression
(LIC). Our method builds on the channel-wise progressive
coding framework, incorporating Spatial-Channel Rearrangement (SCR) on the encoder side and Mask Conditional Aggregation (MCA) on the decoder side to improve reconstruction quality with unpredictable errors. By integrating
the Gilbert-Elliot model into the training process, we enhance the model’s ability to generalize in real-world network
conditions. Extensive evaluations show that our approach
outperforms traditional and deep learning-based methods in
terms of compression performance and stability under diverse
packet loss, offering robust and efficient progressive transmission even in challenging environments. Code is available
at https://github.com/NJUVISION/LossResilientLIC.

Ground Truth

Abstract

Introduction

Figure 1: Visualizations of reconstruction results with packet
loss. Even under progressive transmission, burst packet loss
can disrupt the subsequent reconstruction, leading to unavoidable pixel error in JPEG2000 or color deviation in
ProgDTD. Our proposed method demonstrates generalized
resilience to unpredictable loss.

Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) satellite communication
offers distinct advantages over internet-based or Low Earth
Orbit (LEO) satellite (e.g., Starlink) transmission, including wide signal coverage and all-weather synchronization.
These benefits make it particularly suitable for navigation,
communication in remote areas, and short burst data service, as it is less vulnerable to harsh environments. However, GEO satellite communication often suffers from extremely low available bandwidth, large transmission intervals between packets, and severe packet loss (Withers 1977;
Vishwakarma, Chauhan, and Aasma 2014), posing significant challenges for emergency image transmission.
Over the past few decades, image compression technologies have focused on reducing bitrate consumption under
bandwidth constraints. From traditional rules-based image
coding standards like JPEG (Wallace 1992), BPG (Bellard
2014), and WebP (Si and Shen 2016) to recent learned image compression (LIC) methods (Ballé et al. 2018; Minnen, Ballé, and Toderici 2018; Lu et al. 2022; Liu, Sun, and

Katto 2023), substantial progress has been made in enhancing compression performance. In light of high network latency, progressive coding (also known as scalable coding)
techniques (Rabbani and Joshi 2002; Lee et al. 2022; Hojjat, Haberer, and Landsiedel 2023) have been developed to
allow image previews using received packets. These algorithms encode images into a single scalable bitstream, improving the quality of the reconstructed image as more complete packets are received. However, currently, few efforts
have been made to consider the impact of packet loss on reconstruction results, especially in learning-based methods.
Given an encoder-decoder pair typically deployed in
transmission systems, the encoder attempts to eliminate redundancy from the input image, creating a compact representation that encapsulates essential information (e.g.,

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12506

