The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Comprehensive Overhaul of Multimodal Assistant
with Small Language Models
Minjie Zhu1 * , Yichen Zhu2 * † , Ning Liu2 , Xin Liu1 , Zhiyuan Xu2 , Chaomin Shen1† , Yaxin Peng3
1

East China Normal University
2
Midea Group
3
Shanghai University
{zhumj, liuxin}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {zhuyc25, xuzy70}@midea.com,
ningliu1220@gmail.com, cmshen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yaxin.peng@shu.edu.cn
Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have showcased impressive skills in tasks related to visual understanding
and reasoning. Yet, their widespread application faces obstacles due to the high computational demands during both the
training and inference phases, restricting their use to a limited
audience within the research and user communities. In this
paper, we investigate the design aspects of Multimodal Small
Language Models (MSLMs) and propose an efficient multimodal assistant named Mipha, which is designed to create synergy among various aspects: visual representation, language
models, and optimization strategies. We show that without
increasing the volume of training data, our Mipha-3B outperforms the state-of-the-art large MLLMs, especially LLaVA1.5-13B, on multiple benchmarks. Through detailed discussion, we provide insights and guidelines for developing strong
MSLMs that rival the capabilities of MLLMs.

Code — https://github.com/zhuyiche/llava-phi

Introduction
Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) have demonstrated exceptional visual understanding and reasoning performances across a range of tasks such
as visual question answering (Team et al. 2023; Alayrac et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2023), referring comprehension (Achiam
et al. 2023), and for embodied intelligence (Wen et al. 2024b;
Zhu et al. 2024c; Wen et al. 2024a; Zhu et al. 2024b; Wen
et al. 2024c; Zhu et al. 2024d). Benefiting from the scaling
law of Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) and
web-scale training data sources, these models have become
foundational in the field of artificial intelligence, with their
parameters increasing from billions to trillions (Achiam et al.
2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Chowdhery et al. 2023). However,
the deployment of these models is often hindered by their
substantial computational costs and memory consumption
in both the training and inference phases, which limits their
popularization across the broader research and user communities.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

: Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10986

How can we boost the inference speed of MLLMs? Delving into the computational costs of MLLMs, it becomes evident that the Large Language Models (LLMs), primarily
tasked with transforming visual-text pairs into textual outputs,
account for a substantial computational load. In MLLMs, the
visual encoder, such as CLIP-ViT-L, typically only comprises
around 0.4 billion parameters, while the language model
within MLLMs can escalate to between 7 and 65 billion
parameters.
Intuitively, reducing the computational demands of the language model could lead to a significant decrease in overall
inference costs. The rapid advancements by the open-source
community in developing Small Language Models (SLMs),
with parameter sizes ranging from 1 billion to 3 billion (i.e.,
Phi (Gunasekar et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a; Javaheripi et al.
2023)), enable us to construct vision-language models more
compact than traditional MLLMs. However, as the parameter
count of these smaller language models is reduced, their capabilities often do not measure up to those of their larger counterparts, potentially diminishing the effectiveness of small
multimodal models. This motivation drives us to explore the
development of multimodal assistants using small language
models that can deliver competitive performance comparable
to their counterparts (Dai et al. 2023; Bai et al. 2023; Ye et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2023a), which rely on large language models.
In this paper, we present an in-depth analysis of the impact
of various design elements in MSLMs on their downstream
performance. A brief summary of the design space that we explored is illustrated in Fig 1 (right). Our investigation dissects
the existing MSLMs into three key components: the language
model, the visual representation, and the optimization strategy. Our thorough empirical research leads us to several
findings that diverge from the conventional wisdom established by prior studies on Multimodal Large Language
Models. For example:
• Increasing image resolution is not a silver bullet. In some
benchmarks, images with a resolution of 224 pixels outperform those with 448 pixels.
• Contrary to earlier findings that suggest finetuning the
visual backbone negatively impacts MLLMs, we underscore the importance of simultaneously finetuning both
the visual backbone and the language model for MSLMs.
• While the prevailing trend among MLLMs is to employ

