The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MOL-Mamba: Enhancing Molecular Representation with
Structural & Electronic Insights
Jingjing Hu1 * , Dan Guo1,2 * † , Zhan Si3 * , Deguang Liu4 , Yunfeng Diao1 , Jing Zhang1 ,
Jinxing Zhou1 , Meng Wang1†
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Department of Chemistry and Centre for Atomic Engineering of Advanced Materials, Anhui University
4
Department of Applied Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China
xianhjj@mail.hfut.edu.cn, guodandd@gmail.com, naa0528@163.com, ldg123@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{sjdiaoyunfeng, hfutzhangjing, zhoujxhfut, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com

Abstract

for extensive human annotations. These methods can capture
complex patterns and relationships within molecular structures, making them highly valuable for downstream tasks.
Early molecular representation is feature-driven, with research focusing on the computation of chemical molecular fingerprints and descriptors (Rogers and Hahn 2010;
Wu et al. 2018), where molecular descriptors are numerical
molecular chemical constants that can be quickly obtained
by mathematical logic calculations (Moriwaki et al. 2018).
These descriptors include quantitative physical, chemical,
or topological features of the molecule and are essential
for summarizing our understanding of molecular behavior. In recent years, data-driven molecular representations
have received great popularity due to the rapid development of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Hu et al. 2020)
and Transformer sequence models (Transformers) (Vaswani
et al. 2017). Largely, the data-driven molecular pretraining focus on learning representations from molecular structures. Methods such as PretrainGNN (Hu et al. 2020),
GROVER (Rong et al. 2020), and GEM (Fang et al. 2022a)
have utilized GNNs and self-supervised learning techniques
to explore 2D topologies and 3D spatial information of
molecules. These approaches have achieved notable success
by predicting node attributes, graph motifs, and geometric
features, thereby enhancing the structural representation of
molecules. However, this does not mean that researchers discard the study of features such as molecular descriptors; on
the contrary, molecular representation has evolved towards
a more multimodal fusion. KCL (Fang et al. 2022b) and
TDCL (Luo, Shi, and Thost 2023b) facilitate the fusion of
expression with molecular structure information by introducing chemical feature knowledge, thus significantly enhancing the molecular learning of the model.
Currently, the methodological study of structural and
electronic feature of fusion molecules as an emerging trend
still has a lot of room for development, and this paper adapts
to this trend and further pushes it forward. Technically, most
of the existing molecular representation methods are based
on GNNs, and Graph Transformer architectures (GTs) (Ying
et al. 2021). While GNNs excel in capturing local struc-

Molecular representation learning plays a crucial role in various downstream tasks, such as molecular property prediction
and drug design. To accurately represent molecules, Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) and Graph Transformers (GTs)
have shown potential in the realm of self-supervised pretraining. However, existing approaches often overlook the
relationship between molecular structure and electronic information, as well as the internal semantic reasoning within
molecules. This omission of fundamental chemical knowledge in graph semantics leads to incomplete molecular representations, missing the integration of structural and electronic
data. To address these issues, we introduce MOL-Mamba, a
framework that enhances molecular representation by combining structural and electronic insights. MOL-Mamba consists of an Atom & Fragment Mamba-Graph (MG) for hierarchical structural reasoning and a Mamba-Transformer
(MT) fuser for integrating molecular structure and electronic
correlation learning. Additionally, we propose a Structural
Distribution Collaborative Training and E-semantic Fusion
Training framework to further enhance molecular representation learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MOLMamba outperforms state-of-the-art baselines across eleven
chemical-biological molecular datasets.

Code — https://github.com/xian-sh/MOL-Mamba

Introduction
Molecular property prediction is a critical task in various
fields, including drug discovery, material science, and chemical engineering. Accurate molecular representation is essential for predicting molecular properties and facilitating
the design of novel molecules. Self-supervised pretraining methods (Li et al. 2022; Fang et al. 2022b; Luo, Shi,
and Thost 2023a; Liu et al. 2022) have shown significant
promise in this area, as they leverage vast amounts of unlabeled data to learn useful representations without the need
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

317

