The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Eve: Efficient Multimodal Vision Language Models with Elastic Visual Experts
Miao Rang, Zhenni Bi, Chuanjian Liu, Yehui Tang, Kai Han* , Yunhe Wang∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{rangmiao1,bizhenni, liuchuanjian, yehui.tang, kai.han,yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract

it to adeptly handle a diverse range of visual and textual inputs, but also enhance its ability to recognize and comprehend complex real-world scenarios and relationships. However, these models are usually large in size, making it difficult to deploy and perform efficient inference on the devices,
hindering their practical applications.
To develop efficient VLMs, several methods are proposed to maintain multimodal capabilities while reducing
the model size (Chu et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2024; Yuan et al.
2024). However, these methods often focus on augmenting
multimodal capabilities at the expense of linguistic proficiency. MoE-LLAVA (Lin et al. 2024), for instance, significantly enhances multimodal capacities by integrating multiple experts. However, a notable degradation in the precision of language tasks. Conversely, DeepSeek-VL (Lu et al.
2024) maintains linguistic abilities during multimodal training by incorporating substantial amounts of language data.
Although effective, this strategy heavily enlarges the training cost.
In this paper, we propose an efficient VLM framework to
build multimodal and language capabilities under relatively
small model size and low training cost. Based on the existing powerful LLMs, we introduce elastic vision experts
to process visual inputs and enhance multimodal capabilities. The proposed Eve framework consists of three training stages and strategically embeds elastic vision experts at
each stage. In the initial two stages, we can leverage the
well pretrained vision encoders such as ResNet and Vision
Transformer (ViT), in the public community which is elastic for building strong visual capability. In the third stage,
we integrate an elastic vision feed forward network (FFN)
in the LLM transformer while keeping the original LLM
part frozen. This structured integration allows each expert
to concentrate on distinct visual tasks, thereby enhancing
multimodal capabilities without compromising the intrinsic
linguistic abilities. Furthermore, this approach obviates the
need for substantial textual data during training, thus significantly expediting the model training process. Within a model
size of 3B parameters, Eve achieves state-of-the-art performance, and compared to other multimodal models, our language capabilities are better preserved.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:

Multimodal vision language models (VLMs) have made significant progress with the support of continuously increasing
model sizes and data volumes. Running VLMs on edge devices has become a challenge for their widespread application. There are several efficient VLM efforts, but they often
sacrifice linguistic capabilities to enhance multimodal abilities, or require extensive training. To address this quandary,
we introduce the innovative framework of Efficient Vision
Language Models with Elastic Visual Experts (Eve). By
strategically incorporating adaptable visual expertise at multiple stages of training, Eve strikes a balance between preserving linguistic abilities and augmenting multimodal capabilities. This balanced approach results in a versatile model
with only 1.8B parameters that delivers significant improvements in both multimodal and linguistic tasks. Notably, in
configurations below 3B parameters, Eve distinctly outperforms in language benchmarks and achieves state-of-the-art
results 68.87% in VLM Benchmarks. Additionally, its multimodal accuracy outstrips that of the larger 7B LLaVA-1.5
model.

Introduction
As the swiftly evolving of artificial intelligence, the understanding of vision and language has gained significant attention, becoming a prominent research focus. Multi-modal
models, such as Vision-Language Models (VLMs), are designed to combine visual information and textual descriptions, aiming to enhance semantic comprehension. These
models, including GPT4V (Liu et al. 2023b) and Gemini (Team et al. 2023), have shown substantial potential in
various applications, such as visual reasoning, visual question answering, and multi-modal retrieval.
Most of the existing VLMs primarily enhance multimodal
capabilities by expanding data volumes or enlarging the
model sizes. Consequently, numerous high-quality visualtextual datasets (Zhang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023; Zhao
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024) have been developed alongside
a suite of large model tuning techniques (Team et al. 2023;
Bai et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a,c). These approaches not
only boost the model’s generalization capabilities, enabling
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We present the Elastic Visual Expert (Eve) framework,
meticulously structured across three training stages, and
6694

