The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OneBatchPAM: A Fast and Frugal K-Medoids Algorithm
Antoine de Mathelin1 , Nicolas Enrique Cecchi1 , François Deheeger2 ,
Mathilde Mougeot1 , Nicolas Vayatis1
1

Centre Borelli, Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay
2
Michelin
antoine.de mathelin@ens-paris-saclay.fr

Abstract

Matejek 2015). The main local-search approach considered
by the operations research communities is called PAM (Partitioning Around Medoid) (Kaufman and Rousseeuw 1987;
Kaufman 1990). This algorithm starts from an initial choice
of k points (potentially greedily selected) and then performs
a series of ”swaps”. The state-of-the-art PAM algorithms are
the FastPAM variants (Schubert and Rousseeuw 2021; Schubert and Lenssen 2022).
A major drawback of these approximation algorithms is
the computational burden encountered for large values of
n. Indeed, the main algorithms require the computation and
in-memory conservation of pairwise dissimilarities between
the n points, resulting in a complexity of O(n2 ). Nowadays,
with the rise of Big Data, and the focus on reducing computational resources, there is a strong incentive to build algorithms that overcome this O(n2 ) limitation.
Subsampling is a straightforward solution to reduce the
number of dissimilarity calculations. The idea is to use an
approximation algorithm (like PAM) on a subsample of size
m ≪ n selected among the n data points, resulting in a reduction of the time and memory complexities from O(n2 )
to O(m2 ). Previous works have proven that this simple approach yields appealing statistical guarantees over the approximation error for relatively small batch size m (Mishra,
Oblinger, and Pitt 2001; Thorup 2005; Mettu and Plaxton
2004; Meyerson, O’callaghan, and Plotkin 2004; Huang,
Jiang, and Lou 2023; Guha and Mishra 2016; Czumaj and
Sohler 2007). In this category of methods, the CLARA algorithm (Clustering LARge Applications) (Kaufman 1986;
Kaufman and Rousseeuw 2008) is the most commonly used.
The main drawback of the subsampling approach is the loose
approximation of considering only the medoid candidates in
the m subsampled data points, resulting in worse clustering quality (Tiwari et al. 2020). A recent method, BanditPAM, leverages Bandit algorithms to deal with this limitation (Tiwari et al. 2020, 2023). BanditPAM keeps the n data
points as potential medoid candidates but only computes the
dissimilarities for data points with high medoid potential,
thus reducing the number of pairwise dissimilarity computations to O(n log(n)) for one medoid selection or one swap
step of the PAM algorithm. Although BanditPAM provides
a medoid selection close to PAM (in terms of k-medoids objective), the Bandit-based framework requires the computation of new pairwise dissimilarities at each medoid selection,

This paper proposes a novel k-medoids approximation algorithm to handle large-scale datasets with reasonable computational time and memory complexity. We develop a localsearch algorithm that iteratively improves the medoid selection based on the estimation of the k-medoids objective. A
single batch of size m ≪ n provides the estimation, which
reduces the required memory size and the number of pairwise
dissimilarities computations to O(mn), instead of O(n2 )
compared to most k-medoids baselines. We obtain theoretical results highlighting that a batch of size m = O(log(n))
is sufficient to guarantee, with strong probability, the same
performance as the original local-search algorithm. Multiple
experiments conducted on real datasets of various sizes and
dimensions show that our algorithm provides similar performances as state-of-the-art methods such as FasterPAM and
BanditPAM++ with a drastically reduced running time.

Code — https://github.com/antoinedemathelin/obpam

Introduction
The k-medoids problem consists in choosing k medoids
from a set of n points Xn , minimizing the sum of the pairwise dissimilarities between the n points and their nearest
medoid. This problem has many uses in machine learning,
in particular for clustering, subset selection and active learning (Bhat 2014; Wei, Iyer, and Bilmes 2015; Kaushal et al.
2019; de Mathelin et al. 2021). The k-medoids problem is
related to k-medians, k-means and facility location (Schubert and Rousseeuw 2021). One specificity of k-medoids
is to consider generic dissimilarities (non-necessarily metric). In machine learning applications, the dissimilarity function can involve heavy computational costs, especially when
computed between complex data types such as images, texts,
or time series.
The k-medoids problem is a discrete optimization problem known to be NP-hard (Kariv and Hakimi 1979), for
which a wide variety of approximation algorithms have been
developed. Many k-medoids approximations are greedy or
local-search algorithms, which improve a medoid selection
sequentially by either adding or removing a medoid or swapping one medoid with another data point (Dohan, Karp, and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16172

