The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

POI-Enhancer: An LLM-based Semantic Enhancement Framework
for POI Representation Learning
Jiawei Cheng1,2 , Jingyuan Wang1,3,4, * , Yichuan Zhang1 ,
Jiahao Ji1 , Yuanshao Zhu2 , Zhibo Zhang1 , Xiangyu Zhao2, *
1

SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
MIIT Key Laboratory of Data Intelligence and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{JarvisC, jywang, tadshi, jiahaoji, hljzhangzhibo}@buaa.edu.cn, yaso.zhu@my.cityu.edu.hk, xy.zhao@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract

et al. 2020), forecasting visit flow (Song et al. 2020), and
similar tasks (Han et al. 2024) have become key research
focuses. In tackling these difficulties, POI representation
learning, which can be trained via self-supervised methods
and utilized across various tasks like traffic forecasting (Liu
et al. 2024b; Ji et al. 2022a; Wang et al. 2022) and trajectory
predction (Jiang et al. 2023b; Wu et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2018), stands as a particularly meaningful and promising direction.
To enhance the diversity of information within POI
representation vectors and achieve superior performance
in complex downstream tasks, researchers are exploring
the integration of various information beyond basic geographic data. For example, they incorporated user preference
data (Dai et al. 2022) and visual information (Balsebre et al.
2023) into POI representations. Although related textual information, such as POI categories (e.g. restaurants and hotels) and check-in content on social media like Twitter, provides some insights into the social functions and other aspects of POIs, the semantic richness and depth of these data
are limited. When compared to the vast amount of descriptive information available on the internet regarding POIs,
these data sources fall short in both content richness and
coverage. In recent years, large language models (LLMs)
trained on extensive volumes of internet data have been
applied across numerous fields, demonstrating remarkable
capabilities, particularly in the domain of spatial-temporal
data (Li et al. 2024). Although LLMs have proven beneficial
in addressing challenges in this area, leveraging LLMs to enhance POI representation presents two specific challenges.
The first challenge lies in effectively extracting the
geographical knowledge within LLMs. A common
idea (Golkar et al. 2023) is to provide LLMs with prompts
related to geographic information and then obtain text output. However, LLMs have limitations in handling numerical input, and for representation learning, we need vectors
that are versatile across tasks, which makes this method
not suitable. Some studies (Chen, Wang, and Xu 2023; Liu
et al. 2024a) have also experimented with feeding extracted
spatial-temporal features to a partially or fully frozen LLM,
using the LLM as the backbone to solve specific problems.
But these works are typically tailored to a single spatialtemporal task and extract information specific to that task

POI representation learning plays a crucial role in handling
tasks related to user mobility data. Recent studies have shown
that enriching POI representations with multimodal information can significantly enhance their task performance. Previously, the textual information incorporated into POI representations typically involved only POI categories or check-in
content, leading to relatively weak textual features in existing
methods. In contrast, large language models (LLMs) trained
on extensive text data have been found to possess rich textual
knowledge. However leveraging such knowledge to enhance
POI representation learning presents two key challenges: first,
how to extract POI-related knowledge from LLMs effectively, and second, how to integrate the extracted information to enhance POI representations. To address these challenges, we propose POI-Enhancer, a portable framework that
leverages LLMs to improve POI representations produced
by classic POI learning models. We first design three specialized prompts to extract semantic information from LLMs
efficiently. Then, the Dual Feature Alignment module enhances the quality of the extracted information, while the
Semantic Feature Fusion module preserves its integrity. The
Cross Attention Fusion module then fully adaptively integrates such high-quality information into POI representations
and Multi-View Contrastive Learning further injects humanunderstandable semantic information into these representations. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, showing significant improvements across all baseline representations.

Code — https://github.com/Applied-Machine-LearningLab/POI-Enhancer
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10038

1

Introduction

With the advancement of smart city technology (Ji et al.
2022b; Wang et al. 2021b; Wang, Wang, and Wu 2018) and
the widespread adoption of smart devices, the volume of
location-based mobile data, such as POI (Points of Interest)
check-in data and user trajectory data, has surged (Ding et al.
2018; Zhu et al. 2023). Predicting user destinations (Zhao
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11509

