The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Context in Public Health for Underserved Communities:
A Bayesian Approach to Online Restless Bandits
Biyonka Liang1 , Lily Xu1 * , Aparna Taneja2 , Milind Tambe1,2 , Lucas Janson1
1

Harvard University
2
Google Research
biyonka@g.harvard.edu, lily.x@columbia.edu, aparnataneja@google.com, tambe@seas.harvard.edu, ljanson@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract

an arm, their adherence status as the state of the corresponding MDP, and the allocation of an intervention as the action.
The reward is a function of the adherrence status of the beneficiary (i.e., the state of the MDP) and a budget-constrained
subset of arms are given intervention (i.e., pulled) at each
timestep. Most relevantly for our work, RMABs have been
used to model this resource allocation problem by our collaborators at ARMMAN (ARMMAN 2022), an NGO in India
which runs a large-scale maternal mHealth (mobile health)
program that disseminates vital health information to pregnant beneficiaries via automated voice calls each week, with
the goal of improving maternal and infant health outcomes
(Mate et al. 2022; Verma et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023). To
encourage listenership (i.e., adherence), ARMMAN’s healthcare workers can give live service calls (the intervention) to
a subset of beneficiaries each week to troubleshoot potential
barriers to adherence, thus improving overall listenership,
which has been shown to result in to positive impact on the
behavioural outcomes of the mothers (Dasgupta et al. 2024).

Public health programs often provide interventions to encourage program adherence, and effectively allocating interventions is vital for producing the greatest overall health outcomes,
especially in underserved communities where resources are
limited. Such resource allocation problems are often modeled as restless multi-armed bandits (RMABs) with unknown
underlying transition dynamics, hence requiring online reinforcement learning (RL). We present Bayesian Learning
for Contextual RMABs (BCoR), an online RL approach for
RMABs that novelly combines techniques in Bayesian modeling with Thompson sampling to flexibly model the complex
RMAB settings present in public health program adherence
problems, namely context and non-stationarity. BCoR’s key
strength is the ability to leverage shared information within
and between arms to learn the unknown RMAB transition dynamics quickly in intervention-scarce settings with relatively
short time horizons, which is common in public health applications. Empirically, BCoR achieves substantially higher
finite-sample performance over a range of experimental settings, including a setting using real-world adherence data that
was developed in collaboration with ARMMAN, an NGO in
India which runs a large-scale maternal mHealth program,
showcasing BCoR practical utility and potential for real-world
deployment.

1

Introduction

Public health programs in a wide array of areas such as communicable disease (Killian et al. 2019), prenatal care (Hegde
and Doshi 2016; Ope 2020), and cancer prevention (Wells
et al. 2011; Lee, Lavieri, and Volk 2019) often have many
beneficiaries who are not adhering to their treatment. As
adherence can be vital for ensuring positive health impacts,
especially in the underserved communities these programs
are designed to aid, programs frequently must decide how to
allocate a scarce set of resources or interventions to beneficiaries at risk of drop-out of the program due to continued nonadherence. Such a constrained resource allocation problem is
often modeled as a Restless Multi-Armed Bandit (RMAB)
(Whittle 1980), which is an extension of stochastic multiarmed bandits where each arm represents a Markov Decision
Process (MDP). Specifically, a beneficiary is represented as
* Now at Columbia University
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28195

Developing an algorithm for resource allocation for
mHealth programs like ARMMAN faces a few key challenges: (1) the transition dynamics of the underlying MDPs
(e.g., corresponding to the beneficiaries’ adherence) are unknown a priori; (2) these settings are often resource scarce,
so the (intervention) budget B is typically much smaller than
the total number of arms N ; and (3) the time horizon T is
naturally limited to the treatment period, which is often small
relative to N . For example, ARMMAN can only provide interventions to ∼ 2% of their beneficiaries each week (Hegde
and Doshi 2016), and the time horizon is naturally limited by
the duration of a pregnancy. Due to the scarce intervention
budget and relatively short time horizon, at any given time
point, many (or most) of the beneficiaries in the program
have never been intervened on. Thus, the algorithm must
make a resource allocation decision despite not observing the
underlying outcome distributions for a potentially vast number of arms. Additionally, previous analyses on public health
programs indicate that beneficiary adherence varies with contextual factors such as income and education, and that adherence rates can vary over time, suggesting non-stationarity in
transition dynamics (Mate et al. 2022; Verma et al. 2023).
However, these known properties of public health settings
(e.g., short time horizon, contextual information, and nonstationarity) are largely unaddressed by existing online RL

