The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mind Individual Information! Principal Graph Learning for
Multimedia Recommendation
Penghang Yu1 , Zhiyi Tan1 , Guanming Lu1, 2 , Bing-Kun Bao3 *
1
School of Communications and Information Engineering,
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
2
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing and Communication Technology, Nanjing, China
3
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
2022010201@njupt.edu.cn, tzy@njupt.edu.cn, lugm@njupt.edu.cn, bingkunbao@njupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based methods have recently
emerged as effective approaches for multimedia recommendation. Typically, these methods employ message passing on
the user-item interaction graph, and model user preferences
by exploiting co-occurrence patterns. Despite their effectiveness, we argue that they insufficiently exploit the individual information, potentially limiting recommendation performance. To validate our argument, we first analyze existing
methods from spectral graph theory. We identify that existing methods focus on capturing global structural features, but
underutilize local structural features that convey individual
information. Further detailed experiments reveal that such
an underutilization leads to overly similar user preferences
modeling. Furthermore, we propose a novel Principal Graph
Learning (PGL) framework to address this issue. The idea
is to enhance user preference modeling by effectively mining and utilizing principal local structural features. PGL first
extracts the principal subgraph from the user-item interaction
graph using two novel extraction operators: global-aware and
local-aware subgraph extraction. It then employs message
passing on the principal subgraph to comprehensively model
user perference, with the aim of simultaneously capturing cooccurrence patterns and individual information. Compared to
existing methods, PGL achieves an average performance improvement of 9%.

−3.3

−3.4

LightGCN
DirectAU
LATTICE
FREEDOM
PGL

Uuser

−3.5

LATTICE
(0.0733)

LightGCN
(0.0526)

−3.6

DirectAU
(0.0683)

−3.7

FREEDOM
(0.0941)

−3.8

−3.9

PGL
(0.1034)
−3.9

−3.8

−3.7

−3.6

−3.5

Uitem

Figure 1: Uuser − Uitem demonstrates the uniformity of the
representations during the training phase. The stars denote
the converged points. Lower Uniformity indicates a more
uniform distribution and higher distinguishability. We also
include the Recall@20 for each model in parentheses, where
higher values indicate better performance.

effectively model user preference. Recognizing that behavioral data can be naturally represented as a bipartite graph,
recent researches have focused on leveraging Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) for more effective user preference modeling (Wu et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023). For instance, (He et al.
2020) propose a linear message passing mechanism (LightGCN) to capture high-order connections between users and
items. Due to its simplicity and effectiveness, this mechanism has been widely adopted in subsequent GNN-based
methods (Zhang et al. 2021; Sharma et al. 2024). Considering that latent item-item connections may also be informative, (Zhang et al. 2021) introduce the LATTICE framework. LATTICE simultaneously aggregates information on
both user-item graph and item-item graph, further boosting
recommendation performance. This framework has inspired
a series of effective methods such as MICRO (Zhang et al.
2022), FREEDOM (Zhou and Shen 2023), and MGCN (Yu
et al. 2023c). Despite their effectiveness, existing methods
model user preference heavily based on complex connection
relationships (i.e., co-occurrence patterns). We argue that

Introduction
Recommender systems have been widely adopted in various domains. They analyze user historical behaviors to provide personalized item recommendations (Zhou et al. 2023a;
Ding et al. 2023; Marinó et al. 2023). Yet, the behavioral
data sparsity issue hinders the recommendation performance
(Wu et al. 2021). To address this limitation, researchers begin to explore incorporating rich content information to enhance user preference modeling. Consequently, multimedia
recommendation methods start to emerge (Chen et al. 2017).
Early multimedia recommendation methods (Shen et al.
2013; Zhang et al. 2016; He and McAuley 2016) primarily rely on matrix factorization (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky
2009). These studies combine content features with behavioral features obtained from matrix factorization, aiming to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13096

