The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3D-RPE: Enhancing Long-Context Modeling Through 3D Rotary Position Encoding
Xindian Ma1 , Wenyuan Liu1 , Peng Zhang1 * , Nan Xu2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Beijing Wenge Technology Co.
xindianma@tju.edu.cn, 1wy2020@tju.edu.cn, pzhang@tju.edu.cn, xunan2015@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

We propose a novel position encoding mechanism for transformer architecture, called 3D Rotary Position Encoding (3DRPE), to address challenges in long-context modeling faced
by LLMs using RoPE. Inspired by the Bloch Sphere, 3DRPE applies rotary position encoding on a three-dimensional
spherical surface, as illustrated in Figure 1(b). In contrast,
RoPE employs a rotation on a 2-dimensional circular path,
as depicted in Figure 1(a). This leads that RoPE suffers from
long-term decay. As shown in Figure 1(c), with the increase
in relative distance, the relative upper bound on token correlations at modeled relative positions will continuously decrease.
Our proposed 3D-RPE addresses this issue by segmenting a
long sequence into chunks and setting rotation angles within
and between the chunks to construct position encoding. As
shown in Figure 1(d), 3D-RPE is able to control this relative upper bound through two relative positional dimensions,
namely within and between chunks. Compared to the relative
upper bound in RoPE shown in Figure 1(c), our method improves the correlation upper bound for long relative distances
and effectively mitigates the problem of long-term decay.

An essential component in Large Language Models (LLMs) is
Rotary Position Encoding (RoPE) , which efficiently manages
positional dependencies in long-context modeling. However,
when the number of input tokens surpasses the pretrained
capacity of LLMs, their ability to process and generate text
is markedly weakened. Although position interpolation techniques for RoPE can mitigate this issue, an increase in interpolations leads to a decrease in positional resolution. To tackle
this challenge, drawing inspiration from the Bloch Sphere
representation, we propose a novel rotary position encoding
on a three-dimensional sphere, named 3D Rotary Position
Encoding (3D-RPE). 3D-RPE is an advanced version of the
widely used 2D RoPE, with two major advantages for modeling long contexts: controllable long-term decay and improved
position resolution. For controllable long-term decay, 3D-RPE
allows for the regulation of long-term decay within the chunk
size, ensuring the modeling of relative positional information
between tokens at a distant relative position. For improved
position resolution, 3D-RPE can mitigate the degradation of
position resolution caused by position interpolation on RoPE.
We have conducted experiments on long-context Natural Language Understanding (NLU) and long sequence Language
Modeling (LM) tasks. From the experimental results, 3D-RPE
achieved performance improvements over RoPE, especially in
long-context NLU tasks.

Introduction
Rotary Position Encoding (RoPE) (Su et al. 2024) is essential
in Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs), such
as the LLaMA models (Touvron et al. 2023). RoPE merges
the advantages of absolute and relative positional encoding
by using a rotation mechanism to represent each position.
Despite its widespread use in LLMs (Touvron et al. 2023;
Wang and Komatsuzaki 2021; Chiang et al. 2023), RoPE
has notable limitations when extending LLMs with a predefined context window. The long-term decay problem of RoPE
limits the model’s ability to extend positions outward in longcontext tasks. Although the long-context modeling capability
of LLMs can be extended through position interpolation, as
more positions are inserted, RoPE encounters the challenge
of decreased position resolution (An et al. 2024).
* Corresponding Author: Peng Zhang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Furthermore, our proposed 3D-RPE alleviates the problem
of reduced positional resolution caused by Position Interpolation (PI) (Chen et al. 2023a) on RoPE in long-context
modeling. PI methods are often employed to extend LLMs
for modeling contexts that exceed the pre-training length.
These techniques scale the position encoding during inference, allowing the originally out-of-range position encoding
to fall within the trained position interval after interpolation.
However, as the interpolation factor increases, PI experiences
a substantial decline in positional resolution among tokens,
detrimentally affecting long-context modeling performance.
As illustrated in Figure 1(e), extending the pre-training length
Lp to L using linear PI (Chen et al. 2023a) results in the poL
sitional resolution transitioning from the original 1 to Lp .
As L increases, the positional resolution decreases accordingly. However, our proposed 3D-RPE employs a 3D rotating
sphere for position encoding. Based on the same positional interpolation, our method supports higher positional resolution
L
′
compared to RoPE’s 2D circular rotation, i.e., E3d−rpe
> Lp
(See Figure 1(f)). This benefit has been theoretically proven
(see Theorem 1) and corroborated by experimental results
(see Table 4 in Ablation Study).
We conducted experiments on long-context Natural Lan-

24804

