The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training on the Benchmark Is Not All You Need
⋆

⋆

Shiwen Ni1,2, , Xiangtao Kong1,3, , Chengming Li4 , Xiping Hu4 , Ruifeng Xu5
Jia Zhu2,∗ , Min Yang 1,2, *
2

1
Shenzhen Key Laboratory for High Performance Data Mining, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Normal University
3
University of Science and Technology of China
4
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
5
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{sw.ni, min.yang}@siat.ac.cn, jiazhu@zjnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of Large Language Models (LLMs) relies heavily on the huge amount of pre-training data learned in the
pre-training phase. The opacity of the pre-training process
and the training data causes the results of many benchmark
tests to become unreliable. If any model has been trained on
a benchmark test set, it can seriously hinder the health of the
field. In order to automate and efficiently test the capabilities
of large language models, numerous mainstream benchmarks
adopt a multiple-choice format. As the swapping of the contents of multiple-choice options does not affect the meaning
of the question itself, we propose a simple and effective data
leakage detection method based on this property. Specifically,
we shuffle the contents of the options in the data to generate
the corresponding derived data sets, and then detect data leakage based on the model’s log probability distribution over the
derived data sets. If there is a maximum and outlier in the set
of log probabilities, it indicates that the data is leaked. Our
method is able to work under gray-box conditions without
access to model training data or weights, effectively identifying data leakage from benchmark test sets in model pretraining data, including both normal scenarios and complex
scenarios where options may have been shuffled intentionally or unintentionally. Through experiments based on two
LLMs and benchmark designs, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. In addition, we evaluate the degree of
data leakage of 35 mainstream open-source LLMs on four
benchmark datasets and give a ranking of the leaked LLMs
for each benchmark, and we find that the Qwen family of
LLMs has the highest degree of data leakage.

Figure 1: Log-probability distributions for different option
orders. For example: {Order1: All of the following are examples of connective tissue EXCEPT A: ligaments B: muscle C:
blood D: cartilage ,..., Order24: All of the following are examples of connective tissue EXCEPT A: cartilage B: blood
C: muscle D: ligaments}.

Code — https://github.com/nishiwen1214/Benchmarkleakage-detection
intentional or unintentional data collection process of the
developers of LLMs, the pre-trained corpus may set contain data from various evaluation benchmarks. Data leakage
from such benchmarks causes an inability to accurately evaluate the true performance of LLMs, and the model may simply memorize the answers to difficult questions. The composition of the pre-trained corpus is often considered to be the
core secret of existing large models, and open-source models such as LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023a), Qwen (Bai et al.
2023), and Yi (Young et al. 2024) do not open-source the
full training data of their models. Currently most LLMs do
not disclose their full pre-training data, which makes it uncertain whether the performance of these LLMs on certain

Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have made significant advances in most natural language processing benchmarks (Hendrycks et al. 2021a; Li et al. 2023; Huang et al.
2024; Wang et al. 2023; Cobbe et al. 2021; Zheng et al.
2024). One of the key reasons why LLMs have achieved
such success is through large-scale pre-training on large
corpora collected from the Internet. However, due to the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24948

