The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BOIDS: High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization via
Incumbent-Guided Direction Lines and Subspace Embeddings
Lam Ngo1 , Huong Ha1 , Jeffrey Chan1 , Hongyu Zhang2
1

RMIT University, Australia
Chongqing University, China
s3962378@student.rmit.edu.au, huong.ha@rmit.edu.au, jeffrey.chan@rmit.edu.au, hyzhang@cqu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Common acquisition functions are computationally inexpensive to optimize and may even have tractable solutions
under certain conditions. As a result, BO problems are transformed into less costly optimization tasks.
As recent applications involve optimizing problems with
hundreds to thousands of dimensions, scaling BO to such
high dimensions has become a prevalent research topic (Binois and Wycoff 2022; Wang et al. 2023). However, BO’s
performance significantly degrades as the dimension increases, partly due to the over-exploration of the acquisition function (Eriksson et al. 2019; Ngo et al. 2024). Classical approaches for optimizing BO acquisition functions,
such as gradient solvers or evolutionary algorithms, operate over the entire search space, which can suffer from the
curse of dimensionality. In high dimensions, the exponentially large search space makes optimizing the acquisition
function computationally expensive (if the entire space is
considered) or less accurate (if approximation techniques are
used). Among existing solutions, LineBO (Kirschner et al.
2019) introduces line-based optimization, which restricts
the acquisition function optimization to a one-dimensional
line (guiding line), enhancing efficiency. This approach from
LineBO can be interpreted as moving the data points following predefined lines as guiding directions. Despite its strong
theoretical foundation, LineBO is not empirically competitive against recent high-dimensional BO baselines (Letham
et al. 2020; Bardou, Thiran, and Begin 2024).
In this work, we propose a novel high-dimensional BO
method inspired by the line-based optimization approach,
where the optimization process is guided by our proposed
novel guiding lines learnt from observed data. Specifically,
inspired by Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm
(Kennedy and Eberhart 1995), we propose to use incumbents - the best solutions found so far - to determine the directions of these guiding lines. We make use of two types of
incumbents: (1) the global incumbent across all data points
and (2) the personal incumbent of each data point throughout its history. By using these incumbents, we encourage exploitation in regions closer to the incumbents, mitigating the
over-explorative behavior in high dimensions. We term our
proposed guiding lines as incumbent-guided lines. We then
introduce a new line-based optimization process tailored for
these incumbent-guided lines, using a novel multi-objective
acquisition function. Furthermore, to increase the sample

When it comes to expensive black-box optimization problems, Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a well-known and powerful solution. Many real-world applications involve a large
number of dimensions, hence scaling BO to high dimension is
of much interest. However, state-of-the-art high-dimensional
BO methods still suffer from the curse of dimensionality, highlighting the need for further improvements. In this
work, we introduce BOIDS, a novel high-dimensional BO
algorithm that guides optimization by a sequence of onedimensional direction lines using a novel tailored line-based
optimization procedure. To improve the efficiency, we also
propose an adaptive selection technique to identify most optimal lines for each round of line-based optimization. Additionally, we incorporate a subspace embedding technique
for better scaling to high-dimensional spaces. We further provide theoretical analysis of our proposed method to analyze
its convergence property. Our extensive experimental results
show that BOIDS outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on
various synthetic and real-world benchmark problems.

Code — https://github.com/LamNgo1/boids
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12918

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2015; Garnett
2023) is a powerful optimization method, capable of solving
expensive black-box objective functions. BO has applications in many fields, notably hyperparameter tuning for machine learning models (Turner et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2024),
neural architecture search (Ru et al. 2021), reinforcement
learning (Parker-Holder et al. 2022), engineering (Shields
et al. 2021; Ament et al. 2023), robotics (Mayr et al. 2022).
BO is an iterative method that can optimize expensive,
black-box objective functions in a sample-efficient manner.
In each iteration, BO constructs a surrogate model from observed data to approximate the objective function. To propose the next data points for observation, BO optimizes an
acquisition function derived from the surrogate model and
an optimization policy. The acquisition function quantifies
the potential information gain from new observations, guiding the search towards solutions that maximize this gain.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19659

