The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HyperDefender: A Robust Framework for Hyperbolic GNNs
Nikita Malik1 , Rahul Gupta2 , Sandeep Kumar1,3,4
1

Bharti School of Telecommunication Technology and Management, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
2
Department of Mathematics and Computing, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
4
Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
bsz218185@iitd.ac.in, mt1200619@iitd.ac.in, ksandeep@iitd.ac.in
Abstract

Due to this several Hyperbolic Graph Neural Networks (HyGNNs) architectures have been developed to enhance the
representation of hierarchical datasets. The theoretical and
empirical superiority of hyperbolic space, characterized by
constant negative curvature, is evident in capturing implicit
hierarchies and outperforming Euclidean baselines. Motivated by these advantages, ongoing research focuses on developing machine learning models in hyperbolic space. HyGNN (Chami et al. 2019; Liu, Nickel, and Kiela 2019;
Shimizu, Mukuta, and Harada 2020; Gulcehre et al. 2018),
including HyLa-SGC (Yu and De Sa 2022), have demonstrated strong empirical results in tasks like node classification and link prediction, highlighting the efficacy of hyperbolic geometry in graph-based learning.
In summary, while Hy-GNNs have demonstrated remarkable performance in hierarchical graph representation learning (Peng et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022), their reliability remains an open question. At this juncture, it is crucial to address the following question:
Are existing Hy-GNN models inherently robust against
adversarial attacks and noise in the input data? If not, how
can we enhance their robustness to ensure their effectiveness
in practical scenarios?
To address these questions, we evaluate the vulnerability
of Hy-GNNs (including HGAT (Zhang et al. 2021), HGCN
(Chami et al. 2019), and HyLa-SGC) and GCNs under adversarial attacks, as illustrated in Figures 1a, 1b and 1c. The
performance plots demonstrate a consistent decline for HyGNNs when exposed to adversaries, indicating that these
models, similar to GNNs, lack inherent robustness against
adversarial attacks. Moreover, adversarial attacks can compromise the inbuilt hierarchies (measured by Gromov δhyperbolicity, details in section 2) of such networks, as
shown in Figure 1d.
This raises concerns about the utility of Hy-GNNs, as
their performance degrade significantly under subtle perturbations in graphs. Such a lack of robustness poses severe consequences for critical applications (Hao et al. 2021;
Sawhney et al. 2021) which must be considered to prevent vulnerabilities exploited by attackers. These hierarchical networks can be corrupted for discrediting information,
gaining a competitive advantage, extortion, or financial gain.
In practical scenarios, data like the disease networks depicting infection propagation are prone to human errors during

Graph neural networks for hyperbolic space has emerged as
a powerful tool for embedding datasets exhibiting a highly
non-Euclidean latent anatomy e.g., graphs with hierarchical
structures. While several Hyperbolic Graph Neural Networks
(Hy-GNNs) have been developed to enhance the representation of hierarchical datasets, they remain susceptible to noise
and adversarial attacks, posing serious risks in critical applications. The absence of robust Hy-GNN frameworks underscores a pressing problem. This research addresses this challenge by introducing HyperDefender—a robust and flexible
approach designed to fortify Hy-GNNs against adversarial
attacks and noises. HyperDefender aims to secure the reliability of applications that depend on the integrity of hierarchical graph-structured data in real-world scenarios. Experimental results demonstrate that HyperDefender significantly
improves node classification accuracy across various attacks,
effectively mitigating the performance degradation typically
observed in Hy-GNNs when the hierarchy in original datasets
is compromised.

Code — https://github.com/nikimal99/HyperDefender.git

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) extend traditional neural
networks to graph-structured data (Xu et al. 2018; Velickovic et al. 2017; Kipf and Welling 2016). Despite the remarkable breakthroughs, the existing GNN models are still
limited by the representation ability of Euclidean geometry, especially for datasets with hierarchical structures and
highly non-Euclidean latent anatomy (Yang et al. 2022; Zitnik et al. 2019; Clauset, Moore, and Newman 2008). Numerous real-world datasets, such as disease propagation trees,
flight networks (Chami et al. 2019), recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2021a), knowledge graphs (Wang et al.
2021b), drug molecules (Qu and Zou 2022), stock graph relations (Sawhney et al. 2021), medical ontology matching
networks (Hao et al. 2021), and Human PPI networks (Li
et al. 2023) have hierarchical structure.
Recently, hyperbolic spaces due to their exponential growth
properties have emerged as a better alternative, allowing
for high-fidelity embedding of hierarchical structured data.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19396

