The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GuideNER: Annotation Guidelines Are Better than Examples for In-Context
Named Entity Recognition
Shizhou Huang1 , Bo Xu2 , Yang Yu1 , Changqun Li1 , Xin Alex Lin1, 3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Donghua University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
huangshizhou@ica.stc.sh.cn, xubo@dhu.edu.cn, {52205901014, 52215901009}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, xlin@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract

Given The Wrong Input-Label Pairs:

Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive performance on downstream tasks through in-context learning
(ICL). However, there is a significant gap between their performance in Named Entity Recognition (NER) and in finetuning methods. We believe this discrepancy is due to inconsistencies in labeling definitions in NER. In addition, recent
research indicates that LLMs do not learn the specific inputlabel mappings from the demonstrations. Therefore, we argue that using examples to implicitly capture the mapping
between inputs and labels in in-context learning is not suitable for NER. Instead, it requires explicitly informing the
model of the range of entities contained in the labels, such as
annotation guidelines. In this paper, we propose GuideNER,
which uses LLMs to summarize concise annotation guidelines as contextual information in ICL. We have conducted
experiments on widely used NER datasets, and the experimental results indicate that our method can consistently and
significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods, while using
shorter prompts. Especially on the GENIA dataset, our model
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art model by 12.63 F1
scores.

Description: Given a sentence, identify the entities in the text and
: Task
classify each entity as one of the following categories: Person, Location,
Organization, or Miscellaneous.

User

Examples:
Text: Amazon was founded by Jeff Bezos in Bellevue.
Label: Person: [Amazon, Bellevue] Location [Jeff Bezos]
Text: He stopped by Italy on his way to France.
Label: Organization: [He] Person: [Italy, France]
Text to be recognized: Who's your favorite player, Stephen Curry or
LeBron James?

: Label: Person: [Stephen Curry, LeBron James]
Assistant
Given The Correct Input-Label Pairs:
Description: Given a sentence, identify the entities in the text and
: Task
classify each entity as one of the following categories: Person, Location,
Organization, or Miscellaneous.

User

Examples:
Text: Linus makes another great contribution to the latest Linux.
Label: Person: [Linus]
Text: Tim Cook will make Apple great again
Label: Person: [Tim Cook] Organization: [Google]

Code — https://github.com/JinFish/GuideNER

Text to be recognized: Google's Android remains the dominant
operating system for mobile devices.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive performance on downstream tasks through in-context learning
(ICL), which allows them to generalize to unseen cases using only a few input-label pairs (examples) without requiring
further fine-tuning (Liu et al. 2022; Min et al. 2022). However, there is a significant gap between their performance in
Named Entity Recognition (NER) and in fine-tuning methods (Li et al. 2023). We believe this discrepancy is due to inconsistencies in labeling definitions in NER. For example, in
ACE05 (Walker et al. 2006), pronouns (such as “he”) are annotated as Person, whereas in CoNLL03 (Tjong Kim Sang
and De Meulder 2003), they are not.
Intuitively, the input-label pairs provided in ICL allow the
LLM to accurately understand the relationship between the
inputs and the labels, and thus the range of entities corresponding to the labels. However, (Min et al. 2022) has shown

: Label: Organization: [Google]

Miscellaneous: [Android]

Assistant

Figure 1: Two examples of LLM for NER within ICL.

that even if labels in the label space (the set of labels for this
task) are randomly assigned to inputs, there is almost no difference in model performance compared to using the correct
input-label pairs. This indicates that LLMs do not learn the
specific input-label mappings from the examples but rather
grasp the general definition of the task itself.
The above phenomenon is also observed in the current advanced LLMs, including GPT-4 and Gemini. As
shown in Figure 1, even with incorrect input label pairs
(e.g., labeling Amazon as Person), the LLM can still correctly classify Stephen Curry and LeBron James as
Person. Furthermore, even when provided with correct

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24159

