The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhanced Sample Selection with Confidence Tracking: Identifying Correctly
Labeled yet Hard-to-Learn Samples in Noisy Data
Weiran Pan1, 2 , Wei Wei1, 2 * , Feida Zhu3 , Yong Deng4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Joint Laboratory of HUST and Pingan Property & Casualty Research (HPL), China
3
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
4
State Grid Fujian Electric Power Co.
{panwr, weiw}@hust.edu.cn, fdzhu@smu.edu.sg, hhdyyong@qq.com
Abstract

shown that deep neural networks can easily fit noisy data,
resulting in poor generalization. Therefore, developing algorithms robust to noisy labels is of great practical importance (Natarajan et al. 2013).
Sample selection methods aim to identify correct labels
from noisy data, which is increasingly crucial for current
deep learning models to effectively learn from noisy labels.
There is a general consensus that the small-loss criterion is
an effective approach, which assumes samples with small
losses are more likely to have correct labels. In this context,
the Co-teaching family (Han et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2019; Wei
et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2022) and other state-of-the-art methods (Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Li et al. 2023) have been proposed. Typically, these methods select samples with losses
below a threshold for training. So a higher threshold introduces more incorrect labels while a lower threshold excludes
more correct labels, creating a trade-off dilemma between
precision and recall in sample selection. To alleviate this issue, one possible solution is establishing another sample selection criterion that can distinguish correct labels from incorrect ones in high-loss data. Then we can combine it with
the small-loss criterion to improve recall while maintaining
precision in sample selection.
To achieve this, we propose considering the changing
trends in model predictions to identify correct labels rather
than relying solely on loss values. This is motivated by our
empirical observations that although some correctly labeled
samples may obtain similar loss values to mislabeled ones,
their training dynamics are still distinguishable. As shown
in Figure 1, some correctly labeled data can be hard to fit by
the model and exhibit similar high loss to mislabeled data
in the early training stage. It is difficult to distinguish them
by setting a threshold on loss values. But we also observe
that, only for the correctly labeled samples, the model’s prediction confidence for annotated labels tends to rise more
quickly than for other classes. For instance, with correctly
labeled dog images, the model’s prediction confidence for
the “dog” class (i.e., the posterior probability of the image
belonging to the “dog” class predicted by the model) increases more rapidly than for any other class. Conversely,
for cat images mislabeled as “dog”, the model’s prediction
confidence for the “cat” class rises slightly faster than for
the “dog” class. This observation suggests it’s possible to
identify correctly labeled samples by considering training

We propose a novel sample selection method for image classification in the presence of noisy labels. Existing methods typically consider small-loss samples as correctly labeled. However, some correctly labeled samples are inherently difficult
for the model to learn and can exhibit high loss similar to mislabeled samples in the early stages of training. Consequently,
setting a threshold on per-sample loss to select correct labels
results in a trade-off between precision and recall in sample
selection: a lower threshold may miss many correctly labeled
hard-to-learn samples (low recall), while a higher threshold
may include many mislabeled samples (low precision). To address this issue, our goal is to accurately distinguish correctly
labeled yet hard-to-learn samples from mislabeled ones, thus
alleviating the trade-off dilemma. We achieve this by considering the trends in model prediction confidence rather than
relying solely on loss values. Empirical observations show
that only for correctly labeled samples, the model’s prediction confidence for the annotated labels typically increases
faster than for any other classes. Based on this insight, we
propose tracking the confidence gaps between the annotated
labels and other classes during training and evaluating their
trends using the Mann-Kendall Test. A sample is considered
potentially correctly labeled if all its confidence gaps tend to
increase. Our method functions as a plug-and-play component that can be seamlessly integrated into existing sample
selection techniques. Experiments on several standard benchmarks and real-world datasets demonstrate that our method
enhances the performance of existing methods for learning
with noisy labels.

Code — https://github.com/Aliinton/ConfidenceTracking

1

Introduction

The remarkable success of deep learning methods in classification tasks can largely be attributed to high-quality
datasets. However, collecting such datasets through manual labeling can be both time-consuming and expensive in
many applications. Acquiring data via online queries (Li
et al. 2017) or crowdsourcing (Xiao et al. 2015) can construct large-scale datasets at a lower cost but inevitably introduces noise labels. Existing research (Zhang et al. 2021) has
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19795

