The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RoPaSS: Robust Watermarking for Partial Screen-Shooting Scenarios
Zehua Ma1 , Han Fang2* , Xi Yang3 , Kejiang Chen1 * , Weiming Zhang1, 4
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security, University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore
3
Jinan University
4
Institute of Hefei High Dimensional Data Ltd.

Abstract

Easy to

Screen-shooting robust watermarking is an effective means
of preventing screen content leakage from unauthorized camera shooting, as it can trace the leaked source through the
watermark extraction thereby providing an effective deterrent. However, current screen-shooting resilient watermarking schemes rely on the image’s contours to synchronize and
then extract the watermark. While in practical applications,
it’s common for only a portion of the image to be captured, resulting in a limited performance of the previous watermarking
schemes. To address this problem, we propose the RoPaSS:
a robust watermarking scheme for partial screen-shooting
scenarios, which effectively constructs symmetric characteristics on the embedding watermark to handle the sticky resynchronization issue. Specifically, RoPaSS consists of a watermark encoder, a decoder, and three estimators, which are
trained in two stages. In the first training stage, RoPaSS integrates the flipping operation into the watermark encoder and
decoder training to increase the redundancy of watermark
messages and artificially guide the generation of symmetric
watermarks. In the second stage, estimators utilize the watermark symmetry as an additional reference to estimate the
restoration parameters to resynchronize the partially captured
watermarked image. Experiments have demonstrated the excellent performance of RoPaSS in partial screen-shooting
traceability, with extraction accuracy of above 93% in frontal
shooting and above 86% in 30◦ shooting even if only 50% of
the image content is captured.

Overall

Synchronize

Partial

Synchronize original image

Hard to

w/o

or image edges

Figure 1: Schematic diagrams of the screen-shooting process
(blue) and the partial screen-shooting process (red).

Digital watermarking technology (Ma et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Fang et al. 2024) serves as
a common solution for tracing the source of leakage. It embeds imperceptible markers, such as identification information, into digital content to authenticate its copyright and
trace its source. Robustness is a key property of digital image watermarks, ensuring traceability despite distortions. To
ensure robustness against screen-shooting distortion, many
researchers have proposed various screen-shooting resilient
watermarking schemes (SSR watermark) (Fang et al. 2018,
2022, 2023; Ge et al. 2023). These schemes primarily address scenarios where full watermarked images are captured.
But real-life scenarios often capture only partial content, reducing their effectiveness.
The primary reason is that most existing SSR watermark
methods necessitate synchronization of the captured image
before extraction, where the synchronization reference is
typically the image contours or screen edges. However, in
the partial screen-shooting scenario, there are not enough
references to synchronize the captured image. Such a desynchronization distortion poses challenges in watermark extraction; see the bottom row of Fig. 1.
It should be noted that the existing watermark synchronization methods (Ma et al. 2021; He et al. 2023) cannot
adapt well to the screen-shooting scenario since they can
only recover the base transform on low-distortion images. In
addition to desynchronization, the screen-shooting process
also introduces strong pixel distortions such as illumination
distortion and moiré distortion (Fang et al. 2022), which also
seriously affect the survivability of the watermark.
Therefore, the core of realizing a watermarking scheme
applicable to partial screen-shooting scenarios lies in de-

Introduction
In recent years, there has been a rapid growth in screen usage (Min et al. 2021), owing to the advent of the digital information age and the increasing adoption of paperless offices (Briscoe 2022). This has led to a significant increase
in the display of important data and sensitive information
on a wide range of screens, including personal computing
devices, collaborative workspaces, and various digital platforms. Meanwhile, the widespread use of high-resolution
cameras in small smart devices, such as mobile phones,
has heightened the risk of screen content leakage. A typical
threat scenario is that the confidential drawings displayed on
a screen are easily captured unauthorized and further leaked.
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19332

