The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Object-level Geometric Structure Preserving for Natural Image Stitching
Wenxiao Cai, Wankou Yang*
Southeast University, 2 SiPaiLou, Nanjing JS 210096, China
{wxcai,wkyang}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
The topic of stitching images with globally natural structures
holds paramount significance, with two main goals: pixellevel alignment and distortion prevention. The existing approaches exhibit the ability to align well, yet fall short in
maintaining object structures. In this paper, we endeavour to
safeguard the overall OBJect-level structures within images
based on Global Similarity Prior (OBJ-GSP), on the basis of
good alignment performance. Our approach leverages semantic segmentation models like the family of Segment Anything
Model to extract the contours of any objects in a scene. Triangular meshes are employed in image transformation to protect the overall shapes of objects within images. The balance
between alignment and distortion prevention is achieved by
allowing the object meshes to strike a balance between similarity and projective transformation. We also demonstrate that
object-level semantic information is necessary in low-altitude
aerial image stitching. Additionally, we propose StitchBench,
the largest image stitching benchmark with most diverse scenarios. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that OBJGSP outperforms existing methods in both pixel alignment
and shape preservation.

(a) Autostitch: misalignment &
distortion

(c) GSP: distortion

(b) UDIS++: misalignment and
distortion

(d) GES-GSP: distortion

Code — https://github.com/RussRobin/OBJ-GSP
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12677

Introduction
Image stitching aims to align multiple images and create a composite image with a larger field of view. This
method is widely utilized across diverse domains, including
smartphone panoramic photography (Xiong and Pulli 2009),
robotic navigation (Dewangan, Raja, and Singh 2014), and
virtual reality (Anderson et al. 2016; Kim, taek Lim, and Ro
2020). In recent years, the problem of alignment has largely
been addressed. Methods such as APAP (Zaragoza et al.
2013) and GSP (Chen and Chuang 2016) divide the images
into multiple grids, compute local transformation matrices
within each grid, and combine them with global transformation information to achieve precise alignment in overlapping
regions. Thus, the main concern of image stitching nowadays is to prevent distortion on the basis of good alignment
performance.

(e) SAM result and our sampling
points in overlapping area

(f) Our pano

Figure 1: Red boxes indicate blurriness. (a) and (b) are not
aligned well. (c) GSP (Chen and Chuang 2016) aligns well
but distorts the building. Based on this, (d) GES-GSP (Du
et al. 2022) tries to prevent distortion but still fails in this
case. (f) our method protects the structure of the building by
sampling on object contours extracted by segmentation (e).

* Correspond to: Wankou Yang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Existing works extract lines in images are preserve them
in image transformation. LPC (Jia et al. 2021) extracts and
1926

