The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Open Models, Closed Minds? On Agents Capabilities in Mimicking Human
Personalities through Open Large Language Models
Lucio La Cava, Andrea Tagarelli
DIMES Department, University of Calabria, Italy
lucio.lacava@dimes.unical.it, andrea.tagarelli@unical.it

Abstract

rapid emergence of LLM-powered agents aimed at supporting humans in different real-life tasks and scenarios (Zhao,
Jin, and Cheng 2023).
The emergence of human-like behaviors (Bubeck et al.
2023) in AI has also shed light on the intersection between
NLP and human psychology, prompting the critical examination of whether and to what extent LLMs can understand and mimic human personalities (Miotto, Rossberg,
and Kleinberg 2022; Pan and Zeng 2023; Safdari et al. 2023;
tse Huang et al. 2023). As LLM agents are growing to become the main front of human-computer interaction nowadays, understanding how they embody human personalities
is paramount to fostering better interactions and supporting
related tasks, as well as to preventing weird behaviors (Yang
and Menczer 2023).
In this context, the recent surge in the adoption of open
LLMs1 has created unprecedented research opportunities.
While there have been efforts to study the inherent personalities of closed LLMs, a significant gap remains in understanding these aspects within open LLMs, which may exhibit distinct characteristics. The openness of such models provides valuable insights into their training data, architectures, parameters, and alignment techniques, enabling
deeper investigations than those possible with closed models, which typically restrict interactions to API access. Furthermore, the accessibility of open models (e.g., via the Huggingface Hub) makes them ideal for research studies, like
ours, which require extensive experimentation. In fact, unlike closed models, open models are really cost-effective and
allow local execution, eliminating the need for expensive
and limited API calls. Additionally, they offer enhanced customization opportunities through fine-tuning and alignment,
which are often unavailable with proprietary counterparts.
In light of the above remarks and motivations for using open LLMs upon closed ones, our study proposes the
first in-depth exploration of the intrinsic personality traits of
LLMs and assessing the potential for shaping these models around specific personalities by conditioning them with
particular prompts and roles. Based on the two most widely
known personality tests, namely Myers-Briggs Type Indi-

The emergence of unveiling human-like behaviors in Large
Language Models (LLMs) has led to a closer connection between NLP and human psychology. However, research on the
personalities exhibited by LLMs has largely been confined
to limited investigations using individual psychological tests,
primarily focusing on a small number of commercially licensed LLMs. This approach overlooks the extensive use and
significant advancements observed in open-source LLMs.
This work aims to address both the above limitations by conducting an in-depth investigation of a significant body of 12
LLM Agents based on the most representative Open models, through the two most well-known psychological assessment tests, namely Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) and
Big Five Inventory (BFI). Our approach involves evaluating
the intrinsic personality traits of LLM agents and determining
the extent to which these agents can mimic human personalities when conditioned by specific personalities and roles. Our
findings unveil that (i) each LLM agent showcases distinct
human personalities; (ii) personality-conditioned prompting
produces varying effects on the agents, with only few successfully mirroring the imposed personality, while most of
them being “closed-minded” (i.e., they retain their intrinsic
traits); and (iii) combining role and personality conditioning
can enhance the agents’ ability to mimic human personalities.
Our work represents a step up in understanding the dense relationship between NLP and human psychology through the
lens of LLMs.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.07115

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the
Natural Language Processing (NLP) realm by elevating
human-like text generation capabilities to unforeseen levels.
LLMs can also be considered agents as they can generate
coherent and contextually relevant text based on the input
they receive and by interacting with users or other systems
(e.g., for answering questions, generating text, or engaging
in conversations). Indeed, these models have been proven
effective in solving human-level tasks (Guo et al. 2023b)
and self-improving skills (Huang et al. 2022), leading to the

1
In this context, the term “open” is typically meant to distributions of models with a highly permissive license, allowing free use
and access to the model’s weights and documentation. This might
include open-sourceness, although not always in a fully manner.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1355

