The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ALLVB: All-in-One Long Video Understanding Benchmark
Xichen Tan1 , Yuanjing Luo1 , Yunfan Ye2 , Fang Liu2 * , Zhiping Cai1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
School of Design, Hunan University, Changsha, China
tanxc23@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

AGIEval (Zhong et al. 2023), which focuses on performance in standardized exams like GRE, GMAT, and
China’s Gaokao. For image-text multi-modal benchmarks,
ScienceQA (Lu et al. 2022) includes Q&As from elementary and middle school curricula, while MMMU (Yue et al.
2024) features questions from six core academic subjects at
the university level.
Regarding video-text benchmarks, current benchmarks
mainly focused on short videos, such as MSVD-QA (Xu
et al. 2017), MSRVTT-QA (Xu et al. 2017), TGIFQA (Jang et al. 2017), ActivityNet-QA (Yu et al. 2019),
and BDIQA (Mao et al. 2024). These benchmarks typically involve videos averaging under 10 seconds, except for
ActivityNet-QA, which averages 180 seconds.
When it comes to benchmarks for long videos,
several contemporary works are noteworthy, including
MLVU (Zhou et al. 2024), Video-MME (Fu et al. 2024), and
LVBench (Wang et al. 2024). They rely on manual Q&As
annotations, limiting scalability due to labor costs, and resulting in shorter videos and fewer Q&As per video. Moreover, the lack of a unified standard in designing video comprehension questions poses challenges. To address these issues, we develop an automated pipeline for a more efficient
and scientifically robust benchmark.
Since existing LLMs do not yet natively support video
modality input, the current method involves generating textual descriptions of video content for the models. Given the
significant challenges of describing hour-long videos, we
have opted to use existing text descriptions closely related
to the video content, with movie scripts being the most common example.
First, we collect a large number of movie scripts from
open-source websites, then filter out duplicates and unsuitable scripts, ultimately obtaining 1,376 movie scripts. These
scripts are used as input to GPT-4o (OpenAI 2024) for generating video-related Q&As. To ensure that the LLM can
capture the details within the movie and considering its limitations in handling ultra-long contexts, we use a two-stage
segmentation method to divide the script into different plots
and sub-plots, and then construct overarching Q&As for
the entire script and detailed Q&As for the sub-plots. This
method ensures the correctness of the Q&As construction.
To design the Q&As as objectively as possible and to
enhance the benchmark’s versatility, we select 9 major ex-

From image to video understanding, the capabilities of Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) are increasingly powerful. However,
most existing video understanding benchmarks are relatively
short, which makes them inadequate for effectively evaluating the long-sequence modeling capabilities of MLLMs.
This highlights the urgent need for a comprehensive and integrated long video understanding benchmark to assess the
ability of MLLMs thoroughly. To this end, we propose ALLVB (ALL-in-One Long Video Understanding Benchmark).
ALLVB’s main contributions include: 1) It integrates 9 major video understanding tasks. These tasks are converted into
video QA formats, allowing a single benchmark to evaluate 9
different video understanding capabilities of MLLMs, highlighting the versatility, comprehensiveness, and challenging
nature of ALLVB. 2) A fully automated annotation pipeline
using GPT-4o is designed, requiring only human quality control, which facilitates the maintenance and expansion of the
benchmark. 3) It contains 1,376 videos across 16 categories,
averaging nearly 2 hours each, with a total of 252k QAs. To
the best of our knowledge, it is the largest long video understanding benchmark in terms of the number of videos, average duration, and number of QAs. We have tested various
mainstream MLLMs on ALLVB, and the results indicate that
even the most advanced commercial models have significant
room for improvement. This reflects the benchmark’s challenging nature and demonstrates the substantial potential for
development in long video understanding.

Datasets —
https://huggingface.co/datasets/ALLVB/ALLVB

Introduction
The field of Large Language Models (LLMs) is currently
a highly popular research area, rapidly evolving from textfocused to multi-modal, incorporating image and video inputs. To objectively assess the performance of these models,
various Q&A benchmarks are continually being proposed.
For pure text benchmarks, notable examples include MMLU (Hendrycks et al. 2020), which evaluates
LLMs across 57 tasks in various academic fields, and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7211

