The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DOGR: Leveraging Document-Oriented Contrastive Learning in Generative
Retrieval
Penghao Lu, Xin Dong * , Yuansheng Zhou, Lei Cheng, Chuan Yuan, Linjian Mo
Ant Group
{lupenghao.lph,zhaoxin.dx,zhouyuansheng.zys,lei.chenglei,yuanzheng.xy,linyi01}@antgroup.com

Abstract

each document and then treated document retrieval as a standard sequence-to-sequence task. Specifically, this task learns
the generation of identifiers through the interaction between
queries and identifiers in an end-to-end manner. However,
the identifier length is often much smaller than documents,
identifiers may experience a certain degree of information
loss compared to the complete document. Existing generative retrieval methods mainly concentrate on learning the relationship between the queries and the identifiers, thus they
are unable to capture the complete semantic relationships
between queries and documents.
There are some studies introducing additional optimization objectives to comprehensively characterize the relationship between queries and documents. A previous approach
(Li et al. 2024) proposed a document-oriented margin-based
loss based on generation probability to optimize the document ranking. Another work (Lee et al. 2023) modeled
query-document relevance by separately learning the generation probabilities of the query and document to the target
identifier. However, these work only focused on the intermediate target of learning identifiers and lack the interaction
between query and documents. This could potentially affect
the retrieval performance. Since the model can only learn the
nuanced interactions through the identifier, it is insufficient
to model the relevance between queries and documents by
solely relying on the generation probability of identifiers.
To address the above problems, we introduce a novel and
general framework, namely Leveraging Document-Oriented
Contrastive Learning in Generative Retrieval (DOGR),
which captures the relationship between queries and documents comprehensively through their direct interactions.
DOGR proposed a two-stage learning strategy consisting of
an identifier generation stage and a document ranking stage.
First, in the identifier generation stage, we train an encoderdecoder architecture model based on the generation loss to
learn the connections between the document identifier and
the query. Next, in the document ranking stage, we fine-tune
the model with contrastive learning objectives to directly
learn the correlation between queries and documents. We enhance document representation through the elaborate design
of two negative sampling methods. Specifically, DOGR explicitly leverages prefix-oriented negative sampling to learn
semantic representations of documents with the same identifier prefix and retrieval-augmented negative sampling to

Generative retrieval constitutes an innovative approach in information retrieval, leveraging generative language models
(LM) to generate a ranked list of document identifiers (docid) for a given query. It simplifies the retrieval pipeline by
replacing the large external index with model parameters.
However, existing works merely learned the relationship between queries and document identifiers, which is unable to
directly represent the relevance between queries and documents. To address the above problem, we propose a novel
and general generative retrieval framework, namely Leveraging Document-Oriented Contrastive Learning in Generative
Retrieval (DOGR), which leverages contrastive learning to
improve generative retrieval tasks. It adopts a two-stage learning strategy that captures the relationship between queries
and documents comprehensively through direct interactions.
Furthermore, negative sampling methods and corresponding contrastive learning objectives are implemented to enhance the learning of semantic representations, thereby promoting a thorough comprehension of the relationship between queries and documents. Experimental results demonstrate that DOGR achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to existing generative retrieval methods on two public
benchmark datasets. Further experiments have shown that our
framework is generally effective for common identifier construction techniques.

Introduction
Information retrieval aims to satisfy user queries by retrieving documents. With the rapid increase in the volume of information, the importance of retrieval technology is becoming gradually prominent. In recent years, a novel retrieval
method known as generative retrieval has emerged. Unlike
traditional retrieval methods (sparse retrieval and dense retrieval), generative retrieval assigns an identifier to each document and generates relevant document identifiers end-toend through language models. In addition, generative retrieval can better utilize the capabilities of the large language
models(LLMs), especially the knowledge learned during the
pre-training phase.
Most generative retrieval methods (Cao et al. 2021; Tay
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022a) first define an identifier for
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24732

