The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Logic of Theory Base Change: Reformulation of Belief Bases
Eduardo L. Fermé1 , Andreas Herzig2 , Maria Vanina Martinez3
1

Universidade da Madeira and NOVA-LINCS, Portugal
2
IRIT, CNRS, Univ. Toulouse, France
3
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute (IIIA-CSIC), Spain
ferme@uma.pt, andreas.herzig@irit.fr, vmartinez@iiia.csic.es

Abstract

extensions is the use of belief bases (Hansson 1991) instead
of belief sets. Belief bases consist of sets of sentences not
necessarily closed under logical consequence. Belief bases
have more expressive power than belief sets, as they allow
to distinguish between basic beliefs and beliefs that are inferred from basic beliefs: a logical consequence p of B is
explicitly believed if p ∈ B, and is implicitly believed otherwise (Levesque 1984; Lorini 2020). For example, consider
the following two belief bases:

In the logic of theory change, the AGM model has acquired
the status of a standard model. However, the AGM model
does not seem adequate for some contexts and application domains. This inspired many researchers to propose extensions
and generalizations to AGM. Among these extensions, one of
the most important are belief bases. Belief bases have more
expressivity than belief sets, as explicit and implicit beliefs
have different statuses. In this paper, we present reformulation, a belief change operation that allows us to reformulate a
belief base making some particular sentences explicit without
modifying the consequences of the belief base. We provide a
constructive method and its axiomatic characterization.

1

B1 = {p, p ↔ q};
B2 = {p, q}.
They have the same logical consequences, and, therefore,
generate the same belief set. However, note that the difference between B1 and B2 is not just a “notational bondage”
that should be straightened out by some process of “articulation” ((Belnap 1979), cited in (Rott 2000)): the fact that they
are expressed differently adds to their semantics.
Several contraction models initially defined for belief sets
have been adapted to belief states, such as partial meet and
kernel contractions (Hansson 1991). Going back to the previous example, AGM contractions by p on B1 and B2 would
yield the same result, the reason being that it is not B1
and B2 that are contracted, but rather the set of all logical consequences of B1 and B2. However, in Hansson’s
tradition of belief bases, due to the postulate of inclusion
((B − p ⊆ B) the contraction by p can yield different results
for B1 and B2 even when B1 and B2 have the same logical
consequences. 1 Under pseudo-contraction one would get
the same result in both bases when contracting by p; however, this is a much more complex operation from a computational point of view.
A similar situation arises when we focus on revision. Consider the previous belief bases and let B1 represent Abe’s
belief state and B2 Bob’s belief state; let also proposition
p be “Liberal Party will support the proposal to subsidize
the steel industry”, and let q be “Ms. Smith, who is a liberal
party’s member, will vote in favor of that proposal”. Now,
Abe and Bob receive and accept the information that p is

Introduction

The primary objective underlying research in the area of belief change is to identify appropriate methods for modeling
belief states of rational agents and the changes that occur in
these states when the agent receives new information as a
result of its interaction with the world. What is now generally considered the standard model of belief change was proposed by Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and Makinson (1985) and
is commonly known as the AGM model. In this framework,
the belief state of an agent is modeled by a belief set, i.e.,
a set of sentences that is closed under logical consequence.
Furthermore, contractions are considered the primary type
of belief change, that is, when one or more beliefs are to be
eliminated from the agent’s belief state.
In Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and Makinson (1985), a set of
conditions, commonly referred to as the AGM postulates for
contraction, were defined as the properties that such operations should satisfy. Additionally, a constructive definition
of contraction operations was presented, called partial meet
contractions, and a representation theorem was established,
proving that the AGM postulates for contraction exactly
characterize this class of operations. Subsequently, several
other constructive definitions have been proposed that yield
the same class of operations, including safe and kernel contraction (Alchourrón and Makinson 1985; Hansson 1994).
Various extensions and generalizations of the AGM model
have been proposed since then. One of the most significant

1
In Santos et al. (2018), the authors define the operation of
pseudo-contraction, which explores a different inclusion postulate,
namely the set of logical consequences of B − p is included in the
set of logical consequences of B.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14922

