The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Power of Diversity: Enhancing Data-Free Black-Box Attack with
Domain-Augmented Learning
Yang Wei 1 , Jingyu Tan 1 , Guowen Xu 2 , Zhuoran Ma 3∗ , Zhuo Ma 3 , Bin Xiao 1, 4∗
1
2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
4
Jinan Inspur Data Technology Co., Ltd., Jinan, China
weiyang@cqupt.edu.cn, s230231105@stu.cqupt.edu.cn, guowen.xu@foxmail.com,
emmazhr@163.com, mazhuo@mail.xidian.edu.cn, xiaobin@cqupt.edu.cn
Abstract
Substitute training-based data-free black-box attacks pose a
significant threat to enterprise-deployed models. These attacks use a generator to synthesize data and query APIs, then
train a substitute model to approximate the target model’s decision boundary based on the returned results. However, existing attack methods often struggle to produce sufficiently
diverse data, particularly for complex target models and extensive target data domains, severely limiting their practical application. To address this gap, we design domainaugmented learning to improve the quality of the synthetic
data domain (SDD) generated by the generator from two perspectives. Specifically, (1) To broaden the SDD’s coverage,
we introduce textual semantic embeddings into the generator
for the first time. (2) To enhance the SDD’s discretization,
we propose a competitive optimization strategy that forces
the generator to self-compete, along with heterogeneity excitation to overcome the constraints of information entropy
on diversity. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that
our method is more effective. In non-targeted attacks on the
CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet datasets, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art by 14% and 7% in attack success
rate, respectively.

1

Discretization

`

Expansion

Previous synthetic
data domain
Our synthetic data domain

Figure 1: Distribution comparison of synthetic data domains. Previous work usually show high degree of concentration, resulting in limited data domain coverage. Our
domain-augmented learning can discretize these data and
expand the coverage of the synthetic data domain.

then use it to create adversarial samples that attack the target model, resulting in a transferable attack(Szegedy et al.
2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014a; Tramèr et al.
2017). It can be divided into three types: (1) The first type involves directly using real public data to query APIs for substitute training, such as Knockoff (Orekondy, Schiele, and
Fritz 2019; Jindal et al. 2024; Papernot et al. 2017). (2) Due
to protection of data privacy and the difficulty in obtaining
suitable real data, the second type uses the generator to create synthetic data for querying. This type is based on the
“min-max” game framework, exemplified by DaST (Zhou
et al. 2020; Yu and Sun 2022; Wang et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2022; Wei et al. 2023), which enhances the attack’s effectiveness by simulating the adversarial mechanism of GANs
(Goodfellow et al. 2014). (3) The third type is also using
synthetic data for querying, but it’s based on gradient estimation, such as DFME (Truong et al. 2021; Kariyappa,
Prakash, and Qureshi 2021; Beetham et al. 2023; Sanyal,
Addepalli, and Babu 2022), which gives the generator extra
information by estimating the gradients of the target model.
Nevertheless, as the performance of models provided by enterprises gradually improves due to factors such as the increasing complexity of model structures and the expanded
distribution of training datasets. This means that the deci-

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning technology has been
widely applied across various fields, including self-driving
cars, intelligent medical diagnostics, etc., its influence is
pervasive. With the rapid advancement of these technologies, Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) has emerged.
It provides access to complex machine learning models for
users without a deep learning background. Therefore, more
enterprises are deploying pre-trained machine learning models on cloud platforms and making APIs avaiable to make
machine learning services easy to use.
However, this convenience also brings new security challenges. Recent studies indicate that models with public APIs
may be vulnerable to black-box attacks based on substitute
training. In this type of attacks, attackers query the API and
use the API’s predictions to train a substitute model that
closely approximates the functions of the target model, and
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8304

