The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Query Quantized Neural SLAM
Sijia Jiang, Jing Hua * , Zhizhong Han
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA
sijiajiang@wayne.edu, jinghua@wayne.edu, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract

et al. 2021), depth (Yu et al. 2022), or normal (Wang et al.
2022) at a pixel, we query neural implicit representations
for signed distances or occupancy labels and color at points
sampled along a ray, which are integrated based on volume
rendering equations.
We usually use coordinates, positional encodings, or other
features as the input of neural implicit representations (Peng
et al. 2020; Müller et al. 2022; Rosu and Behnke 2023; Li
et al. 2023b), which we call a query. Queries are continuous
vectors which allow neural networks to generalize well on
unseen queries that are similar to the ones seen before. Continuity is good for generalization but also brings huge variations for neural networks to overfit. Neural networks need
to see these queries or similar ones lots of times so that they
can infer and remember attributes like geometry and color
at these queries, which takes significant time. However, this
runtime efficiency does not meet the requirement of SLAM
systems. What is more critical is that we are only allowed to
conduct optimization on current frame in merely few iterations, and no beyond frames are observable.
Underfitting on these queries results in huge drifts in camera tracking and artifacts on reconstructions. Therefore, how
to query neural implicit representations to make overfitting
more efficiently in SLAM is still a challenge.
To overcome this challenge, we introduce query quantized neural SLAM to jointly model geometry, color, and
camera poses from RGBD images. We learn a neural singed
distance function (SDF) to represent geometry in a scene
through rendering the SDF with a color function to overfit
image observations. We propose to quantize a query into a
discrete representation with a set of codes, and use the discrete query as the input of neural SDF, which significantly
reduces the variations of queries and improves the performance of reconstruction and camera tracking. Our approach
is to make neural networks become increasingly familiar to
these quantized queries after overfitting more and more previous frames, which leads to faster and easier convergence
at each frame. We provide a thorough solution to discretize
queries like coordinates, positional encodings, or other geometry features for overfitting each frame more effectively.
Moreover, to support our quantized queries, we also introduce novel initialization, losses, and augmentation to stabilize the optimization with huge uncertainty in the very
beginning, constrain the optimization space, and estimate

Neural implicit representations have shown remarkable abilities in jointly modeling geometry, color, and camera poses
in simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). Current
methods use coordinates, positional encodings, or other geometry features as input to query neural implicit functions
for signed distances and color which produce rendering errors to drive the optimization in overfitting image observations. However, due to the run time efficiency requirement in
SLAM systems, we are merely allowed to conduct optimization on each frame in few iterations, which is far from enough
for neural networks to overfit these queries. The underfitting usually results in severe drifts in camera tracking and
artifacts in reconstruction. To resolve this issue, we propose
query quantized neural SLAM which uses quantized queries
to reduce variations of input for much easier and faster overfitting a frame. To this end, we quantize a query into a discrete representation with a set of codes, and only allow neural networks to observe a finite number of variations. This
allows neural networks to become increasingly familiar with
these codes after overfitting more and more previous frames.
Moreover, we also introduce novel initialization, losses, and
argumentation to stabilize the optimization with significant
uncertainty in the early optimization stage, constrain the optimization space, and estimate camera poses more accurately.
We justify the effectiveness of each design and report visual
and numerical comparisons on widely used benchmarks to
show our superiority over the latest methods in both reconstruction and camera tracking.

Introduction
Neural implicit representations have made huge progress
in simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) (Zhu
et al. 2022, 2023; Wang, Wang, and Agapito 2023; Sucar et al. 2021; Stier et al. 2023). These methods represent
geometry and color as continuous functions to reconstruct
smooth surfaces and render plausible novel views, which
shows advantages over point clouds in classic SLAM systems (Koestler et al. 2022). Current methods learn neural
implicits in a scene by rendering them into RGBD images
through volume rendering and minimizing the rendering errors to ground truth observations. To render color (Wang
* Corresponding author: Jing Hua
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4057

