The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Open Science in AI: A Replication Study
Odd Erik Gundersen1,2 , Odd Cappelen1,3 , Martin Mølnå1,2 , Nicklas Grimstad Nilsen1,2
1

Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
2
Aneo AS, Trondheim, Norway
3
Minus 1, Oslo, Norway
odderik@ntnu.no, odd.cappelen@minus1.no, {martin.molna,nicklas.nilsen}@aneo.com,

Description Experiments
Research
Design

Reproducibility
Study

Original
Study

A reproducibility crisis has been reported in science, but the
extent to which it affects AI research is not yet fully understood. Therefore, we performed a systematic replication
study including 30 highly cited AI studies relying on original
materials when available. In the end, eight articles were rejected because they required access to data or hardware that
was practically impossible to acquire as part of the project.
Six articles were successfully reproduced, while five were
partially reproduced. In total, 50% of the articles included
was reproduced to some extent. The availability of code and
data correlate strongly with reproducibility, as 86% of articles that shared code and data were fully or partly reproduced, while this was true for 33% of articles that shared only
data. The quality of the data documentation correlates with
successful replication. Poorly documented or miss-specified
data will probably result in unsuccessful replication. Surprisingly, the quality of the code documentation does not correlate with successful replication. Whether the code is poorly
documented, partially missing, or not versioned is not important for successful replication, as long as the code is shared.
This study emphasizes the effectiveness of open science and
the importance of properly documenting data work.

Data

Outcome

Analysis

Conclusion

Code
...

HW

SW

Data

Code

Partial Success

Abstract

..
.

Assumptions
HW

SW

Figure 1: An R3 type reproducibility study is conducted
where only the research report and data are shared publicly, so the code implementing both the AI method and
experiment as well as hardware an ancillary software differ from the original experiment, as illustrated by differing
icons. Many assumptions must be made when conducting a
reproducibility study as the research report cannot possibly
cover all design decisions. Difference in implementation as
well as differences in hardware and ancillary software can
introduce differences between the output produced by the
original and the reproducibility experiments. Sometimes the
differences lead to different conclusions even after doing the
exact same analysis. This is indicated for one of the reproducibility experiments by the black light bulb icon. When
the original article describes several experiments, the overall result of the reproducibility study depends on whether all
the conclusions of all these experiments agree or not. If only
a subset of the conclusions is the same, the reproducibility
study is considered Partial Success.

Introduction
There is evidence that science is undergoing a reproducibility crisis (Baker 2016). (Ioannidis 2005) claims that most
published research findings are false. Research in artificial
intelligence (AI) is not spared (Hutson 2018; Haibe-Kains
et al. 2020; Gundersen 2020), and machine learning-based
science, which is science that uses machine learning algorithms, is severely affected (Kapoor and Narayanan 2023).
Some even argue that AI might be one of the causes of irreproducibility (Ball 2023). However, it is not clear how
much science is reproducible. Notable examples of studies that have tried to estimate the reproducibility exist for
psychology (Collaboration 2015), social science (Camerer
et al. 2018), economics (Camerer et al. 2016), medicine
(Prinz, Schlange, and Asadullah 2011), and social psychology (Klein et al. 2014). (Raff 2019) estimated the reproducibility of machine learning to be 63.5% by attempting to
independently reproduce 255 articles by reimplementing the

algorithms, while (Gundersen and Kjensmo 2018) estimated
the reproducibility of research published in AAAI and IJCAI
to be 26% indirectly by analyzing 400 research articles.
Many studies in machine learning have investigated reproducibility in various ways. (Pham et al. 2020) and (Zhuang
et al. 2022) investigate how different sources of variability affect the results of neural networks, and (Gundersen
et al. 2023) investigate how variability affects conclusions.
Natural language processing is the focus of (Melis, Dyer,
and Blunsom 2018), who find that standard LSTM archi-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26211

