The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Generalization of Deep Neural Networks
by Optimum Shifting
Yuyan Zhou1 , Ye Li1 * , Lei Feng2 , Sheng-Jun Huang1
1 MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, College of Computer Science and Technology,

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China.
2 Information Systems Technology and Design Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design

{yuyanzhou, yeli20, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn, lfengqaq@gmail.com
Abstract

DNNs is correlated with the sharpness of the loss landscape,
and flat minima suggest a better generalization ability than
sharp minima (Keskar et al. 2016; Neyshabur 2017; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1994; Keskar et al. 2017; Chaudhari
et al. 2019; Gatmiry et al. 2023). Existing works on sharpness minimization mainly focus on penalty-based methods
(Foret et al. 2021; Kwon et al. 2021; Zhao, Zhang, and
Hu 2022). However, in this work, we propose a penaltyfree sharpness minimization technique aimed at addressing
a fundamental question below:
Can we change the solution of a DNN from one point to a
flatter one while maintaining the same training loss value?
In this paper, we propose a method called optimum shifting (OS) to attain this objective. This approach is based on
the matrix multiplication within the neural network:

Recent studies showed that the generalization of neural networks is correlated with the sharpness of the loss landscape,
and flat minima suggests a better generalization ability than
sharp minima. In this paper, we propose a novel method
called optimum shifting, which changes the parameters of a
neural network from a sharp minimum to a flatter one while
maintaining the same training loss value. Our method is based
on the observation that when the input and output of a neural network are fixed, the matrix multiplications within the
network can be treated as systems of under-determined linear
equations, enabling adjustment of parameters in the solution
space, which can be simply accomplished by solving a constrained optimization problem. Furthermore, we introduce a
practical stochastic optimum shifting technique utilizing the
Neural Collapse theory to reduce computational costs and
provide more degrees of freedom for optimum shifting. Extensive experiments (including classification and detection)
with various deep neural network architectures on benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

𝑨𝑽 = 𝒁,

(1)

where 𝑨 ∈ R𝑏𝑎𝑡 𝑐ℎ×𝑚 represents the input matrix, and 𝑽 ∈
R𝑚×𝑛 denotes the parameters in the neural network’s linear
layer. Consider it a set of linear equations, and the parameter 𝑽 can be modified in the solution space. Assume that
the rows in 𝑨 are independent without loss of generality, if
the equation 𝑨𝑽 = 𝒁 is under-determined, it will have infinite solutions for 𝑽. This property allows us to change the
parameters of the neural network from the current point 𝑽
in the solution space to another point 𝑽 ∗ by minimizing the
sharpness (i.e., the trace of its Hessian (Gatmiry et al. 2023;
Yao et al. 2020; Blanc et al. 2020)), which can be calculated
by solving a simple constrained optimization problem.
The main challenge for the above method is that it requires keeping training loss unchanged across all training samples. Using the entire training set for OS demands
a significantly large memory capacity and huge computational costs. Moreover, OS in the whole dataset results in
a less under-determined input matrix, which limits the degrees of freedom for optimum shifting. To overcome these
challenges, we take inspiration from stochastic gradient descent, which uses a small batch to conduct gradient descent,
thereby reducing computational costs. We propose stochastic optimum shifting, which performs OS on a small batch
of data. In this way, the generalization ability of the neural
network can be improved and the computational costs can
be decreased. According to the theory of the Neural Collapse (Zhu et al. 2021; Tirer and Bruna 2022; Zhou et al.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful and have shown
remarkable results in various fields, including computer
vision (Goodfellow et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2023; SohlDickstein et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2023;
Guan et al. 2024a; Hu et al. 2024b; Sun 2024), natural language processing (OpenAI 2023; Wang et al. 2024; Zhou
et al. 2024; Vaswani et al. 2017) and AIGC tasks (Lin et al.
2024b; Shen et al. 2024b; Shen and Tang 2024; Hu et al.
2024a). Contemporary deep learning approaches formulate
the learning problem as an optimization problem and utilize stochastic gradient descent and its variants to minimize
the loss function (Lin et al. 2024a; Guan et al. 2024b; Shen
et al. 2024a; Wu et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024). Nowadays,
DNNs are generally over-parameterized and capable of providing a larger hypothesis space with normally better solutions having smaller training errors. However, this expansive
hypothesis space is concurrently populated with different
minima, each characterized by distinct generalization abilities. Recent studies have shown that the generalization of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10870

