The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GLEN: Generalized Focal Loss Ensemble of Low-Rank Networks for Calibrated
Visual Question Answering
Mahsa Mozaffari 1 , Hitesh Sapkota 2 * , Qi Yu 1
1

Rochester Institute of Technology,
2
Amazon Inc.
mm3424@rit.edu, sapkoh@amazon.com, qi.yu@rit.edu

Abstract
Q: How many people are sitting on
the bench?
GT A: 3

Deep learning models with large-scale backbones have been
increasingly adopted to tackle complex visual question answering (VQA) problems in real settings. While providing
powerful learning capacities to handle the high-dimensional
and multimodal VQA data, these models tend to suffer
from the memorization effect leading to overconfident predictions. This can significantly limit their applicability in
critical domains (e.g., medicine, cyber-security, and public
safety), where confidently wrong predictions may lead to severe consequences. In this work, we propose to perform novel
low-rank network factorization, resulting in much bettercalibrated networks. These low-rank factorized networks are
then aggregated into an ensemble guided by a generalized focal loss to further improve the overall performance and calibration. The overall framework, referred to as the Generalized
focal Loss Ensemble of low-rank Networks (GLEN), is an important step toward developing well-calibrated VQA models.
We theoretically demonstrate that the generalized focal loss
provides a more balanced bias-variance trade-off, which guarantees to lower the confidence of the incorrect predictions,
resulting in improved calibration. Extensive experimentation
conducted on benchmark datasets and comparison on various VQA models shows that GLEN leads to much better calibration over both in-distribution and out-of-distribution data
without sacrificing the VQA accuracy.

1

Pythia A: 2 ✘
ViLBERT A: 2 ✘

Confidence: 0.98
Confidence: 1.0

Q: Does this look like nice weather
for a day at the beach?
GT A: No
Pythia A: Yes ✘ Conﬁdence: 0.98
ViLBERT A: Yes ✘ Conﬁdence: 0.92

Figure 1: Illustration of over-confidence in VQA models:
Pythia (Jiang et al. 2018) and ViLBERT (Lu et al. 2019)
models, exhibiting incorrect answers with high confidence.
due to the overfitting phenomenon stemming from the memorization effect of over-parametrized models. This issue undermines the reliability for VQA models, and negatively impacts user trust. For example as illustrated in Figure 1 both
Pythia (Jiang et al. 2018) and ViLBERT (Lu et al. 2019)
VQA models produce wrong predictions with a high confidence. As further demonstrated in Figures 2a, 2b, both models suffer from a poor calibration performance, despite having a decent VQA accuracy. Additionally, a better VQA accuracy does not necessarily ensure a better calibration. Such
poor calibration behavior can severely limit the applicability
of these VQA models in critical domains.
Some preliminary efforts have been devoted to achieving
calibrated VQA model training. For example, (Whitehead
et al. 2022; Dancette et al. 2023) introduces a trainable addon component to a frozen VQA model, to estimate the confidence score associated with the VQA model’s answer. They
formulate VQA as a selective prediction problem, and the
proposed techniques abstain from answering a question if
the estimated confidence score by the selector falls below a
threshold. However, there are two key limitations. First the
training of the add-on selector depends on the VQA model,
which may already be poorly calibrated, making the selector sub-optimal. Second, the selector needs to be trained on a
standalone validation dataset, which significantly increases
the annotation cost. As a result, those techniques still exhibit

Introduction

Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015) has
drawn significant attention due to its wide applicability in
challenging real-world problems from diverse domains. Despite its wide applicability, VQA is inherently a challenging
problem as it requires complex and common sense reasoning from multimodal data constituting images and natural
language questions. To tackle the complex VQA problem,
various methodologies have been developed (Schwenk et al.
2022; Lin et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022; Qian et al. 2022;
Vosoughi et al. 2023). However, most existing techniques
are centered on enhancing VQA accuracy, without paying
attention to the calibration of the model. Thus, these models are more likely to produce confidently wrong predictions
* Work was completed during the PhD study at RIT, which is
not related to the position at Amazon.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19563

