The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EvSTVSR: Event Guided Space-Time Video Super-Resolution
Haojie Yan1,2 , Zhan Lu3 , Zehao Chen1,2 , De Ma1,2∗ , Huajin Tang1,2 , Qian Zheng1,2 * , Gang Pan1,2
1

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{hjyan,zehao,made,htang,qianzheng,gpan}@zju.edu.cn, zhan007@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

implicit alignment, whereas the latter uses optical flow for
explicit alignment. Aligning reference frames to the target
frame is essential for video frame interpolation(VFI) (Kim
et al. 2023), video super-resolution(VSR) (Liu et al. 2022),
and space-time video super-resolution(STVSR) (Chen et al.
2022). However, the lack of inter-frame information in
RGB-based methods hinders accurate alignment under complex motions, such as large and nonlinear movements. Inaccurate alignment introduces errors, often leading to artifacts
and blurring(as shown in (c) of Figure 1).
To tackle these challenges, recent studies (Tulyakov et al.
2021, 2022; He et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2023) in VFI have
introduced the use of event cameras to address the issue of
motion loss between frames. However, there is still a lack
of research utilizing event alignment in VSR and STVSR to
accomplish these tasks. As an emerging type of visual sensor, the event camera possesses microsecond-level temporal
resolution (Chen et al. 2021, 2024). It is sensitive to edges,
allowing it to accurately record motion trajectories even under large movements (see Figure 1(b)). Consequently, using
event signals for alignment is an intuitive approach. Moreover, event cameras capture dense temporal information (see
Figure 1(f)). This dense temporal data can be transformed
into dense spatial information (Jing et al. 2021), offering
finer details to enhance RGB frames for the reconstruction
of high-quality video results (see Figure 1(h)).
Therefore, in this paper, we present a method that leverages two RGB frames along with the events between them
to accomplish the task. Our contributions are as follows,

In the domain of space-time video super-resolution, it is
typically challenging to handle complex motions (including
large and nonlinear motions) and varying illumination scenes
due to the lack of inter-frame information. Leveraging the
dense temporal information provided by event signals offers
a promising solution. Traditional event-based methods typically rely on multiple images, using motion estimation and
compensation, which can introduce errors. Accumulated errors from multiple frames often lead to artifacts and blurriness
in the output. To mitigate these issues, we propose EvSTVSR,
a method that uses fewer adjacent frames and integrates dense
temporal information from events to guide alignment. Additionally, we introduce a coordinate-based feature fusion upsampling module to achieve spatial super-resolution. Experimental results demonstrate that our method not only outperforms existing RGB-based approaches but also excels in handling large motion scenarios.

Code — https://github.com/hjyyyd/EvSTVSR.

Introduction
Visual information in the real world is inherently continuous in both spatial and temporal dimensions. However,
image sensor size, cost, transmission bandwidth, and storage capacity limitations often result in recorded visual
data with low spatiotemporal resolution. Acquiring highresolution(HR) visual information is crucial for both practical applications and enhancing downstream vision tasks.
But how can we reconstruct high space-time resolution visual data from low-resolution(LR) inputs?
Several RGB-based approaches have recently explored
this challenge, highlighting the mutual benefits of jointly addressing temporal and spatial super-resolution tasks. For instance, Zooming SlowMo (Xiang et al. 2020), and TMNet
(Xu et al. 2021) use Bi-directional Deformable ConvLSTM
for spatiotemporal feature fusion, while VideoINR (Chen
et al. 2022) and MoTIF (Chen Y H et al. 2023) achieve alignment through spatial and temporal implicit neural representations(INR). Their critical distinction lies in their alignment
strategies: the former employs deformable convolutions for

• We propose a framework that addresses both superresolution and frame interpolation in large-motion scenarios using fewer input frames. Our results demonstrate
that reducing the number of input frames, even without optical flow, mitigates blurring and ghosting effects
common in multi-frame and event-based methods while
maintaining competitive performance.
• To handle super-resolution and frame interpolation with
limited frame input, we introduce a method that combines optical flow prediction from dense images and
sparse events, coupled with an implicit sampling strategy that fuses features based on positional coordinates.
This approach effectively solves the space-time superresolution task.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9085

