The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Wavelet-Positional Encoding for High-Frequency Information Learning
in Implicit Neural Representation
Hongxu Zhao1 , Zelin Gao1 , Yue Wang1 , Rong Xiong1 , Yu Zhang1,2 *
1

2

State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Collaborative sensing and autonomous unmanned systems of Zhejiang Province
(zhaohongxu, jamesgzl, ywang24, rxiong, zhangyu80)@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representation (INR) has shown great potential in constructing the complex nature signal as a continuous implicit function. However, the representation results are incomplete since different components of the signal correspond to different frequencies and neural network
inherently tends to low-frequency convergence. In this paper,
we propose the adaptive Wavelet-Positional Encoding (WPE)
to precisely represent content under different frequency distributions for coordinate-based implicit representations. The
High-Frequency Perception (HFP) method is first proposed
to query locations of high-frequency components from input signals, which can be indicated as local centers of WPE.
Then, motivated by wavelet series regression, we present to
embed these queried low-dimensional coordinate inputs into
wavelet-frequency space by WPE to represent fine details
of target signals. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed
method can be integrated into various INR methods without
modifying training frameworks while significantly improving
their performance in 1D signal fitting, 2D image regression,
and even 3D scene representation.

High-Frequency Region

Low-Frequency Region

(a)
Global

y

GT

Global Encoding

Wavelet Encoding

Target Position

Local

Introduction

(b)

Implicit Neural Representation (INR) has recently emerged
as a potential representation paradigm in the coordinatedbased complex signal modeling field, including 2D image
fitting (Sitzmann, Zollhoefer, and Wetzstein 2019) and 3D
scene representation (Chen and Zhang 2019; Genova et al.
2020). One of the most influential INR works is the Neural
Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020), which employs the neural weights of MLP to learn the implicit representation function of scenes and demonstrates adaptability
to various task formats (Chen et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023).
INR methods (Zhang et al. 2020; Pumarola et al. 2021; Barron et al. 2021) can circumvent the limitations associated
with classical methods like SfM (Schonberger and Frahm
2016) because of the continuous and implicit neural representations they use. However, due to the “spectral bias”
problem, where neural networks inherently learn different
frequency components with different convergence performances, it is difficult for these existing coordinate-based

x

(c)

Figure 1: (a) The spatial distribution of different frequency
components in the scene is non-uniform. (b) Compared to
global transforms like Fourier transforms, wavelet transform
contributes to local signal representations. (c) The experimental result of 1D signal regression using Fourier series
embedding and Wavelet series embedding respectively.

INR methods to provide a complete signal representation,
especially for the complex signals with more high-frequency
components (Jacot, Gabriel, and Hongler 2018). This issue
limits the ability of INR methods to effectively represent
complex nature signals and capture complete fine details.
To address the “spectral bias” problem, some methods embed low-dimensional coordinate inputs into higherdimensional feature space thus make network more aware
of the difference in the inputs (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Tancik et al. 2020), while other methods investigate the activation function of MLP to preserve more fine-grained gradients (Sitzmann et al. 2020; Ramasinghe and Lucey 2022).

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10430

