The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Look Back for More: Harnessing Historical Sequential Updates for Personalized
Federated Adapter Tuning
Danni Peng1 , Yuan Wang1 , Huazhu Fu1 , Jinpeng Jiang2 , Yong Liu1 , Rick Siow Mong Goh1 ,
Qingsong Wei1
1

Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
EVYD Technology
dannip@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, wang yuan@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, hzfu@ieee.org, jinpeng.jiang@evydtech.com,
liuyong@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, gohsm@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, wei qingsong@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract

Personalized federated learning (PFL) studies effective model
personalization to address the data heterogeneity issue among
clients in traditional federated learning (FL). Existing PFL
approaches mainly generate personalized models by relying solely on the clients’ latest updated models while ignoring their previous updates, which may result in suboptimal personalized model learning. To bridge this gap, we
propose a novel framework termed pFedSeq, designed for
personalizing adapters to fine-tune a foundation model in
FL. In pFedSeq, the server maintains and trains a sequential learner, which processes a sequence of past adapter updates from clients and generates calibrations for personalized
adapters. To effectively capture the cross-client and crossstep relations hidden in previous updates and generate highperforming personalized adapters, pFedSeq adopts the powerful selective state space model (SSM) as the architecture
of sequential learner. Through extensive experiments on four
public benchmark datasets, we demonstrate the superiority of
pFedSeq over state-of-the-art PFL methods.

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) existing PFL methods
and (b) our approach. Instead of leveraging only the latest
updates, our approach accounts for past learning trajectories
by modeling cross-client and cross-step relations in previous
steps, providing a broader view for identifying the consistent
trends for learning more robust personalized adapters.

and Lyu 2023). One of the most popular ways of empowering FL with FMs is through parameter-efficient adapter
tuning (e.g., LoRA (Hu et al. 2021)), also known as federated adapter tuning (Li et al. 2024; Woisetschläger et al.
2024). This new FL paradigm allows clients to leverage a
powerful, pre-trained FM while only fine-tuning and sharing
the lightweight adapters with the server, enabling enhanced
performance with minimal on-client computation and communication costs. It also opens up opportunities to tailor
PFL methods for fine-tuning FM with adapters. For example, leveraging FL for collaborative fine-tuning while personalizing the adapters to better align the representations of
pre-trained FM with the local needs of clients (Yi et al. 2023;
Xie et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024).
However, a common limitation of existing PFL and efforts tailored for FM adapter tuning is that they rely solely
on the updates received in the most recent round to develop
personalized models, while the potentially valuable information contained in previous updates is either underutilized or
completely discarded. This can easily lead to noisy and suboptimal solutions, jeopardizing performance when applied
to federated adapter tuning personalization. If we view the
development of a personalized adapter for a client as an optimization process, focusing only on the latest updates is akin
to performing simple gradient descents. By incorporating
information from previous updates—much like using mo-

Introduction
In recent years, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al.
2017) has attracted growing research interest for enabling
privacy-preserving collaborative model training. However,
due to data heterogeneity among clients (i.e. data from different clients are non-IID or unbalanced), it is difficult to
develop a one-fits-all global model that performs well on all
clients’ local distributions. To address this, personalized federated learning (PFL) (Smith et al. 2017) has emerged. Unlike traditional FL, which develops a single best model for
the collective goal, PFL allows each client to have a unique
personalized model tailored specifically to the local objective (Li et al. 2021a; Fallah, Mokhtari, and Ozdaglar 2020).
Through the collaborative learning scheme, PFL further enables the personalized models to benefit from knowledge
sharing across clients, striking a balance between individualization and generalization for enhanced local performance
(Kulkarni, Kulkarni, and Pant 2020; Kairouz et al. 2021).
Recently, as large foundation models (FMs) demonstrate
impressive capabilities across various tasks, there has seen
a rise in research synergizing FL and FMs (Zhuang, Chen,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19857

