The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridge Then Begin Anew: Generating Target-Relevant Intermediate Model
for Source-Free Visual Emotion Adaptation
Jiankun Zhu1 , Sicheng Zhao2 , Jing Jiang1 , Wenbo Tang3 , Zhaopan Xu1 , Tingting Han4 ,
Pengfei Xu3 , Hongxun Yao1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
NavInfo, Beijing, China
4
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
{23s003059, 23s003045, 20b903054}@stu.hit.edu.cn, h.yao@hit.edu.cn, schzhao@gmail.com, ttinghan@hdu.edu.cn,
{xupengfei11850, tangwenbo11883}@navinfo.com
Abstract

sufficient emotion annotations. However, labeling reliable
large-scale datasets for VER tasks is challenging in practical
applications because of the intrinsic properties of emotions,
such as subjectivity, complexity, and ambiguity (Zhao et al.
2023). To reduce the annotation burden, much attention has
been devoted to unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for
VER, which enables the models trained on labeled source
data to generalize well on the unlabeled target data (Zhao
et al. 2019b). However, existing UDA methods require access to the source data during adaptation (Li, Guo, and Ge
2023; Zhao et al. 2024; Jiang et al. 2024). Regarding privacy and security concerns, source-free domain adaptation
(SFDA) has attracted much interest in dealing with the situation where labeled source data is unavailable (Li et al. 2024).
On the one hand, although prior SFDA methods are effective for standard classification tasks, they face specific challenges and performance decreases when directly applied to
VER. This is because of the large affective gap (Zhao et al.
2014) between VER datasets, which arises from annotator
variations and the scope of data collection. The distribution gap significantly affects the feature alignment, which
in turn reduces the confidence of pseudo-labels. As shown
in Figure 1 (a), we use SHOT (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020),
a typical SFDA method, to generate pseudo-labels for VER
datasets EmoSet → FI and standard classification datasets
Real World → Clipart, respectively. The results show that
the classification scores for emotional pseudo-labels are relatively low, which increases the risk of misalignment between features and labels, and can lead to a confirmation
bias due to the accumulation of errors (Ding et al. 2023).
To address this issue, bridging the inter-domain variation to
generate reliable pseudo-labels is necessary.
On the other hand, traditional SFDA methods are finetuned on the source model. However, the unclear class features of the VER dataset make the source model lack robustness. For a better illustration, as shown in Figure 1 (b),
we train two ResNet-101 models (He et al. 2016) with the
same number of categories on EmoSet and Clipart from the
Office-Home (Venkateswara et al. 2017), respectively. The
results indicate that the VER dataset has lower interclass
distinction and higher intraclass variability. Consequently,
the source model will overfit on noise, which is unrelated

Visual emotion recognition (VER), which aims at understanding humans’ emotional reactions toward different visual
stimuli, has attracted increasing attention. Given the subjective and ambiguous characteristics of emotion, annotating a
reliable large-scale dataset is hard. For reducing reliance on
data labeling, domain adaptation offers an alternative solution by adapting models trained on labeled source data to
unlabeled target data. Conventional domain adaptation methods require access to source data. However, due to privacy
concerns, source emotional data may be inaccessible. To address this issue, we propose an unexplored task: source-free
domain adaptation (SFDA) for VER, which does not have access to source data during the adaptation process. To achieve
this, we propose a novel framework termed Bridge then Begin
Anew (BBA), which consists of two steps: domain-bridged
model generation (DMG) and target-related model adaptation (TMA). First, the DMG bridges cross-domain gaps by
generating an intermediate model, avoiding direct alignment
between two VER datasets with significant differences. Then,
the TMA begins training the target model anew to fit the target structure, avoiding the influence of source-specific knowledge. Extensive experiments are conducted on six SFDA settings for VER. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of
BBA, which achieves remarkable performance gains compared with state-of-the-art SFDA methods and outperforms
representative unsupervised domain adaptation approaches.

Introduction
With the rapid development of social networks, people
have become used to posting images to express their feelings (Zhao et al. 2017). Visual emotion recognition (VER)
aims to identify human emotions elicited by images (Zhao
et al. 2022b), attracting increasing attention and playing an
essential role in various applications, such as depression detection (Bokolo and Liu 2023) and opinion mining (Razali
et al. 2021). Advanced technologies based on supervised
deep neural networks have been proposed to improve the
VER performance (Deng et al. 2024; Cen et al. 2024). Existing methods mainly follow a supervised pipeline requiring
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1674

