The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Region-aware Difference Distilling with Attribute-guided Contrastive
Regularization for Change Captioning
Rong Li1 , Liang Li2 * , Jiehua Zhang3 , Qiang Zhao1,4 , Hongkui Wang1,4 , Chenggang Yan1,4
1

Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China;
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
3
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University;
4
Lishui Institute of Hangzhou Dianzi University
rongli@hdu.edu.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn, jiehua.zhang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, qiangzhao@ieee.org, wanghk@hdu.edu.cn
2

before

Abstract
Change captioning aims to describe the differences between
two similar images using natural language, significantly aiding in understanding and monitoring changes. This challenging task requires a fine-grained understanding of subtle
changes while resisting disturbances like viewpoint shifts and
illumination variations. Existing methods often rely solely
on global difference features and lack comprehensive alignment of linguistic and visual information, leading to overlooking fine-grained details and generating semantic hallucinated sentences. To address these limitations, we propose
the region-aware difference distilling (RDD) network with
attribute-guided contrastive regularization (ACR). The RDD
uses global difference features to progressively distill regional difference features using learnable vectors, allowing
for more precise identification of changed regions. The ACR
enhances comprehensive alignment between linguistic and
visual information by formulating Nouns-to-Objects (N2O)
and Verbs-to-Actions (V2A) alignment losses to regularize
the regional difference features. Promising results on three
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms the stateof-the-art change captioning methods.

after

Change caption

(a)

there is a person in a
different position

(b)

the small blue metal ball that
is to the right of the large
purple matte cube is missing

(c)

a new building show up
near the road

Figure 1: Three examples of change captioning: (a) Slight
object movement within a scene. (b) Change with interference from viewpoint shift. (c) Change with interference
from illumination variation.

(Figure 1 (c)). To facilitate the recognition of fine-grained
area changes, current change captioning methods often employ semantic interaction and introduce intricate positional
encoding techniques (Yue et al. 2023; Tu et al. 2024b)
within two individual images. For resisting the turbulence
of pseudo changes, feature matching (Kim et al. 2021), including attention mechanism (Qiu et al. 2021), is often used
to match similar patches before difference feature extraction.
Contrastive learning is also commonly leveraged to establish
cross-view consistency (Tu et al. 2024a, 2023c) between two
images, enhancing the recognition of real changes.
Despite significant progress made by previous methods,
two notable limitations remain: (1) Redundancy information unrelated to change is included due to obtaining solely
global features. Specifically, previous methods directly subtract representations in the final step, extracting only global
difference features. Without complete image alignment, this
can include irrelevant elements like background, interfering with fine-grained change description and increasing susceptibility to pseudo-changes. (2) Semantically hallucinated
difference representations are constructed by incomprehensive linguistic and visual information alignment. Previous
methods rely on ground truth captions for final supervision

Introduction
Change captioning aims to describe the difference between
two similar images by natural language, making monitoring
changes highly understandable(Yan et al. 2022a; Li et al.
2024; Zhang et al. 2024a). This task tries to model the association between dynamic visual content and language(Ye,
He, and Peng 2022; Yan et al. 2020a, 2021a; Zhang et al.
2024b; Yan et al. 2020b). It has many practical applications, such as real-time monitoring (Jhamtani and BergKirkpatrick 2018; Sun et al. 2024), geological environment
observation (Liu et al. 2022a; Bashmal et al. 2023), medical
image analysis(Zhang et al. 2020) and visual reasoning(Liu
et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2021b, 2022b), etc.
Change captioning is a challenging task that involves
recognizing fine-grained area changes (Figure 1 (a)) and
then building robust connections between changes and language. Additionally, it must handle disturbances such as
viewpoint shifts (Figure 1 (b)) and illumination variations
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4887

