The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fair and Efficient Completion of Indivisible Goods
Vishwa Prakash HV1 , Ayumi Igarashi2 , Rohit Vaish3
1

Chennai Mathematical Institute, India
2
University of Tokyo, Japan
3
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
vishwa@cmi.ac.in, igarashi@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, rvaish@iitd.ac.in

Abstract

allocating specific assets to each party. In such settings, it
is more natural to assume that specific resources have been
pre-assigned to particular agents. We refer to such resources
as frozen. The goal is to find a fair and efficient completion
of the frozen allocation; that is, to allocate the unassigned resources such that the overall allocation is fair and efficient.
Frozen resources present an interesting challenge, as illustrated by the following example. Consider a scenario where
two agents are each pre-allocated one good, and there is one
unallocated precious good. If these agents envy each other
under the frozen allocation, then no completion can satisfy
envy-freeness up to one good (EF1). An allocation is EF1 if
any pairwise envy can be eliminated by removing some good
from the envied bundle (Budish 2011). In the absence of
frozen goods, an EF1 allocation always exists in the standard
setting of fair division (Lipton et al. 2004; Caragiannis et al.
2019). However, as the above example demonstrates, an EF1
completion may not exist with frozen resources. Therefore,
studying the existence and computation of fair and efficient
completion of indivisible resources is crucial.
Another challenge posed by the completion problem is
in the formulation of solution concepts. Specifically, let us
consider the maximin share (MMS) criterion (Budish 2011),
where fairness is defined based on a utility threshold for each
agent. This threshold is defined in terms of an n-person cutand-choose game, where the cutter is the last to pick a bundle. When some resources are preassigned, there can be multiple ways of extending this definition. For example, the cutter may only consider the extension of its own frozen bundle,
or it may seek to maximize the value of the least-valued bundle overall. These choices lead to different existential and
computational results. Thus, adapting existing solution concepts to the completion setting is non-trivial.

We formulate the problem of fair and efficient completion of
indivisible goods, defined as follows: Given a partial allocation of indivisible goods among agents, does there exist an
allocation of the remaining goods (i.e., a completion) that satisfies fairness and economic efficiency guarantees of interest?
We study the computational complexity of the completion
problem for prominent fairness and efficiency notions such as
envy-freeness up to one good (EF1), proportionality up to one
good (Prop1), maximin share (MMS), and Pareto optimality
(PO), and focus on the class of additive valuations as well
as its subclasses such as binary additive and lexicographic
valuations. We find that while the completion problem is
significantly harder than the standard fair division problem
(wherein the initial partial allocation is empty), the consideration of restricted preferences facilitates positive algorithmic results for threshold-based fairness notions (Prop1 and
MMS). On the other hand, the completion problem remains
computationally intractable for envy-based notions such as
EF1 and EF1+PO even under restricted preferences.

Introduction
The problem of fair and efficient allocation of resources, particularly discrete (or indivisible) resources, is fundamental
to economics and computer science. Such problems arise in
a multitude of applications such as course allocation at universities (Budish et al. 2017), inheritance division (Goldman
and Procaccia 2015), dividing household chores (Igarashi
and Yokoyama 2023), and dispute resolution (Brams and
Taylor 1996). There is now a well-developed theory on discrete fair division spanning various notions of fairness and
algorithmic results (Amanatidis et al. 2023).
The existing theory of fair allocation of indivisible resources assumes that all resources are initially unassigned.
While this may be a natural assumption, it is not always applicable in practical scenarios where resource allocation is
predetermined or specific agents are designated to handle
particular tasks. For instance, in a heterosexual couple, certain household tasks like breastfeeding can only be assigned
to a specific individual. In course allocation, certain courses
may be mandatory for a particular group of students. Similarly, in dispute resolution, legal agreements may specify

Our Contributions. The main conceptual contribution of
our work is the formulation of the model of fair and efficient completion of indivisible goods. In our model, the assignment of certain resources is fixed, while the remaining
resources can be flexibly assigned. We study the computational complexity of the completion problem for various
notions of fairness, including envy-freeness up to one good
(EF1), proportionality up to one good (Prop1), and maximin
share (MMS), as well as their combinations with economic
efficiency (specifically, Pareto optimality). Our results, sum-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14045

