The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decoupled Spatio-Temporal Consistency Learning for Self-Supervised Tracking
Yaozong Zheng1,2 , Bineng Zhong1,2 * , Qihua Liang1,2 , Ning Li1,2 , Shuxiang Song1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education,
Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
2
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-Source Information Mining and Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
yaozongzheng@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, qhliang@gxnu.edu.cn
ningli65536@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn, songshuxiang@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn
Abstract

+

…

The success of visual tracking has been largely driven by
datasets with manual box annotations. However, these box
annotations require tremendous human effort, limiting the
scale and diversity of existing tracking datasets. In this
work, we present a novel Self-Supervised Tracking framework named SSTrack, designed to eliminate the need of box
annotations. Specifically, a decoupled spatio-temporal consistency training framework is proposed to learn rich target
information across timestamps through global spatial localization and local temporal association. This allows for the
simulation of appearance and motion variations of instances
in real-world scenarios. Furthermore, an instance contrastive
loss is designed to learn instance-level correspondences from
a multi-view perspective, offering robust instance supervision
without additional labels. This new design paradigm enables
SSTrack to effectively learn generic tracking representations
in a self-supervised manner, while reducing reliance on extensive box annotations. Extensive experiments on nine benchmark datasets demonstrate that SSTrack surpasses SOTA selfsupervised tracking methods, achieving an improvement of
more than 25.3%, 20.4%, and 14.8% in AUC (AO) score on
the GOT10K, LaSOT, TrackingNet datasets, respectively.

…

Unlabeled Videos

+

…

…

…

…
(a) Fully-Supervised Tracking
with frame-wise annotations

(b) Self-Supervised Tracking
with one-frame annotation

Contrastive

Contrastive

Local

Global
Forward
Tracking

Global

Global
Forward
Tracking

Local
Backward
Tracking

Local
Backward
Tracking

(c) Our Self-Supervised Tracking Method
R, S: Reference/Search frame

Information flow

Forward-backward Tracking

Figure 1: The annotation requirements of different tracking
tasks and our proposed framework. (a) The fully-supervised
tracking methods (Li et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021) with
frame-wise annotations. (b) The self-supervised tracking
methods (Sio et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2020) with one-frame
annotation. (c) Our self-supervised tracking method based
on decoupled spatio-temporal consistency training framework and instance contrastive loss.

Code — https://github.com/GXNU-ZhongLab/SSTrack

Introduction
Given an arbitrarily initial target, visual object tracking
(VOT) requires recognizing and tracking an object in subsequent video frames. To accomplish this computer vision
task, current high-performance visual tracking algorithms
are typically trained using the full bounding box annotations
of published tracking datasets (Fan et al. 2019; Müller et al.
2018; Lin et al. 2014; Huang, Zhao, and Huang 2021), as
shown in Fig.1(a). However, the bounding boxes in existing
VOT benchmarks rely on tremendous human efforts, making it difficult to expand their scale and diversity, such as the
number of arbitrary tracked objects and open tracking scenarios. This poses a challenge for transformer-based tracking algorithms (Ye et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2022; Xing et al.
2023; Zheng et al. 2024), as they tend to be particularly datahungry. From this perspective, equipping a model with the

ability to automatically learn to track instances from unlabeled videos becomes crucial in the field of visual tracking.
Therefore, as shown in Fig.1(b), we reconsider the need for
box annotations by exploring a new self-supervised tracking
algorithm under an initial bounding box setting.
To minimize the reliance on box annotations, some selfsupervised tracking methods (Wang, Jabri, and Efros 2019;
Sio et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2020; Li et al. 2023) have been
proposed to learn object correspondences from unlabeled
videos. They learn instance tracking representations through
contrastive learning or cycle-consistency matching strategies. For instance, S 2 SiamFC (Sio et al. 2020) and TADS
(Li et al. 2023), based on supervised tracking methods, generate training pairs through random region selection and
data augmentation to train self-supervised trackers. Mean-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10635

