The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Test-Time Adaptation on Noisy Data via Model-Pruning-Based Filtering and
Flatness-Aware Entropy Minimization
Xingzhi Zhou1 * , Zhiliang Tian2† , Boyang Zhang2 , Yibo Zhang2 , Ka Chun Cheung3 , Simon See3 ,
Hao Yang2 , Yun Zhou2 , Nevin L. Zhang1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA
{xzhoubl, lzhang}@cse.ust.hk {tianzhiliang, zhangboyang, zhangyibo22, yanghao, zhouyun}@nudt.edu.cn
{chcheung,ssee}@nvidia.com
Abstract

variations between the source and target domains. However,
accessing labeled source-domain data could be challenging due to computational overhead or privacy concerns, and
collecting target-domain data requires significant human efforts. Test-time adaptation (TTA) is a specialized approach
within UDA that aims to tackle these challenges.
TTA is required not to access source-domain data and instead adapts the model using only unlabeled test samples,
which are drawn from the target domain experiencing domain shifts (Liang, He, and Tan 2024). TTA enhances model
performance at inference, making it useful for deploying
models in situations where the target domain distribution is
unpredictable, e.g., medical image classification across different environments (Kim et al. 2022). The primary strategy
of TTA is to continuously learn from test samples, thereby
enhancing the generalization ability of the model.
TTA falls into two main categories (Niu et al. 2024):
gradient-free and gradient-based methods. (1) Gradient-free
methods learn from test samples without conducting backpropagation, instead adjusting the model’s modules or outputs. The adjustments include updating batch normalization
statistics (Schneider et al. 2020; Lim et al. 2023), the classifier layer (Iwasawa and Matsuo 2021) (modules), or refining the predicted probability (Boudiaf et al. 2022) (outputs)
based on test samples. These methods freeze most model parameters, thereby reducing the risk of catastrophic forgetting
on the source domain. However, the constraints of freezing
the primary model parameters limit the learning capacity. (2)
Gradient-based methods update the model parameters in real
time through self-supervised or unsupervised learning over
test data. The objective functions for these learning tasks
include entropy minimization (Wang et al. 2021), teacherstudent self-training (Yuan, Xie, and Li 2023), and contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2022). The potential risk with
these methods is overfitting to the current samples, which results in catastrophic forgetting on the source domain and losing the generalization ability to adapt to continually arriving
new domains. Both gradient-free and gradient-based methods assume that the categories of test samples fall within the
source domain. However, in real world, test samples may
contain categories out of the source domains, referred to as
noisy samples, which reduces the effectiveness of these TTA

Test-time adaptation (TTA) deals with domain shifts during
inference by training models based on only unlabeled test
samples. Test samples may include noisy samples, which
degrade domain adaptation. Existing methods rely on the
model’s output prediction to detect and filter noisy samples,
and further search for flat regions during optimization, which
makes the optimization more robust on noisy samples. However, there are two issues: (1) the output prediction tends to
be inaccurate due to domain shifts, weakening noisy-sample
detection; (2) current approaches for searching flat regions focus on optimization to enhance the worst case, which ignores
achieving flatness by avoiding the quick changing of losses.
To address these challenges, we propose a model pruningbased test-time adaptation model for noisy data streams,
named MoTTA, which leverages a new proposed filtering,
output difference under pruning (ODP)-based filtering, and a
flatness-aware entropy minimization (FlatEM). Specifically,
to reduce the impact of inaccurate output predictions, ODPbased filtering measures the output difference of a sample before and after model pruning, which works even under inaccurate output. To improve the search for flat loss surfaces,
FlatEM integrates zeroth-order flatness and first-order flatness (minimize the maximal gradient normalization with a
weight perturbation constrained in a small Euclidean ball) on
entropy minimization. To solve these hard maximum problems, we leverage Taylor expansion to obtain approximated
results for optimization. FlatEM also adopts a parameter regularization to mitigate incorrect updates from noisy samples.
The experiments show our advantages in dealing with noisy
data streams at TTA comparable to existing baselines.

Code — github.com/XingzhiZhou/MoTTA

Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) addresses domain
shifts by using transfer learning to apply knowledge from
labeled source domains to unlabeled target domains (Long
et al. 2015; Ganin et al. 2016). Domain shifts refer to the
* This work was done while Xingzhi was an intern at NVIDIA.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10852

