The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GigaGS: 3D Gaussian Based Planar Representation for Large-Scene Surface
Reconstruction
Junyi Chen1,2 , Weicai Ye2,3 * , Yifan Wang1,2 , Danpeng Chen3 , Di Huang2 ,
Wanli Ouyang2 , Guofeng Zhang3 , Yu Qiao2 , Tong He2*
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
junyichen@sjtu.edu.cn, {maikeyeweicai, tonghe90}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

context of large-scale scene reconstruction. Firstly, the computational resource consumption is enormous, as a scene
covering several square kilometers often contains billions of
Gaussian points.
Directly applying previous methods may lead to suboptimal reconstruction quality or run into memory-related
issues. Secondly, previous neural reconstruction methods
with 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023) often address the challenging task by introducing monocular regularization. For example, SuGaR (Guédon and Lepetit 2023)
introduces single-view depth and normal geometry consistency constraints to ensure the correctness of single-view geometry. Despite achieving good reconstruction results, these
methods fail to incorporate multi-view constraints to ensure
global geometry consistency. Recent work of PGSR (Chen
et al. 2024a) first utilizes multiview geometric constraints to
3DGS representation. Although impressive, the method fails
to capture the geometric details at different scales.
To address the above challenges, we propose GigaGS. To
the best of our knowledge, it is the first work of high-quality
surface reconstruction for large-scale scenes using 3DGS.
Firstly, we implement an efficient and scalable partitioning
strategy to address the computational demands of processing large-scale scenes. Unlike conventional approaches relying on spatial distance metrics, we introduce a novel grouping mechanism based on the mutual visibility of spatial regions captured by the scene cameras. This enables us to
partition the scene into overlapping blocks that can be processed in parallel. Each block undergoes independent optimization, thus allowing for distributed processing of the
scene data. Subsequently, the optimized blocks are seamlessly merged to reconstruct the complete scene, ensuring
computational efficiency without compromising on reconstruction accuracy. Secondly, we present a novel method to
harness multi-view photometric and geometric consistency
constraints within a Level-of-Detail (LoD) framework. This
approach is designed to enhance the preservation of geometric details across different scales of the reconstructed scene.
By integrating LoD representation into the constraint formulation, we ensure that the reconstruction process maintains fidelity and coherence across varying levels of scene
complexity. Leveraging both photometric and geometric information from multiple views, our method facilitates robust
reconstruction of intricate scene details while mitigating ar-

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has shown promising performance in novel view synthesis. Previous methods adapt it to
obtaining surfaces of either individual 3D objects or within
limited scenes. In this paper, we make the first attempt to
tackle the challenging task of large-scale scene surface reconstruction. This task is particularly difficult due to the high
GPU memory consumption, different levels of details for geometric representation, and noticeable inconsistencies in appearance. To this end, we propose GigaGS, the first work for
high-quality surface reconstruction for large-scale scenes using 3DGS. GigaGS first applies a partitioning strategy based
on the mutual visibility of spatial regions, which effectively
grouping cameras for parallel processing. To enhance the
quality of the surface, we also propose novel multi-view
photometric and geometric consistency constraints based on
Level-of-Detail representation. In doing so, our method can
reconstruct detailed surface structures. Comprehensive experiments are conducted on various datasets. The consistent improvement demonstrates the superiority of GigaGS.

Code — https://open3dvlab.github.io/GigaGS/

1

Introduction

3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023) has demonstrated
remarkable performance on the task of novel view synthesis.
Recently, some methods (Guédon and Lepetit 2023; Huang
et al. 2024a) adapted it to surface reconstruction, which is
drawing increasing attention for its numerous promising applications, such as 3D asset generation (Tang et al. 2023;
Chen et al. 2024b; He et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024; Tang et al.
2024a) and virtual reality (Wu et al. 2023; Charatan et al.
2024). Compared with the task of novel view synthesis, recovering the inherited 3D surfaces is much more challenging
as it requires preserving 3D coherence throughout varying
perspectives with only 2D projects for supervision.
Although significant advances (Huang et al. 2024a;
Guédon and Lepetit 2023; Yu, Sattler, and Geiger 2024)
have been made, these methods either focus on object-level
reconstruction or struggle to capture intricate geometric surfaces. These challenges become even more critical in the
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2088

