The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-resource Hallucination Detection for Text Generation
via Graph-based Contextual Knowledge Triples Modeling
Xinyue Fang1 , Zhen Huang1 * , Zhiliang Tian1 * , Minghui Fang2 , Ziyi Pan1 , Quntian Fang1 , Zhihua
Wen1 , Hengyue Pan1 , Dongsheng Li1
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{fangxinyue, huangzhen, tianzhiliang, panziyi, fangquntian, zhwen, hengyuepan, dsli}@nudt.edu.cn
minghuifang@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Existing hallucination detection studies mainly concentrate on tasks like question answering (QA) (Zhang et al.
2023a; Wen et al. 2023a) and arithmetic calculation (Xue
et al. 2023; Tian et al. 2022) with short and concrete correct
answers. In these tasks, the consistency among their concrete answers can be easily checked for hallucination (Jiang
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2024a). The research on detecting
hallucinations in generated long text is more challenging because (1) generating text is open-ended and rarely has concrete answers and (2) long text contains multiple facts and
the consistency among them is hard to verify. Therefore, we
focus on hallucination detection in long text generation with
black-box models (powerful LLM, like GPT-4) without external resources (i.e. zero-resource setting).
Currently, the studies on black-box zero-resource hallucination detection for text generation can be divided into
two categories: (1) Self-checking (Friel and Sanyal 2023;
Liu et al. 2023) designs prompt texts using chain-of-thought
(CoT) to verify response factuality by the LLMs’ own capabilities. Though that can be easily implemented and applied in various scenarios, it relies on the model’s own ability
and can lead to missed detection: The model may overconfidently trust its outputs (Li et al. 2024a; Chen et al. 2024).
(2) Consistency comparison (Zhang et al. 2023a; Ma et al.
2024) samples multiple responses to check whether the sampled responses are highly inconsistent, which indicates hallucination (Farquhar et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024b). The
method is effective for short responses with few concrete
claims, making consistency comparison easy. However, in
long text responses, diverse wording or lexical representations of the same fact complicate consistency comparison.
To address those issues, researchers propose divide-andconquer (Zhang et al. 2024) based on consistency comparison. It has three steps: (1) sample multiple additional responses appending to the original response; (2) divide each
response into multiple facts; (3) compare the consistency of
facts in the original response with those in the sampled responses, where highly inconsistent facts indicate hallucinations. However, it ignores the omission issue: facts in the
original but not in sampled responses may be wrongly seen
as hallucinations for lack of comparison. To overcome that,
(Yang, Sun, and Wan 2023; Cao, Yang, and Zhao 2024)
propose reverse verification. For each fact in the original response, they prompt LLMs to create a new question

LLMs obtain remarkable performance but suffer from hallucinations. Most research on detecting hallucination focuses
on questions with short and concrete correct answers that are
easy to check faithfulness. Hallucination detections for text
generation with open-ended answers are more hard. Some researchers use external knowledge to detect hallucinations in
generated texts, but external resources for specific scenarios
are hard to access. Recent studies on detecting hallucinations
in long texts without external resources conduct consistency
comparison among multiple sampled outputs. To handle long
texts, researchers split long texts into multiple facts and individually compare the consistency of each pair of facts. However, these methods (1) hardly achieve alignment among multiple facts; (2) overlook dependencies between multiple contextual facts. In this paper, we propose a graph-based contextaware (GCA) hallucination detection method for text generations, which aligns facts and considers the dependencies
between contextual facts in consistency comparison. Particularly, to align multiple facts, we conduct a triple-oriented
response segmentation to extract multiple knowledge triples.
To model dependencies among contextual triples (facts), we
construct contextual triples into a graph and enhance triples’
interactions via message passing and aggregating via RGCN.
To avoid the omission of knowledge triples in long texts, we
conduct an LLM-based reverse verification by reconstructing
the knowledge triples. Experiments show that our model enhances hallucination detection and excels all baselines.

Code —
https://github.com/GCA-hallucinationdetection/GCA
Technical Appendices — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.11283

1

Introduction

Recent research has shown that large language models
(LLMs) achieved state-of-the-art performance in various
NLP tasks (Fang et al. 2024; Lu et al. 2022). However, these
models often suffer from hallucinations: generate incorrect
or fabricated content in a factual way, which undermines
models’ credibility (Ji et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2023a) and limits LLMs’ application in fields requiring factual accuracy
(Huang et al. 2023; Su et al. 2024). Detecting hallucination
in the model’s responses is crucial for LLMs’ boom.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23868

