The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tokenphormer: Structure-aware Multi-token Graph Transformer
for Node Classification
Zijie Zhou1 * , Zhaoqi Lu1, 2, 3 * , Xuekai Wei1 , Rongqin Chen1 , Shenghui Zhang1 , Pak Lon Ip 1 ,
Leong Hou U1†
1
University of Macau
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Guangdong Institute of Intelligent Science and Technology, China
{zhou.zijie, lu.zhaoqi}@connect.um.edu.mo; xuekaiwei2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk; {chen.rongqin,
zhang.shenghui}@connect.um.edu.mo; {paklonip, ryanlhu}@um.edu.mo
2

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely used in graph
data mining tasks. Traditional GNNs follow a message passing scheme that can effectively utilize local and structural information. However, the phenomena of over-smoothing and
over-squashing limit the receptive field in message passing
processes. Graph Transformers were introduced to address
these issues, achieving a global receptive field but suffering
from the noise of irrelevant nodes and loss of structural information. Therefore, drawing inspiration from fine-grained
token-based representation learning in Natural Language Processing (NLP), we propose the Structure-aware Multi-token
Graph Transformer (Tokenphormer), which generates multiple tokens to effectively capture local and structural information and explore global information at different levels of granularity. Specifically, we first introduce the walk-token generated by mixed walks consisting of four walk types to explore the graph and capture structure and contextual information flexibly. To ensure local and global information coverage, we also introduce the SGPM-token (obtained through
the Self-supervised Graph Pre-train Model, SGPM) and the
hop-token, extending the length and density limit of the walktoken, respectively. Finally, these expressive tokens are fed
into the Transformer model to learn node representations collaboratively. Experimental results demonstrate that the capability of the proposed Tokenphormer can achieve state-of-theart performance on node classification tasks.

Figure 1: Idea of Tokenphormer.

capable of solving various graph-based tasks. Traditional
GNNs follow the message passing scheme (Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017), aggregating neighboring nodes to update node representation. However, these methods are hindered by issues such as over-smoothing (Chen et al. 2020)
and over-squashing (Alon and Yahav 2021).
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) has demonstrated remarkable performance due to its powerful modeling capability, making it a potent architecture for graphs as well. The
traditional graph Transformer treats the entire input graph as
a fully connected entity, where individual nodes are regarded
as independent tokens, and a unified sequence encompassing all nodes is constructed, thus alleviating the limitations
of Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs). This approach allows the graph Transformer to extend the receptive field to the global, which benefits node representation
learning. However, this scheme also results in high computational complexity, introduces noise from irrelevant nodes,
and leads to a loss of structural information (Kreuzer et al.
2021). This limitation potentially hinders a comprehensive
understanding of the entire graph.
In recent years, researchers have developed token-based
methods (Kreuzer et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2022) that generate a sequence for each node , which have
shown improved performance compared to the traditional
graph Transformer. However, these models encounter difficulties when dealing with various graphs, as they lack the
flexibility to thoroughly explore the complete graph structure due to the monotonous token design. For instance,
NAGphormer (Chen et al. 2023), which serves as a repre-

Code — https://github.com/Dodo-D-Caster/Tokenphormer
Appendix — https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.15302

1

Introduction

Graph structures are commonly seen in both physical and
virtual domains, such as anomaly detection (Deng and Hooi
2021), traffic (Kong, Guo, and Liu 2024), and recommendation (Agrawal et al. 2024). Mining tasks face a significant challenge due to the inherent complexity of various
graphs and their intricate features. Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) have emerged as a successful learning framework
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13428

