The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Constraint Optimisation Approaches for Designing Group-Living Captive
Breeding Programmes
Matthew Forshaw1,2 , Rachel Gray1 , Bridgett vonHoldt3 , Alexander Ochoa4 , Joshua M. Miller5 ,
Kristin E. Brzeski6 , Adalgisa Caccone4 , Evelyn L. Jensen1
1

Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, United Kingdom
2
The Alan Turing Institute, London, NW1 2DB, United Kingdom
3
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
4
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
5
MacEwan University, Edmonton, Canada
6
Michigan Technological University, Michigan, USA
{matthew.forshaw, R.Gray2, Evelyn.Jensen}@ncl.ac.uk, mforshaw@turing.ac.uk, vonholdt@princeton.edu,
alexander.ochoa@yale.edu, millerj253@macewan.ca, kbrzeski@mtu.edu, adalgisa.caccone@yale.edu
Abstract
Captive breeding programs play a critical role in combating
the ongoing biodiversity crisis by preserving the most endangered species and supporting reintroduction efforts. Maintaining the genetic health of captive populations requires
careful management to prevent inbreeding and maximize the
effective population size. Decisions about which males and
females should be bred together are guided by the principle
of minimizing relatedness between pairs. Methods to select
breeding pairs are well developed, however, some species’
ecology requires them to live in groups, and evaluating optimal groupings of multiple males and females that would be
suitable to breed together is a more complex problem. Current computational tools to support the design of group-living
captive breeding programs suffer from challenges of scalability and flexibility. In this paper we demonstrate the applicability of constraint programming (CP) approaches to optimize breeding groups to minimize relatedness. We present
the example of the Galápagos giant tortoises as the test case
used to develop our approach. Exploration of the needs of
this captive breeding program has informed the development
of our flexible approach to capture the constraints on viable
captive breeding program design. Our findings have directly
informed the implementation of new group configurations at
the captive breeding centre. We further demonstrate that our
approach is broadly applicable in other contexts through a
second case study, providing multi-objective optimisation of
a breeding program of canids. Through these case studies and
an ablation study using synthetic datasets, we show that our
constraint optimisation approach provides an expressive and
generalizable means to support captive breeding program design, including scaling to large captive populations, which are
currently intractable using current computational methods.

Figure 1: Galápagos giant tortoises at the captive breeding
center in Puerto Ayora, Galápagos.

Biodiversity Crisis (Western 1992). Captive breeding is
playing an increasingly important role in preserving species
at immediate risk of extinction, often with the goal of
captive bred individuals being released to supplement depleted wild populations or reintroduce species where they
have been extirpated (McGowan, Traylor-Holzer, and Leus
2017). To be successful in this goal, captive populations
must be carefully managed to maintain genetic diversity,
which can be a challenge given that they are typically constrained to a small number of breeding individuals (Ralls
and Ballou 1986). When populations are small, inbreeding
can lead to homozygous deleterious genetic traits increasing in frequency, negatively impacting the health of offspring (Boakes, Wang, and Amos 2007). To manage this
risk, managers of captive breeding programs monitor the
kin relationships among individuals using either pedigrees
that map families over generations, or genetic tests to estimate the relatedness among individuals. Decisions about
which males and females should be bred together are then
guided by the principle of minimizing relatedness or kinship
between pairs (Ballou and Lacy 1995). Methods to identify
suitable pairs for breeding are well developed (Ivy and Lacy
2012) and integrated into software commonly used by pro-

Code — https://github.com/MattForshaw/AAAI25CaptiveBreeding

1

Introduction

Globally there have been precipitous declines in wildlife
populations and heightened rates of extinction, termed the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27989

