The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spiking Point Transformer for Point Cloud Classification
Peixi Wu1 * , Bosong Chai3 * , Hebei Li1 , Menghua Zheng4 , Yansong Peng1 , Zeyu Wang3 , Xuan Nie5 ,
Yueyi Zhang1† , Xiaoyan Sun1,2†
1

MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University 4 Tsingmao Intelligence
5
School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University
wupeixi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, sunxiaoyan}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

Zhou et al. 2024; Yao et al. 2024) and in various application scenarios (Yu et al. 2024; Ouyang and Jiang 2024). A
question is naturally raised: can transformer-based SNNs be
adapted to the 3D domain while maintaining their energy efficiency and fully leveraging the ability of transformers? To
this end, we present Spiking Point Transformer (SPT), the
first spiking neural network based on transformer architecture for deep learning on point cloud.
The successful application of transformer-based traditional artificial neural networks (ANNs) in the 3D point
cloud domain has been widely demonstrated (Zhao et al.
2021; Park et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022, 2024b). Since point
clouds are collections embedded in 3D space, the core selfattention operator in Transformer networks is in essence a
set operator which is invariant to the permutation and number of input elements, making it highly suitable for processing point cloud data. Considering the computational costs,
point cloud transformers cannot perform global attention.
The Point Transformer series (Zhao et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2022) calculates local self-attention within the k-nearest
neighbors (KNN) neighborhood. In order to integrate this
self-attention operation with SNNs, we follow the design of
spiking self-attention (Yao et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024) and
employ a spiking local self-attention mechanism to model
sparse point cloud using spike Query, Key, and Value. By using AC operations instead of numerous multiply accumulate
(MAC) operations, we significantly reduce the energy consumption of self-attention computations for 3D point cloud.
Training point cloud networks requires more expensive
memory and computational costs than images because point
cloud data requires more dimensions to describe itself. Researchers have proposed various optimization strategies, including sparse convolutions (Choy, Gwak, and Savarese
2019), optimization during the data processing phase (Hu
et al. 2020), and local feature extraction (Ma et al. 2022). If
the existing direct encoding methods used by transformerbased SNNs (Zhou et al. 2024; Yao et al. 2024) for 2D
static images or used by SNNs for 3D point clouds (Ren
et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024a) are directly applied to the
Transformer structure for point cloud, the training of SNNs
with multiple time steps will result in a sharp increase in
computational costs. Point cloud data is high-dimensional
but has low information density. The current direct encoding methods for point clouds means we need to repeat T

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) offer an attractive and
energy-efficient alternative to conventional Artificial Neural
Networks (ANNs) due to their sparse binary activation. When
SNN meets Transformer, it shows great potential in 2D image
processing. However, their application for 3D point cloud remains underexplored. To this end, we present Spiking Point
Transformer (SPT), the first transformer-based SNN framework for point cloud classification. Specifically, we first design Queue-Driven Sampling Direct Encoding for point cloud
to reduce computational costs while retaining the most effective support points at each time step. We introduce the Hybrid
Dynamics Integrate-and-Fire Neuron (HD-IF), designed to
simulate selective neuron activation and reduce over-reliance
on specific artificial neurons. SPT attains state-of-the-art results on three benchmark datasets that span both real-world
and synthetic datasets in the SNN domain. Meanwhile, the
theoretical energy consumption of SPT is at least 6.4× less
than its ANN counterpart.

Code — https://github.com/PeppaWu/SPT

Introduction
Bio-inspired Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are regarded
as the third generation of neural networks (Maass 1997).
In SNNs, spiking neurons transmit information through
sparse binary spikes, where a binary value of 0 denotes
neural quiescence and a binary value of 1 denotes a spiking event. Neurons communicate via sparse spike signals,
with only a subset of spiking neurons being activated to perform sparse synaptic accumulation (AC), while the rest remain idle. Their high biological plausibility, sparse spikedriven communication (Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019), and
low power consumption on neuromorphic hardware (Pei
et al. 2019) make them a promising alternative to traditional
AI for achieving low-power, efficient computational intelligence (Schuman et al. 2022).
Drawing on the success of Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), researchers have combined SNNs with
Transformers, achieving significant performance improvements on the ImageNet benchmark (Shi, Hao, and Yu 2024;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21563

