The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Text-Guided Fine-grained Counterfactual Inference for Short Video Fake News
Detection
Linlin Zong1 , Wenmin Lin1 , Jiahui Zhou1 , Xinyue Liu1 , Xianchao Zhang1 , Bo Xu2 * , Shimin Wu1
1

Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, School of Software, Dalian University
of Technology, Dalian, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
{llzong, xyliu, xczhang, xubo}@dlut.edu.cn, {wmlin, zjhjixiang, wushimin}@mail.dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

Title: Location, location, location.
Comments: The Earth is round. It will eventually
come back. It’s real, not special effects, it’s on
CCTV. It will drift next to Tangchen Yipin...

Detecting fake news in short videos is crucial for combating misinformation. Existing methods utilize topic modeling and co-attention mechanism, overlooking the modality
heterogeneity and resulting in suboptimal performance. To
address this issue, we introduce Text-Guided Fine-grained
Counterfactual Inference for Short Video Fake News detection (TGFC-SVFN). TGFC-SVFN leverages modality bias
removal and teacher-model-enhanced inter-modal knowledge distillation to integrate the heterogeneous modalities in
short videos. Specifically, we use causality-based reasoning
prompts guided text as teacher model, which then transfers
knowledge to the video and audio student models. Subsequently, a multi-head attention mechanism is employed to
fuse information from different modalities. In each module, we utilize fine-grained counterfactual inference based
on a diffusion model to eliminate modality bias. Experimental results on publicly available fake short video news
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art techniques.

(a)
On the evening of the 21st, an explosion occurred
at a chemical plant in the Ganyu District…
Teacher

Student
(b)

Figure 1: (a) Case of modality bias. (b) Modality bias amplification, the real news is that there was a fire, not an explosion. The reference to an explosion is misleading.

could introduce two issues: modality bias amplification and
teacher model inadequacy.
Modality bias amplification. Modality bias as the phenomenon in which certain factors or keywords exhibit spurious correlations with the labels during the model’s learning
and prediction process, leading to biased outcomes (Qian
et al. 2021). Figure 1(a) shows a spurious correlation between the keyword ”real” in the comment and the label,
causing the model to misclassify the news as real. Intermodal knowledge distillation based fusion methods often
overemphasize certain modalities, leading to modality bias
in short videos. As shown in Figure 1(b), the visual modality
may present both ”explosion” and ”fire” information simultaneously. If the teacher model disproportionately highlights
the ”explosion” element, which is a piece of false information, it may be transferred to the visual modality, thereby
obscuring the fact of ”fire”. In short videos, which typically
integrate multiple modalities, biases can be further amplified. Modality bias amplification undoubtedly complicates
the detection of fake news in short videos. This bias complicates accurate content analysis and fake information detection. Existing debiasing methods, such as those using counterfactual inference for images (Chen et al. 2023) or focusing on specific text (Zhang et al. 2024), are often too coarsegrained, making it difficult to identify key semantic features
for recognizing fake news.
Teacher model inadequacy. Existing inter-modal knowl-

Introduction
Fake news detection is essential for preventing misinformation and maintaining public trust (DiFonzo and Bordia 2007;
Jin et al. 2017; Jankowski et al. 2020). Today, short video
platforms are key channels for disseminating fake news.
These platforms combine images, videos, audio, social content, and comments, each with different formats and characteristics. This diversity complicates the assessment of news
authenticity.
The research on detecting fake news in short videos
primarily focuses on the effective integration of multiple
modalities using approaches like topic modeling (Choi and
Ko 2021) and co-attention mechanism (Qi et al. 2023a).
While these methods have shown success, they often overlook the heterogeneity among modalities. Greater differences among modalities increase the difficulty of effective
integration. In text-image fake news detection, inter-modal
knowledge distillation is used to balance modality differences (Wei et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2024). However, applying
these methods directly to short video fake news detection
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1237

