The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MPQ-DM: Mixed Precision Quantization for Extremely Low Bit Diffusion Models
Weilun Feng1,2 * , Haotong Qin3 * , Chuanguang Yang1† , Zhulin An1† , Libo Huang1 , Boyu Diao1 ,
Fei Wang1 , Renshuai Tao4 , Yongjun Xu1 , Michele Magno3
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
ETH Zurich
4
Beijing Jiaotong University
{fengweilun24s, yangchuanguang, anzhulin, diaoboyu2012, wangfei, xyj}@ict.ac.cn,
{haotong.qin,michele.magno}@pbl.ee.ethz.ch, www.huanglibo@gmail.com, rstao@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Diffusion models have received wide attention in generation tasks. However, the expensive computation cost prevents
the application of diffusion models in resource-constrained
scenarios. Quantization emerges as a practical solution that
significantly saves storage and computation by reducing the
bit-width of parameters. However, the existing quantization
methods for diffusion models still cause severe degradation
in performance, especially under extremely low bit-widths
(2-4 bit). The primary decrease in performance comes from
the significant discretization of activation values at low bit
quantization. Too few activation candidates are unfriendly for
outlier significant weight channel quantization, and the discretized features prevent stable learning over different time
steps of the diffusion model. This paper presents MPQ-DM,
a Mixed-Precision Quantization method for Diffusion Models. The proposed MPQ-DM mainly relies on two techniques:
(1) To mitigate the quantization error caused by outlier severe weight channels, we propose an Outlier-Driven Mixed
Quantization (OMQ) technique that uses Kurtosis to quantify outlier salient channels and apply optimized intra-layer
mixed-precision bit-width allocation to recover accuracy performance within target efficiency. (2) To robustly learn representations crossing time steps, we construct a Time-Smoothed
Relation Distillation (TRD) scheme between the quantized
diffusion model and its full-precision counterpart, transferring discrete and continuous latent to a unified relation space
to reduce the representation inconsistency. Comprehensive
experiments demonstrate that MPQ-DM achieves significant
accuracy gains under extremely low bit-widths compared
with SOTA quantization methods. MPQ-DM achieves a 58%
FID decrease under W2A4 setting compared with baseline,
while all other methods even collapse.

(a) Baseline

Figure 1: Visualization of samples generated by baseline and
MPQ-DM under W2A6 bit-width.

et al. 2020; Mei and Patel 2023; Yang et al. 2024b; Liu
et al. 2023b). However, the iterative denoising process and
the massive of parameters in order to cope with the highresolution demand seriously hinder the wide deployment of
the diffusion model in edge devices with limited computing
resources (Liu et al. 2024a; Dai et al. 2024).
As an effective model compression approach that reduces
the floating-point parameters to low-bit integers, model
quantization can simultaneously reduce the model size and
improve the inference speed (Gholami et al. 2022). This
technique has been widely used in CNNs (Pilipović, Bulić,
and Risojević 2018; Ding et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024) and
Transformers (Chitty-Venkata et al. 2023). Model quantization is mainly divided into post-training quantization (PTQ)
(Hubara et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2023a) and quantization-aware training (QAT) (Esser
et al. 2019; Jacob et al. 2018; Krishnamoorthi 1806). QAT
often requires a full amount of raw data to fine-tune model
weights and quantization parameters. Therefore, it requires
a fine-tuning time equivalent to original training but performs well on extremely low bit-width (2-4 bit) or even binarization (Qin et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2024). PTQ only
requires a small amount of calibration data to fine-tune the
quantization parameters. Thus, a shorter calibration time is
required, but model performance cannot be guaranteed. To
solve this problem, quantization-aware low-rank fine-tuning
(QLORA-FT) scheme (He et al. 2023) proposes to add a
LoRA (Hu et al. 2021) module to perform a low-rank update
on model quantized weights to enhance the performance of

Code — https://github.com/cantbebetter2/MPQ-DM

1

(b) MPQ-DM

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generation tasks (Rombach et al. 2022; Song
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16595

