The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CLIP-PCQA: Exploring Subjective-Aligned Vision-Language Modeling
for Point Cloud Quality Assessment
Yating Liu* , Yujie Zhang* , Ziyu Shan, Yiling Xu†
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{Olivialyt, yujie19981026, shanziyu, yl.xu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, No-Reference Point Cloud Quality Assessment (NR-PCQA) research has achieved significant progress.
However, existing methods mostly seek a direct mapping
function from visual data to the Mean Opinion Score (MOS),
which is contradictory to the mechanism of practical subjective evaluation. To address this, we propose a novel languagedriven PCQA method named CLIP-PCQA. Considering that
human beings prefer to describe visual quality using discrete
quality descriptions (e.g., “excellent” and “poor”) rather than
specific scores, we adopt a retrieval-based mapping strategy
to simulate the process of subjective assessment. More specifically, based on the philosophy of CLIP, we calculate the cosine similarity between the visual features and multiple textual features corresponding to different quality descriptions,
in which process an effective contrastive loss and learnable
prompts are introduced to enhance the feature extraction.
Meanwhile, given the personal limitations and bias in subjective experiments, we further covert the feature similarities
into probabilities and consider the Opinion Score Distribution
(OSD) rather than a single MOS as the final target. Experimental results show that our CLIP-PCQA outperforms other
State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) approaches.

Figure 1: The process of subjective experiment. Participants
first undergo a training process to understand the voting
standard, then they are able to convert the quality descriptions into quantitative values. Note that multiple subjects
may give diverse scores, which forms the score distribution.

In the past years, a variety of deep learning-based NRPCQA methods have been proposed. These methods can be
operated directly on 3D point clouds (Liu et al. 2023b; Shan
et al. 2023; Tliba et al. 2023) or 2D projected images (Torlig
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2021; Mu et al. 2023). More recently,
another family of methods (Zhang et al. 2022b; Xie et al.
2023) have designed multi-modal architecture to jointly utilize differentiated 2D and 3D information. These works, regardless of which modality they are based on, try to seek a
direct mapping from visual data to quantitative scores. The
common strategy is to use well-designed deep neural networks to extract effective quality features from input point
clouds, and then regress the features into required scores.
Although promising results have been reported, the prevalent regression-based mapping strategy is somewhat contradictory to the mechanism of subjective evaluation. In fact,
when stimulated by distorted samples, people’s immediate
perception involves intrinsic descriptions such as “the quality of this sample is good” or “the distortion is annoying”.
To acquire quantitative scores that are more convenient in
practical applications, participants in subjective experiments
need to undergo a training process in which they are informed about the voting standard (i.e., the correspondence
between quality/impairment descriptions and quantitative
values). As shown in Figure 1, the five-grade categorical
scales (Recommendation 2019) have been widely used. After the training session, subjects can use quantitative values

Code — https://github.com/Olivialyt/CLIP-PCQA

1

Introduction

Point clouds are essentially collections of points scattered
in 3D space, where each point has the corresponding geometry coordinates and other attributes. With its widespread
applications in various fields (e.g., autonomous driving (Cui
et al. 2021) and virtual/augmented reality (Park, Lepetit, and
Woo 2008)), point clouds have become one of the most typical representations of 3D objects or scenes. However, many
visual artifacts could be introduced into point clouds during
processing stages, such as capturing, compression, transmission, and rendering. In order to ensure the Quality Of Experience (QoE), it is necessary to develop effective metrics that
accurately measure the perceptual distortion, especially in
the common No-Reference (NR) situation where “perfect”
reference point clouds are not available.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5694

