The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Curriculum Conditioned Diffusion for Multimodal Recommendation
Yimeng Yang1 , Haokai Ma1 , Lei Meng1, 2 * , Shuo Xu1 , Ruobing Xie3 , Xiangxu Meng1
1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
Shandong Research Institute of Industrial Technology, Jinan, China
3
Tencent, China
{y yimeng, mahaokai, shuo.xu}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {lmeng, mxx}@sdu.edu.cn, xrbsnowing@163.com
2

Abstract
Multimodal recommendation (MMRec) aims to integrate
multimodal information of items to address the inherent data
sparsity issue in collaborative-based recommendation. Traditional MMRec methods typically capture the structure-level
item representations from the observed user behaviors within
the multimodal graph, overlooking the potential impact of
negative instances for personalized preference understanding. In light of the outstanding generative ability and step-bystep inference characteristic of Diffusion Models (DMs), we
propose a Curriculum Conditioned Diffusion framework for
Multimodal Recommendation (CCDRec), which precisely
excavates the modality-aware distribution-level correlation
among multi-modalities and elegantly integrates the reverse
phase of DMs into negative sampling to highlight the most
suitable instances in a curricular manner. Specifically, CCDRec proposes the Diffusion-controlled Multimodal Aligning module (DMA) to align multimodal knowledge with
collaborative signals by capturing the fine-grained relationships among multi-modalities in the probabilistic distribution
space. Furthermore, CCDRec designs the Negative-sensitive
Diffusive Inferring module (NDI) to progressively synthesize
the negative sample pool with diverse hardness to support
the following knowledge-aware negative sampling. To gradually ramp up the training complexity, CCDRec further introduces a Curricular Negative Sampler (CNS) to tally the curriculum learning paradigm with the reverse phase of DMA,
thereby adaptively sampling the gold-standard negative instances to enhance optimization. Extensive experiments on
three datasets with four diverse backbones demonstrate the
effectiveness and robustness of our CCDRec. The visualization analyses also clarify the underlying mechanism of our
DMA in multimodal representation alignment and CNS in
curricular negative discovery. The code and the corresponding dataset will be uploaded in the Appendix.

positive
items

positive
items

un-observed
items

un-observed
items

Forward
...

...

Hard
Random Sampler
Adaptively Sampling
+
Overlooking User’s Negative Instances
Negative Instances with Diverse Hardness

(a) Illustration of
Traditional MMR

...

Reverse

Hard to distinguish

...

Easy

Easy to distinguish

(b) Illustration of the proposed CCDRec for MMR

Figure 1: Illustration of the difference between the traditional MMR methods and CCDRec, which integrates the reverse process of DM with negative sampling to sample negative instances with diverse hardness adaptively.

Several research directions have emerged to incorporate
multimodal content into recommender systems. Inspired by
the success of graph neural networks (GNNs), several studies have frequently utilized GNNs to derive representations
from different views. For instance, these methods typically
generate modality preference representations under the user
preference view (Zhou, Zhou, and Shen 2023) and obtain
item representations within the multimodal view (Zhang
et al. 2021; Zhou and Shen 2023). Additionally, some researchers leverage self-supervised multimodal signals (Yang
et al.) to ensure content coherence across diverse modalities (Zhou et al. 2023; Tao et al. 2022). Recently, the effectiveness of generative models (Li et al. 2024; Sun et al.
2024) such as Variational Autoencoders and Diffusion Models (DM) have been explored in this specific recommendation task (Bai et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2024c). Existing algorithms primarily leverage the observed user interactions
to improve the representation learning of items from multimodal knowledge and collaborative information. Nevertheless, these methodologies overlook the impact of negative
behaviors, thereby losing some necessary knowledge that effectively understands user preferences.
In recommender systems, negative sampling is critical for
capturing negative instances in a sparse user-item interaction
matrix to enhance model performance. Traditional strategies
typically define the fixed probabilities in recommendation
(e.g., uniform sampling (Guo et al. 2017) and popularitybased sampling (Mikolov et al. 2013)), lacking flexibility in
capturing users’ dynamical preferences. To address this, re-

Introduction
Multimodal recommendation is crucial in the information
society as it combines different data types (Ma et al. 2023a;
Wang et al. 2023b), including text, images, and audio, to
fully capture user preferences and deliver more personalized
and relevant recommendations.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13035

