The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Structural Causal Models from Ordering: Identifiable Flow Models
Minh Khoa Le 1 , Kien Do 1 , Truyen Tran 1
1

Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2I2), Deakin University, Australia
{minh.le, k.do, truyen.tran}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract

restrict model design to be monotonic and require additional
regularization to scale to multiple layers. Sanchez and Tsaftaris (2022) propose a counterfactual estimation method using diffusion models and classifier guidance, but it only considers bivariate causal graphs and lacks theoretical analysis.
(Chao et al. 2024) generalize previous diffusion-based methods but require a fully observed causal graph and a separate
deep neural network for each observed variable, resulting in
slow sequential inference and a large number of parameters.
We propose a identifiable flow models that requires only
observational data and a valid causal ordering. Our approach
is designed to represent SCMs and ensure causal consistency
through its structure. A parallel sped-up design can answer
observational, interventional, and counterfactual questions
with computational complexity scaling linearly with the
number of model layers, independent of the causal graph’s
node count. This scalability enables efficient handling of
large causal models, making our approach practical and effective for diverse applications.
We empirically demonstrate that our method outperforms
competing approaches across a wide range of synthetic and
real datasets, excelling in estimating both the mean and overall shape of interventional and counterfactual distributions.
The experiments confirm that our parallel architecture is not
only scalable but also maintains high performance as the
complexity and size of the datasets increase.
Our key contributions are:

In this study, we address causal inference when only observational data and a valid causal ordering from the causal graph
are available. We introduce a set of flow models that can
recover component-wise, invertible transformation of exogenous variables. Our flow-based methods offer flexible model
design while maintaining causal consistency regardless of
the number of discretization steps. We propose design improvements that enable simultaneous learning of all causal
mechanisms and reduce abduction and prediction complexity to linear O(n) relative to the number of layers, independent of the number of causal variables. Empirically, we
demonstrate that our method outperforms previous state-ofthe-art approaches and delivers consistent performance across
a wide range of structural causal models in answering observational, interventional, and counterfactual questions. Additionally, our method achieves a significant reduction in computational time compared to existing diffusion-based techniques, making it practical for large structural causal models.

Introduction
Deep neural networks are highly expressive and learnable,
but are inherently associative, making it difficult for them to
capture causal relationships. This limitation can lead to inaccurate predictions in fields where causality is crucial (LeRoy
2004; Russo and Williamson 2007; Nguyen et al. 2023).
Among the efforts to alleviate this problem, a promising
direction dubbed causal representation learning (Schölkopf
et al. 2021) is to integrate neural networks within the framework of Structural Causal Models (SCMs) (Pearl 2009).
SCMs are principled way to answer observational, interventional, and counterfactual questions, but learning them from
data remains challenging. This paper focuses on efficient
learning of SCMs from only observational data and causal
ordering, leveraging deep neural networks to model causal
relationships in complex systems.
Some previous methods such as (Sánchez-Martin,
Rateike, and Valera 2022) require a fully observed causal
graph, which can be infeasible in real-world settings. Others (Javaloy, Martin, and Valera 2023; Khemakhem et al.
2021) use Autoregressive Normalizing Flows (Papamakarios, Pavlakou, and Murray 2017; Durkan et al. 2019), which

1. We prove the identifiability of flow models for learning
SCMs from observational data and causal ordering.
2. We introduce novel model designs enabling parallel abduction and approximated prediction, removing autoregressive constraints and significantly reducing computational and memory requirements.
3. We validate our methods’ effectiveness and performance
on diverse synthetic and real-world datasets.

Related Work
Recent advances in deep generative models (DGMs) have
found their way into learning Structural Causal Models
(SCMs). Karimi et al. (2020) propose a conditional variational autoencoder (VAE) for each Markov factorization implied by the causal graph. VAEs on graphs are also studied assuming certain design constraints but have yet to

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17831

