The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Recording for Eyes, Not Echoing to Ears: Contextualized Spoken-to-Written
Conversion of ASR Transcripts
Jiaqing Liu1 , Chong Deng1 , Qinglin Zhang1 , Shilin Zhou2 , Qian Chen1 , Hai Yu1 , Wen Wang1
1

Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
{mingzhai.ljq,dengchong.d,qinglin.zql,tanqing.cq,yuhai.yu,w.wang}@alibaba-inc.com {slzhou.cs}@outlook.com
2

Podcast Introduction (auxiliary)
Discussing Nolan’s movie Oppenheimer with Kerry Lee and Gill Wang …

Abstract
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) transcripts exhibit
recognition errors and various spoken language phenomena
such as disfluencies, ungrammatical sentences, and incomplete sentences, hence suffering from poor readability. To
improve readability, we propose a Contextualized Spokento-Written conversion (CoS2W) task to address ASR and
grammar errors and also transfer the informal text into the formal style with content preserved, utilizing contexts and auxiliary information. This task naturally matches the in-context
learning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs). To
facilitate comprehensive comparisons of various LLMs, we
construct a document-level Spoken-to-Written conversion of
ASR Transcripts Benchmark (SWAB) dataset. Using SWAB,
we study the impact of different granularity levels on the
CoS2W performance, and propose methods to exploit contexts and auxiliary information to enhance the outputs. Experimental results reveal that LLMs have the potential to excel in
the CoS2W task, particularly in grammaticality and formality,
our methods achieve effective understanding of contexts and
auxiliary information by LLMs. We further investigate the effectiveness of using LLMs as evaluators and find that LLM
evaluators show strong correlations with human evaluations
on rankings of faithfulness and formality, which validates the
reliability of LLM evaluators for the CoS2W task.

ASR Transcript (source)
Hello Ms. Carrie. I am Jill. What topic are we discussing today? Everyone,
seeing the title, you already know. A blockbuster movie. Nolan Oppenheimer.
Yes, aha, Oppenheimer, it feels. This movie has achieve very high box office.
CoS2W Record (target)
Hello Ms. Kerry. I'm Gill. As everyone can tell from the title, today we will
discuss Nolan's blockbuster movie— "Oppenheimer", which has achieved
very high box office revenue.

Figure 1: An example of the proposed CoS2W task. CoS2W
involves Text Style Transfer across sentences, ASR Error
Correction and Grammar Error Correction (GEC).
preserving the content, that is, the CoS2W task is designed
to convert verbatim transcripts (“echoing to ears”) into readable documents (“recording for eyes”). Note that different domains vary in their requirements for adjustments on
ASR transcripts. Some domains only allow removal of filler
words while some domains (e.g., speech analysis for diagnosis) require verbatim transcripts. Nonetheless, the readable
documents of CoS2W task are particularly helpful for many
domains such as podcasts, education, and meetings (business, project, etc.), where efficiency in information delivery
and knowledge acquisition is essential.
Moreover, for a wide variety of downstream tasks on
ASR transcripts, such as machine translation, summarization, question-answering (Gupta et al. 2021), and sentiment
classification (Zhang et al. 2023), even competitive models (including LLMs) perform substantially better on written text than on transcripts, and the performance could benefit substantially from applying CoS2W to ASR transcripts.
For example, for machine translation of ASR transcripts, we
employ the competitive CSANMT model1 on the development set of the speech translation BSTC dataset (Zhang et al.
2021b) and find that compared to directly translating ASR
transcripts, applying CoS2W (with GPT-4) on ASR transcripts then translating improves the BLEURT (Sellam, Das,
and Parikh 2020) score from 57.07 to 61.9.
Although the CoS2W task could improve both readability
and performance of downstream tasks of ASR transcripts,

Datasets — https://github.com/alibaba-damoacademy/SpokenNLP/tree/main/swab
Extended version —
https://www.arxiv.org/abs/2408.09688

Introduction
As can be seen in Figure 1, since ASR transcripts aim to provide verbatim transcriptions of oral communications, they
often exhibit various spoken language phenomena and informal styles, such as filler words, repetitions, repairs, and
fragments, and include ASR errors and ungrammatical text.
These characteristics lead to poor readability. To enhance the
readability of ASR transcripts, we propose the Contextualized Spoken-to-Written conversion (CoS2W) task, which
aims to correct ASR errors and grammatical errors and transfer the informal style to the written and formal style while
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

24623

https://www.huggingface.co/modelscope-unofficial/damo-csanmt-zh-en-large

