The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DualOpt: A Dual Divide-and-Optimize Algorithm for the Large-scale Traveling
Salesman Problem
Shipei Zhou1 * , Yuandong Ding1 * , Chi Zhang1 , Zhiguang Cao2 , Yan Jin1†
1

School of Computer Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
m202273616@hust.edu.cn, yuandong@hust.edu.cn, chizhang02@hust.edu.cn, zgcao@smu.edu.sg,jinyan@mail.hust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

as the depot, from which the salesman starts and ends the
trip. A feasible solution of TSP is defined as a Hamiltonian cycle that starts from the depot, visits each node exactly once, and ends at the depot. The objective is to minimize the total travel cost of the solution route τ , denoted as
N
−1
X
L(τ ) =
cost(τi , τi+1 ) + cost(τN , τ1 ), where τi repre-

This paper proposes a dual divide-and-optimize algorithm
(DualOpt) for solving the large-scale traveling salesman
problem (TSP). DualOpt combines two complementary
strategies to improve both solution quality and computational efficiency. The first strategy is a grid-based divide-andconquer procedure that partitions the TSP into smaller subproblems, solving them in parallel and iteratively refining the
solution by merging nodes and partial routes. The process
continues until only one grid remains, yielding a high-quality
initial solution. The second strategy involves a path-based
divide-and-optimize procedure that further optimizes the solution by dividing it into sub-paths, optimizing each using a
neural solver, and merging them back to progressively improve the overall solution. Extensive experiments conducted
on two groups of TSP benchmark instances, including randomly generated instances with up to 100,000 nodes and realworld datasets from TSPLIB, demonstrate the effectiveness
of DualOpt. The proposed DualOpt achieves highly competitive results compared to 10 state-of-the-art algorithms in the
literature. In particular, DualOpt achieves an improvement
gap up to 1.40% for the largest instance TSP100K with a
remarkable 104x speed-up over the leading heuristic solver
LKH3. Additionally, DualOpt demonstrates strong generalization on TSPLIB benchmarks, confirming its capability to
tackle diverse real-world TSP applications.

i=1

sents the i − th node in the route.
Due to its theoretical and practical interest, various traditional exact/heuristic and machine learning-based algorithms have been proposed in the literature. While exact algorithms are generally computationally infeasible for largescale instances, heuristics can provide near-optimal solutions for TSP with millions of cities, though they cannot
guarantee optimality. They often involve time-consuming
iterative searches, making them less suitable for timesensitive tasks. Machine learning based algorithms, on the
other hand, offer high computational efficiency and can
achieve solution quality comparable to traditional methods
for small-scale TSP instances. However, applying them to
large-scale TSP, especially those with over 1,000 cities,
remains a challenge. One approach is to leverage pretrained models from small-scale instances for larger ones,
but this often results in poor performance due to distribution shift (Joshi et al. 2022). Training models specifically
for large-scale TSP is also impractical due to computational
resource limitations.
A basic approach to deal with the large-scale routing
problem is to apply the general principle of “divide-andconquer” (Fu, Qiu, and Zha 2021; Pan et al. 2023; Hou et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2024b; Zheng et al. 2024;
Xia et al. 2024). It involves decomposing TSP into a subset of small sub-problems, which can be efficiently solved
using traditional or machine learning algorithms to attain
sub-solutions. The final solution is then obtained by combining these sub-solutions. This approach can significantly
reduce the computational complexity of the large-scale TSP,
and yield high-quality solutions in a relatively short time.
In this work, we introduce a novel dual divide-andoptimize algorithm DualOpt based on the divide-andconquer framework. The first divide-and-optimize procedure partitions the nodes into M × M equal-sized grids
based on their coordinates. The nodes within each grid are

Code — https://github.com/Learning4OptimizationHUST/DualOpt

Introduction
The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem, which has numerous realworld applications (Madani, Batta, and Karwan 2021; Hacizade and Kaya 2018; Matai, Singh, and Mittal 2010).
Let G = (V, E) represent an undirected graph, where
V = {vi | 1 ≤ i ≤ N } is the set of nodes and
E = {eij | 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N } is the set of edges, with
N being the total number of nodes. For each edge eij , the
travel cost cost(i, j) is defined as the Euclidean distance between the nodes vi and vj . A special node vd ∈ V serves
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Yan Jin is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27178

