The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Inapproximability of Optimal Multi-Agent Pathfinding Problems
Xing Tan1 , Alban Grastien2
1

Department of Computer Science, Lakehead University, Canada
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France
xing.tan@lakeheadu.ca, alban.grastien@cea.fr

2

Abstract

2022). The study of MAPF on directed graphs (diMAPF) is
relatively recent, with findings indicating that both of its decisional and optimal variants are NP-complete (Nebel 2020,
2023; Tan and Bercher 2023; Nebel 2024).
Given the intractability of optimal MAPF problems, current research often emphasizes finding suboptimal solutions
that balance practical efficiency and solution quality. Aiming to provide feasible solutions within reasonable computational limits, these algorithms focus on minimizing the
makespan (de Wilde, ter Mors, and Witteveen 2013; Barer
et al. 2014; Cohen et al. 2016), and/or maximizing the number of agents reaching their goals (Ma et al. 2018). We
believe however that, in the development and application
of these approximate algorithms for MAPF, delineating the
boundaries of what is computationally feasible is important.
Knowing the exact limitations and inherent difficulties of the
problem helps set realistic expectations and design strategies
that work within given constraints. Furthermore, intractability results can guide the development of heuristics and approximation algorithms, ensuring that they are both effective
and efficient.
This paper presents, to the best of our knowledge, a
first set of inapproximability results concerning the optimal makespan and the total number of agents reaching their goals. In Section 3, we examine the complexity
of MAPF/diMAPF which are constrained on maximallyallowed makespan. We investigate problems of maximizing the total number of agents reaching their goals with a
makespan of three agent-steps at most, proving their nonapproximability, that is, non-existence of any polytime algorithm solving these problems sub-optimally within a certain factor ( 662
665 ≈ 0.995). We then in Section 4 examine
the complexity of MAX-diMAPF, i.e., the optimal variant of
diMAPF, on maximizing the total number of agents reaching their goals. We prove for this problem, the non-existence
of any polytime algorithm within a certain factor (initially
113
57
120 ≈ 0.942, and later the bound is refined to 64 ≈ 0.891).
Our findings reveal the inherent limitations in approximating
optimal solutions for MAPF, providing a deeper understanding of the problem’s complexity, thus offering foundational
references for future research.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 covers the preliminaries. Our complexity analysis is
detailed in Sections 3 and 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.

Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) is a problem where multiple
autonomous agents must find paths to their respective destinations without colliding. Decisional MAPF on undirected
graphs can be solved in polytime; several optimization MAPF
variants however are NP-complete. The directed graph variant (diMAPF) is more complex, with its decisional version
already being NP-complete. This paper examines the computational approximability of optimal MAPF problems (i.e.,
minimizing makespan for agent travel distance and maximizing the total number of agents reaching their goals), providing a first set of several inapproximability results for these
problems. The results reveal an inherent limitation in approximating optimal solutions for MAPFs, provide a deeper understanding regarding their computational intractability, thus
offer foundational references for future research.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) is a problem in which multiple autonomous agents, such as robots in a warehouse,
navigate paths to their individual destinations while avoiding collisions with one another (Wurman, D’Andrea, and
Mountz 2008; Stern et al. 2019). This problem has garnered significant attention in both research and practical
applications, given its relevance to various fields such as
robotics, operations research, and AI planning (Salzman and
Stern 2020; Okumura et al. 2022). For example, in robotics,
MAPF is essential for coordinating autonomous drones or
mobile robots in factories; in operations research, it plays
a vital role in optimizing the transportation of goods and
personnel in logistics and supply chain management (Salzman and Halperin 2016; Boyarski et al. 2015; Vodrázka,
Barták, and Svancara 2020; Standley 2010; Šišlák, Volf, and
Pěchouček 2010).
Determining whether a solution exists for a MAPF problem can be done efficiently in polytime for undirected graphs
(Kornhauser, Miller, and Spirakis 1984). However, optimizing MAPF problems, such as finding the optimal makespan
or travel distance for the agents, is NP-complete on general graphs and various constrained settings, like planar
graphs or grids (Surynek 2010; Yu and LaValle 2013; Yu
2016; Banfi, Basilico, and Amigoni 2017; Geft and Halperin
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26707

