The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Robustness in Incremental Learning with Adversarial Training
Seungju Cho* , Hongsin Lee* , Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{joyga, hongsin04, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

solutions that combine the strengths of adversarial training
with the dynamic requirements of incremental learning.
In incremental learning, a central challenge is acquiring
new knowledge without forgetting what has already been
learned. To address this issue, incremental learning employs
various methods, such as knowledge distillation (Li and
Hoiem 2017; Rebuffi et al. 2017) and rehearsal techniques
(Riemer et al. 2018; Buzzega et al. 2020). However, these
methods do not take adversarial robustness into account,
so we construct new baselines for ARCIL by applying adversarial training on those incremental learning in Table 1.
This includes not only standard adversarial training methods (Madry et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020)
but also adversarial distillation techniques (Goldblum et al.
2020; Zi et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2023) in place of the traditional knowledge distillation used in incremental learning,
to ensure a fair comparison within the framework. Nonetheless, existing baselines are insufficient to solve ARCIL.
We identify several reasons why the baseline methods
struggle to perform well. Firstly, the straightforward application of adversarial distillation leads to conflicts between
learning new tasks and preserving knowledge from previous
tasks. This issue is exacerbated in adversarial training, due
to its adversarial input. Secondly, we figure out that incorporating new tasks causes the disappearance of one of the
main characteristics of adversarial training, a flat loss landscape (Qin et al. 2019; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2019). Given
the abundance of research on adversarial robustness and flatness, we believe preserving flatness is important to maintain
robustness. However, we observe in Table 1 that the baselines tend to forget the flatness of the loss for past tasks as
new tasks are introduced. Lastly, ARCIL inherently suffers
from a lack of training data, which is a significant issue since
adversarial training generally requires more data than natural training (Rebuffi et al. 2021; Li and Spratling 2023; Yue
et al. 2024).
To resolve these issues, we propose a FLatnesspreserving Adversarial Incremental learning for Robustness
(FLAIR). The proposed method employs separated-logits
(Rebuffi et al. 2017; Ahn et al. 2021) to ensure that the logits
corresponding to past tasks remain unaffected when learning
new tasks. This approach mitigates conflicts between retaining existing knowledge and acquiring new information while
leveraging the benefits of adversarial distillation. Addition-

Adversarial training is one of the most effective approaches
against adversarial attacks. However, adversarial training has
primarily been studied in scenarios where data for all classes
is provided, with limited research conducted in the context of
incremental learning where knowledge is introduced sequentially. In this study, we investigate Adversarially Robust Class
Incremental Learning (ARCIL), which deals with adversarial
robustness in incremental learning. We first explore a series of
baselines that integrate incremental learning with existing adversarial training methods, finding that they lead to conflicts
between acquiring new knowledge and retaining past knowledge. Furthermore, we discover that training new knowledge
causes the disappearance of a key characteristic in robust
models: a flat loss landscape in input space. To address such
issues, we propose a novel and robust baseline for ARCIL,
named FLatness-preserving Adversarial Incremental learning for Robustness (FLAIR). Experimental results demonstrate that FLAIR significantly outperforms other baselines.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to comprehensively investigate the baselines, challenges, and solutions for
ARCIL, which we believe represents a significant advance
toward achieving real-world robustness.

Introduction
Given the susceptibility of deep neural networks (DNNs) to
adversarial attacks, adversarial training is recognized as the
most effective defense method (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Wu, Xia, and Wang 2020; Wang et al. 2021; Wu
et al. 2021). Furthermore, adversarial training has garnered
significant attention not only for its role in improving adversarial robustness but also for enhancing feature representation and interpretation (Engstrom et al. 2019; Salman
et al. 2020; Santurkar, Tsipras, and Madry 2020; Bai et al.
2021; Deng et al. 2021; Allen-Zhu and Li 2022; Kireev,
Andriushchenko, and Flammarion 2022). Despite its effectiveness, adversarial training has not been sufficiently explored in the context of real-world scenarios with continuously evolving data. This leads us to address a crucial problem: ensuring robustness in incremental learning environments. We term this challenge Adversarially Robust Class
Incremental Learning (ARCIL), highlighting the need for
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2518

