The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ScaleOT: Privacy-utility-scalable Offsite-tuning with Dynamic LayerReplace and
Selective Rank Compression
Kai Yao1,2 , Zhaorui Tan3 , Tiandi Ye4 , Lichun Li2 ,
Yuan Zhao2 , Wenyan Liu2 , Wei Wang2 * , Jianke Zhu1∗
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Ant Group
3
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, the United Kingdom
4
East China Normal University, Shanghai China
jiumo.yk@antgroup.com, jkzhu@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Offsite-tuning is a privacy-preserving method for tuning large
language models (LLMs) by sharing a lossy compressed emulator from the LLM owners with data owners for downstream task tuning. This approach protects the privacy of both
the model and data owners. However, current offsite tuning
methods often suffer from adaptation degradation, high computational costs, and limited protection strength due to uniformly dropping LLM layers or relying on expensive knowledge distillation. To address these issues, we propose ScaleOT, a novel privacy-utility-scalable offsite-tuning framework that effectively balances privacy and utility. ScaleOT introduces a novel layerwise lossy compression algorithm that
uses reinforcement learning to obtain the importance of each
layer. It employs lightweight networks, termed harmonizers,
to replace the raw LLM layers. By combining important original LLM layers and harmonizers in different ratios, ScaleOT
generates emulators tailored for optimal performance with
various model scales for enhanced privacy protection. Additionally, we present a rank reduction method to further compress the original LLM layers, significantly enhancing privacy with negligible impact on utility. Comprehensive experiments show that ScaleOT can achieve nearly lossless offsite
tuning performance compared with full fine-tuning while obtaining better model privacy.

(a) Uniform LayerDrop
Data Owner Site
Performance
(b) Dynamic LayerDrop (ours)
Model Owner Site
Performance
(c) Dynamic LayerReplace (ours)
Adapter
Harmonizer

Frozen Layer
Dropped Layer

(d) Offsite-tuning results on NLP tasks

Figure 1: Comparison of layerwise compression strategies.
(a) Uniform LayerDrop. (b) Our Dynamic LayerDrop drops
layers with the estimated importance scores. (c) Our Dynamic LayerReplace with harmonizers. (d) Results of using
different compression ratios. Our approach achieves better
performance at the owner site while maintaining the performance discrepancy.

of leaking the expensively trained models (Chua et al. 2023;
Xiao, Lin, and Han 2023). Moreover, the possible exposure
of parameters for the latter may increase the susceptibility of
their fine-tuned models to be attacked (Li et al. 2020; Zou
et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024b). All the above
issues may hinder the long-run sustenance of LLMs.
To protect both model ownership and data privacy effectively, the concept of offsite-tuning (Xiao, Lin, and Han
2023; Chua et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023a) has been proposed. As shown in Fig. 2(b), instead of training with the full
model, it enables the data owner to conduct fine-tuning using
a lossy compressed emulator provided by the model owner,
whose paradigm would result in a performance-degraded
emulator for data owners. The trained adapter is then returned to the model owner and plugged into the full model
to create an adapted model with high performance. Particularly, as the key factor for model privacy, the performance discrepancy between the data owner’s and owner’s
sites encourages downstream users to use the adapted full
model. Thus, the primary challenge of offsite-tuning lies in
efficiently compressing LLM to protect model privacy by
maintaining the performance discrepancy but improving the

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the bloom of large language
models (LLMs) (Devlin et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2019;
Touvron et al. 2023; Du et al. 2022). Pre-trained on massive datasets, these models acquire robust general capabilities to tackle a comprehensive range of tasks by zero-shot
(ZS) predictions or in-context learning (Dong et al. 2024;
Wies, Levine, and Shashua 2024) and able to be fine-tuned
for complex downstream tasks (Wortsman et al. 2022; Zhou
et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2022; Ouyang et al. 2022; Tan et al.
2024; Liu et al. 2024a; Dai et al. 2024). However, conventional centralized fine-tuning processes require the model
and the data to be co-located - either the data owner uploads
the data, which may threaten the data owner’s data privacy,
or the model owner shares the model weights - posing a risk
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22074

