The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Windowed MAPF with Completeness Guarantees
Rishi Veerapaneni, Muhammad Suhail Saleem, Jiaoyang Li, Maxim Likhachev
Carnegie Mellon University
{rveerapa, msaleem2, jiaoyanl, mlikhach}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Traditional multi-agent path finding (MAPF) methods try to
compute entire collision free start-goal paths, with several algorithms offering completeness guarantees. However, computing partial paths offers significant advantages including
faster planning, adaptability to changes, and enabling decentralized planning. Methods that compute partial paths employ a “windowed” approach and only try to find collision
free paths for a limited timestep horizon. While this improves
flexibility, this adaptation introduces incompleteness; all existing windowed approaches can become stuck in deadlock
or livelock. Our main contribution is to introduce our framework, WinC-MAPF, for Windowed MAPF that enables completeness. Our framework leverages heuristic update insights
from single-agent real-time heuristic search algorithms and
agent independence ideas from MAPF algorithms. We also
develop Single-Step Conflict Based Search (SS-CBS), an instantiation of this framework using a novel modification to
CBS. We show how SS-CBS, which only plans a single step
and updates heuristics, can effectively solve tough scenarios
where existing windowed approaches fail.

Horizon

wCBS
CBS+
SS-CBS

1,2,4,8,16
∞
1

Tunnel
3
4
0.9
1
1

Loopchain
6
7
1
0.95

Connector
5
6
1
1

Table 1: Success rates of different optimal approaches: windowed CBS (wCBS) and full horizon CBS with all optimizations enabled (CBS+). Horizon denotes window size. We
test on small congested scenarios (number of agents written
below each map) across 20 seeds and a 1 minute timeout.
wCBS and CBS+ fail due to deadlock or timeout while SSCBS, with a single-step planning horizon, is able to solve
these scenarios using our WinC-MAPF framework which
maintains completeness guarantees.
the first W timesteps account for inter-agent coordination
and avoids collisions. This window W is typically much
shorter than the entire solution path, e.g. W = 5 is common
when the entire solution path spans 50 to 500 timesteps. As a
result, windowed methods are significantly faster than those
that compute the entire path.
A key issue with windowed approaches is that their myopic planning results in deadlock or livelock. Table 1 shows
examples where windowed MAPF solvers fail in congestion
if their window is too small. More broadly, all existing windowed MAPF solvers regardless of window size lack theoretical completeness, and several windowed works have explicitly cited deadlock as a key issue in their experiments
(Silver 2005; Li et al. 2020; Okumura et al. 2022; Jiang
et al. 2024). Interestingly, no previous work has addressed
completeness in windowed MAPF solvers.
Our first main contribution is the introduction of the
Windowed Complete MAPF framework, WinC-MAPF, designed to create Windowed MAPF solvers that guarantee
completeness. WinC-MAPF is a general framework that
leverages concepts from single-agent real-time heuristic
search and the semi-independent structure of MAPF. First,
we view Windowed MAPF in its joint configuration and
show how we can apply real-time heuristic updates on the
joint configuration to enable completeness. However, due

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01798

1

Method

Introduction

A core problem for multi-agent systems is to figure out how
agents should move from their current locations to their goal
locations. Without careful consideration, agents can collide,
get stuck in deadlock, or take inefficient paths which take
longer to traverse. This Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF)
problem is particularly tough in congestion or when the
number of agents becomes very large (e.g. 100s).
Full horizon MAPF methods attempt to find entire paths
for each agent from their start to their goal. Many such
MAPF methods additionally have theoretical completeness
guarantees, i.e., they will find a solution if one exists given
enough time and compute. However, planning partial paths
has multiple advantages including decreasing planning time,
adaptability to changes, and enabling decentralized planning. This is particularly useful in scenarios where planning
a full horizon path may be tough (e.g. too many collisions to
resolve) and planning a partial path is more feasible.
Therefore existing windowed methods define a time window W and plan paths for each agent to the goal such that
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23323

