The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhance Modality Robustness in Text-Centric Multimodal Alignment with
Adversarial Prompting
Yun-Da Tsai1 , Ting-Yu Yen1 , Keng-Te Liao, Shou-De Lin
National Taiwan University
f08946007@csie.ntu.edu.tw, r11922042@ntu.edu.tw, d05922001@ntu.edu.tw, sdlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

Recent study (Wang et al. 2023b) discovered that Vision LLMs trained on pure synthetically generated highquality captions by image caption models to replace original noisy data fall into model collapse (Robinson et al.
2021). This phenomenon can be explained by captioning
collapse (Vinyals et al. 2015; Wang, Zhang, and Yu 2020)
and the one-to-many problem (Young et al. 2014) in image captioning. That is, when transforming images into text,
it generates fixed or similar captions for different images,
which limits diversity in the output and could potentially
jeopardize the downstream model training. This could cause
the learned multimodal representations to be less robust for
discriminative models (ex. classifier) and cause modality
collapse issue for generative models (ex. MLLMs). This
leads to the concern where text-centric alignment method
would be lead to less robust performance.
In this paper, we improve the modality robustness in textcentric modality alignment methods. Specifically, we aim
to repair the modal collapse issue when transforming various modalities into text leads to the generation of fixed or
similar outputs, resulting in information loss and reduced
diversity. This, in turn, compromises the robustness of the
learned multimodal representation. We further propose using adversarial prompting (Yang et al. 2024; Dong et al.
2023; Xu and Wang 2024) and formulate a text-centric adversarial training approach to enhance the modality robustness of text-centric multimodal alignment. Before converting different input modalities into text using expert models
and align these modalities within a similar semantic space,
we applied a LLM-based perturbation module on top and
increase the diversity and robustness of text representations.
This adversarial training procedure along with multimodal
alignment will optimizes for a more robust performance.
This can be easily understand as using LLMs as an adversary to force improve the robustness of multimodal alignment and the downstream model.
In our experiment, different input modalities are converted into text descriptions using expert foundation models
for each modality. To evaluate the robustness of these representations, we follow the MULTIBENCH (Liang et al. 2021)
framework, which introduces varying levels of and imperfections. This approach simulates real-world conditions, allowing us to assess how well our unified textual representations perform under scenarios of missing or noisy data. By

Converting different modalities into generalized text, which
then serves as input prompts for large language models
(LLMs), is a common approach for aligning multimodal
models, particularly when pairwise data is limited. Textcentric alignment method leverages the unique properties of
text as a modality space, transforming diverse inputs into a
unified textual representation, thereby enabling downstream
models to effectively interpret various modal inputs. This
study evaluates the quality and robustness of multimodal
representations in the face of noise imperfections, dynamic
input order permutations, and missing modalities, revealing that current text-centric alignment methods can compromise downstream robustness. To address this issue, we propose a new text-centric adversarial training approach that significantly enhances robustness compared to traditional robust training methods and pre-trained multimodal foundation models. Our findings underscore the potential of this approach to improve the robustness and adaptability of multimodal representations, offering a promising solution for dynamic and real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Text-centric multimodal alignment methods have emerged
as a powerful approach for integrating multimodal information by converting diverse data types into text. This technique leverages the unique properties of text as a universal
modality space, enabling large language models (LLMs) to
process and understand visual, auditory, and other forms of
data, and have shown competetive performance compared to
other traditional embedding-based alignment methods (Tsai
et al. 2024). By transforming non-textual information into
textual descriptions, these methods facilitate the alignment
and integration of various modalities, enhancing the capability of LLMs to comprehend and generate contextually
rich responses. For example, LLaVA (Liu et al. 2023c) uses
expert models to generate captions, object detection locations, and textual descriptions from images. These are then
used as input to GPT-4 to create vision-text instructionfollowing data as a substitute of actual collecting vision-text
instruction-following data, which is inherently difficult and
resource-intensive to obtain.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27740

