The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Recommendation with Explicitly Encoding Item Bias
Zhihao Wang1∗ , He Bai2∗ , Wenke Huang1 * , Duantengchuan Li1 , Jian Wang1† , Bing Li13†
2

1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
School of Journalism and Information Communication, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China
{zhihao wang, jianwang, bingli}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
With the development of federated learning techniques and
the increased need for user privacy protection, the federated recommendation has become a new recommendation
paradigm. However, most existing works focus on user-level
federated recommendation, leaving platform-level federated
recommendation largely unexplored. A significant challenge
in platform-level federated recommendation scenarios is severe label skew. Users behave in various ways on different
platforms, bringing up the rating and item bias problem. In
this work, we propose FREIB (Federated Recommendation
with Explicitly Encoding Item Bias). The core idea is explicitly encoding item bias during federated learning, addressing
the problem of fuzzy item bias, and achieving consistent representation in label skew scenarios. We achieve this by utilizing global knowledge guidance to model common rating
patterns and by aligning feature prototypes to enhance item
encoding at the same rating level. Extensive experiments conducted on three public datasets demonstrate the superiority of
our method over several state-of-the-art approaches.

Figure 1: Illustration of platform-level federated learning. Users behave differently on various platforms, leading
to the label skew problem. (a) Users give different ratings according to the characteristics of movies, which shows item
bias. (b) The tendency of user scoring varies across platforms, resulting in rating bias between platforms.

Introduction
Federated recommendation, a new recommender system
paradigm incorporating advanced federated learning techniques (McMahan et al. 2017a), has demonstrated significant potential in protecting user privacy and providing personalized recommendations. In scenarios where data sources
for recommender systems are decentralized and come from
different clients, federated recommendation models deploy
algorithms on each client for training and co-tuning on the
server side. This schema ensures user privacy while delivering personalized recommendations.
In addition to user-level federated recommendation, realworld scenarios also involve platform-level federated recommendation tasks, where users interact on different platforms, exhibiting label skew (Kairouz et al. 2019). As shown
in Fig. 1, users behave differently on various platforms, leading to the item bias and rating bias learning problem. Items
tend to get similar ratings across platforms because of their
characteristic, which indicates item bias. Users score strictly

on some platforms and are prone to low scores, while they
score leniently on others and are prone to high scores, showing the rating bias. However, the co-existence of item bias
and rating bias will confuse item embedding learning. For
example, the classic movie Titanic should be widely liked
and have high ratings on different platforms. However, this
is susceptible to the rating bias of different platforms, where
items learned on platforms with strict scoring habits have
lower scores, affecting the item representation and causing inconsistent item bias. Consequently, the gradient of the
model on each platform falls in a different direction, making
it challenging for the server to learn accurate item representations and make effective rating predictions.
Previous work on federated recommender systems has focused on privacy protection at the individual user level and
deploying models to user clients for recommendation (Lin
et al. 2021; Chai et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2024c,b). However, these approaches face new challenges in platform-level
federated recommendation scenarios requiring accurate gen-

* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12792

