The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Implicit Neural Representations via Symmetric Power Transformation
Weixiang Zhang, Shuzhao Xie, Chengwei Ren, Shijia Ge, Mingzi Wang, Zhi Wang*
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
{zhang-wx22, xsz24, rcw22, gsj23, wmz22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangzhi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose symmetric power transformation to enhance the
capacity of Implicit Neural Representation (INR) from the
perspective of data transformation. Unlike prior work utilizing random permutation or index rearrangement, our method
features a reversible operation that does not require additional storage consumption. Specifically, we first investigate
the characteristics of data that can benefit the training of INR,
proposing the Range-Defined Symmetric Hypothesis, which
posits that specific range and symmetry can improve the expressive ability of INR. Based on this hypothesis, we propose
a nonlinear symmetric power transformation to achieve both
range-defined and symmetric properties simultaneously. We
use the power coefficient to redistribute data to approximate
symmetry within the target range. To improve the robustness
of the transformation, we further design deviation-aware calibration and adaptive soft boundary to address issues of extreme deviation boosting and continuity breaking. Extensive
experiments are conducted to verify the performance of the
proposed method, demonstrating that our transformation can
reliably improve INR compared with other data transformations. We also conduct 1D audio, 2D image and 3D video fitting tasks to demonstrate the effectiveness and applicability
of our method.

Figure 1: Pipeline of Symmetric Power Transformation. We
transform data with specific range and symmetry to enhance
implicit neural representation without any additional time
and spatial consumption. Integrating this simple nonlinear
transformation can significantly improve the reconstruction
quality. See comparison of “KBS” in reconstructed image.

sis (Mildenhall et al. 2020), and physics simulations (Raissi,
Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019).
However, encoding signals into neural representations is
resource-intensive, requiring training a neural network to fit
natural signals, which hinders the application of this novel
representation in real-world scenarios. Therefore, optimizing the training process of INR has become a crucial research topic in recent times. To address this challenge, various approaches have been proposed to improve INR training from different perspectives, including periodic activation functions (Liu et al. 2023b), partition-based acceleration (Saragadam et al. 2022), and reparameterized training (Shi, Zhou, and Gu 2024). Recently, RPP (Seo et al.
2024) provided an insight to enhance INR through data
transformation in the pre-processing stage, aiming to transform data such that optimization more effectively fits the
transformed data with INR. However, this work primarily focused on random pixel permutation (RPP), which, although accelerating training in the long run, disrupts signal
continuity and thus lowers performance in typical training
scenarios, limiting real-world applicability. Moreover, such

Code — https://github.com/zwx-open/Symmetric-PowerTransformation-INR

Introduction
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) have been proposed
for continuously representing signals using neural networks,
which has garnered significant attention in the representation of multimedia data, including audios (Su, Chen, and
Shlizerman 2022), images (Chen, Liu, and Wang 2021)
and videos (Chen et al. 2021). Compared to traditional discrete representations such as amplitudes, pixels and frames,
INR offers several advantages, including memory efficiency,
resolution agnosticism, and suitability for inverse problems. These advantages make INR particularly useful in
downstream tasks such as compression (Strümpler et al.
2022), super-resolution (Lu et al. 2023), novel view synthe*
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10157

