The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Representation-driven Option Discovery in Reinforcement Learning
Marlos C. Machado
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
machado@ualberta.ca

Talk Overview
The ability to reason at multiple levels of temporal abstraction is a fundamental aspect of intelligence. In reinforcement
learning (RL), this attribute is often modelled through temporally extended courses of actions called options (Sutton et
al. 1999). Many approaches within the options framework
assume a well-defined set of options is already known.
Without such a set, determining which options to consider
remains an open question. In this talk, I will introduce a general framework for option discovery, which uses the agent’s
representation to discover useful options (Machado et al.
2023). By leveraging these options to generate a rich stream
of experience, the agent can improve its representations and
learn more effectively. This representation-driven option
discovery approach creates a virtuous cycle of refinement,
continuously improving both the representation and options,
and it is particularly effective for problems where agents
need to operate at varying levels of abstraction to succeed.
I will begin by discussing the representation-driven option discovery (ROD) cycle at a high level before presenting
a concrete instantiation of it. At its core, the ROD cycle
involves the agent interacting with the environment to
collect data, which is then used to learn a representation.
This representation defines subtasks for the agent, which
solves them and leverages the learned policies to define
options. These options enable the agent to act in new ways,
altering its interaction with the environment and generating
a different data stream. This, in turn, refines the learned
representation, creating a continuous, constructivist cycle of
increasingly complex temporal abstractions (see Figure 1).
The concrete instantiation of the ROD cycle I will describe addresses the exploration problem in RL. Here, the
agent starts by selecting actions uniformly at random to
learn the successor representation (Dayan 1993). Inspired
by eigenoptions (Machado, Bellemare, and Bowling 2017),
the agent discovers options through the successor representation’s eigenvectors, which are added to its option set. This
significantly reduces the time required to cover the environment and learn an effective reward-maximizing policy.
For clarity, the representation-driven option discovery
framework and its different instantiations will be first pre-

Figure 1: The representation-driven option discovery cycle.
sented in the tabular case. After establishing the proper intuitions, I will discuss how one can scale such an approach to
powerful nonlinear function approximators like neural networks. Such an approach relies on recent results on how
to properly estimate the eigenfunctions of the graph Laplacian with neural networks (Gomez, Bowling, and Machado
2024), being able to achieve state-of-the-art performance in
many challenging benchmarks such as Atari 2600 games
and 3D navigation tasks (Klissarov and Machado 2023).

References
Dayan, P. 1993. Improving generalization for temporal
difference learning: The successor representation. Neural
Computation, 5(4): 613–624.
Gomez, D.; Bowling, M.; and Machado, M. C. 2024. Proper
Laplacian representation learning. In ICLR.
Klissarov, M.; and Machado, M. C. 2023. Deep Laplacianbased options for temporally-extended exploration. In
ICML.
Machado, M. C.; Barreto, A.; Precup, D.; and Bowling, M.
2023. Temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning with
the successor representation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 24(80): 1–69.
Machado, M. C.; Bellemare, M. G.; and Bowling, M. 2017.
A Laplacian framework for option discovery in reinforcement learning. In ICML.
Sutton, R. S.; Precup, D.; and Singh, S. 1999. Between
MDPs and semi-MDPs: A framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artif. Intell., 112: 181–211.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28705

