The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Experimental Design to Accelerate
Scientific Discovery and Engineering Design
Aryan Deshwal
adeshwal@umn.edu
University of Minnesota

One important class of problems that lies at the heart of
accelerating scientific discovery and engineering design is
that of adaptive experimental design where we need to select a sequence of experiments in order to achieve a goal
in a resource-efficient manner. For example, in materials/chemical design, scientists are interested in finding the best
material where making and evaluating a candidate material involves performing an expensive physical lab experiment. Similarly, in hardware design, engineers are interested
in finding high-performing design where evaluating each
candidate design involves performing a computationallyexpensive simulation to emulate the real hardware.
In this talk, we will focus on this general problem setting where the goal is to find the best design over a given
input design space in order to optimize an objective of interest guided by expensive experiments. Commonly, evaluating
each candidate input design requires performing an expensive physical lab-experiment or computational simulation.
We will first formally define the overall problem setting and
then introduce novel adaptive experiment design algorithms
to tackle this challenge.
The talk will be divided into two parts. First, we will
survey a subset of probabilistic modeling approaches that
we developed over high-dimensional combinatorial structures. We introduce a novel dictionary embeddings-based
Gaussian Process (GP) model for high-dimensional binary/categorical spaces (Deshwal et al. 2023). We will present
theoretical analysis showing that the regret bounds for GP
bandits trained on the embeddings is a function of a notion of orthogonality of the dictionary. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first result showing a direct connection between GP modeling of combinatorial structures and
compressed sensing techniques. We will also show experiments results demonstrating its performance on both synthetic and real-world domains including maximum satisfiability, communications engineering, pest contamination control, and Auto ML. Subsequently, we plan to discuss our
LADDER approach (Deshwal and Doppa 2021) that combines kernels over latent spaces of deep generative models
with expert-designed structured kernels, demonstrating improved optimization performance on challenging molecule
design benchmarks.

In the second part, we will discuss new information theoretic decision-making policies that we developed for realworld design optimization challenges. We will introduce the
output space entropy (OSE) based decision-making framework and effective instantiations (Belakaria, Deshwal, and
Doppa 2021) which are based on the principle of maximizing the information gain per unit resource cost about the
optimal Pareto front. These information-theoretic policies
significantly improved the state-of-the-art in multi-fidelity
multi-objective design optimization problems (Deshwal, Simon, and Doppa 2021).
The impact of these methodologies is evident across multiple high-impact real-world applications. We plan to cover
a representative subset of applications during the talk. For
example, in nanoporous materials discovery, our approaches
identified optimal covalent organic frameworks for methane
storage and noble gas separation, evaluating only a small
fraction of candidates. For electronic design automation, we
enabled efficient design space exploration of 3D heterogeneous manycore systems. In additive manufacturing, our AIdriven approach improved the shape precision and porosity
of 3D-printed organ models. We conclude with open challenges and future directions, including cost-aware optimization with black-box constraints, and exploration of grey-box
optimization leveraging side information from experiments.

References
Belakaria, S.; Deshwal, A.; and Doppa, J. R. 2021. Output space entropy search framework for multi-objective
Bayesian optimization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 72: 667–715.
Deshwal, A.; Ament, S.; Balandat, M.; Bakshy, E.; Doppa,
J. R.; and Eriksson, D. 2023. Bayesian Optimization over
High-Dimensional Combinatorial Spaces via Dictionarybased Embeddings. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 7021–7039. PMLR.
Deshwal, A.; and Doppa, J. 2021. Combining latent space
and structured kernels for Bayesian optimization over combinatorial spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34: 8185–8200.
Deshwal, A.; Simon, C. M.; and Doppa, J. R. 2021.
Bayesian optimization of nanoporous materials. Molecular
Systems Design & Engineering, 6(12): 1066–1086.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28709

