The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CUPCase: Clinically Uncommon Patient Cases and Diagnoses Dataset
Oriel Perets* , Ofir Ben Shoham* , Nir Grinberg, Nadav Rappoport
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Be’er Sheva, Israel
orielpe, benshoho@post.bgu.ac.il; nirgrn, nadavrap@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

LLMs. Examples of CLLMs include Meditron (Chen et al.
2023), MedLM (Singhal et al. 2023), BioMistral (Labrak
et al. 2024), and Llama3-OpenBioLLM (Ankit Pal 2024).
CLLMs have several applications, such as disease prediction
(Shoham and Rappoport 2024a), medical chatbots, healthcare education, text generation, and more (He et al. 2024).

Medical benchmark datasets significantly contribute to developing Large Language Models (LLMs) for medical knowledge extraction, diagnosis, summarization, and other uses.
Yet, current benchmarks are mainly derived from exam questions given to medical students or cases described in the medical literature, lacking the complexity of real-world patient
cases that deviate from classic textbook abstractions. These
include rare diseases, uncommon presentations of common
diseases, and unexpected treatment responses. Here, we construct Clinically Uncommon Patient Cases and Diagnosis
Dataset (CUPCase) based on 3,562 real-world case reports
from BMC, including diagnoses in open-ended textual format
and as multiple-choice options with distractors. Using this
dataset, we evaluate the ability of state-of-the-art LLMs, including both general-purpose and Clinical LLMs, to identify
and correctly diagnose a patient case, and test models’ performance when only partial information about cases is available.
Our findings show that general-purpose GPT-4o attains the
best performance in both the multiple-choice task (average
accuracy of 87.9%) and the open-ended task (BERTScore F1
of 0.764), outperforming several LLMs with a focus on the
medical domain such as Meditron-70B and MedLM-Large.
Moreover, GPT-4o was able to maintain 87% and 88% of its
performance with only the first 20% of tokens of the case presentation in multiple-choice and free text, respectively, highlighting the potential of LLMs to aid in early diagnosis in
real-world cases. CUPCase expands our ability to evaluate
LLMs for clinical decision support in an open and reproducible manner.

To evaluate the performance of LLMs and CLLMs,
medical clinical benchmarks are required. Notable examples of existing benchmarks in the medical domain include PubMedQA (Jin et al. 2019), which focuses on
question-answering over PubMed-derived questions; ClinicalBench (Liu et al. 2024), which covers tasks such as
treatment recommendation and hospitalization summarization; and BioASQ-QA, which involves biomedical questionanswering, document retrieval, text snippet extraction, and
summarization (Krithara et al. 2023). Additionally, some
benchmarks are specifically designed for medical exam
questions, such as MedQA (Jin et al. 2021) and MedMCQA,
which are multiple-choice QA datasets tailored to medical
entrance exam scenarios (Pal, Umapathi, and Sankarasubbu
2022). Given their origin, these medical benchmarks often
focus on evaluating LLMs’ knowledge based on standard
medical literature and fail to assess many skills necessary
for deployment in a realistic clinical decision-making environment (Hager et al. 2024; Mehandru et al. 2024). In particular, showed that only 5% of reviewed works used real
patient care data for LLM evaluation (Bedi et al. 2024).

Introduction

To complement these previous efforts, we propose using
published case reports as a benchmark for LLMs. Clinical case reports are detailed accounts of individual patient
cases that highlight unique or rare conditions, treatments, or
outcomes, often providing insights into new or unusual aspects of medical practice. Published in scientific journals,
they serve as valuable educational resources, contributing
to medical knowledge by documenting specific clinical scenarios that may not be covered in larger studies. Published
patient case reports offer crucial insights beyond the scope
of traditional textbooks. These reports can reveal significant
scientific observations that might be missed in clinical trials, and expand our understanding by introducing novel findings and scenarios that deviate from classical cases (Cohen
2006).

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated promising results in the medical field (Zhou et al. 2023), including
when general-purpose LLMs (such as GPT-4) are applied to
medical tasks. For example, GPT-4 showed promising performance in the United States Medical Licensing Examination (Nori et al. 2023), interpreting medical concepts (diagnoses, procedures, and drug codes) (Shoham and Rappoport
2024b), rare disease prediction (do Olmo et al. 2024), and
more.
Clinical LLMs (CLLMs) are specialized LLMs focused
on the clinical domain, as opposed to general-purpose
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28293

