The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

From PEFT to DEFT: Parameter Efficient Finetuning for Reducing Activation
Density in Transformers
Bharat Runwal1 , Tejaswini Pedapati2 , Pin-Yu Chen2
1

Independent Researcher
2
IBM Research
bharatrunwal@gmail.com, tejaswinip@us.ibm.com, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Abstract

and McCallum 2019). Some methods to achieve faster and
greener inference are by pruning the model parameters (Lee,
Ajanthan, and Torr 2019; Tanaka et al. 2020), pruning the
number of heads by analyzing the attention patterns (Behnke
and Heafield 2020; Voita et al. 2019; Michel, Levy, and Neubig 2019), distilling the larger model to a smaller model
(Sanh et al. 2019), quantizing the models to convert the
weights to a lower precision (Dettmers et al. 2022; Zadeh
et al. 2020), using mixture of experts (MOE) (Kudugunta
et al. 2021; Rajbhandari et al. 2022), etc. In contrast, this paper focuses on accelerating the model inference by increasing the activation sparsity in the model. This is achieved by
including a penalty for high activation density in the loss
function.
Recent studies (Zhang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022) have
shown that in a transformer architecture, specifically in
the intermediate outputs of MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron)
blocks with ReLU activations, only a fraction of neurons are
activated for a given input, leading to the sparse activation
maps as the output. Building upon this observation, we propose a novel density loss that encourages higher activation
sparsity in pre-trained models when adapting to downstream
tasks, effectively reducing the activation density.
Moreover, the induction of higher activation sparsity
holds promising prospects for substantial energy savings,
especially on modern hardware acceleration architectures
like ASICs (Application Specific Integrated Circuits) (Lazzaro et al. 2023), which leverage zero-skip operations. By
promoting sparsity in the activation maps of transformers,
hardware can take advantage of zero-skip operations, skipping unnecessary computations on zero-valued activations,
resulting in reduced power consumption and more efficient
model inference. This energy-efficient approach becomes
particularly advantageous for resource-constrained environments or applications with strict energy constraints.
In this work, we present Density-Efficient Fine-Tuning
(DEFT) and its variant ADA-DEFT (Adaptive-DEFT),
which induces activation sparsity using parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques. We illustrate DEFT in Figure (1a). The bar plot shows the reduction in Activation Density (%), which is defined as the number of non-zero values in the intermediate output of MLP layers in transformer
blocks averaged over the full validation set. Our proposed
DEFT significantly lowers the activation density compared

Pretrained Language Models (PLMs) have become the de
facto starting point for fine-tuning on downstream tasks.
However, as model sizes continue to increase, traditional
fine-tuning of all parameters becomes challenging. To address this, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods
have gained popularity as a means to adapt PLMs effectively.
In parallel, recent studies have revealed the presence of activation sparsity within the intermediate outputs of the multilayer perceptron (MLP) blocks in transformers. Low activation density enables efficient model inference on sparsityaware hardware. Building upon this insight, in this work, we
propose a novel density loss that encourages higher activation
sparsity (equivalently, lower activation density) in the pretrained models. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by utilizing mainstream PEFT techniques, including
QLoRA, LoRA, Adapter, and Prompt/Prefix Tuning, to facilitate efficient model adaptation across diverse downstream
tasks. Experiments show that our proposed method, DEFT
(Density-Efficient Fine-Tuning), can consistently reduce activation density by up to 44.94% on RoBERTaLarge and by
53.19% (encoder density) and 90.60% (decoder density) on
Flan-T5XXL (11B) compared to PEFT, using GLUE and QA
(SQuAD) benchmarks respectively, while maintaining competitive performance on downstream tasks. We also introduce
ADA-DEFT, an adaptive variant of our DEFT approach,
which achieves significant memory and runtime savings during inference for large models. For instance, ADA-DEFT reduces runtime by 8.75%and memory usage by 16.78% in
Flan-T5XL , and by 2.79% and 2.54% respectively in FlanT5XXL . Additionally, we showcase that DEFT works complementarily with quantized and pruned models.

Code — https://github.com/IBM/DEFT

Introduction
With the advent of pre-trained large language models
(LLMs) (Devlin et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2019; Raffel et al.
2020), fine-tuning (Howard and Ruder 2018) these models
to adapt to a task has become prevalent. However, training
these models and performing inference on them requires a
significant amount of time, energy, and memory, thereby resulting in an enormous carbon footprint (Strubell, Ganesh,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20218

