The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

V ERSE: Verification-based Self-Play for Code Instructions
Hao Jiang1 , Qi Liu1, 2 * , Rui Li1 , Yuze Zhao1 , Yixiao Ma1 ,
Shengyu Ye1 , Junyu Lu1, 2 , Yu Su2, 3
1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Normal University
{jianghao0728, ruili2000, yuzezhao, mayx, ysy007, lujunyu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn, yusu@hfnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Instruction-tuned Code Large Language Models (Code LLMs)
have excelled in diverse code-related tasks, such as program
synthesis, automated program repair, and code explanation.
To collect training datasets for instruction-tuning, a popular
method involves having models autonomously generate instructions and corresponding responses. However, the direct
generation of responses does not ensure functional correctness, a crucial requirement for generating responses to code
instructions. To overcome this, we present Verification-Based
Self-Play (V ERSE), aiming to enhance model proficiency in
generating correct responses. V ERSE establishes a robust verification framework that covers various code instructions. Employing V ERSE, Code LLMs engage in self-play to generate
instructions and corresponding verifications. They evaluate execution results and self-consistency as verification outcomes,
using them as scores to rank generated data for self-training.
Experiments show that V ERSE improves multiple base Code
LLMs (average 7.6%) across various languages and tasks on
many benchmarks, affirming its effectiveness.

void sign(string n){
std::cout << n
Correct

Response: The fixed version:
void sign(
const std::string& n){
std::cout << n;}

Code
LLMs

str = "Stack".split('').
reverse().join(''); Incorrect

Response: The code will
output the reverse of the word
"Stack": tackS.

Figure 1: Instructions and responses created by Code LLMs.

Code — https://github.com/TechxGenus/VERSE

1

Instruction: Please tell me
what will be the output of the
JavaScript code?

Instruction: Repair the
following C++ code.

Introduction

In the realm of Large Language Models (LLMs), code serves
as a pivotal link between human understanding and machine
execution. It acts as a fundamental element by transforming
human instructions into executable actions, thereby constructing agents (Hong et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024a; Liu et al. 2024).
To augment the code generation capabilities of LLMs, Code
LLMs, trained on a vast corpus of code, have emerged as
a focal point (Li et al. 2022; Johnson, Tarlow, and Walder
2023; Khakhar, Mell, and Bastani 2023; Li et al. 2024b).
Recently, researchers are primarily focusing on instructiontuning (Chung et al. 2022; Ouyang et al. 2022; Longpre et al.
2023) for Code LLMs (Wang et al. 2023b; Muennighoff et al.
2023; Luo et al. 2023). This technique utilizes code-related
instructions and their corresponding responses in supervised
training, enhancing the model’s understanding and generalization abilities across various code downstream tasks, such
as program synthesis (Young, Bastani, and Naik 2019), and
code explanation (Mahbub, Shuvo, and Rahman 2022).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24276

To collect training data for instruction-tuning, considering
factors such as the cost and copyright issues of using data
written by humans, a prevalent approach is to employ models
to autonomously generate instructions and responses (Wang
et al. 2023a; Taori et al. 2023). However, code instructions
demanding strict adherence to the functional correctness of
responses—a facet often overlooked in previous research.
As illustrated in Figure 1, unverified and unexecuted data
generated by LLMs lacks guaranteed quality and may contain
errors. A natural idea to solve it is to have Code LLMs verify
the functional correctness of self-generated responses with
the executable nature of code. There have been some attempts
at this in Python code generation tasks (Haluptzok, Bowers,
and Kalai 2023; Rozière et al. 2023), but it has not been
explored for general code instructions. In this paper, we focus
on how Code LLMs can self-improve through verification
for code instructions.
However, direct verification of responses to code instructions presents challenges. On the one hand, responses to
code instructions have different modals. For example, generating code summaries or predicting outputs for programs
differs from program synthesis and repair, as they may not
produce executable code, but generate natural language text
that cannot be executed directly instead. This introduces new
difficulties to self-verification. On the other hand, both the
responses and verification schemes are not guaranteed to
be entirely correct. Some responses that are deemed correct
under one set of verification schemes may be considered incorrect under another set of schemes. Reaching a consensus
on the optimal response is not easy.
To address these challenges, in this paper, we present
V ERSE, an innovative approach that leverages verificationbased self-play with execution to improve responses to code
instructions for Code LLMs. We initiate the process by creat-

