The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Production Functions for Supply Chains with Graph Neural Networks
Serina Chang1 , Zhiyin Lin1 , Benjamin Yan1 , Swapnil Bembde2 , Qi Xiu2 , Chi Heem Wong1,2 ,
Yu Qin2,3 , Frank Kloster2 , Xi Luo2 , Raj Palleti1,2 , Jure Leskovec1
1

Stanford University, Department of Computer Science
2
Hitachi America, Ltd.
3
Tulane University

Abstract

static GNNs for supply chains (Aziz et al. 2021; Kosasih
and Brintrup 2021; Wasi, Islam, and Akib 2024), but these
static models miss crucial dynamic aspects of supply chains,
such as the propagation of shocks. Thus, there is a need to
develop temporal GNNs that can capture the unique dynamics and mechanisms of supply chain graphs.
One key feature of these graphs is that they are governed by underlying production functions: firms receive input products (e.g., wheels) from other firms, internally transform those inputs into outputs (e.g., cars) via production
functions, then sell those output products to other firms or
consumers (Carvalho and Tahbaz-Salehi 2019). These production functions dictate which firms are connected to each
other, as well as the timing of transactions across the network. For example, if a firm experiences a shortage in an
input, its production of outputs that rely on that input will
be disrupted, but it can continue to produce other outputs
for some time. However, existing temporal GNNs (Huang
et al. 2023) are not designed to learn these hidden production functions or to incorporate them into link prediction.
The present work. Here, we are among the first to develop temporal GNNs for supply chains, demonstrating their
ability to learn rich, dynamic representations of firms and
products. Furthermore, by introducing supply chains to temporal GNNs, we identify a challenging setting unexplored
by prior models: temporal graphs governed by production functions, which we term temporal production graphs
(TPGs). Beyond supply chains, TPGs also appear in biological domains, such as enzymes producing metabolites
within metabolic pathways, or in organizations, where teams
rely on inputs from other teams to produce their outputs.
TPGs introduce new challenges compared to other temporal
graphs, such as the need to infer production functions. Furthermore, even standard tasks, like link prediction, may be
complicated under TPGs. For example, while standard temporal GNNs might capture disruptions generally propagating across connected firms, they will miss the specific connections between each firm’s inputs and outputs and, under
a shortage of inputs, not be able to precisely predict which
outputs will be affected.
Since existing GNNs cannot handle TPGs, we introduce
a new class of GNNs designed for TPGs, focusing on two
objectives: (1) learning the graph’s production functions,
(2) predicting its future edges. Prior temporal GNNs have

The global economy relies on the flow of goods over supply chain networks, with nodes as firms and edges as transactions between firms. While we may observe these external
transactions, they are governed by unseen production functions, which determine how firms internally transform the input products they receive into output products that they sell.
In this setting, it can be extremely valuable to infer these production functions, to improve supply chain visibility and to
forecast future transactions more accurately. However, existing graph neural networks (GNNs) cannot capture these hidden relationships between nodes’ inputs and outputs. Here,
we introduce a new class of models for this setting by combining temporal GNNs with a novel inventory module, which
learns production functions via attention weights and a special loss function. We evaluate our models extensively on real
supply chains data and data generated from our new opensource simulator, SupplySim. Our models successfully infer production functions, outperforming the strongest baseline by 6%–50% (across datasets), and forecast future transactions, outperforming the strongest baseline by 11%–62%.

Code — https://github.com/snap-stanford/supply-chains
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2407.18772

1

Introduction

Supply chains form the backbone of the global economy
and disruptions can have enormous consequences, costing
trillions of dollars (Baumgartner, Malik, and Padhi 2020)
and risking national security (The White House 2021). Thus,
modeling supply chains and how they evolve, especially under shocks, is essential. Prior models of supply chains have
been mainly mechanistic and struggle to fit even highly aggregated measures, such as country-level production (Inoue
and Todo 2019). As a result, recent literature has called
for integration of machine learning (ML) into supply chain
modeling (Baryannis, Dani, and Antoniou 2019; Brintrup
et al. 2020; Younis, Sundarakani, and Alsharairi 2022).
Graph neural networks (GNNs) serve as a particularly
promising ML methodology, as supply chains are naturally represented as graphs, with nodes as firms and edges
as transactions between firms. A few works have explored
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27878

