The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Block-Based Multi-Scale Image Rescaling
Jian Li and Siwang Zhou*
Hunan University, China
{lijian543, swzhou}@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image rescaling (IR) seeks to determine the optimal lowresolution (LR) representation of a high-resolution (HR) image to reconstruct a high-quality super-resolution (SR) image.
Typically, HR images with resolutions exceeding 2K possess
rich information that is unevenly distributed across the image. Traditional image rescaling methods often fall short because they focus solely on the overall scaling rate, ignoring
the varying amounts of information in different parts of the
image. To address this limitation, we propose a Block-Based
Multi-Scale Image Rescaling Framework (BBMR), tailored
for IR tasks involving HR images of 2K resolution and higher.
BBMR consists of two main components: the Downscaling
Module and the Upscaling Module. In the Downscaling Module, the HR image is segmented into sub-blocks of equal size,
with each sub-block receiving a dynamically allocated scaling rate while maintaining a constant overall scaling rate.
For the Upscaling Module, we introduce the Joint SuperResolution method (JointSR), which performs SR on these
sub-blocks with varying scaling rates and effectively eliminates blocking artifacts. Experimental results demonstrate
that BBMR significantly enhances the SR image quality on
the of 2K and 4K test dataset compared to initial network image rescaling methods.

Introduction
With the growing demand in practical applications, the
technology of image rescaling (IR) has rapidly advanced.
Specifically, it can significantly optimize storage utilization
(Zhang and Wu 2023) and minimize the bandwidth required
for images and videos transmission (Yeo et al. 2018, 2020;
Yu et al. 2023). The availability of high-resolution displays
and advancements in camera equipment have led to the
widespread usage of images and videos with 2K resolution
or higher. However, as image resolution increases, there is
a significant exponential growth in the demand for storage
space and network transmission bandwidth. Therefore, the
development of IR techniques is crucial for effectively storing and transmitting high-resolution images and videos.
Typically, IR methods (Sun and Chen 2020; Xu et al.
2023; Xiao et al. 2023) demonstrate superior superresolution (SR) image reconstruction performance com-

Figure 1: Comparison of traditional image rescaling methods (left) and our block-based multi-scale image rescaling
framework (right) at ×4 scaling rate. Both methods use bicubic interpolation downscaling and OmniSR model upscaling. The improvement in the image quality of the red box is
due to the smaller scaling rate.

pared to image super-resolution models (Wang et al. 2023;
Chen et al. 2023a,b) trained with bicubic downscaling. This
superiority is attributed to IR’s focus on designing wellcrafted downscaling methods, which produce low-resolution
(LR) images more suitable for SR reconstruction. In practice, from a holistic perspective, these methods emphasize
overall image scaling. However, (Kong et al. 2021) suggests
that the difficulty of super-resolution varies across different regions of an image, indicating that different parts contain varying amounts of information. Therefore, considering

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4761

