The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RESQUE: Quantifying Estimator to Task and Distribution Shift for
Sustainable Model Reusability
Vishwesh Sangarya and Jung-Eun Kim*
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University

Abstract

of primary importance with the overwhelmingly increasing deployments of AI models in the current era, which in
turn has given rise to the socially important field of Green
AI (Schwartz et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2022; Verdecchia, Sallou, and Cruz 2023; Salehi and Schmeink 2024). It is not
uncommon for models to have several billion parameters
(Menghani 2023), and as these models grow in complexity, their computational demands also increase. With the increased computational requirements, there is an accompanying need for resources required to perform the computation and byproducts of the computation to deal with. These
demands place significant strain on available resources and
highlight the importance of addressing both the direct and
indirect impacts of AI model use. Consequently, there exists a need for sustainable and efficient development of AI
models so as to reduce the environmental impact, especially when looking at the carbon footprint (Ali et al. 2023;
Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum 2019; Bannour et al. 2021;
Wu et al. 2024) and energy consumption (Dodge et al. 2022;
Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum 2019; Ali et al. 2023; Wu
et al. 2024) involved in the research, evolution, and utilization of AI models.

As a strategy for sustainability of deep learning, reusing an
existing model by retraining it rather than training a new
model from scratch is critical. In this paper, we propose REpresentation Shift QUantifying Estimator (RESQUE), a predictive quantifier to estimate the retraining cost of a model
to distributional shifts or change of tasks. It provides a single
concise index for an estimate of resources required for retraining the model. Through extensive experiments, we show
that RESQUE has a strong correlation with various retraining
measures. Our results validate that RESQUE is an effective
indicator in terms of epochs, gradient norms, changes of parameter magnitude, energy, and carbon emissions. The measures align well with RESQUE for new tasks, multiple noise
types, and varying noise intensities. As a result, RESQUE enables users to make informed decisions for retraining to different tasks/distribution shifts and determine the most costeffective and sustainable option, allowing for the reuse of a
model with a much smaller footprint in the environment.

Introduction
With the rapid and ever increasing use of deep learning models in everyday applications, a crucial aspect that is often
overlooked is the adaptation of a model to changes and new
data. Models need to be adaptive and capable of learning
from these new inputs. This dynamic adaptation is essential for maintaining model performance and relevance over
time. Particularly, the continuous series of changes a model
may need to undergo subject to distributional shifts, or need
for primary task updates. For example, new data with better relevant features may be introduced, the environment of
deployment may undergo a change leading to distribution
shift of the input data, or the prediction classes and task
may change. Retraining helps the model remain effective
with satisfactory performance for the desired deployed application while shortening the adaptation time. While new
models can be developed from scratch when the data undergoes a distribution shift or the task changes, leveraging existing learned features is a resource-efficient option. Reusing
models not only saves time and resources but also aligns
with the principles of sustainable AI development. This is

With the goal of reusing models and reducing computation, energy consumption, and carbon emissions, we
propose a novel estimating index called the REpresentation Shift QUantifying Estimator (RESQUE). This estimator provides a single index to predict the cost of retraining
a model for new distributions or tasks before any computation is performed. RESQUE enables deep learning practitioners and researchers to quickly estimate the costs associated with adapting a model, offering valuable insights for
informed decision-making. This quantifiable estimator helps
them achieve sustainability goals when using and developing the models. For the context of distribution shifts, the estimator referred to as RESQUEdist , measures the shift in the
model’s representation outputs between the original and new
distribution. To obtain RESQUEdist , the input data is propagated through the model just once with no backward propagation or computation. For the case of a new target task, the
estimator, specifically termed as RESQUEtask , quantifies the
separation in class decision boundary of the new target task
in the representation space, using the original task model.
RESQUE obtained after the forward pass serves as an index
to estimate the resources required to adapt the model to a

* Correspondence.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20264

