The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semi-supervised 3D Semantic Scene Completion
with 2D Vision Foundation Model Guidance
Duc-Hai Pham1 , Duc-Dung Nguyen2 , Anh Pham2 , Tuan Ho1 , Phong Nguyen1 ,
Khoi Nguyen1 , Rang Nguyen1
1
VinAI Research, Vietnam
AITech Lab., Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology, VNU-HCM, Vietnam
{v.haipd13, v.tuanhl25, v.phongnh31, v.khoindm, v.rangnhm}@vinai.io, {nddung, anhpham}@hcmut.edu.vn
2

Abstract
Accurate prediction of 3D semantic occupancy from 2D visual images is crucial for enabling autonomous agents to
understand their surroundings for planning and navigation.
State-of-the-art methods typically rely on fully supervised approaches, requiring large labeled datasets obtained through
expensive LiDAR sensors and meticulous voxel-wise annotation by human experts. The resource-intensive nature of
this annotation process significantly limits the scalability and
application of these methods. To address this challenge, we
propose a novel semi-supervised framework that reduces reliance on densely annotated data. Our approach leverages 2D
foundation models to extract essential 3D scene geometry
and semantic cues, enabling a more efficient training process.
The proposed framework has two key advantages: (1) Generalizability, as it is compatible with various 3D semantic
scene completion methods, including 2D-3D lifting and 3D2D transformer techniques; and (2) Effectiveness, as demonstrated by experiments on the SemanticKITTI and NYUv2
datasets, where our method achieves up to 85% of the fully
supervised performance using only 10% of the labeled data.
This approach not only reduces the cost of data annotation
but also highlights its potential for broader adoption in visionbased systems for 3D semantic occupancy prediction.

Input Image

Self-Occ
VFG-SSC - Ours
(7.5 mIoU, 32.4 IoU) (11.7 mIoU, 35.8 IoU)

Ground Truth

Self Training
Mean Teacher
(10.5 mIoU, 33.9 IoU) (10.5 mIoU, 33.3 IoU)

Figure 1: Visual comparison on SemanticKITTI: VFGSSC surparses self-supervised methods like SelfOcc by
4% mIoU and outperforms other semi-supervised methods:
Self-Training and Mean Teacher by 1.5% mIoU.

of many SSC systems. An alternative approach to reduce
the annotation costs is self-supervised learning (Cao and
de Charette 2023; Huang et al. 2023a; Zhang et al. 2023a),
which only requires unlabeled images for training. However,
these methods often produce suboptimal results, with a significant performance gap compared to fully supervised approaches.
To address these limitations, this paper introduces the
problem of semi-supervised vision-based 3D semantic scene
completion (Semi-SSC). In this setup, a small percentage
of images are labeled with 3D semantic occupancy, while
the majority remain unlabeled. To overcome the challenge
of limited labeled data, semi-supervised learning approaches
like Self-Training (Lee et al. 2013) and Mean-Teacher (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017) can be employed. In Self-Training
(ST), a fully supervised SSC network first learns from labeled data and then predicts pseudo-labels for unlabeled
data. These pseudo-labels are used to retrain the network,
leveraging the unlabeled data. In contrast, the Mean-Teacher
(MT) approach involves a more stable Teacher network, derived from the student network’s Exponential Moving Average (EMA), which predicts pseudo-labels for unlabeled images. These pseudo-labels are combined with labeled data
to continually train the student network. While there are ad-

Introduction
Vision-based 3D semantic scene completion (SSC) is a crucial vision task with numerous applications in both indoor
and outdoor scenarios (Song et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018;
Roldao, de Charette, and Verroust-Blondet 2020; Wu et al.
2020; Li et al. 2020; Dourado et al. 2021; Huang et al.
2023b; Cao and de Charette 2022; Tong et al. 2023; Yao
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023; Zhang, Zhu, and Du 2023). Given
an input image, the goal is to predict a complete 3D voxel
representation of volumetric occupancy and semantic labels
for a scene. This task is challenging due to the absence of 3D
information in 2D images. Most SSC methods (Song et al.
2017; Li et al. 2023; Zhang, Zhu, and Du 2023) address this
challenge through fully supervised learning, which relies on
dense 3D SSC annotations. However, obtaining these annotations requires deploying vehicles equipped with LiDAR
sensors and performing meticulous voxel-level human labeling, which severely limits the scalability and deployment
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6514

