The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Knowledge in Superposition: Unveiling the Failures of Lifelong Knowledge
Editing for Large Language Models
Chenhui Hu1,2 , Pengfei Cao1,2 , Yubo Chen1,2 , Kang Liu1,2 * , Jun Zhao1,2
1

The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
huchenhui2024@ia.ac.cn, {pengfei.cao, yubo.chen, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
(a) Structure of knowledge editing. (e) Superposition determines interference.
Knowledge Editing Methods
(d) Superposition Term
ROME MEMIT PMET WilKE ...

Abstract
Knowledge editing aims to update outdated or incorrect
knowledge in large language models (LLMs). However, current knowledge editing methods have limited scalability for
lifelong editing. This study explores the fundamental reason
why knowledge editing fails in lifelong editing. We begin
with the closed-form solution derived from linear associative
memory, which underpins state-of-the-art knowledge editing
methods. We extend the solution from single editing to lifelong editing, and through rigorous mathematical derivation,
identify an interference term in the final solution, suggesting that editing knowledge may impact irrelevant knowledge.
Further analysis of the interference term reveals a close relationship with superposition between knowledge representations. When knowledge superposition does not exist in language models, the interference term vanishes, allowing for
lossless knowledge editing. Experiments across numerous
language models reveal that knowledge superposition is universal, exhibiting high kurtosis, zero mean, and heavy-tailed
distributions with clear scaling laws. Ultimately, by combining theory and experiments, we demonstrate that knowledge superposition is the fundamental reason for the failure of lifelong editing. Moreover, this is the first study to
investigate knowledge editing from the perspective of superposition and provides a comprehensive observation of superposition across numerous real-world language models.

Different Implementations ...
Closed-Form Solution

(c) Interference Term
Expanding Solution

(b) Expanding to Lifelong Editing.

Figure 1: Illustration of our work. (a) Current knowledge
editing methods use a unified closed-form solution, which
means adding Λ(C −1 ke )T to parameters matrix W to
achieve knowledge updating. (b) Extend the closed-form solution to lifelong editing, where Wn represents parameters
matrix after the n-th edit. (c) Interference term accumulating
sufficiently will cause language models to forget knowledge.
(d) Superposition term, where p(·, ·) denotes the degree of
superposition between two knowledge representations. (e)
Superposition term actually determines interference term.

cle. For example, using the representative editing methods
ROME (Meng et al. 2022a) or MEMIT (Meng et al. 2022b)
for lifelong editing results in severe performance degradation after dozens or hundreds of editing steps, rendering the
edited models unusable (Hu et al. 2024). However, the underlying reason has been rarely explored.
In this paper, we explore the fundamental reason why
knowledge editing fails in lifelong editing. We start from
the closed-form solution for knowledge editing derived by
(Meng et al. 2022a) through linear associative memory,
which is the foundation of the state-of-the-art knowledge
editing methods (Figure 1a), including ROME (Meng et al.
2022a), MEMIT (Meng et al. 2022b), PMET (Li et al. 2023),
WilKE (Hu et al. 2024) and so on. Specifically, we extend
the closed-form solution from single editing to lifelong editing (Figure 1b). Our rigorous mathematical derivation reveals that the extended solution introduces an interference
term (Figure 1c), which, when accumulated sufficiently,
leads language models to forgetting the knowledge, including original knowledge and previously edited knowledge.
Further analysis of the interference term reveals a close
relationship with superposition: if superposition does not exist in language models, the superposition term (Figure 1d)

Introduction
In large language models (LLMs), outdated or incorrect
knowledge may persist (Radford et al. 2019; Wang and
Komatsuzaki 2022; Biderman et al. 2023; Touvron et al.
2023). However, retraining these models to update knowledge incurs prohibitively high costs. To address this problem, knowledge editing (De Cao et al. 2021; Mitchell et al.
2021) is introduced to edit specific knowledge by directly
updating the internal parameters of language models.
Despite achieving significant progress in single editing,
where knowledge is edited only once, knowledge editing
should be continuous in fact. However, current methods
struggle with scalability for lifelong editing (Huang et al.
2023), where continuous editing and performance monitoring are required throughout the language models’ lifecy* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24086

