The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Audio-Visual Segmentation with Modality Alignment
Swapnil Bhosale1 , Haosen Yang1 , Diptesh Kanojia1 , Jiankang Deng2 , Xiatian Zhu1
1

2

University of Surrey, UK
Imperial College London, UK

Abstract
Audio-Visual Segmentation (AVS) aims to identify, at the
pixel level, the object in a visual scene that produces a
given sound. Current AVS methods rely on costly finegrained annotations of mask-audio pairs, making them impractical for scalability. To address this, we propose the
Modality Correspondence Alignment (MoCA) framework,
which seamlessly integrates off-the-shelf foundation models
like DINO, SAM, and ImageBind. Our approach leverages
existing knowledge within these models and optimizes their
joint usage for multimodal associations. Our approach relies
on estimating positive and negative image pairs in the feature space. For pixel-level association, we introduce an audiovisual adapter and a novel pixel matching aggregation strategy within the image-level contrastive learning framework.
This allows for a flexible connection between object appearance and audio signal at the pixel level, with tolerance to
imaging variations such as translation and rotation. Extensive experiments on the AVSBench (single and multi-object
splits) and AVSS datasets demonstrate that MoCA outperforms unsupervised baseline approaches and some supervised
counterparts, particularly in complex scenarios with multiple
auditory objects. In terms of mIoU, MoCA achieves a substantial improvement over baselines in both the AVSBench
(S4: +17.24%; MS3: +67.64%) and AVSS (+19.23%) audiovisual segmentation challenges.

Figure 1: Emergence of coarse and noisy audio-pixel association in ImageBind’s (Girdhar et al. 2023) multimodal
feature space. (a) Raw audio waveform, (b) input RGB, (c)
using frozen ImageBind features, (d) MoCA (ours) – generating finer masks and particularly only in the presence of
sounding objects (see the 2nd frame, MoCA generates no
mask due to silent audio).

unsupervised AVS approach, eliminating the need for exhaustive pixel annotation. This choice is influenced by notable advancements in purpose-generic image-level audiovisual representation learning, as demonstrated by ImageBind (Girdhar et al. 2023). Empirically, we observe the
emergence of coarse cross-modal associations between audio and image pixels, as depicted in Figure 1. However, despite this progress, the acquired knowledge remains insufficient for achieving an extremely precise unsupervised solution.
To address the mentioned limitation, we propose
Modality Correspondence Alignment (MoCA), an unsupervised audio-visual segmentation framework that efficiently
integrates off-the-shelf foundation models using a minimal
number of learnable parameters. Our approach initiates with
unsupervised pairing of training images, leveraging imagelevel visual features such as those provided by DINO (Caron
et al. 2021). This process augments the original audioimage pairing relationships by introducing additional positive and negative pairs at a coarse image level, thereby estab-

Introduction
Audio-visual segmentation (AVS) accurately identifies
pixel-level objects producing specific sounds in videos.
Previous studies focused on audio-visual signal intersection using self-supervised learning methods (Afouras et al.
2020; Rouditchenko et al. 2019), but face limitations in
real-world applications like video editing and robotics. Supervised learning with pixel-level annotated video-audio
pairs is intuitive (Zhou et al. 2022), but scaling annotation is challenging, as object segmentation levies significantly higher cognitive load, and effort, than classifying or
bounding boxes (Zlateski et al. 2018). In complex backgrounds, ground-truth segmentation labels may overlap or
be ill-defined, requiring fine-grained boundaries for differentiation among surrounding objects. In this work, we address this challenge with a more pragmatic and scalable
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15567

