The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Trustable SHAP Scores
Olivier Létoffé1 , Xuanxiang Huang2 , Joao Marques-Silva3
1
Univ. Toulouse, France
CNRS@CREATE, Singapore
3
ICREA, Univ. Lleida, Spain
olivier.letoffe@orange.fr, xuanxiang.huang@cnrsatcreate.sg, jpms@icrea.cat
2

Abstract

influence in a prediction can be assigned more importance
than features having the most influence in the prediction. This
recent evidence should be perceived as far more problematic, because it reveals apparent limitations with the theoretical foundations of SHAP scores, and not with concrete
implementations. Nevertheless, Shapley values are of fundamental importance, not only in game theory (Chalkiadakis,
Elkind, and Wooldridge 2012), but also in many other domains, namely because of their intrinsic properties (Shapley
1953). As a result, a natural question is whether the definitions of Shapley values in XAI can be changed, so as to
avoid situations where the computed feature importance is
problematic.

SHAP scores represent the proposed use of the well-known
Shapley values in eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI).
Recent work has shown that the exact computation of SHAP
scores can produce unsatisfactory results. Concretely, for some
ML models, SHAP scores will mislead with respect to relative feature influence. To address these limitations, recently
proposed alternatives exploit different axiomatic aggregations,
all of which are defined in terms of abductive explanations.
However, the proposed axiomatic aggregations are not Shapley values. This paper investigates how SHAP scores can be
modified so as to extend axiomatic aggregations to the case
of Shapley values in XAI. More importantly, the proposed
new definition of SHAP scores avoids all the known cases
where unsatisfactory results have been identified. The paper
also characterizes the complexity of computing the novel definition of SHAP scores, highlighting families of classifiers for
which computing these scores is tractable. Furthermore, the
paper proposes modifications to the existing implementations
of SHAP scores. These modifications eliminate some of the
known limitations of SHAP scores, and have negligible impact
in terms of performance.

Introduction
Shapley values for eXplainable AI (XAI), i.e. SHAP
scores (Lundberg and Lee 2017), are arguably among the
most widely used explainability methods that target the attribution of (relative) feature importance, as exemplified by
the success of the tool SHAP (Molnar 2023; Mishra 2023).1
Despite the massive popularity of SHAP scores, some works
have identified limitations with their use (Young et al. 2019;
Kumar et al. 2020; Sundararajan and Najmi 2020; Merrick
and Taly 2020; Fryer, Strümke, and Nguyen 2021; Yan and
Procaccia 2021; Mothilal et al. 2021; Afchar, Guigue, and
Hennequin 2021; Watson et al. 2021; Kumar et al. 2021;
Campbell et al. 2022). However, most of these limitations
can be attributed to the results obtained with existing tools,
and not necessarily with the theoretical foundations of SHAP
scores. More recent work (Huang and Marques-Silva 2023;
Huang and Marques-Silva 2024) uncovered examples of classifiers where exact SHAP scores assign manifestly unsatisfactory importance to features. Namely, features having no

Contributions. This paper argues that the key issue with
SHAP scores is not the use of Shapley values in explainability per se, and shows that the identified shortcomings of
SHAP scores can be solely attributed to the characteristic
functions used in earlier works (Strumbelj and Kononenko
2010, 2014; Lundberg and Lee 2017; Janzing, Minorics, and
Blöbaum 2020; Sundararajan and Najmi 2020; Arenas et al.
2021; Van den Broeck et al. 2021, 2022; Arenas et al. 2023).
As noted in the recent past (Janzing, Minorics, and Blöbaum
2020; Sundararajan and Najmi 2020), by changing the characteristic function, one is able to produce different sets of
SHAP scores.2 Motivated by these observations, the paper
outlines fundamental properties that characteristic functions
ought to exhibit in the context of XAI. Furthermore, the paper
proposes several novel characteristic functions, which either
respect some or all of the identified properties. In addition,
the paper analyzes the impact of the novel characteristic functions on the computational complexity of computing SHAP
scores, by building on recent work on the same topic (Van
den Broeck et al. 2021; Arenas et al. 2021; Van den Broeck
et al. 2022; Arenas et al. 2023). An indirect consequence of
our work is that corrected SHAP scores can be safely used for
feature attribution in XAI, while offering strong guarantees
regarding known shortcomings. Furthermore, the results in
the paper apply independently of the machine learning (ML)
model considered.
2

Unfortunately, this paper argues that past alternative proposals
of characteristic functions (Janzing, Minorics, and Blöbaum 2020;
Sundararajan and Najmi 2020) also exhibit critical limitations.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See https://github.com/shap/shap.

18198

