The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Complex-Cycle-Consistent Diffusion Model for Monaural Speech Enhancement
Yi Li1 , Yang Sun2 , Plamen P Angelov1
1

School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, UK
2
Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, UK

Abstract

Firstly, these methods typically operate in the timefrequency (T-F) domain, where they estimate the magnitude
response while leaving the phase response unaltered, as seen
in (Wang, Narayanan, and Wang 2014; Li et al. 2021b).
However, Wang et al. introduced a novel approach by
proposing a complex ideal ratio mask that allows for simultaneous enhancement of both magnitude and phase spectra,
operating in the complex domain (Williamson, Wang, and
Wang 2016). Recent studies, such as (Welker, Richter, and
Gerkmann 2022a), have widely adopted complex spectra in
monaural speech enhancement due to their efficient performance improvement through the utilization of phase information from speech signals. Nevertheless, in most cases,
magnitude and phase spectra are simultaneously enhanced
by one or two neural networks to generate the final estimated
speech spectra, neglecting the intrinsic relationship between
magnitude and phase, which has been shown to be beneficial
for further improving speech enhancement performance, as
indicated in (Shimauchlt et al. 2017).
Secondly, diffusion models for speech enhancement (Hu
et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2022) exploit Gaussian noise to learn
denoising noisy speech based on maximum entropy and statistical inference. However, some recent diffusion-based image denoising techniques replace the Gaussian noise to realworld noise. Wu et al. synthesise realistic noise with the environmental settings to better model noise distribution complexity (Wu et al. 2023). The experiments prove that using real-world noise can boost the performance rather than
Gaussian noise. Nevertheless, there has been a lack of recent research attempting to substitute real-world noise for
Gaussian noise in the filed of speech enhancement. This has
sparked our interest in exploring the problem.
We present three contributions to address these limitations in this paper. Firstly, we propose a novel speech enhancement diffusion model (SEDM). In contrast to conventional diffusion model-based speech enhancement methods
(Lu, Tsao, and Watanabe 2021), we replace the Gaussian
noise in the forward process with real-world noise. In each
embedding, a noise clip is randomly selected from different
noise types, e.g., dwashing, dliving, and pstation (Thiemann, Ito, and Vincent 2013). Secondly, we propose a noiseaware reverse process that facilitates learning to generate
both clean speech and noise spectra. Thirdly, we investigate
the speech enhancement performance with independent net-

In this paper, we present a novel diffusion model-based
monaural speech enhancement method. Our approach incorporates the separate estimation of speech spectra’s magnitude and phase in two diffusion networks. Throughout the
diffusion process, noise clips from real-world noise interferences are added gradually to the clean speech spectra
and a noise-aware reverse process is proposed to learn how
to generate both clean speech spectra and noise spectra.
Furthermore, to fully leverage the intrinsic relationship between magnitude and phase, we introduce a complex-cycleconsistent (CCC) mechanism that uses the estimated magnitude to map the phase, and vice versa. We implement this algorithm within a phase-aware speech enhancement diffusion
model (SEDM). We conduct extensive experiments on public datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
highlighting the significant benefits of exploiting the intrinsic relationship between phase and magnitude information to
enhance speech. The comparison to conventional diffusion
models demonstrates the superiority of SEDM.

Introduction
In real-world acoustic environments, speech signals are inevitably contaminated by background noise, which can significantly deteriorate speech quality and intelligibility. The
primary goal of speech enhancement techniques is to separate the target speech signal from the background noise.
Consequently, speech enhancement plays a pivotal role in
various speech processing systems, including assisted living,
teleconferencing, and automatic speech recognition (ASR)
(Zhu et al. 2023; Yang, Pandey, and Wang 2023). Monaural
speech enhancement presents one of the most challenging
scenarios in this field, as it deals with a single channel.
Traditional deep learning-based methods for solving the
monaural speech enhancement problem have been extensively studied. Recently, the diffusion model has not only
achieved significant success in the field of image processing
(Rahman, J. M. J. Valanarasu, and Patel 2023; Croitoru et al.
2023) but has also been introduced into the field of speech
enhancement with excellent results (Hu et al. 2023; Lu et al.
2022). However, these methods have two limitations.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18557

