The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VarCMP: Adapting Cross-Modal Pre-Training Models
for Video Anomaly Retrieval
Peng Wu1 , Wanshun Su1 , Xiangteng He2 , Peng Wang1 * , Yanning Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
{xdwupeng, suws0616, hexiangteng}@gmail.com, {peng.wang, ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

However, events in videos typically capture evolving actions
and interactions among entities over time, simply using single labels in VAD may be insufficient to comprehensively
elucidate these sequential occurrences. In contrast, video
anomaly retrieval (VAR), through detailed textual descriptions or synchronized audio, provides a more thorough account of the events transpiring within the video. Therefore,
it also plays a crucial role in intelligent video analysis, such
as, sifting through evidence of dangerous occurrence. Additionally, unlike traditional video retrieval, which targets
short and trimmed clips, VAR is designed to handle long and
untrimmed videos. It aims to retrieve both normal and abnormal videos, where anomalies may only appear in certain
segments of untrimmed videos, presenting novel challenges.
ALAN (Wu et al. 2024a) is the first work for VAR, which
utilizes anomaly-guided sampling to capture local anomalous segments and learn cross-modal fine-grained associations through video-prompt-based masked phrase modeling.
However, this approach fails to achieve interaction at even
finer granularity between visual and text features, as well
as audio features. Furthermore, ALAN does not leverage the
robust cross-modal semantic matching capabilities of the latest CMP models, leaving room for further improvement.
Recent advancements have witnessed the widespread
adoption of CMP models, such as CLIP (Radford et al.
2021) and CLAP (Wu et al. 2023), in cross-modal retrieval
tasks. CLIP4Clip (Luo et al. 2022) is a pioneering approach
that integrated CLIP into video-text retrieval (VTR), which
introduces a temporal fusion module designed to aggregate
features across different video frames. This facilitates intermodal alignment between video and text features, thereby
enhancing the retrieval capability. However, this work directly aligns the fused temporal sequences of video and text
features, which limits its ability to capture fine-grained interactions. Building upon the success of CLIP4Clip, subsequent research endeavors delve further into exploring alignment strategies that progress from coarse to fine granularity (Ma et al. 2022; Gorti et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023;
Yang et al. 2024). These methods aim to more accurately
capture the intricate relationships between videos and their
textual counterparts. On the other hand, CLAP has also
made notable progress in audio-text retrieval by employing
a contrastive learning mechanism to jointly train on largescale audio-text pairs. Clearly, CMP models has achieved

Video anomaly retrieval (VAR) aims to retrieve pertinent
abnormal or normal videos from collections of untrimmed
and long videos through cross-modal requires such as textual descriptions and synchronized audios. Cross-modal pretraining (CMP) models, by pre-training on large-scale crossmodal pairs, e.g., image and text, can learn the rich associations between different modalities, and this cross-modal
association capability gives CMP an advantage in conventional retrieval tasks. Inspired by this, how to utilize the robust cross-modal association capabilities of CMP in VAR to
search crucial visual component from these untrimmed and
long videos becomes a critical research problem. Therefore,
this paper proposes a VAR method based on CMP models,
named VarCMP. First, a unified hierarchical alignment strategy is proposed to constrain the semantic and spatial consistency between video and text, as well as the semantic, temporal, and spatial consistency between video and audio. It
fully leverages the efficient cross-modal association capabilities of CMP models by considering cross-modal similarities
at multiple granularities, enabling VarCMP to achieve effective all-round information matching for both video-text and
video-audio VAR tasks. Moreover, to further solve the problem of untrimmed and long video alignment, an anomalybiased weighting is devised in the fine-grained alignment,
which identifies key segments in untrimmed long videos using anomaly priors, giving them more attention, thereby discarding irrelevant segment information, and achieving more
accurate matching with cross-modal queries. Extensive experiments demonstrates high efficacy of VarCMP in both
video-text and video-audio VAR tasks, achieving significant improvements on both text-video (UCFCrime-AR) and
audio-video (XDViolence-AR) datasets against the best competitors by 5.0% and 5.3% R@1.

Introduction
In recent years, with the exponential growth of video data
and rapid advancements in artificial intelligence technology,
video anomaly detection (VAD) has achieved significant
progress, leading to the development of various works (Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018; Wu, Liu, and Shen 2019; Wu
et al. 2020; Park, Noh, and Ham 2020; Georgescu et al.
2021; Feng, Hong, and Zheng 2021; Wu et al. 2024c,d,b).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8423

