The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimally Solving Simultaneous-Move Dec-POMDPs:
The Sequential Central Planning Approach
Johan Peralez1 , Aurelien Delage1 , Jacopo Castellini2 , Rafael F. Cunha3 , Jilles S. Dibangoye3
1

2

Univ Lyon, INSA Lyon, Inria, CITI, EA3720, 69621 Villeurbanne, France
Haute Ecole de Gestion de Genève, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western, 1227 Carouge, Geneva, Switzerland
3
Bernoulli Institute, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, NL-9747AG, Groningen, Netherlands
johan.peralez@gmail.com, aurelien.delage@insa-lyon.fr, jacopo.castellini@hesge.ch, {r.f.cunha,j.s.dibangoye}@rug.nl
Abstract

2002), and approximations remain intractable (Rabinovich,
Goldman, and Rosenschein 2003).
There are two distinct but interdependent explanations
for the limited scalability of existing algorithms. The more
widely known reason is that agents in such a setting can neither see the state of the world nor explicitly communicate
with one another due to communication costs, latency, or
noise. However, what one agent sees and does directly affects what the others see and do. That silent coordination
problem makes it hard to define a right notion of state necessary to apply dynamic programming theory (Hansen, Bernstein, and Zilberstein 2004). A standard solution method
suggests reducing the original multi-agent problem into a
single-agent one, which is then solved using single-agent
algorithms based on recent advances in Markov decision
processes. This simultaneous-move centralized training for
decentralized execution paradigm applies successfully to
planning (Szer, Charpillet, and Zilberstein 2005; Oliehoek,
Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Oliehoek et al. 2013; Dibangoye
et al. 2016; Sokota et al. 2021) and reinforcement learning (Foerster et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018; Bono et al.
2018; Dibangoye and Buffet 2018). The less well-known
reason for the poor scaling behavior is the requirement of
current methods for simultaneous-move decision-making.
In such methods, the simultaneous-move greedy selection
of joint decision rules, i.e., simultaneous-move Bellman’s
backup, is performed collectively for agents—all at once.
Unfortunately, this decision entanglement problem is double exponential with agents and time, rendering even a single simultaneous-move Bellman’s backup prohibitively expensive when facing realistic problems with long planning
horizons—let alone finding an optimal solution.
In contrast, this paper builds upon the assumption that
decision rules to be executed simultaneously can nonetheless be selected sequentially. A paradigm we refer to as
sequential-move centralized training for simultaneous-move
decentralized execution. This paradigm pushes further the
applicability of Bellman’s principle of optimality so that
a central planner can still select joint decision rules, but
now one private decision rule at a time. Doing so disentangles the decision variables with mutual influence and
raises three new properties. First, it allows a sequentialmove central planner to reason upon sufficient sequentialmove statistics instead of prior simultaneous-move ones.

The centralized training for decentralized execution paradigm
emerged as the state-of-the-art approach to ϵ-optimally solving decentralized partially observable Markov decision processes. However, scalability remains a significant issue. This
paper presents a novel and more scalable alternative, namely
the sequential-move centralized training for decentralized execution. This paradigm further pushes the applicability of the
Bellman’s principle of optimality, raising three new properties. First, it allows a central planner to reason upon sufficient sequential-move statistics instead of prior simultaneousmove ones. Next, it proves that ϵ-optimal value functions
are piecewise linear and convex in such sufficient sequentialmove statistics. Finally, it drops the complexity of the backup
operators from double exponential to polynomial at the expense of longer planning horizons. Besides, it makes it easy
to use single-agent methods, e.g., SARSA algorithm enhanced with these findings, while still preserving convergence guarantees. Experiments on two- as well as many-agent
domains from the literature against ϵ-optimal simultaneousmove solvers confirm the superiority of our novel approach.
This paradigm opens the door for efficient planning and reinforcement learning methods for multi-agent systems.

1

Introduction

The problem of designing a system with multiple agents that
cooperate to control a hidden Markov chain is of interest in
artificial intelligence, optimal decentralized and stochastic
control, and game theory (Yoshikawa and Kobayashi 1978;
Radner 1962; Ooi and Wornell 1996; Bernstein et al. 2002;
Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008). Simultaneous-move decentralized partially observable Markov decision processes
(Dec-POMDPs) emerged as the standard framework for formalizing and solving such problems when agents act simultaneously. Given the growth of multi-agent intelligence
systems, e.g., online interactive services, the Internet of
Things, and intelligent transportation systems, the importance of scalable multi-agent solutions is clear. It also highlights the impetus for methods with theoretical guarantees to
find safe and secure solutions. However, as the situation currently stands, ϵ-optimally solving Dec-POMDPs is widely
believed to be out of reach: finite-horizon cases are NEXPhard, infinite-horizon cases are undecidable (Bernstein et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23276

