The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MVREC: A General Few-shot Defect Classification Model Using Multi-View
Region-Context
Shuai Lyu1 2 , Rongchen Zhang1 2 , Zeqi Ma1 2
Fangjian Liao1 2 , Dongmei Mo1 2 , Waikeung Wong 1 2 *
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design, Hong Kong SAR, China
{shuai.lyu, rongchen.zhang, mzeqi.ma, fangjian.liao, dongmei.mo}@connect.polyu.hk
calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Few-shot defect multi-classification (FSDMC) is an emerging trend in quality control within industrial manufacturing.
However, current FSDMC research often lacks generalizability due to its focus on specific datasets. Additionally, defect
classification heavily relies on contextual information within
images, and existing methods fall short of effectively extracting this information. To address these challenges, we propose
a general FSDMC framework called MVREC, which offers
two primary advantages: (1) MVREC extracts general features for defect instances by incorporating the pre-trained AlphaCLIP model. (2) It utilizes a region-context framework
to enhance defect features by leveraging mask region input
and multi-view context augmentation. Furthermore, Few-shot
Zip-Adapter(-F) classifiers within the model are introduced to
cache the visual features of the support set and perform fewshot classification. We also introduce MVTec-FS, a new FSDMC benchmark based on MVTec AD, which includes 1228
defect images with instance-level mask annotations and 46
defect types. Extensive experiments conducted on MVTec-FS
and four additional datasets demonstrate its effectiveness in
general defect classification and its ability to incorporate contextual information to improve classification performance.

(a)

Less Context and Inconsistent Input
Classification
Broken
Without
Broken
Mask Context

(b)

Rich Context and Consistent Input
Classification
Broken
With
Broken
Mask Context

Figure 1: Comparison of two different Classification models.

with few-shot learning, this type of application is nearly
absent in the context of FSDMC. This is primarily due
to the significant domain gap between general vision tasks
and FSDMC. Secondly, defects inherently differ from normal surface areas, necessitating more contextual information for effective detection and classification. However, common classification models often involve cropping the defect region, resizing it to the model input size, and feeding it into a network, as shown in Figure 1 (a). This pretreatment fails to retain important contextual information,
such as the surrounding background and the size of the defect. The most popular multi-category datasets (Bergmann
et al. 2019, 2022; Kim et al. 2020) with different product
images are typically designed for anomaly detection rather
than defect classification. Although the field of few-shot defect multi-classification has attracted considerable research
attention (Cao et al. 2023; Zhan, Zhou, and Xu 2022; Zhao
et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Xiao et al.
2022), the datasets used, such as the NEU-DET Dataset and
the MTD Dataset, are limited by their focus on a single product category. There is a notable scarcity of multi-category
datasets specifically proposed for FSDMC.
To mitigate these issues, we propose a general fewshot defect classification model using a multi-view regioncontext approach, called MVREC. Specifically, our approach begins by generating region-context visual features
for the defect instance using the AlphaCLIP model (Sun
et al. 2024), a transformer-based model that takes a defect
image and its mask context as input to generate visual features from the masked region. By incorporating the mask region context, the network can perceive both the defect foreground region and its surrounding background, generating

Code — https://github.com/ShuaiLYU/MVREC

Introduction
Defect detection and classification (Jha and Babiceanu
2023) is a critical challenge in industrial manufacturing, as
it involves identifying and categorizing defects within workpieces. However, in practical applications, the diversity of
defect types and the low frequency of defect occurrences
make it a particularly difficult task.
While Few-shot Learning (FSL) (Wang et al. 2020) has
gained traction in general vision tasks like mini-Imagenet,
its application to defect multi-classification (FSDMC) remains challenging. This disparity is evident in the limited availability of dedicated datasets and research focusing
on FSDMC. Although Contrastive Vision-Language Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) has demonstrated remarkable success in learning visual features from largescale image-text pairs and adapting to downstream tasks
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5937

