The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Consistency of Compositional Generalization Across Multiple Levels
Chuanhao Li1,2∗ , Zhen Li1 * , Chenchen Jing3† , Xiaomeng Fan1 , Wenbo Ye2,1 ,
Yuwei Wu1,2† , Yunde Jia2,1

Training
Data

Compositional generalization is the capability of a model to
understand novel compositions composed of seen concepts.
There are multiple levels of novel compositions including
phrase-phrase level, phrase-word level, and word-word level.
Existing methods achieve promising compositional generalization, but the consistency of compositional generalization
across multiple levels of novel compositions remains unexplored. The consistency refers to that a model should generalize to a phrase-phrase level novel composition, and phraseword/word-word level novel compositions that can be derived
from it simultaneously. In this paper, we propose a metalearning based framework, for achieving consistent compositional generalization across multiple levels. The basic idea is
to progressively learn compositions from simple to complex
for consistency. Specifically, we divide the original training
set into multiple validation sets based on compositional complexity, and introduce multiple meta-weight-nets to generate
sample weights for samples in different validation sets. To fit
the validation sets in order of increasing compositional complexity, we optimize the parameters of each meta-weight-net
independently and sequentially in a multilevel optimization
manner. We build a GQA-CCG dataset to quantitatively evaluate the consistency. Experimental results on visual question
answering and temporal video grounding, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

Seen Concepts
Words: white, cat, golden, dog
Phrases: white cat, golden dog

white cat

sample2

Abstract

sample1

1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
3
School of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
{lichuanhao, li.zhen, fanxiaomeng, yewenbo, wuyuwei, jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn
jingchenchen@zju.edu.cn

golden dog

Multiple Levels of Novel Compositions
word-word
golden ⊆
+
cat
⊆

phrase-word

phrase-phrase

golden
+
white cat

⊆ golden dog

⊆

+
white cat

Figure 1: Illustration of multiple levels of novel compositions, including word-word level, phrase-word level and
phrase-phrase level.

in Figure 1, but the consistency of compositional generalization across multiple levels of novel compositions remains unexplored. The consistency refers to the model’s
ability to generalize to both phrase-phrase level novel compositions and phrase-word/word-word level novel compositions, which are derived from the words within the
phrase-phrase structures. For example, when a model generalize to a phrase-phrase level composition like “golden
dog”+“white cat”, it should also be able to generalize to
phrase-word and word-word level compositions, such as
“golden”+“white cat” and “golden”+“cat”. Understanding “golden”+“white cat” and “golden”+“cat” are the
premise for understanding “golden dog”+“white cat”. We
investigate if existing vision-and-language models exhibit
the consistency. Our observations show that the models even
with 37B parameters only achieve ∼40% in the consistency, which indicates that existing models misunderstands
the concepts in novel compositions.
In this paper, we propose a meta-learning based framework applicable to different types of models for consistent
compositional generalization (CCG) across multiple levels
of novel compositions. The basic idea behind our framework is to progressively learn compositions from simple to
complex by making models learn difficult compositions only
after learning simple compositions. To this end, we explicitly distinguish samples with different compositional complexities by generating different sample weights for them,

Repository — https://github.com/NeverMoreLCH/CCG

Introduction
Compositionality is an important property of human cognition (Fodor and Pylyshyn 1988). Compositional generalization, the capability of a model to understand novel compositions composed of seen concepts, is critical for artificial intelligence systems to mimic the compositionality.
Previous work (Pierrot et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023) has shown that novel compositions exist at multiple levels, including phrase-phrase
level, phrase-word level and word-word level, as shown
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author: Chenchen Jing and Yuwei Wu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4661

