The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HSEvo: Elevating Automatic Heuristic Design with Diversity-Driven Harmony
Search and Genetic Algorithm Using LLMs
Pham Vu Tuan Dat1 , Long Doan2 , Huynh Thi Thanh Binh1
1

Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Viet Nam
2
George Mason University, Virginia, United States
dat.pvt210158@sis.hust.edu.vn, ldoan5@gmu.edu, binhht@soict.hust.edu.vn

Abstract

setups. The manual creation, adjustment, and configuration
of a heuristic for a specific problem can be extremely laborious and requires substantial expert knowledge. This is a
bottleneck in many application domains. To address this issue, Automatic Heuristic Design (AHD) has been proposed
aims to selects, tunes, or constructs effective heuristics for a
given problem class automatically (Choong, Wong, and Lim
2018). Various approaches have been used in AHD, including Hyper-Heuristics (HHs) (Pillay and Qu 2018) and Neural Combinatorial Optimization (NCO) (Qu, Kendall, and
Pillay 2020). However, HHs are still constrained by heuristic
spaces that are predefined by human experts. Additionally,
NCO faces limitations related to the necessity for effective
inductive bias (Drakulic et al. 2024), and challenges regarding interpretability and generalizability (Liu et al. 2023).
Recently, the rise of Large Language Models (LLMs)
has opened up new possibilities for AHD. It is believed
that LLMs (Nejjar et al. 2023; Austin et al. 2021) could
be a powerful tool for generating new ideas and heuristics. However, standalone LLMs with prompt engineering
can be insufficient for producing novel and useful ideas beyond existing knowledge (Mahowald et al. 2024). Some attempts have been made to coupling LLMs with evolutionary
computation to automatically generate heuristics, known as
LLM-based Evolutionary Program Search (LLM-EPS) (Liu
et al. 2024b; Meyerson et al. 2024; Chen, Dohan, and So
2024). Initial works such as FunSearch (Romera-Paredes
et al. 2024) and subsequent developments like Evolution
of Heuristic (EoH) (Liu et al. 2024a) and Reflective Evolution (ReEvo) (Ye et al. 2024a) have demonstrated significant
improvements over previous approaches, generating quality heuristics that often surpass current methods. Even so,
ReEvo yields state-of-the-art and competitive results compared with evolutionary algorithms, neural-enhanced metaheuristics, and neural solvers.
A key difference between LLM-EPS and classic AHD lies
in their heuristic search spaces. Classic AHD typically operates in well-defined mathematical spaces such as Rn , while
LLM-EPS searches within the space of functions, where
each function represents a heuristic as a program. LLM-EPS
utilizes LLMs within an evolutionary framework to enhance
the quality of generated functions iteratively. Therefore, it is
crucial to study and understand the search spaces of heuristics to establish foundational theories and principles for the

Automatic Heuristic Design (AHD) is an active research area
due to its utility in solving complex search and NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems in the real world. The recent
advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) introduce
new possibilities by coupling LLMs with evolutionary computation to automatically generate heuristics, known as LLMbased Evolutionary Program Search (LLM-EPS). While previous LLM-EPS studies obtained great performance on various tasks, there is still a gap in understanding the properties of heuristic search spaces and achieving a balance between exploration and exploitation, which is a critical factor
in large heuristic search spaces. In this study, we address this
gap by proposing two diversity measurement metrics and perform an analysis on previous LLM-EPS approaches, including FunSearch, EoH, and ReEvo. Results on black-box AHD
problems reveal that while EoH demonstrates higher diversity
than FunSearch and ReEvo, its objective score is unstable.
Conversely, ReEvo’s reflection mechanism yields good objective scores but fails to optimize diversity effectively. With
this finding in mind, we introduce HSEvo, an adaptive LLMEPS framework that maintains a balance between diversity
and convergence with a harmony search algorithm. Through
experimentation, we find that HSEvo achieved high diversity indices and good objective scores while remaining costeffective. These results underscore the importance of balancing exploration and exploitation and understanding heuristic
search spaces in designing frameworks in LLM-EPS.

Code — https://github.com/datphamvn/HSEvo
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.14995

1

Introduction

Heuristics are widely utilized to address complex search
and NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems (COPs)
in real-world systems. Over the past few decades, significant
efforts have been made to develop efficient heuristics, resulting in the creation of many meta-heuristic methods such as
simulated annealing, tabu search, and iterated local search.
These meticulously crafted methods have been effectively
applied across various practical systems.
Nevertheless, varied applications with distinct constraints
and goals may necessitate different algorithms or algorithm
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26931

