The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Surprising Effectiveness of Infinite-Width NTKs
for Characterizing and Improving Model Training
Joshua DeOliveira1 , Walter Gerych2 , Elke Rundensteiner1
1

Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
jcdeoliveira@wpi.edu, wgerych@mit.edu, rundenst@wpi.edu
2

Abstract
Developments in deep neural nets have trended towards increasingly larger overparameterized architectures, resulting
in lengthy training sessions with ever more elusive training
dynamics. Thus, ensuring these models learn accurate generalizable representations of data efficiently is challenging.
Previous works have developed specialized techniques from
data-pruning, architecture selection, pseudo-label generation,
bias identification, or label refurbishment to improve downstream training. Problematically, most methods require prohibitively expensive iterative model training. In this paper,
we demonstrate that we can exploit the recent neural tangent
kernel (NTK) theory for understanding and improving model
training behavior before ever training a model. First, we show
a powerful signal derived from the NTK theory can be computed remarkably fast. We then leverage this signal for the
design of a unified suite of surprisingly effective tools for the
four important tasks of architecture selection, pseudo-label
verification, bias identification, and label refurbishment, all
requiring zero model training.

1

T1.

Which
Architecture?

T2.

High-Quality
Labels?

T3.

Classes A and
B Related?

T4.

Is this a cat?

Existing Solutions
Expensive Training

Separate
Methods
Method for T1.
Method for T2.
Method for T4.

This subset
is mislabeled

Unified
Approach

Greatly!

Method for T3.

Pr oposed Solution
Training-Free NTK

Arch. 1
is best

NTK Signal

It's a Dog!

Figure 1: Training real overparameterized models is expensive. Currently, improving training requires a suite of extremely expensive tailored methods that can only be conducted during the expensive training process (top). By investigating models using their infinitely-wide analog instead
(bottom), we propose a single versatile signal derived before
real training is conducted that will improve model training.

that can reduce training costs in a reliable way that doesn’t
sacrifice downstream performance.
State-of-the-Art. Previous works improved training by developing a wide variety of specialized methods to combat
common areas of failure to make training either more accurate or cheaper. These include AutoML and neural architecture search (NAS) (Chitty-Venkata et al. 2023; Liu,
Simonyan, and Yang 2018), data-pruning (Nohyun, Choi,
and Chung 2022; Paul, Ganguli, and Dziugaite 2021; Feldman and Zhang 2020), pseudo-label generation (Rizve et al.
2021; Gilhuber et al. 2022; Kaul, Xie, and Zisserman 2022),
inherent bias identification (Nam et al. 2020), and label refurbishment (Patel and Sastry 2023).
While each of the above tasks serve an important step in
providing the best-suited scenario for model training, many
modern methods can only be performed during the actual
training process. This “piggybacking” exacerbates the computational costs incurred from training, and risks requiring
repeated retraining upon attempted improvements.
Proposed Solution. In this paper, we demonstrate that the
recent infinite-width neural tangent kernel (NTK) theory,
characterizing theoretical behavior of neural nets that possess infinitely many neurons in their hidden layers (Jacot,
Gabriel, and Hongler 2018; Arora et al. 2019), is surprisingly more applicable for improving training real models
and conducting data valuation tasks than previously thought.

Introduction

Background. Deep neural nets are a powerful tool for
many data modalities, including tabular data (Gorishniy
et al. 2021), computer vision (Wang et al. 2017; Girdhar
et al. 2023), and natural language processing (Devlin 2018;
Brown et al. 2020). In response to the availability of massive
digital datasets and to aim to solve more complex learning
problems, deep neural nets have become increasingly larger
and heavily overparameterized. For example, models such
as ResNet (He et al. 2016) and its variants have seen parameter counts rise into the tens of millions, and large language
models (LLMs) such as Chat-GPT (Achiam et al. 2023) have
broken into the space of trillion-parameter models.
Problem. Given these overparameterized architectures,
training sessions can become remarkably expensive and
lengthy (Minaee et al. 2024). Practitioners cannot afford to
waste vast amounts of compute resources and risk production delays due to failed or ineffective training. Common pitfalls such as ill-suited architectures, the presence of noisy or
missing labels, or underlying biases in the data can all plague
model training. Thus, there is an urgent need for methods
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16262

