The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

JAQ: Joint Efficient Architecture Design and Low-Bit Quantization with
Hardware-Software Co-Exploration
Mingzi Wang1 , Yuan Meng2* , Chen Tang1,2 , Weixiang Zhang1 , Yijian Qin2 , Yang Yao2 , Yingxin
Li1 , Tongtong Feng2 , Xin Wang2 , Xun Guan1* , Zhi Wang1* , Wenwu Zhu2*
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology & BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
wmz22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuanmeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xun.guan,wangzhi}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn,
wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

while maintaining performance, hardware-aware techniques
(e.g., quantization, and hardware-aware neural architecture
search) have emerged to improve the model efficiency on
the model-side. For example, HAQ (Wang et al. 2019),
OFA (Cai et al. 2019), and ElasticViT (Tang et al. 2023)
optimize the model for a fixed target device. On the other
hand, accelerator-side methods design specialized accelerators (Chen et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2015; Parashar et al. 2017)
to facilitate the deployment of DNNs, have received more
attention recently.
However, the separated design on either the model-side
or accelerator-side falls into sub-optimal (Fu et al. 2021;
Hong et al. 2022) as (1) the model-size optimization will
be up against efficiency loss when the hardware does not
support certain operators and (2) the optimal accelerator design varies very different for various model structures and
the corresponding quantized precision (Wang et al. 2019).
This trend suggests the limitations of and the need for codesign of both neural networks, quantized bit-widths, and
hardware accelerators.
The first principle of co-design involves efficiently navigating the vast design space. To achieve this, differentiable
methods have been developed to facilitate end-to-end coexploration. Notably, AutoNBA (Fu et al. 2021) utilizes
learnable weights for determining the expected precision
and architectural operator, along with designing a new objective for optimizing hardware components. DANCE (Choi
et al. 2021) further introduces an MLP-based accelerator
search strategy into the differentiable search framework.
However, these methods support only high bit-width quantization (i.e., ≥ 4 bits), resulting in minimal performance
degradation due to the significant redundancies that remain
for compression (Esser et al. 2019). In contrast, we have observed that low-precision disrupts the optimization process,
leading to a misguided search, as we will discuss later.
Therefore, we propose JAQ framework, which addresses
challenges and achieves efficient joint exploration. For the
first challenge, we propose channel-wise sparse quantization
method. It selects a small subset of the most crucial activations channels for quantization, leaving other channels unquantized during the search process, effectively alleviating
the issue of memory explosion. For the second challenge, we
propose BatchTile approach that encodes all tile sizes within
the search space as different batches, enabling us to deter-

The co-design of neural network architectures, quantization
precisions, and hardware accelerators offers a promising
approach to achieving an optimal balance between performance and efficiency, particularly for model deployment on
resource-constrained edge devices. In this work, we propose
the JAQ Framework, which jointly optimizes the three critical dimensions. However, effectively automating the design
process across the vast search space of those three dimensions poses significant challenges, especially when pursuing extremely low-bit quantization. Specifical, the primary
challenges include: (1) Memory overhead in software-side:
Low-precision quantization-aware training can lead to significant memory usage due to storing large intermediate features and latent weights for back-propagation, potentially
causing memory exhaustion. (2) Search time-consuming in
hardware-side: The discrete nature of hardware parameters and the complex interplay between compiler optimizations and individual operators make the accelerator search
time-consuming. To address these issues, JAQ mitigates the
memory overhead through a channel-wise sparse quantization (CSQ) scheme, selectively applying quantization to the
most sensitive components of the model during optimization. Additionally, JAQ designs BatchTile, which employs
a hardware generation network to encode all possible tiling
modes, thereby speeding up the search for the optimal compiler mapping strategy. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of JAQ, achieving approximately 7% higher
Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet compared to previous methods and reducing the hardware search time per iteration to
0.15 seconds. Code is available at https://github.com/wmzopensource/JAQ/.

Introduction
Given the significant computational demands of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), deploying them in resource-limited
environments, such as the Internet of Things (IoT), remains a challenge. For example, even highly optimized Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have recently struggled to perform efficiently on resource-constrained hardware devices (Li et al. 2023; Rashid, Kallakuri, and Mohsenin 2024). To speed up inference on real-world hardware
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21171

