The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

iLLuMinaTE: An LLM-XAI Framework Leveraging Social Science Explanation
Theories Towards Actionable Student Performance Feedback
Vinitra Swamy* 1 , Davide Romano* 1 , Bhargav Srinivasa Desikan2 ,
Oana-Maria Camburu3 , Tanja Käser1
1
EPFL, Switzerland
Institute for Public Policy Research, UK
3
University College London, UK
vinitra.swamy@epfl.ch, davide.romano@epfl.ch, b.srinivasa-desikan@ippr.org,
o.camburu@cs.ucl.ac.uk, tanja.kaeser@epfl.ch
2

Abstract

of transparency for fostering educators’ trust in AI-based educational technologies, while Conati, Porayska-Pomsta, and
Mavrikis (2018) stress the need for interpretable models in
contexts where students see decision outcomes without understanding the underlying reasoning.
Recent literature on eXplainable AI (XAI) in education
can be categorized into three main motivations: (1) allowing educational stakeholders to audit model mistakes (Khosravi et al. 2022; Pinto and Paquette 2024), (2) building student and teacher trust in AI (Nazaretsky et al. 2024), and
(3) designing personalized interventions for students (Hur
et al. 2022; Asadi et al. 2023). The most popular approaches
in XAI for education are post-hoc explainers, like LIME
(Hasib et al. 2022; Scheers and De Laet 2021) and SHAP
(Baranyi, Nagy, and Molontay 2020; Mu, Jetten, and Brunskill 2020). These explainers treat the underlying model as a
black-box, enabling explanations after model training.
Despite their rising popularity, XAI methods suffer from
a major weakness: a lack of adequate understandability, especially for a non-technical audience. At a course level,
STEM professors expressed difficulty in understanding explainer outputs, requesting “more concrete and granular insights” on the scale of individual students (Swamy et al.
2023). At the individual student level, Hur et al. (2022) designed XAI-based interventions, but found they were extensive to integrate and provided limited learning gains compared to expert feedback. With pervasive educational benchmarks like ASSISTments (Heffernan and Heffernan 2014)
and MOOCRadar (Yu et al. 2023) having hundreds of features and temporal aspects, it becomes difficult for students
and teachers to interpret feature importance.
LLMs can be useful in making XAI more humaninterpretable, especially towards building stakeholder trust
in AI and designing personalized student interventions. A
recent study (Kroeger et al. 2024) suggests that LLMs can
act as post-hoc explainers for complex models, finding that
LLMs could identify relevant features when given examples
of input data and model outputs. Atanasova et al. (2022) integrate explanation generation directly into the LLM’s training, optimizing over diagnostic properties like data consistency and confidence. However, in domains where explanations directly influence human decisions, the nature of LLMs

Recent advances in eXplainable AI (XAI) for education have
highlighted a critical challenge: ensuring that explanations for
state-of-the-art models are understandable for non-technical
users such as educators and students. In response, we introduce iLLuMinaTE, a zero-shot, chain-of-prompts LLMXAI pipeline inspired by Miller (2019)’s cognitive model
of explanation. iLLuMinaTE is designed to deliver theorydriven, actionable feedback to students in online courses.
iLLuMinaTE navigates three main stages — causal connection, explanation selection, and explanation presentation
— with variations drawing from eight social science theories
(e.g. Abnormal Conditions, Pearl’s Model of Explanation,
Necessity and Robustness Selection, Contrastive Explanation). We extensively evaluate 21,915 natural language explanations of iLLuMinaTE extracted from three LLMs (GPT4o, Gemma2-9B, Llama3-70B), with three different underlying XAI methods (LIME, Counterfactuals, MC-LIME),
across students from three diverse online courses. Our evaluation involves analyses of explanation alignment to the social science theory, understandability of the explanation, and
a real-world user preference study with 114 university students containing a novel actionability simulation. We find
that students prefer iLLuMinaTE explanations over traditional explainers 89.52% of the time. Our work provides a
robust, ready-to-use framework for effectively communicating hybrid XAI-driven insights in education, with significant
generalization potential for other human-centric fields.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, AI has seen widespread application
in education, encompassing both learner-centric models —
such as intelligent tutoring systems (Mousavinasab et al.
2021), knowledge tracing (Piech et al. 2015), and automated feedback systems (Jacobsen and Weber 2023) — and
teacher-centric models, including real-time classroom insights (Holstein et al. 2018) and automated question generation (Hang, Tan, and Yu 2024). To adopt these solutions in real-world classrooms, model explainability is essential. Nazaretsky et al. (2022) underscore the importance
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28431

