The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bi-Level Optimization for Semi-Supervised Learning with Pseudo-Labeling
Marzi Heidari1 , Yuhong Guo1,2
1

School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
2
CIFAR AI Chair, Amii, Canada
marziheidari@cmail.carleton.ca, yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

Abstract

then using them as ground-truth labels for model training.
A number of recent works have explored diverse data augmentation based pseudo-labeling techniques such as MixMatch (Berthelot et al. 2019), ReMixMatch (Berthelot et al.
2020), FixMatch (Sohn et al. 2020), Dash (Xu et al. 2021)
and FlexMatch (Zhang et al. 2021) to enhance the quality
of the pseudo-labels and improve the model performance,
while several other studies such as TSSDL (Shi et al. 2018)
and LPD (Iscen et al. 2019) have explored label propagation
techniques to create pseudo-labels based on the density of
the local neighborhood. Although these methods achieve enhanced SSL performance, they lack principled strategies to
simultaneously maintain the quality of pseudo-labels and the
prediction consistency between labeled and unlabeled samples. Such drawbacks can lead to poor suboptimal solutions,
yielding prediction models that cannot generalize well.
In this paper, we propose a novel Bi-level Optimization method for Pseudo-label Learning (BOPL) to address
the abovementioned limitations of existing pseudo-labeling
techniques. Bi-level optimization provides a convenient
framework for simultaneous optimization of two objectives
that are at different levels and inter-dependent. We adopt bilevel optimization to address SSL through a novel and direct
pseudo-labeling design. Specifically, we treat pseudo-labels
as latent variables and formulate pseudo-labeling as a bilevel optimization problem to jointly learn the pseudo-labels
and model parameters at different levels through a pair of bilevel objectives. By optimizing the pseudo-labels directly,
the method is expected to produce more reliable labels for
the unlabeled samples. By designing the bi-level objectives
properly, the quality of pseudo-labels and the prediction consistency between labeled and unlabeled data can be simultaneously enhanced to promote the generalizability of the prediction model. To validate the proposed methodology, we
conduct experiments on multiple SSL benchmark datasets
and compare the proposed BOPL with multiple state-ofthe-art SSL methods. The experimental results demonstrate
BOPL outperforms the comparison methods and achieves
state-of-the-art performance. The key contributions of this
paper can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel bi-level optimization method, BOPL,
for SSL, which treats pseudo-labels as latent variables
and directly optimizes them.
• We design a proper pair of bi-level objectives to ensure

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a fundamental task in machine learning, empowering models to extract valuable insights from datasets with limited labeled samples and a large
amount of unlabeled data. Although pseudo-labeling is a
widely used approach for SSL that generates pseudo-labels
for unlabeled data and leverages them as ground truth labels for training, traditional pseudo-labeling techniques often face challenges that significantly decrease the quality of
pseudo-labels and hence the overall model performance. In
this paper, we propose a novel Bi-level Optimization method
for Pseudo-label Learning (BOPL) to boost semi-supervised
training. It treats pseudo-labels as latent variables, and optimizes the model parameters and pseudo-labels jointly within
a bi-level optimization framework. By enabling direct optimization over the pseudo-labels towards maximizing the prediction model performance, the method is expected to produce high-quality pseudo-labels. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we conduct extensive experiments on multiple SSL benchmarks. The experimental results show the proposed BOPL outperforms the state-of-theart SSL techniques.

1

Introduction

Despite the remarkable advances achieved by deep learning models, their widespread application has been impeded
by the cost of acquiring sufficient amount of labeled data
(Kingma et al. 2014; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). In
light of this challenge, semi-supervised learning (SSL) has
emerged as a highly promising research area by offering the
capacity to leverage a small number of labeled samples and
a sufficient number of unlabeled samples for effective learning (Van Engelen and Hoos 2020). The key for successful
SSL lies in effectively exploiting the large number of unlabeled samples to remedy the shortage of the labeled data.
Many SSL methods have been developed to exploit the
unlabeled data in various ways, including a variety of loss
regularization based methods (Miyato et al. 2018; Zhang
et al. 2020), and teacher-student model based methods
(Athiwaratkun et al. 2019; Tarvainen and Valpola 2017).
One popularly adopted SSL technique is pseudo-labeling
that aims to effectively expand the labeled data by generating predicted pseudo-labels for the unlabeled samples and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17168

