The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Target Distribution Estimation
for Source-Free Open-Set Domain Adaptation
Zhiqi Yu1 , Zhichao Liao1 , Jingjing Li1 * , Zhi Chen2 , Lei Zhu3
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC)
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Queensland
3
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
{zhiqiyu777,liaozhichao.light}@gmail.com, lijin117@yeah.net, zhi.chen@uq.edu.au, leizhu0608@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Deep neural networks have significantly influenced this era,
but the substantial volume of annotated data required for supervised training can result in expensive labor costs. To alleviate this issue, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
(Tzeng et al. 2017; Ganin and Lempitsky 2015) is proposed to transfer knowledge from one labeled source domain to another unlabeled target domain. However, existing UDA methods (Kang et al. 2019; Hoffman et al. 2018;
Yu et al. 2023; Bucci et al. 2021; Achituve, Maron, and
Chechik 2021) are severely constrained in the real open
world. Firstly, UDA requires simultaneous access to source
and target domain data during the training process, which
can potentially raise privacy concerns (Liang, Hu, and Feng
2020; Xia, Zhao, and Ding 2021) about the source data.
Moreover, in the open world, the target domain probably
contains unknown categories that have not appeared in the

source domain. UDA mostly assumes that the source and target domains share the same label space, so all the unknown
samples will be misclassified into known categories. This is
not practical in reality as the identification of unknown samples is also critically important.
To overcome above limitations of UDA, it is necessary to
explore how to directly transfer the model pre-trained on the
source domain to the open target domain. We refer to this
problem as the Source-Free Open-Set Domain Adaptation
(SF-OSDA) setting. Previous Open-Set Domain Adaptation
(OSDA) works (Panareda Busto and Gall 2017; Saito et al.
2018; Pan et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2021) mostly utilize the
labeled data of source domain to evaluate the distribution
of known samples and simulate the potential distributions
of unknown samples, thereby training the model to separate known and unknown samples with these distributions.
This training strategy is not feasible in SF-OSDA, where the
source domain data is not accessible. Therefore, the primary
challenge of SF-OSDA lies in identifying the typical distribution of known and unknown samples.
In this work, we propose a simple yet effective SF-OSDA
method primarily based on the Dynamic Target Distribution Estimation (DTDE). In DTDE, the distribution of the
target domain is utilized to construct known and unknown
prototypes. For known prototypes, we adopt a self-adaptive
sampling strategy to build a flexible support-sample set that
considers the category disparity within the dataset. To construct unknown prototypes, we propose to use the clustering
distribution to represent the distribution of unknown samples with a self-splitting and excluding principle. Specifically, self-splitting is to evaluate the overall clustering distributions based on the intra-cluster compactness and intercluster separability. Consequently, by excluding the clustering centroids resembling known prototypes, the remaining
centroids can serve as unknown prototypes. The obtained
known and unknown prototypes can be used to pseudo-label
the target data for self-supervised training. Additionally, a
class-aware K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) alignment is complemented to avoid incorrect pseudo-labels during the training process, especially on the challenging categories. The
contribution of our work can be summarized as:

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We challenge a practical but difficult source-free openset domain adaptation setting, directly transferring the
pre-trained source model to the open target domain for

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has emerged as a
promising technique for transferring knowledge from a labeled domain to an unlabeled domain. However, existing
UDA methods are severely constrained by data privacy and
semantic inconsistencies. To alleviate these limitations, this
work challenges the Source-Free Open-Set Domain Adaptation (SF-OSDA), where the pre-trained source model is directly leveraged on the open target domain for adaptation.
For this purpose, we introduce the novel Dynamic Target Distribution Estimation (DTDE) method, which effectively performs known classification and unknown separation through
self-supervised learning with prototypes. To construct known
prototypes, a self-adaptive sampling strategy is employed to
consider the category disparity. For unknown prototypes, we
utilize a self-splitting and excluding principle to bypass the
unknown semantics problem. Specifically, self-splitting is to
evaluate the overall clustering distribution of the target domain. By excluding clusters resembling known prototypes,
the remaining cluster centroids can serve as unknown prototypes. The superiority of our approach is validated across
multiple benchmarks. Remarkably, DTDE outperforms the
best competitor by 7.6% on the VisDA dataset.

Introduction

22254

