The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Replication-proof Bandit Mechanism Design with Bayesian Agents
Suho Shin1 , Seyed A. Esmaeili2 , MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi1
1

University of Maryland
University of Chicago
(suhoshin,hajiagha)@umd.edu,esmaeili@uchicago.edu
2

Abstract
We study the problem of designing replication-proof bandit
mechanisms when agents strategically register or replicate
their own arms to maximize their payoff. Specifically, we consider Bayesian agents who only know the distribution from
which their own arms’ mean rewards are sampled, unlike the
original setting of by Shin, Lee and Ok AISTATS’22. Interestingly, with Bayesian agents in stark contrast to the previous
work, analyzing the replication-proofness of an algorithm becomes significantly complicated even in a single-agent setting.
We provide sufficient and necessary conditions for an algorithm to be replication-proof in the single-agent setting, and
present an algorithm that satisfies these properties. These results center around several analytical theorems that focus on
comparing the expected regret of multiple bandit instances,
and therefore might be of independent interest since they have
not been studied before to the best of our knowledge. We
expand this result to the multi-agent setting, and provide a
replication-proof algorithm for any problem instance. We finalize our result by proving its sublinear regret upper bound
which matches that of Shin, Lee and Ok AISTATS’22.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithms are an important
paradigm for interactive learning that focuses on quantifying
the trade-off between exploration and exploitation (Slivkins
et al. 2019), with various real-world applications such
as recommender systems (Barraza-Urbina and Glowacka
2020; Tang et al. 2014), dynamic pricing by (Badanidiyuru,
Kleinberg, and Slivkins 2018; Badanidiyuru, Langford, and
Slivkins 2014), and clinical trials by (Djallel and Irina 2019)
to name a few. They are used to model various practical applications where there is a set of actions (arms) to be selected
(pulled) over a collection of rounds. Pulling an arm yields
a reward sampled from its distribution which is generally
different from the other arms’ distributions. The objective
is to maximize the sum of rewards accumulated through the
rounds or equivalently minimize the regret with respect to
the optimal clairvoyant arm choice.
In deploying MAB algorithms in real-world applications,
however, the rewards are often not coming from stochastic
distributions, but from a collection of rational individuals
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20453

(agents) who seek to maximize their own payoff. Consequently, there has been a surge of interest in bandit problem
from the mechanism design perspective, which studies MAB
algorithms that induce a good outcome with respect to agents’
strategic behavior, while maintaining its efficiency. Examples
of such settings include two-sided matching markets, where
agents learn their preferences through sequential interactions
(Liu et al. 2021; Liu, Mania, and Jordan 2020), and learning
in environments where agents can strategically modify the
realized rewards of their arms (Braverman et al. 2019; Feng,
Parkes, and Xu 2020).
Recently, (Shin, Lee, and Ok 2022) considered a problem
where agents register arms to a platform that uses a MAB algorithm to minimize regret. Each agent has an original set of
arms, and the mean reward of each arm is known to him a priori, i.e., agents are fully-informed. Each agent receives a fixed
constant portion of the reward whenever its arm is pulled,
and tries to maximize cumulative reward. Importantly, each
agent can potentially register the same arm more than once
(replication) at free cost, which possibly ruins the explorationexploitation balance of the bandit algorithm. Indeed, (Shin,
Lee, and Ok 2022) show that “ordinary” algorithms such
as upper-confidence-bound (UCB) induce rational agents to
replicate infinitely many times, and thus the algorithm suffers linear regret. To address this problem, (Shin, Lee, and
Ok 2022) propose a hierarchical algorithm with two phases,
and prove its truthfulness such that each agent’s dominant
strategy is not to replicate.
Although the introduction of replication-proof mechanism
is remarkable, the assumption that each agent is fully informed about its own arms is theoretically strong and practically limited. Intuitively, if an agent knows all of its own
arms’ mean rewards, there exists no reason for the agent to
consider suboptimal arms. Indeed, this assumption significantly simplifies the equilibrium analysis so that the problem
simply reduces to the case under which each agent only has
a single arm. Then, it is immediate to check that any bandit
algorithm is replication-proof under a single-agent setting.
Moreover, in practice, it is more reasonable to assume that
each agent only has partial information regarding its own
arms. For instance, in online content platforms, each content
provider usually does not know the quality of each content
that has not been posted yet, but only can guess its outcome,
based on the data possibly acquired from the previous con-

