The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PointRWKV: Efficient RWKV-Like Model for Hierarchical Point Cloud Learning
Qingdong He1 * , Jiangning Zhang1 * , Jinlong Peng1† , Haoyang He2 ,
Xiangtai Li3 , Yabiao Wang1 , Chengjie Wang1
1

Youtu Lab, Tencent
Zhejiang University
2
Nanyang Technological University
{yingcaihe, vtzhang, jeromepeng, caseywang, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com, haoyanghe@zju.edu.cn,xiangtai94@gmail.com
2

(a) PointMLP

Abstract

(b) PointMAE

Prediction Head

Transformers have revolutionized the point cloud learning
task, but the quadratic complexity hinders its extension to
long sequences. This puts a burden on limited computational
resources. The recent advent of RWKV, a fresh breed of deep
sequence models, has shown immense potential for sequence
modeling in NLP tasks. In this work, we present PointRWKV, a new model of linear complexity derived from the
RWKV model in the NLP field with the necessary adaptation for 3D point cloud learning tasks. Specifically, taking the
embedded point patches as input, we first propose to explore
the global processing capabilities within PointRWKV blocks
using modified multi-headed matrix-valued states and a dynamic attention recurrence mechanism. To extract local geometric features simultaneously, we design a parallel branch
to encode the point cloud efficiently in a fixed radius nearneighbors graph with a graph stabilizer. Furthermore, we design PointRWKV as a multi-scale framework for hierarchical feature learning of 3D point clouds, facilitating various
downstream tasks. Extensive experiments on different point
cloud learning tasks show our proposed PointRWKV outperforms the transformer- and mamba-based counterparts, while
significantly saving about 42% FLOPs, demonstrating the potential option for constructing foundational 3D models.

Point Cloud

ReLU

Prediction Head
Point Cloud
Decoder

Affine
…

Embedding

Encoder

Residual
Point Block

Embedding

Prediction Head

Prediction Head
Point Cloud

✖

Transformer
Block

✖

Point Cloud

C

L

L

Channel

Embedding

Merging
Spatial

Reordering
Mamba Block

(c) PointMamba

Embedding

PRWKV Block

(d) PointRWKV

Figure 1: Architecture comparison with different methods: (a) MLP-based PointMLP (Ma et al. 2022), (b)
transformer-based PointMAE (Pang et al. 2022), (c) mambabased PointMamba (Liang et al. 2024) and (d) ours PointRWKV with linear complexity is capable of integrating the
advantages of both global and local modeling, and multiscale features endow it with more refined prediction accuracy.

Code — https://hithqd.github.io/projects/PointRWKV/

Introduction
Point cloud analysis is a fundamental vision task that has
a wide range of applications, including autonomous driving (Mao et al. 2022), virtual reality, and robotics (Shafiullah
et al. 2022), etc. Unlike 2D images, the intrinsic irregularity
and sparsity of point clouds make it a challenging task to
conduct point cloud representation learning. Balancing accuracy and complexity simultaneously remains an enduring
problem.
Pioneered by PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) and PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b), a series of works (Atzmon, Maron,
and Lipman 2018; Li et al. 2018; Komarichev, Zhong, and
Hua 2019; Qian et al. 2022; Thomas et al. 2019; Wu, Qi, and
Fuxin 2019; Ma et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2019) have emerged

to follow the MLP architecture to extract geometric features
(Figure 1 (a)). Recently, transformers (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2021) have surfaced as a promising approach
for point cloud analysis, demonstrating significant potential
with a key component of the attention mechanism to effectively capture the relationships among a set of points. Focusing on enhancing transformers for point clouds, Point Transformers (Zhao et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022, 2023b) apply vector attention and enhance the performance and efficiency for
different tasks. Further, by extending self-supervised learning mechanism, some works (Yu et al. 2022; Pang et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Qi et al. 2023) have obtained decent
performance. Among them, PointMAE (Pang et al. 2022),
as depicted in Figure 1 (b), introduces a standard Transformer architecture and a shifting mask tokens operation at

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3410

