The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoRA: Collaborative Information Perception by Large Language Model’s
Weights for Recommendation
Yuting Liu1 * , Jinghao Zhang3 * , Yizhou Dang1 , Yuliang Liang1 ,
Qiang Liu3† , Guibing Guo1† , Jianzhe Zhao1 , Xingwei Wang2
1
Software College, Northeastern University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
3
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{liuyuting, yizhoudang, liangyuliang}@stumail.neu.edu.cn, jinghao.zhang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, qiang.liu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,{guogb,
zhaojz}@swc.neu.edu.cn, wangxw@mail.neu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
EM/ROUGE Score

0.3547

Involving collaborative information in Large Language Models (LLMs) is a promising technique for adapting LLMs for
recommendation. Existing methods achieve this by concatenating collaborative features with text tokens into a unified sequence input and then fine-tuning to align these features with
LLM’s input space. Although effective, in this work, we identify two limitations when adapting LLMs to recommendation tasks, which hinder the integration of general knowledge
and collaborative information, resulting in sub-optimal recommendation performance. (1) Fine-tuning LLM with recommendation data can undermine its inherent world knowledge and fundamental competencies, which are crucial for
interpreting and inferring recommendation text. (2) Incorporating collaborative features into textual prompts disrupts
the semantics of the original prompts, preventing LLM from
generating appropriate outputs. In this paper, we propose a
new paradigm, Collaborative LoRA (CoRA), with a collaborative query generator. Rather than input space alignment,
this method aligns collaborative information with LLM’s parameter space, representing them as incremental weights to
update LLM’s output. This way, LLM perceives collaborative information without altering its general knowledge and
text inference capabilities. Specifically, we employ a collaborative filtering model to extract user and item embeddings
and inject them into a set number of learnable queries. We
then convert collaborative queries into collaborative weights
with low-rank properties and merge the collaborative weights
into LLM’s weights, enabling LLM to perceive the collaborative signals and generate personalized recommendations
without fine-tuning or extra collaborative tokens in prompts.
Extensive experiments confirm that CoRA effectively integrates collaborative information into LLM, enhancing recommendation performance.

0.3
0.2

44.7%↓
0.1959

0.3612

0.2174

0.1
0.0

WikiFact

Vicuna-7B
TALLRec

39.8%↓

SocialIQA

0.1909
0.1509
38.6%↓
0.0926

63.8%↓

XSum

UProfile

0.0691

0.2264
69.8%↓
0.0683
ITMathcing

Figure 1: The performance of Vicuna-7B before and after
fine-tuning on Amazon-Book using the prompt in TALLRec.
The EM/ROUGE-L scores of generated answers on datasets
represent various general and recommendation abilities.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have showcased remarkable
performance in a wide range of natural language processing
tasks and demonstrated excellent generalization capabilities,
offering a promising solution to real-world problems. To
leverage the extensive competencies of LLMs, an increasing number of studies are investigating ways to frame recommendation problems in natural language, allowing LLMs
to tackle these queries (LLMRec) (Li et al. 2023b; Zhang
et al. 2024a; Dai et al. 2023a). Collaborative information,
which delineates the co-occurrence patterns in user-item interactions (Zhang et al. 2024b), is critical for the success of
conventional collaborative filtering methods. Regardless, in
LLM-based recommendation approaches, collaborative information cannot be directly interpreted as text. LLMs’ ineptitude in perceiving this information hampers their performance compared to traditional recommendation models.
Consequently, enabling LLMs to comprehend and utilize
collaborative information presents a significant challenge.
Some approaches are beginning to focus on this issue (Li
et al. 2023c; Li, Zhang, and Chen 2022). For instance,
Prompt4NR (Zhang and Wang 2023) makes the first trial of
prompt learning paradigm to convert the News Recommen-

Code — https://github.com/VanillaCreamer/CoRA

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Guibing Guo and Qiang Liu are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12246

