The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

InstructAvatar: Text-Guided Emotion and Motion Control for Avatar Generation
Yuchi Wang, Junliang Guo* , Jianhong Bai, Runyi Yu, Tianyu He,
Xu Tan, Xu Sun* , Jiang Bian
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{wangyuchi, ingrid yu}@stu.pku.edu.cn, xusun@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Ref. Image

Recent talking avatar generation models have made strides in
achieving realistic and accurate lip synchronization with the
audio, but often fall short in controlling and conveying detailed expressions and emotions of the avatar, making the generated video less vivid and controllable. In this paper, we propose a text-guided approach for generating emotionally expressive 2D avatars, offering fine-grained control, improved
interactivity and generalizability to the resulting video. Our
framework, named InstructAvatar, leverages a natural language interface to control the emotion as well as the facial
motion of avatars. Technically, we utilize GPT-4V to design
an automatic annotation pipeline, constructing an instructionvideo paired training dataset. This is combined with a novel
two-branch diffusion-based generator to predict avatars using
both audio and text instructions simultaneously. Experimental results demonstrate that InstructAvatar produces results
that align well with both conditions, and outperforms existing methods in fine-grained emotion control, lip-sync quality,
and naturalness.

Audio

Generated video

Sing with happy emotion.

Speak with your eyebrows and lids raised.

Turn your head left, please.

Raise your cheek and pull your lip corners.

Figure 1: InstructAvatar enables emotional talking face generation through a flexible natural language interface (top 2
rows). Moreover, it supports direct control of facial motion
and expression without relying on audio cues, a feature absent in previous studies (bottom 2 rows).

Demo — https://wangyuchi369.github.io/InstructAvatar/
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15758

1

Instruction

Introduction
As a seamless interface bridging the gap between humans
and computers, the textual prompt stands out as a natural solution to tackle the limitations of previous approaches, providing a versatile array of controls that encompass desired
motions and expressions for the avatar. Therefore, we steer
towards a textual instruction-based talking avatar generation
model named InstructAvatar, to directly emit talking face
video, which offers three key advantages: (1) Enhanced control over fine-grained details rather than just the overall style;
(2) Improved generalizability compared to limited emotion
or style categories; and (3) Enhanced interactivity and userfriendliness. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our framework enables
text-guided emotional talking face generation with finegrained control and allows for facial motion and expression control without relying on audio cues.
To accomplish this, we meticulously design our algorithm, taking into account both data and model architecture considerations. For data preparation, existing
datasets (Wang et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2014) only offer tag-

Avatar generation has recently gained significant attention
due to its broad applicability in film production, gaming,
video conferencing, and various other domains. The primary objective of this technology is to animate portraits with
synchronized speech audio. While previous studies have
achieved impressive lip synchronization and head pose prediction (Tian et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2023; He et al. 2024;
Zhang et al. 2023b), effectively conveying and controlling
detailed expressions and motions remains a challenge, resulting in less vivid and authentic videos. Some previous
studies have attempted to integrate emotional information
through either labels (Wang et al. 2020; Zhai et al. 2023;
Tan, Ji, and Pan 2023) or example videos (Ma et al. 2023c,b;
Zhang et al. 2023a). However, they continue to face challenges related to limited flexibility and controllability.
* Junliang Guo and Xu Sun are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8132

