The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Controlling Equational Reasoning in Large Language Models
with Prompt Interventions
Jordan Meadows1 , Marco Valentino2 , André Freitas1, 2, 3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester
2
Idiap Research Institute
3
National Biomarker Centre, CRUK-MI
jordan.meadows@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
{marco.valentino, andre.freitas}@idiap.ch

Abstract
This paper investigates how hallucination rates in Large Language Models (LLMs) may be controlled via a symbolic data
generation framework, exploring a fundamental relationship
between the rate of certain mathematical errors and types of
input intervention. Specifically, we systematically generate
data for a derivation generation task using a symbolic engine,
applying targeted interventions to prompts to perturb features
of mathematical derivations such as the surface forms of symbols, equational tree structures, and mathematical context. We
then evaluate the effect of prompt interventions across a range
of LLMs including fine-tuned T5 models, GPT, and LLaMabased models. Our experiments suggest that T5-Large can
outperform the few-shot performance of GPT-4 on various
evaluation sets generated via the framework. However, an extensive evaluation based on human analysis, template-based
error detection, and text generation metrics reveals model
weaknesses beyond what the reference-based metrics singularly describe. We use these results to tie characteristic distributional footprints of interventions to the human evaluation of
LLM derivation quality, potentially leading to significant control over fine-grained mathematical capabilities of language
models with respect to specific types of errors.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) possess the potential to
accelerate mathematical discovery (Trinh et al. 2024). Yet,
without incorporating symbolic approaches, their ability to
derive correct mathematical results is significantly impeded
by their sensitivity to input perturbations and tendency to hallucinate (Mirzadeh et al. 2024; Frieder et al. 2023). In order
to understand and mitigate persisting challenges in mathematical reasoning, recent work has focused on the ability
of LLMs to learn and sequentially apply symbolic operations to premise equations (Chen et al. 2024; Valentino et al.
2024), investigating whether state-of-the-art models can derive goal equations defined within prompts (Meadows et al.
2024). Such derivation-style equational reasoning is at the
core of many applied mathematical fields, such as theoretical
physics, engineering, and quantitative finance (Plaisted 1993;
Premtoon, Koppel, and Solar-Lezama 2020).
In this paper, we aim to establish a deeper connection
between input perturbations applied to prompts and certain
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24858

mathematical hallucinations, attempting to expose a fundamental relationship between training data, prompt intervention type, and derivational error distributions in LLM output.
In particular, we are interested in whether such a relationship
can be identified and potentially leveraged to control the rate
of certain types of mathematical errors.
To this end, we develop a methodology supported by a
symbolic data generation framework that has been effectively
applied in related contexts (Valentino et al. 2024; Meadows
et al. 2024), which we adapt and improve (≈ 15x faster) to
construct and augment various fine-grained datasets for equational reasoning tasks. This framework allows us to operate
at a mathematical granularity within derivations that is far
greater than what is surfaced on published derivations (Mann
et al. 2018; Akrobotu et al. 2022), where many steps are
typically omitted or summarised. This ultimately addresses
a fundamental incompleteness problem for reasoning data
available for training and evaluating LLMs (Villalobos et al.
2022). Given that fine-grained workings contribute to much
of the theoretical research distilled in papers, that generative
models frequently hallucinate when solving domain-specific
reasoning problems (Shuster et al. 2021; Taylor et al. 2022;
Frieder et al. 2023; Wysocka et al. 2023; Meadows, James,
and Freitas 2024), and that granular reasoning lends itself
better to explainability and inference control (Hebenstreit
et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2023; Yuan et al. 2023; Valentino and
Freitas 2024), it is clear that methods of control over the rate
of mathematical reasoning errors made by LLMs, without
incorporating external solvers (Toshniwal et al. 2024; Liu
and Yao 2024; Trinh et al. 2024; Jiang et al. 2022; Quan et al.
2024), are highly valuable.
By leveraging the granularity of the symbolic data generation framework, we investigate control mechanisms that
involve fine-tuning LLMs and applying targeted prompt interventions that systematically manipulate inputs to the models.
These interventions — here, alterations in symbolic representation, equational structure, and contextual elements —–
serve as levers to induce and regulate specific error types in
model outputs, moving beyond methodologies which are agnostic to certain classes of mathematical hallucination and/or
deal with less complex equation manipulation (Stolfo et al.
2023; Meadows et al. 2024). Crucially, our experiments suggest that certain interventions distinctly correspond to distributional footprints in the error space, opening up the possibil-

