The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DocKylin: A Large Multimodal Model for Visual Document Understanding with
Efficient Visual Slimming
Jiaxin Zhang1 * , Wentao Yang1 * , Songxuan Lai2 , Zecheng Xie2, , Lianwen Jin1,
1

South China University of Technology
2
Huawei Cloud
xiezecheng1@huawei.com, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn

support for input resolutions of only up to 448 × 448, which
is inadequate for high-resolution, fine-grained document images. Numerous efforts (Yu et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024d;
Li et al. 2024b; Wei et al. 2025; Bai et al. 2023b; Ye et al.
2023a; Lin et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024a) have recently been
made to increase the input resolution to address this limitation and achieved notable improvements. However, these
efforts still face several challenges: 1) Increasing the resolution also escalates the redundant regions within documents,
which results in an increased number of redundant visual
tokens, complicating the task for LLMs to identify the correct answers. 2) Some methods (Li et al. 2024b; Wei et al.
2025; Liu et al. 2024a; Bai et al. 2023b) employ a fixed rectangular resolution, which can lead to text distortion given
the typically large aspect ratios of document images. Moreover, scaling smaller images to larger ones results in inefficiencies. 3) To manage the extended sequences of visual tokens resulting from high resolution, most methods (Li et al.
2024b; Yu et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024d; Bai et al. 2023b)
employ a fixed compression ratio or extract a predetermined
number of tokens. While this approach may be suitable for
natural scene images, it is less effective for document scenarios where content density varies significantly. For example,
images of scientific papers are information-dense, whereas
images of identification cards are comparatively sparse.

Abstract
Current multimodal large language models (MLLMs) face
significant challenges in visual document understanding
(VDU) tasks due to the high resolution, dense text, and complex layouts typical of document images. These characteristics demand a high level of detail perception ability from
MLLMs. While increasing input resolution improves detail
perception capability, it also leads to longer sequences of visual tokens, increasing computational costs and straining the
models’ ability to handle long contexts. To address these challenges, we introduce DocKylin, a document-centric MLLM
that performs visual content slimming at both the pixel and
token levels, thereby reducing token sequence length in VDU
scenarios. We introduce an Adaptive Pixel Slimming (APS)
preprocessing module to perform pixel-level slimming, increasing the proportion of informative pixels. Moreover, we
propose a novel Dynamic Token Slimming (DTS) module to
conduct token-level slimming, filtering essential tokens and
removing others to adaptively create a more compact visual
sequence. Experiments demonstrate DocKylin’s promising
performance across various VDU benchmarks and the effectiveness of each component.

Introduction
With the substantial growth in data and model sizes, as well
as alignment with human preferences, current Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI 2022; Touvron et al. 2023;
The Vicuna Team 2023; Bai et al. 2023a; The InternLM
Team 2023; Yang et al. 2023) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in reasoning, common sense understanding,
expertise in specialized knowledge, zero/few-shot learning,
and instruction following, shedding light on the potential for
Artificial General Intelligence. Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) aim to enhance these powerful LLMs by
endowing them with multimodal capabilities, enabling the
integration of diverse modalities beyond text alone (Yin et al.
2024; Fu et al. 2024).
Although there has been significant progress in the development of MLLMs, their performance in visual document
understanding (VDU) tasks remains suboptimal (Liu et al.
2023a; Zhang et al. 2024b). A primary reason for this is their

To tackle these challenges, we propose DocKylin, a
document-centric MLLM that incorporates several innovative designs: Firstly, we propose a parameter-free Adaptive
Pixel Slimming (APS) preprocessing technique that utilizes
gradient information to identify and eliminate redundant regions within document images, thereby reducing the proportion of redundant pixels and enhancing computational
efficiency. Secondly, we adopt a more flexible image encoding strategy by capping the maximum number of pixels
instead of fixing resolutions. This allows for variable resolutions and aspect ratios. Our lightweight Swin encoder
(Liu et al. 2021) processes high-resolution document images
holistically, ensuring feature coherence. Furthermore, we introduce a parameter-free Dynamic Token Slimming (DTS)
method based on dual-center clustering. DTS efficiently filters informative tokens from a large set of visual tokens, resulting in reduced and dynamically sized visual sequences.
Incorporating these innovations, we developed our DocKylin, which demonstrates superior performance across mul-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9923

