The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging Large Vision-Language Model as User Intent-Aware Encoder
for Composed Image Retrieval
Zelong Sun1 , Dong Jing1 , Guoxing Yang1, 2 , Nanyi Fei2 , Zhiwu Lu1, *
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
MetaBrain AGI Lab, Shanghai, China
zelongsun@ruc.edu.com, luzhiwu@ruc.edu.com

Abstract

Existing methods (Baldrati et al. 2022; Zhao, Song, and
Jin 2022; Levy et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b) attempt to utilize Vision-Language Pre-training Models (VLPMs) (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022) with various fusion strategies. Particularly, some methods (Levy et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2023b) propose to integrate image embedding with text embedding by an unimodal encoder with intermediate crossattention layers, known as the “early-fusion”. However, due
to the limitation of cross attention mechanism, these methods fail to retain the desired visual information, which is
contained in the reference image but not mentioned in the
relative caption. For example, as shown in Fig.1 (a), such
methods tend to miss the “species of Corgi”. More recent
approaches (Saito et al. 2023; Bai et al. 2023b) introduce a
textual inversion module to generate a textual prompt from
the reference image and concatenate it with the relative caption. These approaches allow a more flexible interaction
for hybrid-modality queries, enabling the model to perceive
more comprehensive information from the reference image.
However, the limitations of the text encoder may still result
in missed user intent, especially when complex relative captions are provided. As shown in Fig.1 (b), these approaches
tend to ignore the user intent to “move the dog outdoors”.
Recently, several generative retrieval methods (Karthik
et al. 2023; Sun, Ye, and Gong 2023) have emerged to leverage the advanced reasoning capability of large language
models (LLMs) to better perceive the user intent by inferring target image captions with LLMs from composed
queries. However, the user intent captured in the inferred
captions often remains at a coarse granularity level, resulting in suboptimal retrieval accuracy. Notably, these methods
encounter substantial efficiency challenges due to their reliance on multi-pass decoding processes.
To overcome the limitations of the current state-of-the-art
methods, we propose CIR-LVLM, a single-pass encoding
framework designed to adopt a large vision-language model
(LVLM) as a user intent-aware encoder to derive both query
and target embeddings. As shown in Fig.1 (c), we employ
the Connector module to generate a sentence-level prompt
that enables the model to perceive comprehensive information from the image. Instead of using a text encoder, we
leverage advanced LVLMs, which exhibit superior reasoning and instruction-following abilities, to accurately discern
the user intent and obtain the desired information.

Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) aims to retrieve target
images from candidate set using a hybrid-modality query
consisting of a reference image and a relative caption that
describes the user intent. Recent studies attempt to utilize
Vision-Language Pre-training Models (VLPMs) with various fusion strategies for addressing the task. However, these
methods typically fail to simultaneously meet two key requirements of CIR: comprehensively extracting visual information and faithfully following the user intent. In this work,
we propose CIR-LVLM, a novel framework that leverages
the large vision-language model (LVLM) as the powerful
user intent-aware encoder to better meet these requirements.
Our motivation is to explore the advanced reasoning and
instruction-following capabilities of LVLM for accurately understanding and responding the user intent. Furthermore, we
design a novel hybrid intent instruction module to provide
explicit intent guidance at two levels: (1) The task prompt
clarifies the task requirement and assists the model in discerning user intent at the task level. (2) The instance-specific
soft prompt, which is adaptively selected from the learnable
prompt pool, enables the model to better comprehend the user
intent at the instance level compared to a universal prompt
for all instances. CIR-LVLM achieves state-of-the-art performance across three prominent benchmarks with acceptable
inference efficiency. We believe this study provides fundamental insights into CIR-related fields.

Introduction
Compared with conventional image retrieval (Gordo et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2016; Frome et al. 2013; Gao et al. 2020),
which involves only a single-modality query, Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) faces greater challenges as its query
comprises both visual (i.e., a reference image) and textual
(i.e., a relative caption) modalities. Specifically, CIR aims
to retrieve the target image according to the user intent described in the relative caption and the visual information
contained in the reference image. To achieve the goal, two
fundamental challenges are presented: (1) How to comprehensively extract visual information contained in the reference image. (2) How to accurately capture and understand
the user intent embedded in the composed query.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7149

