The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Relation-Aware Equivariant Graph Networks for Epitope-Unknown
Antibody Design and Specificity Optimization
Lirong Wu1,2 , Haitao Lin1,2 , Yufei Huang2 , Zhangyang Gao2 , Cheng Tan2 ,
†
Yunfan Liu2 , Tailin Wu2 , Stan Z. Li2,
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, 310058
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China, 310030
{wulirong, linhaitao, huangyufei, gaozhangyang, tancheng, liuyunfan, wutailin, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn
2

AAR (%)

Antibodies are Y-shaped proteins that protect the host by
binding to specific antigens, and their binding is mainly determined by the Complementary Determining Regions (CDRs)
in the antibody. Despite the great progress made in CDR design, existing computational methods still encounter several
challenges: 1) poor capability of modeling complex CDRs
with long sequences due to insufficient contextual information; 2) conditioned on pre-given antigenic epitopes and their
static interaction with the target antibody; 3) neglect of specificity during antibody optimization leads to non-specific antibodies. In this paper, we take into account a variety of
node features, edge features, and edge relations to include
more contextual and geometric information. We propose a
novel Relation-Aware Antibody Design (RAAD) framework,
which dynamically models antigen-antibody interactions for
co-designing the sequences and structures of antigen-specific
CDRs. Furthermore, we propose a new evaluation metric to
better measure antibody specificity and develop a contrasting
specificity-enhancing constraint to optimize the specificity of
antibodies. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the superior capability of RAAD in terms of antibody modeling,
generation, and optimization across different CDR types, sequence lengths, pre-training strategies, and input contexts.

L=15
L=20
L=25

6

75
50

RMSD (Å)

Abstract

4

25

L=15
L=20
L=25

0
0

5

10

15

20

Position in CDR-H3

25

2
0

0

5

10

15

20

Position in CDR-H3

25

Figure 1: Correlation of the performance of sequence generation (Left) and structure generation (Right) w.r.t amino acid
position in CDR-H3 for different lengths L from SAbDab.

2024a,b; Tan et al. 2024; Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2022).
RefineGNN (Jin et al. 2021) is the first work to co-design
CDR sequences and structures in an autoregressive manner, and its follow-up HSRN (Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola
2022) unifies antigen-binding antibody design and docking
in a hierarchical refinement framework. DiffAb (Luo et al.
2022) adopts diffusion models (Hoogeboom et al. 2021)
to design the CDR sequences, Cα coordinates, and orientations in an iterative manner. Similarly, AbDiffuser (Martinkus et al. 2024) incorporates family-specific priors into
the diffusion process, which greatly improves generation efficiency and quality over DiffAb. To improve computational
efficiency, MEAN (Kong, Huang, and Liu 2022) replaces
autoregressive decoding with progressive full-shot decoding and involves the light chain as a conditional input to
generate CDRs. It is further extended as dyMEAN (Kong,
Huang, and Liu 2023), an end-to-end full-atom antibody design method. Two recent works, ABGNN (Gao et al. 2023)
and HTP (Wu and Li 2023), focus on the benefits of antibody
sequence pre-training and hierarchical pre-training, respectively. A detailed comparison of the characteristics of these
methods has been summarized in Table. A1 of Appendix A.
Despite the fruitful progress, existing approaches still face
several challenges. The first issue is that it is hard to model
complex CDRs with long sequences. Take MEAN as an
example in Fig. 1, it fails to model the types and coordinates of those amino acids in the middle of CDRs, especially for CDRs with long sequences. This is probably because the amino acids in the middle region of CDRs are
far from the framework regions on either side and thus cannot acquire sufficient contextual information to make cor-

Introduction
Antibodies are a family of Y-shaped proteins produced
by the immune system to recognize, bind, and neutralize
pathogens (e.g., antigens) (Basu et al. 2019). Since the specificity of antibody-antigen binding is mainly determined by
the Complementary Determining Regions (CDRs) in the antibody, how to design CDRs that bind to specific regions
(epitopes) of an antigen becomes an important problem.
Considering the enormous search space of over 2060 potential CDR sequence candidates and the high variability of
CDR structures, it is not feasible to test all potential CDRs
by experimental assays in the web laboratory, which calls for
computational methods for antigen-binding antibody CDR
design (Tiller and Tessier 2015; Kuroda et al. 2012).
The computational antibody design has undergone a
paradigm shift from energy-base models (Adolf-Bryfogle
et al. 2018; Lapidoth et al. 2015) to deep generative models (Lin et al. 2024; Kong, Huang, and Liu 2022; Wu et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

895

