The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Distortion of Public-Spirited Participatory Budgeting
Mark Bedaywi1 , Bailey Flanigan2 , Mohamad Latifian3 , Nisarg Shah1
1

University of Toronto
2
Harvard University
3
University of Edinburgh
mark.bedaywi@mail.utoronto.ca, bflaniga@andrew.cmu.edu, mohamad.latifian@ed.ac.uk, nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

which are then aggregated via an aggregation rule. The output of this rule is a set of projects to be funded whose total
cost is at most B. PB is now used all over the world to allocate public funds1 (Participedia 2023; De Vries, Nemec, and
Špaček 2022; Wampler, McNulty, and Touchton 2021).
When designing the PB process, one goal that many consider important is ensuring that the ultimate allocation of
funds has high societal benefit. As have many others (e.g.,
Benadè et al. (2021)), we formalize the “societal benefit” of
an allocation by its utilitarian social welfare: the total utility
it gives to all voters. As such, we adopt the standard model of
latent additive utilities: each voter i has utility ui (a) ∈ R⩾0
for each project a, and her total
P utility for a set of projects
S being funded is ui (S) =
a∈S
Pui (a). Then, the social
welfare of S is equal to sw(S) = i∈N ui (S).
If voters’ utilities were known, choosing the maximumwelfare allocation would amount to solving the knapsack
problem. However, in practice voters’ preferences can only
be elicited more coarsely through ballots. One popular PB
ballot format is rankings by value, where voters rank all individual projects. It is not hard to see that this ballot format
loses far too much information about voters’ utilities: suppose there are two projects a and b, and they both cost B so
we can fund only one. If the utilities for (a, b) are (1, 0) for
half the population and (0, X) for the other half (so, the welfare of b is X times that of a), the resulting ballots will be
symmetric. Any deterministic aggregation rule will choose a
without loss of generality, suffering unbounded welfare loss
as X grows large; the best a randomized aggregation rule
can do is to choose a project uniformly at random.
This example illustrates a prohibitive impossibility: in the
worst case, any deterministic rule over ranking ballots will
select an outcome with arbitrarily sub-optimal social welfare
(and while randomized rules can do better, they do so trivially by ignoring voters’ preferences). In fact, this impossibility holds for all widely-studied ballots in the PB literature
due to the same example. Formally, this sub-optimality is
captured with the distortion: the worst-case (over latent utilities) ratio between the best possible social welfare and that
of the outcome. Existing work sidesteps this impossibility by
assuming that each voter’s utilities sum to 1 (Benadè et al.

Participatory budgeting (PB) is an increasingly popular tool
for democratically allocating limited budgets to public-good
projects. In PB, constituents vote on their preferred projects
via ballots, and then an aggregation rule selects a set of
projects whose total cost fits within the budget. Recent work
studies how to design PB ballots and aggregation rules that
yield low distortion outcomes (informally, outcomes with
high social welfare). Existing distortion bounds, however,
rely on strong assumptions that restrict voters’ latent utilities.
We prove that low distortion PB outcomes can be achieved by
dropping these assumptions and instead leveraging the established idea that voters can be public-spirited: they may consider others’ interests alongside their own when voting.
Flanigan, Procaccia, and Wang (2023) prove that in publicspirited single-winner voting (the special case of PB where
exactly one project can be funded) with ranking ballots, deterministic aggregation rules can achieve constant distortion.
Our first contribution is to extend this analysis to PB; there,
we prove that the best distortion permitted by deterministic
rules with ranking ballots grows linearly in the number of
projects. We find that this impossibility—a problem in practice, where m is often large—holds for other known ballots
as well. Our second contribution is the design of a new PB
ballot format that breaks this linear distortion barrier. This
ballot asks voters to rank a predetermined set of entire feasible bundles of projects. We design multiple protocols for
implementing these ballots, each striking a different tradeoff between the number of bundles voters must rank and the
distortion: with m bundles, we get sublinear distortion; with
polynomial bundles, we get logarithmic distortion; and with
pseudopolynomial bundles, we get constant distortion.

1

Introduction

Governments at all scales regularly face the question: Which
public-good projects — e.g., building bike paths or installing
streetlamps — should they fund with their limited budget?
To make such decisions democratically, governments are
increasingly using participatory budgeting (PB), where a
group of constituents convenes to vote on which projects
their government should fund. In PB, the government supplies a budget B and a list of m potential projects with corresponding costs. Voters submit their preferences via ballots,

1
See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of participatory
budgeting votes for a list of use cases.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13605

