The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Certified Trustworthiness in the Era of Large Language Models
Linyi Li
Simon Fraser University
School of Computing Science
linyi li@sfu.ca

Abstract

DecodingTrust (Wang et al. 2023) and more recent ones
such as fine-tuning attacks (Qi et al. 2024). After that, we
will highlight challenges and insights from building LLM
benchmarks, taking InfiBench (Li et al. 2024) and HarmBench (Mazeika et al. 2024) as examples. We conclude by
discussing how to scale certifiable methods for LLMs and
presenting some preliminary results.

Along with the broad deployment of deep learning (DL) systems, their lack of trustworthiness, such as their lack of robustness, fairness, and numerical reliability, is raising serious social concerns, especially in safety-critical scenarios
such as autonomous driving and aircraft navigation. Hence,
a rigorous and accurate evaluation of the trustworthiness of
DL systems is essential and would be a prerequisite for improving DL trustworthiness. The first part of the talk will
be an overview of certified methods for DL trustworthiness.
These methods provide computable guarantees for DL systems in terms of worst-case trustworthiness under certain realistic conditions, such as the accuracy lower bound against
arbitrary tiny perturbations. Based on our taxonomy and systematization, we illustrate key methodologies, specifically semantic randomized smoothing and branch-and-bound, and
their implications for certified DL trustworthiness.
As a representative of recent DL breakthroughs, large language models (LLMs) are transforming our lives, but, on the
other hand, posing more challenges to trustworthiness. For
example, LLMs can be jailbroken with adversarial prompts
to output harmful content with bias, harassment, misinformation, and more. The second part of the talk will be an
overview of LLM trustworthiness. We will start with sharing
hands-on experience in developing fontier LLMs, then illustrate common LLM trustworthiness issues via examples, then
demonstrate evaluation challenges, take one benchmark as an
example, and conclude by envisioning certifiable trustworthiness for LLMs.

References
Li, L.; Geng, S.; Li, Z.; He, Y.; Yu, H.; Hua, Z.; Ning, G.;
Wang, S.; Xie, T.; and Yang, H. 2024. InfiBench: Systematically Evaluating the Question-Answering Capabilities of
Code Large Language Models. In Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Li, L.; Weber, M.; Xu, X.; Rimanic, L.; Kailkhura, B.; Xie,
T.; Zhang, C.; and Li, B. 2021. Tss: Transformation-specific
smoothing for robustness certification. In Proceedings of the
2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 535–557.
Li, L.; Xie, T.; and Li, B. 2023. Sok: Certified robustness for
deep neural networks. In 2023 IEEE symposium on security
and privacy (SP), 1289–1310. IEEE.
Mazeika, M.; Phan, L.; Yin, X.; Zou, A.; Wang, Z.; Mu, N.;
Sakhaee, E.; Li, N.; Basart, S.; Li, B.; et al. 2024. HarmBench: A Standardized Evaluation Framework for Automated Red Teaming and Robust Refusal. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.
Qi, X.; Zeng, Y.; Xie, T.; Chen, P.-Y.; Jia, R.; Mittal, P.; and
Henderson, P. 2024. Fine-tuning Aligned Language Models Compromises Safety, Even When Users Do Not Intend
To! In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Wang, B.; Chen, W.; Pei, H.; Xie, C.; Kang, M.; Zhang, C.;
Xu, C.; Xiong, Z.; Dutta, R.; Schaeffer, R.; et al. 2023. DecodingTrust: A Comprehensive Assessment of Trustworthiness in GPT Models. In Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Zhang, H.; Wang, S.; Xu, K.; Li, L.; Li, B.; Jana, S.; Hsieh,
C.-J.; and Kolter, J. Z. 2022. General cutting planes for
bound-propagation-based neural network verification. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35: 1656–
1670.

The first part of the talk will be an overview of certified
methods for DL trustworthiness following the structure of
our SoK paper (Li, Xie, and Li 2023). We will introduce the
taxonomy of certified methods, the key design methodologies, and the frontier in terms of state-of-the-art trustworthiness guarantees on common DL tasks. We will also dive
deep into two representative methods: semantic randomized
smoothing (Li et al. 2021) and branch-and-bound with differentiable linear relaxations (Zhang et al. 2022).
The second part of the talk will be an overview of LLM
trustworthiness issues and the envisioning of certified methods for LLMs. We present some hands-on experience gained
from developing industry-level frontier LLMs. Then, we
illustrate common trustworthiness issues such as those in
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28713

