The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Parametric ρ-Norm Scaling Calibration
Siyuan Zhang, Linbo Xie*
School of Internet of Things Engineering, Jiangnan University
siyuanz1996@gmail.com, xie linbo@jiangnan.edu.cn

Abstract

operate independently of the model internal optimization,
reconstructing and optimizing the output-probability mapping (Zadrozny and Elkan 2001). In contrast to other calibration techniques, post-processing calibration methods do not
necessitate altering the original baseline, thereby preserving
the model generalization ability for classification (Rahimi
et al. 2020).
Among post-processing calibration methods, parametric
techniques like Platt Scaling (Platt et al. 1999), Temperature Scaling (Tomani, Cremers, and Buettner 2022), and
Beta Calibration (Kull, Silva Filho, and Flach 2017) necessitate parameter optimization using a validation set. The commonly used metric for assessing model confidence, known
as Expected Calibration Error (ECE), computing the expected difference between confidence and accuracy within
each bin (Naeini, Cooper, and Hauskrecht 2015). Confidence estimation captures individual sample characteristics,
yet it cannot be validated on a per-sample basis. Meanwhile, validating bin-level uncertainty fails to capture the
nuances of individual samples. This challenge distinguishes
the assessment of model uncertainty and the design and optimization of parametric output-probability mapping. Specifically, the bin-level loss function, such as ECE, is more
prone to converge to zero during optimization compared to
an instance-level loss function like cross-entropy (Krishnan
and Tickoo 2020). This characteristic makes calibrator optimization susceptible to overfitting, impeding generalization.
To ensure calibrators learn output-probability mappings effectively, it is essential to incorporate specific priori knowledge to limit the optimization hypothesis space and to design
instructive mapping and multi-level optimization objectives.
Inspired by the aforementioned research and questions,
we meticulously considered the internal order-preserving
property (Rahimi et al. 2020) to conserve the inherent uncertainty distribution. Additionally, we assessed the impact
of amplitude on the classifier output, supported by prior
evidence suggesting that excessive output amplitude might
lead to unwarranted calibration error. Building upon this insight, we proposed parametric ρ-Norm Scaling calibration,
addressing the expressivity limitation in TS (Tomani, Cremers, and Buettner 2022) and mitigating the negative effects
by the output amplitudes. Besides, concerning the parameter optimization of the output-probability mapping, we proposed a multi-level loss by introducing a probability distri-

Output uncertainty indicates whether the probabilistic properties reflect objective characteristics of the model output.
Unlike most loss functions and metrics in machine learning,
uncertainty pertains to individual samples, but validating it
on individual samples is unfeasible. When validated collectively, it cannot fully represent individual sample properties,
posing a challenge in calibrating model confidence in a limited data set. Hence, it is crucial to consider confidence calibration characteristics. To counter the adverse effects of the
gradual amplification of the classifier output amplitude in supervised learning, we introduce a post-processing parametric calibration method, ρ-Norm Scaling, which expands the
calibrator expression and mitigates overconfidence due to excessive amplitude while preserving accuracy. Moreover, binlevel objective-based calibrator optimization often results in
the loss of significant instance-level information. Therefore,
we include probability distribution regularization, which incorporates specific priori information that the instance-level
uncertainty distribution after calibration should resemble the
distribution before calibration. Experimental results demonstrate the substantial enhancement in the post-processing calibrator for uncertainty calibration with our proposed method.

Introduction
Model confidence calibration involves refining uncertainty
estimates of the model outputs, enabling more accurate
probability predictions that align closely with the objective characteristics of the output uncertainty. With the progressive expansion of model capacity, the modern models often demonstrate inadequately probability distributions.
Specifically, these probability outputs display unwarranted
over-confidence in comparison to the objective accuracy
(Guo et al. 2017). Furthermore, researchers have identified that achieving high accuracy in classifiers and calibrating the model confidence in baseline are distinct objectives
(Wenger, Kjellström, and Triebel 2020). This scenario emphasizes the pressing necessity to rectify the calibration of
model output uncertainties in deep learning.
As one of the effective calibration methods, postcalibration methods have recently gained popularity, which
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22551

