The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

REPEAT: Improving Uncertainty Estimation in Representation Learning
Explainability
Kristoffer K. Wickstrøm1 * , Thea Brüsch2 , Michael C. Kampffmeyer1, 3 , Robert Jenssen1, 3, 4
1

2

Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
3
Norwegian Computing Center, Oslo, Norway
4
Pioneer Centre for AI, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Abstract

Tackling this drawback has lead to a new direction within
XAI, namely representation learning XAI (R-XAI). Methods within R-XAI solve the problem of explaining representations by either making adaptations of existing XAI methods (Crabbé and van der Schaar 2022) or by designing new
methods that are particularly designed to tackle the representation learning setting (Wickstrøm et al. 2023; Lin et al.
2023; Bertolini, Clevert, and Montanari 2023; Møller et al.
2024).
A key ingredient in recent R-XAI research is uncertainty
estimation (Wickstrøm et al. 2023), where importance is accompanied by a corresponding uncertainty estimate. Providing an indication of certainty is highly desirable, for instance
in safety critical areas such as healthcare (Tonekaboni et al.
2019; Kompa, Snoek, and Beam 2021). However, existing
frameworks are limited to measuring the variation in the importance scores. This only gives an indication of how the numerical importance scores spread out, not if we are certain of
importance. A more critical aspect is how certain are we that
a pixel is important. Consider an estimated importance map,
where all pixels with importance scores higher than 2 are
considered important. Now, take one pixel with importance
value 5.6 ± 0.1 and another with importance value 5.6 ± 1.2.
Due to the higher variance of the second pixel, current RXAI methods would assign high uncertainty to this pixel.
However, since all values within the 95% confidence interval
of the pixel would still be above the importance threshold.
As such, we would still be certain that this pixel is important,
despite the higher uncertainty of the exact value.
Fig. 1 shows an example that illustrates the distinction between these two questions, where a prior metho is compared
to our proposed solution. The example shows which pixels
are important for the representation of this image and corresponding uncertainty estimates that indicate how certain
the importance is. Both methods mostly agree on the important input pixels, but have vastly different estimates of
uncertainty. This shows the effect of modeling certainty in
importance, as opposed to variability in importance scores.
With the aim of answering the question of whether we
are certain that a pixel is important or not, we present a
new R-XAI method called REPEAT. The key idea of REPEAT is to consider each input pixel as a Bernoulli random
variable (RV) that indicates if the pixel is important for the
representation of the input image. To generate samples of

Incorporating uncertainty is crucial to provide trustworthy
explanations of deep learning models. Recent works have
demonstrated how uncertainty modeling can be particularly
important in the unsupervised field of representation learning explainable artificial intelligence (R-XAI). Current RXAI methods provide uncertainty by measuring variability in
the importance score. However, they fail to provide meaningful estimates of whether a pixel is certainly important or
not. In this work, we propose a new R-XAI method called
REPEAT that addresses the key question of whether or not a
pixel is certainly important. REPEAT leverages the stochasticity of current R-XAI methods to produce multiple estimates of importance, thus considering each pixel in an image as a Bernoulli random variable that is either important
or unimportant. From these Bernoulli random variables we
can directly estimate the importance of a pixel and its associated certainty, thus enabling users to determine certainty in
pixel importance. Our extensive evaluation shows that REPEAT gives certainty estimates that are more intuitive, better
at detecting out-of-distribution data, and more concise.

Code — https://github.com/Wickstrom/REPEAT/

Introduction
Representation learning through self-supervision is the cornerstone of recent improvements in the computer vision
domain (Caron et al. 2018; He et al. 2022; Assran et al.
2023; Bardes, Ponce, and LeCun 2022). Transforming images into a new representation has been shown to improve
performance in a wide range of unsupervised tasks (Trosten
et al. 2023; Wickstrøm et al. 2023; Sehwag, Chiang, and
Mittal 2021). Despite the benefits, unsupervised representation learning also suffers from some significant drawbacks,
particularly a lack of explainability. Current methods in explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) are designed with supervised learning in mind, where a scalar model output is
explained in relation to its input (Petsiuk, Das, and Saenko
2018; Bach et al. 2015; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017).
Using these methods to explain representations is either not
possible or requires major modifications of the underlying
algorithms (Crabbé and van der Schaar 2022).
* Corresponding author: kristoffer.k.wickstrom@uit.no
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8341

