The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Disentangle Nighttime Lens Flares: Self-supervised Generation-based Lens Flare
Removal
Yuwen He1 , Wei Wang1 * , Wanyu Wu1 , Kui Jiang2
1

Computer Science and Technology and Hubei Province Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing and Real-time
Industrial System, Wuhan University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
heyuwen@wust.edu.cn, wangwei8@wust.edu.cn, wuwy0510@163.com, jiangkui@hit.edu.cn
Abstract
Lens flares arise from light reflection and refraction within
sensor arrays, whose diverse types include glow, veiling
glare, reflective flare and so on. Existing methods are specialized for one specific type only, and overlook the simultaneous
occurrence of multiple typed lens flares, which is common in
the real-world, e.g. coexistence of glow and displacement reflections from the same light source. These co-occurring lens
flares cannot be effectively resolved by the simple combination of individual flare removal methods, since these coexisting flares originates from the same light source and are generated simultaneously within the same sensor array, exhibit a
complex interdependence rather than simple additive relation.
To model this interdependent flares’ relationship, our Nighttime Lens Flare Formation model is the first attempt to learn
the intrinsic physical relationship between flares on the imaging plane. Building on this physical model, we introduce a solution to this joint flare removal task named Self-supervised
Generation-based Lens Flare Removal Network (SGLFRNet), which is self-supervised without pre-training. Specifically, the nighttime glow is detangled in PSF Rendering
Network(PSFR-Net) based on PSF Rendering Prior, while the
reflective flare is modelled in Texture Prior Based Reflection
Flare Removal Network (TPRR-Net). Empirical evaluations
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in both
joint and individual glare removal tasks.

Figure 1: Up to down: (1) Coexisting flared input and its segmentation GT. (2) Deglowed via Flare7K++ (Dai, Li et al.
2023) and deghosted via RFC (Zhang, Ng et al. 2018) results with its segmented version via (Wu et al. 2021). (3)
Deghosted and deglowed results with its segmented version.
(4) Result and segmented result of our approach.

adopted nighttime dehaze methods to glow suppression
tasks. Based on the smoothness of the glow, (Jin, Yang, and
Tan 2022) introduced an unsupervised light effect suppression method for clean weather. To address individual reflective flares, the Flare7K (Dai, Li et al. 2022) stimulated the
first reflective/ghost flares datasets in a synthetic manner but
limited in Reflective flare patterns. Then, (Dai, Luo et al.
2023) proposed a larger synthetic ghost flare database with
different flare shapes for end-to-end training at nighttime.
However, synthetic paired flare training datasets cannot
accurately model the intricate imaging paths within lens arrays, especially with nighttime light sources. As an example shown in Fig. 1, the flares co-existence cannot be easily
solved via a two-stage cascaded solution in (2) − (3), which
is observed with uncleared glow (blue box) and ghost (yellow box). These cascaded solution further lead to the misrepresentation of sky region (red box) in the semantic segmentation. Our method can solve the joint problem of glow
and ghost and improve the results of semantic segmentation.
To explore their tangle relationship and offer a solution
for this joint flare task, our approach firstly introduces
a comprehensive Nighttime Lens Flare Formation Model
which physically describe the joint formation of glow and

Introduction
Lens flares are common optical artifacts in nighttime photographs, which occur around light sources in images due
to the scattering and reflection of light rays in the medium
and reflection within the camera lens. It can be challenging
to discern details surrounding the light sources as well as
remove the unwanted reflective flare simultaneously, further
hindering the downstream applications.
To tackle lens flares, most hardware solutions focus on
improving the camera’s optics to better eliminate and control flares (Boynton and Kelley 2003; Raskar, Agrawal et al.
2008; Macleod and Macleod 2010; Chen, Zhou et al. 2010).
Inspired by the nighttime haze model including scattered
airlight proposed by (Li, Tan et al. 2015), (Park, Han et al.
2016), (Yang, Liu et al. 2018) and (Jin, Lin et al. 2023)
* Corresponding author: wangwei8@wust.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3464

