The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RATT: A Thought Structure for Coherent and Correct LLM Reasoning
Jinghan Zhang1 , Xiting Wang2 , Weijieying Ren3 , Lu Jiang4 , Dongjie Wang5 , Kunpeng Liu1*
1

Portland State University
Renmin University of China
3
Pennsylvania State University
4
Dalian Maritime University
5
University of Kansas
{jinghanz,kunpeng}@pdx.edu, xitingwang@ruc.edu.cn, wjr5337@psu.edu, jiangl761@dlmu.edu.cn, wangdongjie@ku.edu
2

Abstract

These thought structures help LLMs to organize and generate their responses both contextually and hierarchically, as
well as logically coherent reason across extended narratives
and complex problem spaces.
Researchers have developed various thought structures for
LLMs. Compared to the vanilla input-output (IO) (Zhang
et al. 2024) prompting, where the model directly responds to
the prompt, the basic idea of thought structures like Chainof-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al. 2022) and Self-consistency
with CoT (CoT-SC) (Wang et al. 2022) is to guide the
reasoning process by generating a sequential and coherent
reasoning framework according to the given task. These
methods usually involve generating a series of intermediate
thought steps for analyzing and solving the initial question.
They significantly improve LLM reasoning performance and
the reasoning process transparency.
Despite the advancements in improving LLMs’ reasoning
capability, current thought structures still encounter a major challenge in balancing local factual accuracy and global
strategy planning effectiveness. These limitations could restrict their applicability in complex and dynamic scenarios. For example, in Figure 1, CoT and Tree of Thoughts
(ToT) (Yao et al. 2024), which simulate coherent reasoning processes, lack an effective fact-checking mechanism.
As a result, errors that occur in the early stage of reasoning
can propagate through the entire thought chain and lead the
conclusions to deviate far away from reality. Moreover, the
global selection mechanism of the optimal branch of ToT
is not effective and efficient enough, which could result in
generating excessive texts and branches (Ding et al. 2023).
While Retrieval Augmented Thoughts (RAT) (Wang et al.
2024) combine CoT and Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) (Lewis et al. 2020) to perform fact checking, this
method faces challenges in global strategy optimization, as
it lacks systematic planning and lookahead to search for the
optimal reasoning path in the search space and hence is limited in complex tasks where a broader perspective is necessary (Zhao et al. 2024; Renze and Guven 2024).
Our Targets. To solve the aforementioned issues and enhance the reliability and accuracy of LLM reasoning, we
aim to develop a method that seamlessly unifies local and
global optimization. At the local level, the method should
utilize external knowledge early and continuously to prevent and correct factual errors and thus avoid leading the

Large Language Models (LLMs) gain substantial reasoning and decision-making capabilities from thought structures.
However, existing methods such as Tree of Thought and Retrieval Augmented Thoughts often fall short in complex tasks
due to the limitations of insufficient local retrieval of factual knowledge and inadequate global selection of strategies. These limitations make it challenging for these methods to balance factual accuracy and comprehensive logical optimization effectively. To address these limitations, we
introduce the Retrieval Augmented Thought Tree (RATT),
a novel thought structure that considers both overall logical soundness and factual correctness at each step of the
thinking process. Specifically, at every point of a thought
branch, RATT performs planning and lookahead to explore
and evaluate multiple potential reasoning steps, and integrate
the fact-checking ability of Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) with LLMs’ ability to assess overall strategy. Through
this combination of factual knowledge and strategic feasibility, the RATT adjusts and integrates the thought tree structure to search for the most promising branches within the
search space. This thought structure significantly enhances
the model’s coherence in logical inference and efficiency in
decision-making, and thus increases the limit of the capacity
of LLMs to generate reliable inferences and decisions based
on thought structures. A broad range of experiments on different types of tasks showcases that the RATT structure significantly outperforms existing methods in factual correctness
and logical coherence.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive
reasoning and decision-making capabilities in complex tasks
like mathematical reasoning and creative writing by processing and generating thoughts based on token-level predictions (Huang et al. 2022a; Zhang et al. 2023). However, this approach limits their ability to extend higher-level
or multi-perspective reasoning (Huang et al. 2022b). Research on LLM reasoning indicates that implementing structured thought processes significantly enhances their performance in inference and decision-making (Yu et al. 2023).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26733

