The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IPDN: Image-enhanced Prompt Decoding Network for
3D Referring Expression Segmentation
Qi Chen* 1 , Changli Wu* 1 , Jiayi Ji†1 2 , Yiwei Ma1 , Danni Yang1 , Xiaoshuai Sun1
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen
University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
National University of Singapore.
chenqi@stu.xmu.edu.cn, wuchangli@stu.xmu.edu.cn, jjyxmu@gmail.com, mayiwei@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
yangdanni@stu.xmu.edu.cn, xssun@xmu.edu.cn
Query

Abstract
3D Referring Expression Segmentation (3D-RES) aims to
segment point cloud scenes based on a given expression.
However, existing 3D-RES approaches face two major challenges: feature ambiguity and intent ambiguity. Feature ambiguity arises from information loss or distortion during point
cloud acquisition due to limitations such as lighting and viewpoint. Intent ambiguity refers to the model’s equal treatment
of all queries during the decoding process, lacking top-down
task-specific guidance. In this paper, we introduce an Imageenhanced Prompt Decoding Network (IPDN), which leverages multi-view images and task-driven information to enhance the model’s reasoning capabilities. To address feature
ambiguity, we propose the Multi-view Semantic Embedding
(MSE) module, which injects multi-view 2D image information into the 3D scene and compensates for potential spatial
information loss. To tackle intent ambiguity, we designed a
Prompt-Aware Decoder (PAD) that guides the decoding process by deriving task-driven signals from the interaction between the expression and visual features. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that IPDN outperforms the state-ofthe-art by 1.9 and 4.2 points in mIoU metrics on the 3D-RES
and 3D-GRES tasks, respectively.

A semi-circular
table between
two chairs.

+

Decoder

(a) Traditional Framework
Query
Generation

Query
Decoder
Decoder

A semi-circular
table between
two chairs.

Task-driven
Prompt

Prompt

(b) The proposed IPDN

Figure 1: The pipeline of (a) the previous traditional querybased framework and (b) our method.

recent studies (Wu et al. 2024b; He and Ding 2024; He
et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024a) have pivoted toward adopting
a one-stage query-based paradigm. For example, 3D-STMN
(Wu et al. 2024b) achieves efficient segmentation by directly
matching text with superpoints, while MCLN (Qian et al.
2024b) and some other works (He et al. 2024; Lin et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2024) enhance performance by coupling the
3D-RES task with other tasks for joint multi-task training.
However, despite the promising results these methods
have achieved, they still come with certain limitations: (1)
Feature ambiguity: Existing approaches rely solely on
point cloud data for visual information extraction. However, point cloud data often suffers from information loss
due to factors such as lighting, viewing angles, and sampling rates during collection, making it challenging to reproduce real-world scenes faithfully. Consequently, extracting high-quality features exclusively from point cloud data
becomes difficult. Compared to 2D data, acquiring and annotating 3D data is far more challenging (Dong et al. 2022),
limiting the rapid advancements seen in large-scale visionlanguage pretraining for 2D domains(Fei et al. 2024c,a,b).
Therefore, purely visual 3D backbones (Qi et al. 2017a,b;
Graham, Engelcke, and Van Der Maaten 2018; Deng et al.
2021; Shi et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2021a;
Lai et al. 2022) struggle to align extracted features with tex-

Code — https://github.com/80chen86/IPDN

1

Query
Generation

Introduction

3D Referring Expression Segmentation (3D-RES) presents
significant potential applications in areas such as virtual reality, augmented reality, robotics navigation, and humancomputer interaction. The goal of this task is to segment the
object pointed to by a given textual description from a point
cloud scene (Huang et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2024b).
The earliest approaches (Huang et al. 2021) to 3D-RES
employed a two-stage paradigm: first, they used an instance
segmentation network to generate proposals, and subsequently matched these proposals with the text to compute
matching scores, leading to the final segmentation result.
However, this methodology was found lacking in both efficiency and effectiveness (Wu et al. 2024b). Consequently,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2132

