The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EvHDR-GS: Event-guided HDR Video Reconstruction with 3D Gaussian Splatting
Zehao Chen1,2 * , Zhan Lu3 * , De Ma1,2 , Huajin Tang1,2 , Xudong Jiang3 , Qian Zheng1,2† , Gang Pan1,2†
1

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{zehao, made, htang, qianzheng, gpan}@zju.edu.cn , {zhan007, exdjiang}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Ours

Existing methods

HDR
Frames

…

t1 t2 t3 t4 t5 GT \ Est.

Color
Temporal
Inconsistency Change

…

Optimize by
all frames
HDR
Frames

Trained
Network

HDR
Reconstruction

LDR
Frames

…

Input one/multiple
frames

HDR
Reconstruction

LDR
Frames

Event Stream

High Dynamic Range (HDR) video reconstruction seeks to
accurately restore the extensive dynamic range present in
real-world scenes and is widely employed in downstream
applications. Existing methods typically operate on one or
a small number of consecutive frames, which often leads
to inconsistent brightness across the video due to their limited perspective on the video sequence. Moreover, supervised
learning-based approaches are susceptible to data bias, resulting in reduced effectiveness when confronted with test inputs exhibiting a domain gap relative to the training data. To
address these limitations, we present an event-guided HDR
video reconstruction method through building 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS), to ensure consistent brightness imposed
by 3D consistency. We introduce HDR 3D Gaussians capable
of simultaneously representing HDR and low-dynamic-range
(LDR) colors. Furthermore, we incorporate a learnable HDRto-LDR transformation optimized by input event streams and
LDR frames to eliminate the data bias. Experimental results
on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

HDR 3D
Gaussians
…

t1 t2 t3 t4 t5 GT \ Est.

Temporal
Color
Consistency Consistency

Figure 1: Comparison of existing HDR video reconstruction
methods (left) and our method (right). Existing approaches
frame-by-frame reconstruct HDR information for one or
multiple input LDR frames through pre-trained neural networks. In contrast, our method employs scene representation 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023) to represent
entire LDR frames in the video and conduct HDR reconstruction based on the modeling of the relationship between
RGB frames and events. Compared to the results of HDR
reconstruction, 1) the frame-based method (Chung and Cho
2023) stitches 6 consecutive LDR frames for reducing the
exposure time, while it suffers from brightness inconsistencies between HDR frames (e.g., t1 to t5). In contrast, our
method produces more temporal consistent HDR results;
2) the event-guided method (Yang et al. 2023) leverages a
neural network trained in a supervised manner to estimate
HDR frames, while it introduces data bias and results in a
yellowish color tint. In contrast, our method adopts a selfsupervised approach, learning directly from the distributions
in the current video, thereby avoiding issues related to data
bias.

Introduction
The human visual system perceives a broader dynamic range
to perceptual the environment. However, limited by the low
dynamic range (LDR) of conventional cameras, the recorded
LDR video might lose high dynamic range (HDR) information, e.g., vital highlight and shadow details. As HDR information is useful for improving realism, enhances immersion,
and supports a range of applications in photography, cinematography, video games, and virtual reality, HDR video
reconstruction tasks become more significant.
Existing HDR reconstruction methods focus on recovering frame-by-frame HDR information for LDR video, which
could be categorized into two groups by different input data
requirements, i.e., multi-exposed and single-exposed inputs.
However, each of them has its challenges: 1) multi-exposure
methods suffer from complex capturing settings and ghosting artifacts (Chen et al. 2021a; Yang et al. 2023), 2) singleexposure methods are inherently ill-posed due to the lack
* These authors contributed equally.

of physical cues for reconstructing HDR information (Yang
et al. 2023). Recent advances leverage the event camera to
perform HDR reconstruction (Han et al. 2020; Yang et al.

†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2367

