The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Neural Network Encoding for 3D Color Lookup Tables
Vahid Zehtab* 1, 2, 3 , David B. Lindell1, 2 , Marcus A. Brubaker1, 2, 3, 4 , Michael S. Brown3, 4
1
University of Toronto
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Samsung AI Center Toronto
4
York University
{zehtab, lindell}@cs.toronto.edu, {mab, mbrown}@eecs.yorku.ca
2

Output
images

3D color lookup tables (LUTs) enable precise color manipulation by mapping input RGB values to specific output RGB
values. 3D LUTs are instrumental in various applications, including video editing, in-camera processing, photographic filters, computer graphics, and color processing for displays.
While an individual LUT does not incur a high memory overhead, software and devices may need to store dozens to hundreds of LUTs that can take over 100 MB. This work aims
to develop a neural network architecture that can encode hundreds of LUTs in a single compact representation. To this end,
we propose a model with a memory footprint of less than 0.25
MB that can reconstruct 512 LUTs with only minor color distortion ( ¯
∆EM ≤ 2.0) over the entire color gamut. We also
show that our network can weight colors to provide further
quality gains on natural image colors ( ¯
∆EM ≤ 1.0). Finally,
we show that minor modifications to the network architecture enable a bijective encoding that produces LUTs that are
invertible, allowing for reverse color processing.

Comparison of LUTs
vs. reconstructed LUTs

…

Original

Abstract

…
…

LUT1

LUT2

LUT512

0

Total space for 512 LUTs 124 MB
…

𝑅

+

𝐺′

+

𝑅′

𝐵

+

𝐺

0
i-th ⋮
LUT 1
⋮
0

Δ𝐸
5

…

Ours

Input
images

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨

𝐵′

⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Our network 234 KB

…

LUT1

LUT2

LUT512

Reconstructed LUTs with
average Δ𝐸 ≤ 2 error

Figure 1: We propose a neural network architecture that encodes hundreds of LUTs into a single representation at a
fraction of the memory requirements. Encoded LUTs can be
reconstructed with minimal color distortion (i.e., ∆E ≤ 2).

Code — https://github.com/vahidzee/ennelut
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15438

as smartphones and camera hardware. Black-box compression (e.g., zip) provides limited reduction, for instance, a library of 512 zipped LUTs requires approximately 124 MB.
In this work, we propose a compact neural representation
capable of reconstructing individual LUTs on the fly, reducing storage requirements and enhancing real-time color manipulation capabilities. We examine four network size variants for embedding different numbers of LUTs, with the
largest requiring only 0.3 Mb storage to encode 512 LUTs.
Our model recovers a full-size LUT in under 2 milliseconds,
accommodating real-time applications. The recovered LUTs
incur an average color difference (∆E) of less than or equal
to 2.0, an industry-standard definition for acceptable perceptual color distortion (Sharma and Bala 2017).
We demonstrate the versatility of our method with alternative loss functions and a straightforward weighting of input colors, enabling quality improvements for targeting natural image color gamuts. Our alternative weighted training
achieves color differences (∆E) of less than 1.0 for natural
images. Lastly, we explore a modification to the network architecture, allowing for a bijective encoding of LUTs. This
bijective encoding makes it possible to produce LUTs that
are inherently invertible, opening up opportunities for inverse color processing and expanding the utility of LUTs.

Introduction
Color manipulation is a fundamental operation in computer
vision and image processing, where input RGB values map
to output RGB values. A widely used method for encoding
such mappings is through a 3D color lookup table (LUT).
LUTs are employed in a diverse range of applications, such
as video editing, in-camera processing, photographic filters,
computer graphics, and color processing for displays. Particularly, LUTs play a pivotal role in ensuring color accuracy
and consistency across various display hardware.
An individual 3D LUT imposes a manageable memory
overhead. For example, a standard 33×33×33 LUT at 16bit precision requires approximately 70 KB. However, professional LUTs for color grading or color management often
rely on a 65×65×65 resolution that requires approximately
0.5 MB at 16-bit precision. Storing a library of hundreds of
such LUTs can quickly become a limitation, especially for
applications running on resource-constrained devices, such
* Work done while an intern at the Samsung AI Center Toronto.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9772

