The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bootstrapped Reward Shaping
Jacob Adamczyk1,2 , Volodymyr Makarenko3 , Stas Tiomkin4 , Rahul V. Kulkarni1,2
1
Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts Boston
The NSF Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions
3
Department of Computer Engineering, San José State University
4
Department of Computer Science, Whitacre College of Engineering, Texas Tech University
jacob.adamczyk001@umb.edu, volodymyr.makarenko@sjsu.edu, stas.tiomkin@ttu.edu, rahul.kulkarni@umb.edu
2

Abstract

PBRS was shown to greatly improve the training efficiency
in grid-world tasks with suitably-chosen potential functions
(e.g. the Manhattan distance to the goal). However, this potential function is limited to simple goal-reaching MDPs
and requires external task-specific knowledge to handcraft.
In more complex domains, especially where task-specific
knowledge is not already present, a globally applicable
method for choosing a potential function would be advantageous.
Ng, Harada, and Russell suggested that using the optimal state-value function for the choice of potential:
.
Φ(s) = V ∗ (s) may be useful, as it encodes the optimal values of states, requiring only the remaining non-optimal Qvalues to be learned. This idea was further studied in later
work such as (Zou et al. 2021). However, this approach
presents a circular problem: it requires knowledge of the optimal solution to aid in finding the optimal solution, making
it impractical for single-task learning scenarios.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to choosing
the potential function termed BootStrapped Reward Shaping (BSRS). Rather than using the (unknown) optimal value
function V ∗ itself for the potential function, we use the next
most reasonable choice for a state-dependent function readily available to the agent: the current estimate of the optimal state-value function, V (n) . This approach leverages the
agent’s continually improving estimate of the optimal state
value function (V ∗ ) at step n to introduce a more dense reward signal. By bootstrapping from the agent’s best current
estimate of V ∗ , we introduce an adaptive reward signal that
evolves with the agent’s understanding of the task, while remaining tractable.
The use of a time-dependent potential function raises important questions of convergence, which we address theoretically and empirically in the following sections. Next,
we provide experiments in both tabular and continuous domains with the use of deep neural networks. We find that
the use of this simple but dynamical potential function can
improve sample complexity, even in complex image-based
Atari tasks (Bellemare et al. 2013). Moreover, the proposed
algorithm requires changing only a single line of code in
existing value-based algorithms.
The broader implications of the present work extend beyond immediate performance improvements. By providing a
general, adaptive approach to reward shaping, BSRS opens

In reinforcement learning, especially in sparse-reward domains, many environment steps are required to observe reward information. In order to increase the frequency of such
observations, “potential-based reward shaping” (PBRS) has
been proposed as a method of providing a more dense reward
signal while leaving the optimal policy invariant. However,
the required “potential function” must be carefully designed
with task-dependent knowledge to not deter training performance. In this work, we propose a “bootstrapped” method of
reward shaping, termed BSRS, in which the agent’s current
estimate of the state-value function acts as the potential function for PBRS. We provide convergence proofs for the tabular
setting, give insights into training dynamics for deep RL, and
show that the proposed method improves training speed in the
Atari suite.

Introduction
The field of reinforcement learning has continued to enjoy
successes in solving a variety of problems in both simulation and the physical world. However, the practical use of
reinforcement learning in large-scale real-world problems is
hindered by the enormous number of environment interactions needed for convergence. Furthermore, even defining
the reward functions for such problems (“reward engineering”) has proven to be a significant challenge. Improper design of the reward function can inadvertently change the optimal policy, leading to suboptimal or undesirable behaviors,
while attempts to create more dense or interpretable reward
signals often come at the cost of task complexity. Historically, earlier attempts to adjust the reward function through
“reward shaping” indeed resulted in unpredictable and negative changes to the corresponding optimal policy (Randløv
and Alstrøm 1998).
A significant breakthrough in the field of reward shaping
came with the introduction of Potential-Based Reward Shaping (PBRS) from (Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999). PBRS
provided a theoretically-grounded method for changing the
reward function while keeping the optimal policy fixed. This
guarantee framed PBRS as an attractive method of injecting
prior knowledge or domain expertise into the reward function through the use of the so-called “potential function”.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15302

