The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ScamNet: Toward Explainable Large Language Model-Based
Fraudulent Shopping Website Detection
Marzieh Bitaab∗1 , Alireza Karimi1 , Zhuoer Lyu1 , Ahmadreza Mosallanezhad2 ,
Adam Oest* 3 , Ruoyu Wang1 , Tiffany Bao1 , Yan Shoshitaishvili1 , Adam Doupé1
1

Arizona State University,
2
NVIDIA,
3
Amazon
{mbitaab,akarimi6,zlyu15,fishw,tbao,yans,adoupe1}@asu.edu,
dmosallanezh@nvidia.com, aoest@amazon.com
Abstract

Traditional approaches to identifying fraudulent websites
rely heavily on manually crafted features, which can be
time-consuming to create and potentially miss subtle indicators. Recent methods such as Scamdog Millionaire (Kotzias
et al. 2023) and B EYOND P HISH (Bitaab et al. 2023) attempted to address this issue but each has limitations. Scamdog Millionaire extracts 111 features from collected domains to build a random forest-based classifier, yet its data
collection process may introduce bias by relying on specific scam repositories and filtering out popular domains,
potentially overlooking sophisticated scams masquerading
as well-known entities. Moreover, the limited scope of manual verification in its real-world application raises concerns
about the robustness of the validation process.
B EYOND P HISH, a state-of-the-art fraudulent shopping
websites detection model, emphasizes URL-derived features
such as length, presence of suspicious keywords, and unusual characters. This model detected fraudulent shopping
websites with a high detection rate of 98.34% (Bitaab et al.
2023). However, scammers can easily manipulate URLs to
appear legitimate, thus evading detection. Moreover, the reliance of this approach on a limited set of manually engineered features may struggle to keep pace with the evolving tactics employed by fraudsters (and our evaluation bears
this out, as B EYOND P HISH’s F-1 score drops from 90.19%
on their original dataset to 27.14% on a similar dataset we
collected two years later). B EYOND P HISH also lacks explainability which is a critical factor to the practice, since
browsers that are responsible for blocking illicit websites
cannot ban a website without a clear explaination. Therefore, explainability will reduce the legal risk for browser
vendors such as Google and Microsoft.
Considering the limitations of traditional models and the
unexplored potential of Large Language Models (LLMs) in
identifying fraudulent shopping websites, two critical questions arise: (1) can LLMs effectively detect fraudulent shopping websites at scale using their inherent knowledge and
capabilities and (2) what approach should we employ to
maximize performance when using LLMs for explainable
fraudulent shopping websites detection? To answer these
questions, we examine LLMs’ efficacy in identifying fraudulent shopping websites.

Fraudulent shopping websites pose a significant threat to online consumers and legitimate businesses: in 2023, victims
of such scams reported $392 million in losses to the Federal
Trade Commission. This alarming trend not only impacts individuals but also erodes societal trust in e-commerce, necessitating urgent countermeasures. While previous studies have
attempted to identify these fraudulent websites at scale, they
face limitations such as potential bias in data collection, overreliance on easily manipulated features, and the lack of explainable results. This study explores the potential of Large
Language Models (LLMs) in identifying fraudulent shopping
websites, revealing that current LLMs underperform compared to existing machine learning models. To address this,
we propose S CAM N ET, a fine-tuned LLM for explainable
fraudulent shopping website detection. Our experimental results on real-world datasets demonstrate a breakthrough in
detection performance from 22.35% detection rate to 95.59%,
particularly in identifying subtle deceptive tactics such as using a legitimate-looking website template. S CAM N ET offers
interpretable insights into its decision-making process, enhancing transparency and overcoming a key limitation of previous approaches.

Code and model weights —
https://github.com/mbitaab/scamNet

Introduction
The proliferation of fraudulent e-commerce websites poses a
significant threat to the society, rippling from end users, vendors, and financial departments. Fraudulent shopping websites, distinct from phishing sites, lure customers with enticing discounts on popular items, often resulting in the delivery of counterfeit goods or no products at all. These scams
pose a broader risk to the society by indiscriminately targeting online consumers, unlike phishing attacks which impersonate only a specific brand. The Federal Trade Commission
reports a surge in online shopping scams, ranking them the
second most-reported fraud type in 2023, with $392 million
in loss (Commission 2023).
* The work was done prior to joining Amazon.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27841

