The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Harnessing Multimodal Large Language Models for Multimodal Sequential
Recommendation
Yuyang Ye1 , Zhi Zheng2 , Yishan Shen3 , Tianshu Wang4 , Hengruo Zhang4 ,
Peijun Zhu5 , Runlong Yu6 , Kai Zhang2 , Hui Xiong7 *
1

Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers University
2
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computational Science, University of Pennsylvania
4
Bytedance Inc.
5
School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology
6
Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh
7
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
yuyang.ye@rutgers.edu, zhengzhi97@mail.ustc.edu, yishans@sas.upenn.edu, {ustcwtsphy, hengruoz}@gmail.com,
zpj@gatech.edu, ruy59@pitt.edu, kkzhang08@ustc.edu.cn, xionghui@ust.hk
Abstract

understanding (Floridi and Chiriatti 2020; Achiam et al.
2023; Touvron et al. 2023), which has been instrumental
in advancing recommendation systems (RSs). LLMs have
demonstrated remarkable improvements in processing complex user preferences due to its strong semantic understanding and summarization ability. These attributes significantly enhance personalization and accuracy in recommendations(Wu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024; Ren et al. 2024),
particularly in Sequential Recommendations (SRs) where
extracting long historical preferences is crucial (Hou et al.
2023; Zheng et al. 2024; Zhai et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023).
Simultaneously, beyond solely modeling textual information, there has been a growing interest in leveraging multimodal information (Liu et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024).
Techniques such as multimodal fusion and gated multimodal units have been utilized to integrate data from various
sources—images, videos, and audio—enriching the context
for recommendations. This offers a deeper understanding
of user-item interactions and naturally leads to the exploration of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) for
enhancing multimodal recommendation systems (Liu et al.
2021b; Zhou and Miao 2024; Kim et al. 2024). MLLMs
merge multimodal information into a unified textual semantic space, enhancing the system’s ability to understand complex data inputs, thereby can significantly improving recommendation accuracy (Liu et al. 2024d; Zhang et al. 2024).
The application of MLLMs in sequential recommender systems presents a promising avenue for dynamically adapting
to user preferences and handling the complexity of multimodal data, which holds considerable untapped potential.
However, integrating MLLMs into multimodal sequential
recommendation systems introduces a set of notable challenges. First, the inherent complexity and computational demands of processing sequential multimodal data, particularly with multiple ordered image inputs, significantly constrain the scalability and efficiency of these systems (Yue
et al. 2024; Koh, Fried, and Salakhutdinov 2024; Ye et al.
2024). Moreover, conventional MLLMs often exhibit limitations in comprehending the temporal dynamics of user in-

Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have
demonstrated significant potential in the field of Recommendation Systems (RSs). Most existing studies have focused on converting user behavior logs into textual prompts
and leveraging techniques such as prompt tuning to enable
LLMs for recommendation tasks. Meanwhile, research interest has recently grown in multimodal recommendation
systems that integrate data from images, text, and other
sources using modality fusion techniques. This introduces
new challenges to the existing LLM-based recommendation paradigm which relies solely on text modality information. Moreover, although Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) capable of processing multi-modal inputs have
emerged, how to equip MLLMs with multi-modal recommendation capabilities remains largely unexplored. To this
end, in this paper, we propose the Multimodal Large Language Model-enhanced Sequential Multimodal Recommendation (MLLM-MSR) model. To capture the dynamic user
preference, we design a two-stage user preference summarization method. Specifically, we first utilize an MLLM-based
item-summarizer to extract image feature given an item and
convert the image into text. Then, we employ a recurrent
user preference summarization generation paradigm to capture the dynamic changes in user preferences based on an
LLM-based user-summarizer. Finally, to enable the MLLM
for multi-modal recommendation task, we propose to finetune a MLLM-based recommender using Supervised FineTuning (SFT) techniques. Extensive evaluations across various datasets validate the effectiveness of MLLM-MSR, showcasing its superior ability to capture and adapt to the evolving
dynamics of user preferences.

Code — https://github.com/YuyangYe/MLLM-MSR

Introduction
The development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has
significantly enhanced the capacity for natural language
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13069

