The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Error Diversity Matters: An Error-Resistant Ensemble Method
for Unsupervised Dependency Parsing
Behzad Shayegh1 , Hobie H.-B. Lee1 , Xiaodan Zhu2 , Jackie Chi Kit Cheung3,4 , Lili Mou1,4
1

NDMV
NE-DMV

CRFAE

Sib&L-NDMV

NDMV

NE-DMV

68.5
68.0
67.5

Figure 1: (a) Performances of individuals. (b) Performances
of ensembles by adding individuals in (a) from left to right.
Numbers are UASs on the WSJ test set, reported by the mean
and the standard deviation through five runs. The experiment
setup is detailed in §4.1.

that the combination of two different models can outperform both individuals, suggesting the varied contributions
of different models. We follow our previous work on constituency parsing (Shayegh et al. 2024; Shayegh, Wen, and
Mou 2024) and build an ensemble of different unsupervised
dependency parsers to leverage their diverse expertise.1 We
regard the ensemble output as the dependency structure that
maximizes its overall similarity to all the individual models’
outputs. For the similarity metric, we employ the unlabeled
attachment score (UAS; Nivre and Fang 2017), which is the
most widely used evaluation metric of the task.
In our work, we observe that a naı̈ve application of
Shayegh et al. (2024)’s ensemble is sensitive to weak individuals in dependency parsing. As shown in Figure 1, a
best-to-worst incremental ensemble experiment encounters
a significant drop in performance when weaker individuals
are added. This drop is due to the accumulation of individual
errors, which arises from a low error diversity.
It is important to distinguish between two types of diversity: expertise diversity and error diversity. The former
refers to the phenomenon that different models excel on
different subsets of samples, while the latter indicates that
models are wrong in different ways for each sample. Although both types of diversity are crucial for successful en-

Code — https://github.com/MANGA-UOFA/ED4UDP
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11543

1

(b)

L-NDMV

(a)

69.0

Sib-NDMV

50

CRFAE

60

We address unsupervised dependency parsing by building an
ensemble of diverse existing models through post hoc aggregation of their output dependency parse structures. We
observe that these ensembles often suffer from low robustness against weak ensemble components due to error accumulation. To tackle this problem, we propose an efficient
ensemble-selection approach that considers error diversity
and avoids error accumulation. Results demonstrate that our
approach outperforms each individual model as well as previous ensemble techniques. Additionally, our experiments show
that the proposed ensemble-selection method significantly
enhances the performance and robustness of our ensemble,
surpassing previously proposed strategies, which have not accounted for error diversity.

L-NDMV

Abstract

Sib-NDMV

Dept. Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta
Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering & Ingenuity Labs Research Institute, Queen’s University
3
Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute (Mila), McGill University
4
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
the.shayegh@gmail.com, hobie.lee@ualberta.ca,
xiaodan.zhu@queensu.ca, jcheung@cs.mcgill.ca, doublepower.mou@gmail.com
Sib&L-NDMV

2

Introduction

Syntactic parsing, a fundamental task in natural language
processing (NLP), refers to identifying grammatical structures in text (Zhang 2020), which can help downstream
NLP tasks such as developing explainable models (Amara,
Sevastjanova, and El-Assady 2024). Unsupervised syntactic
parsing is particularly beneficial for processing languages
or domains with limited resources, as it eliminates the need
for human-annotated training data (Kann et al. 2019). In
addition, autonomously discovering patterns and structures
helps to provide evidence to test linguistic theories (Goldsmith 2001) and cognitive models (Bod 2009). Two common
types of syntactic parsing include: (1) constituency parsing,
organizing words and phrases in a sentence into a hierarchy (Chomsky 1967), and (2) dependency parsing, predicting dependence links between words in a sentence (Tesnière,
Osborne, and Kahane 2015). The latter is particularly interesting given its possible applications to other fields, e.g.,
RNA structure prediction (Wang and Cohen 2025).
Unsupervised dependency parsing has seen diverse approaches over decades (Smith and Eisner 2005; Cai, Jiang,
and Tu 2017; Han et al. 2020). Yang et al. (2020) show

1

Expertise diversity may be due to different inductive biases,
objective functions, data features (Rokach 2009), and/or different
training subsets (Breiman 1996; Wen et al. 2023, 2025). In our
work, we build an ensemble of different models exploring various
structures, predictors, and training methods.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25119

