The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Numerical Pruning for Efficient Autoregressive Models
Xuan Shen1 * , Zhao Song2 , Yufa Zhou3 , Bo Chen4 , Jing Liu5 , Ruiyi Zhang2 , Ryan A. Rossi2 , Hao
Tan2 , Tong Yu2 , Xiang Chen2 , Yufan Zhou2 , Tong Sun2 , Pu Zhao1 , Yanzhi Wang1† , Jiuxiang Gu2†
1

Northeastern University
2
Adobe Research
3
University of Pennsylvania
4
Middle Tennessee State University
5
Monash University
{shen.xu, p.zhao, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu, jigu@adobe.com
Abstract

Zhan et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2024; Zhan et al. 2024b) have
sought to compress these models to enhance their execution
efficiency. Compared to irregular pruning methods, structural pruning offers a more efficient reduction in both computational and memory overhead (Jian et al. 2021; Gong
et al. 2022, 2023). By maintaining a consistent and regular
structure, it simplifies implementation, accelerates processing, and leads to more predictable resource savings (Kong
et al. 2022, 2023). However, most of these efforts focus
solely on language models and language-related research areas. Consequently, their methods are not readily applicable
to image generation tasks because of the fundamental differences in data structure and computational requirements
between language and image processing (Reed et al. 2016;
Parmar et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2022; Shen et al. 2024a,c,b,
2023b,a; Li et al. 2023, 2024c,b). Therefore, it is crucial
to explore the transformer architecture itself, rather than focusing on specific application models. This motivates us to
develop a general method for compressing autoregressive
models applicable to multiple kinds of generative tasks.

Transformers have emerged as the leading architecture in
deep learning, proving to be versatile and highly effective
across diverse domains beyond language and image processing. However, their impressive performance often incurs high
computational costs due to their substantial model size. This
paper focuses on compressing decoder-only transformerbased autoregressive models through structural weight pruning to improve the model efficiency while preserving performance for both language and image generation tasks. Specifically, we propose a training-free pruning method that calculates a numerical score with Newton’s method for the Attention and MLP modules, respectively. Besides, we further propose another compensation algorithm to recover the pruned
model for better performance. To verify the effectiveness of
our method, we provide both theoretical support and extensive experiments. Our experiments show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance with reduced memory
usage and faster generation speeds on GPUs.

1

Introduction

Additionally, the recovery of pruned models are crucial.
Full-parameter retraining of large autoregressive models after pruning is often computationally prohibitive, making calibrations with a few samples a preferred approach. Previous
work (Frantar and Alistarh 2023) employs the Optimal Brain
Surgeon (OBS) technique (Hassibi, Stork, and Wolff 1993;
LeCun, Denker, and Solla 1989) for weight updates during pruning. However, its heavy reliance on the approximation information increases sensitivity to noise and reduces
robustness across different datasets. SliceGPT (Ashkboos
et al. 2024) relies on a large number of samples for pruning and calibration, leading to overfitting on calibration data
and limiting the generalization to other different datasets.

Transformers have been dominant in generative models.
This includes Large Language Models (LLMs) (Vaswani
et al. 2017; Touvron et al. 2023b) for language generation, as well as recent autoregressive image generation models (Van Den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017; Esser, Rombach,
and Ommer 2021; Ramesh et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022). Notably, models such as LlamaGen (Sun et al. 2024), which
use image tokenizers to convert continuous images into discrete tokens, have demonstrated the ability to surpass diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Rombach et al.
2022) in image generation tasks. The “next-token prediction” paradigm demonstrates significant capabilities in addressing both language and image generation tasks, enabling solutions that mimic human-like conversational interactions (Achiam, Adler et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024a).
Recognizing the capabilities of large autoregressive models pioneering works (Frantar and Alistarh 2023; Sun et al.
2023; Ma, Fang, and Wang 2023; Ashkboos et al. 2024;

In this work, we present a novel structural pruning approach that leverages our proposed numerical score, combined with compensation techniques for performance recovery. We first calculate the numerical score for each layer
through solving the optimal pruning mask for the minimization of pruning errors using the Newton’s method. By ranking these numerical scores of all layers, we generate the
globally pruning mask with the specified pruning ratio. Additionally, we introduce a compensation algorithm to recover

* Work done during internship at Adobe Research
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20418

