The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Asymmetric Reinforcing Against Multi-Modal Representation Bias
Xiyuan Gao1,2 , Bing Cao1,2 * , Pengfei Zhu1 , Nannan Wang2 , Qinghua Hu1
1

2

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300000, China
The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710000, China
{gaoxiyuan, caobing, zhupengfei, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
The strength of multimodal learning lies in its ability to integrate information from various sources, providing rich and
comprehensive insights. However, in real-world scenarios,
multi-modal systems often face the challenge of dynamic
modality contributions, the dominance of different modalities may change with the environments, leading to suboptimal performance in multimodal learning. Current methods
mainly enhance weak modalities to balance multimodal representation bias, which inevitably optimizes from a partialmodality perspective, easily leading to performance descending for dominant modalities. To address this problem, we
propose an Asymmetric Reinforcing method against Multimodal representation bias (ARM). Our ARM dynamically reinforces the weak modalities while maintaining the ability to
represent dominant modalities through conditional mutual information. Moreover, we provide an in-depth analysis that optimizing certain modalities could cause information loss and
prevent leveraging the full advantages of multimodal data. By
exploring the dominance and narrowing the contribution gaps
between modalities, we have significantly improved the performance of multimodal learning, making notable progress in
mitigating imbalanced multimodal learning.

Figure 1: Accuracy curve of dominant modality compared
with joint training baseline of imbalanced multimodal learning methods on Kinetics Sounds dataset. Other methods:
Greedy (Wu et al. 2022), AGM(Li et al. 2023a), Samplevaluation (Wei et al. 2024).

Introduction
Multimodal learning has emerged as a pivotal area in the
field of machine learning, leveraging data from multiple
sources to enhance the performance of models. This approach has been particularly transformative in applications
such as image and text analysis, speech recognition, and
autonomous driving, where combining visual, auditory, and
textual information leads to more robust systems and makes
multimodal learning an exciting frontier with significant potential (Huang et al. 2021). Despite promising yields, multimodal learning faces a critical challenge: imbalanced learning among different modalities. In most scenarios, partial
modalities, even a single modality, may dominate the learning process, leading to insufficient learning of other modalities. Some modalities may become hard to learn due to environmental interference or limited information, leading to
a multimodal bias for easier-to-learn modalities (Wu et al.

2022), and multimodal learning may degrade to unimodal
learning (Huang et al. 2022).
Imbalanced learning undermines the core objective of
multimodal learning, which is to harness the complementary strengths of different data formats to achieve superior
performance. In recent years, many extraordinary methods
have been proposed to solve this problem, including canonical correlation analysis (Sun et al. 2020), random forest (Bi
et al. 2020) and ensemble learning (Livne et al. 2018). Coupled with continuously optimized large-scale datasets and
algorithm innovation, deep learning methods have shown
significant promise in addressing modality imbalance (Lee,
Lee, and Kim 2022; Das et al. 2023). The researchers attempted to balance the multimodal learning process through
methods such as gradient modulation (Peng et al. 2022; Li
et al. 2023a), collaborative learning (Rahate et al. 2022), and
evaluation of modality contributions (Wei et al. 2024). However, these methods alleviate the imbalance by improving the

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16754

