The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training Matting Models Without Alpha Labels
Wenze Liu1 , Zixuan Ye2 , Hao Lu2∗ , Zhiguo Cao2 , Xiangyu Yue1 *
1

2

MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Prior Art

Abstract
The labeling difficulty has been a longstanding problem in
deep image matting. To escape from fine labels, this work explores using rough annotations such as trimaps coarsely indicating the foreground/background as supervision. We present
that the cooperation between learned semantics from indicated known regions and proper assumed matting rules can
help infer alpha values at transition areas. Inspired by the
nonlocal principle in traditional image matting, we build a directional distance consistency loss (DDC loss) at each pixel
neighborhood to constrain the alpha values conditioned on
the input image. DDC loss forces the distance of similar pairs
on the alpha matte and on its corresponding image to be consistent. In this way, the alpha values can be propagated from
learned known regions to unknown transition areas. With
only images and trimaps, a matting model can be trained under the supervision of a known loss and the proposed DDC
loss. Experiments on AM-2K and P3M-10K dataset show
that our paradigm achieves comparable performance with the
fine-label-supervised baseline, while sometimes offers even
more satisfying results than human-labeled ground truth.

Matting
Model

Loss

Input

Ours

Output

Fine label

DDC Loss

foreground
background

Known
Loss

Matting
Model

transition

Input

Output

Coarse label

(a) Training Paradigm

(b) Our Results

Figure 1: Our training paradigm. (a) Compared to prior
art with alpha matte labels, we use only coarse trimap labels. We use an L1 loss to supervise the known regions indicated by the trimap, and devise a DDC loss to infer the alpha
values at transition areas. (b) Even without fine annotated labels, our trained model predicts accurate alpha mattes.

Code — https://github.com/poppuppy/alpha-free-matting

Introduction
Image matting, a fundamental task in image editing, aims to
decompose an input image I into two layers, i.e., the foreground F and the background B. Specifically, it estimates
the foreground opacity α a.k.a. alpha matte as
I = αF + (1 − α)B .
(1)
Recent years have witnessed dramatic improvement in image matting techniques (Hou and Liu 2019; Li and Lu 2020;
Liu et al. 2021a,b; Tang et al. 2019; Park et al. 2022; Yao
et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2021), particularly since Deep Image
Matting (DIM) (Xu et al. 2017) pioneered an end-to-end
training paradigm. Despite the prosperity of the labelingand-training paradigm, large-scale datasets are difficult to
collect for the subtle details required. Existing datasets either
composite (Xu et al. 2017) few annotated foreground objects with thousands of backgrounds, or make small specialpurpose (Li et al. 2022, 2021) datasets. Although the deficiency of datasets is regarded as a bottleneck of deep image

matting, the contradiction between the need of large-scale
datasets and the labeling difficulty has yet to be handled.
Solving α from Eq. (1) has not always been relying on
labels. Aided by user prompts, e.g., trimaps indicating the
known (1 for foreground and 0 for background), and the unknown (0.5 for transition) regions as shown in Fig. 1, many
works (Chuang et al. 2001; Sun et al. 2004; Levin, Lischinski, and Weiss 2007; He, Sun, and Tang 2010; Lee and Wu
2011; Chen, Li, and Tang 2013) try to trace the color cues
to infer alpha values from known to unknown. For example,
Closed Form Matting (Levin, Lischinski, and Weiss 2007)
assumes the color line model in each neighborhood to figure out the alpha matte. Nonlocal Matting (Lee and Wu
2011) borrows the nonlocal principle from image denoising (Buades, Coll, and Morel 2005, 2008) to solve the alpha
value with affinity matrices. These traditional methods tend
to be impaired in the face of complex textures or similar colors on the junction of foreground and background (Xu et al.

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5604

Coar

