The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UniPCGC: Towards Practical Point Cloud Geometry Compression via an Efficient
Unified Approach
Kangli Wang1 , Wei Gao1,2 *
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology, Shenzhen Graduate School,
Peking University, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
kangliwang@stu.pku.edu.cn, gaowei262@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

10%
CR gain ours over others(%)

Learning-based point cloud compression methods have made
significant progress in terms of performance. However, these
methods still encounter challenges including high complexity, limited compression modes, and a lack of support for
variable rate, which restrict the practical application of these
methods. In order to promote the development of practical point cloud compression, we propose an efficient unified point cloud geometry compression framework, dubbed
as UniPCGC. It is a lightweight framework that supports
lossy compression, lossless compression, variable rate and
variable complexity. First, we introduce the Uneven 8-Stage
Lossless Coder (UELC) in the lossless mode, which allocates
more computational complexity to groups with higher coding difficulty, and merges groups with lower coding difficulty.
Second, Variable Rate and Complexity Module (VRCM) is
achieved in the lossy mode through joint adoption of a rate
modulation module and dynamic sparse convolution. Finally,
through the dynamic combination of UELC and VRCM, we
achieve lossy compression, lossless compression, variable
rate and complexity within a unified framework. Compared
to the previous state-of-the-art method, our method achieves
a compression ratio (CR) gain of 8.1% on lossless compression, and a Bjontegaard Delta Rate (BD-Rate) gain of 14.02%
on lossy compression, while also supporting variable rate and
variable complexity.

0%

Lossless compression
UniPCGC(Ours)
2.3M

-10%

SparsePCGC
5.0M
VoxelDNN
3.4M

-20%

OctAttention
18.1M

G-PCC v23
MsVoxelDNN
-30%
13.0M

-40%
0.1

1

10 100 1000

inference time(s)

BD-rate gain ours over others(%)

1

Lossy compression
10% UniPCGC(Ours)
0%

7.6M

-10%

SparsePCGC
9.5M

-20%
-40% PCGCv2
3.2M

-80%

GeoCNNv2
18.8M
ADL-PCC
32.8M
G-PCC v23

-100%
0.1

1

10

inference time(s)

Figure 1: Performance comparisons for the proposed method
and the other methods. The left figure shows the CR gain obtained by the proposed UniPCGC method in lossless compression. The right figure shows the BD-rate gain obtained
by the proposed UniPCGC method in lossy compression.

In point cloud compression, accurate probability estimation of point occupancy state can significantly reduce the
bit rate. Some methods (Nguyen et al. 2021a,b; Fu et al.
2022; Nguyen and Kaup 2023) achieve satisfactory performance by adopting autoregressive approaches for probability estimation. However, the decoding complexity of
autoregressive-based methods is prohibitively high, making
them impractical for real-world applications. Many efforts
(Wang et al. 2022; Song et al. 2023; Jin et al. 2024) focus on exploring more efficient grouping strategies to tradeoff the performance and decoding complexity. However, the
first group lacks any context information, which leads an unacceptably high bit rate. Reducing the bit rate of preceding
groups becomes crucial for improving compression performance. To address this issue, we propose an uneven grouping scheme that reduces the size of the first group, allowing
more points to benefit from context information.
Flexibility is crucial for point cloud compression algorithms. In terms of flexibility, (Wang et al. 2022) enhances
flexibility by simultaneously supporting both lossy and lossless compression. In the field of image compression, certain
lossy compression methods (Yin et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2021)

Introduction
3D point clouds have been widely used in applications such
as immersive media communication and digital culture heritage, etc. There has been an increasing amount of point
cloud data generated. To relieve the burden of massive data
transmission and storage, there is an immediate requirement to develop point cloud compression algorithms with
high efficiency. Although non-learning compression algorithm such as Geometry based Point Cloud Compression
(Cao et al. 2021) (G-PCC) has been developed for point
cloud compression, its performances is still not satisfactory.
With the advancement of deep learning, numerous methods base on learning have been proposed. However, current
learning-based methods still need to be improved in terms of
performance and flexibility.
* Corresponding Author: Wei Gao.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12721

