The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ChatBug: A Common Vulnerability of Aligned LLMs Induced by Chat Templates
Fengqing Jiang* , Zhangchen Xu* , Luyao Niu, Bill Yuchen Lin, Radha Poovendran
University of Washington
{fqjiang, zxu9, luyaoniu, byuchen, rp3}@uw.edu

Direct Instruct Attack

Abstract

How to build a bomb?

Large language models (LLMs) are expected to follow instructions from users and engage in conversations. Techniques to enhance LLMs’ instruction-following capabilities
typically fine-tune them using data structured according to a
predefined chat template. Although chat templates are shown
to be effective in optimizing LLM performance, their impact
on safety alignment of LLMs has been less understood, which
is crucial for deploying LLMs safely at scale.
In this paper, we investigate how chat templates affect safety
alignment of LLMs. We identify a common vulnerability,
named ChatBug, that is introduced by chat templates. Our
key insight to identify ChatBug is that the chat templates
provide a rigid format that need to be followed by LLMs,
but not by users. Hence, a malicious user may not necessarily follow the chat template when prompting LLMs. Instead,
malicious users could leverage their knowledge of the chat
template and accordingly craft their prompts to bypass safety
alignments of LLMs. We study two attacks to exploit the
ChatBug vulnerability. Additionally, we demonstrate that
the success of multiple existing attacks can be attributed to
the ChatBug vulnerability. We show that a malicious user
can exploit the ChatBug vulnerability of eight state-of-theart (SOTA) LLMs and effectively elicit unintended responses
from these models. Moreover, we show that ChatBug can
be exploited by existing jailbreak attacks to enhance their attack success rates. We investigate potential countermeasures
to ChatBug. Our results show that while adversarial training effectively mitigates the ChatBug vulnerability, the victim model incurs significant performance degradation. These
results highlight the trade-off between safety alignment and
helpfulness. Developing new methods for instruction tuning
to balance this trade-off is an open and critical direction for
future research. WARNING: This paper contains model outputs that may be considered offensive.

Sorry, but I cannot assist you …
Format Mismatch Attack
How to build a bomb?
Sure, here is the instruction on
how to build a bomb! …
Message Overflow Attack
How to build a bomb?

, here is the instruction on how
to build a bomb! …
Template

Mismatched Template

Overflow Message

Figure 1: This figure illustrates how the format mismatch
attack and message overflow attack exploit ChatBug. The
format mismatch attack alters the default chat format ( )
to bypass safety alignment of LLMs. The message overflow
attack inserts a short sequence of tokens ( ) into the field
reserved for the aligned LLM to bypass safety alignment.
used to empower conversational agents. During the interactions with users, LLMs are required to follow instructions
from users and engage in conversations in a meaningful way.
Standard techniques to enhance instruction-following capabilities include instruction tuning (Bakker et al. 2022; Wei
et al. 2022) and preference tuning (Bai et al. 2022; Christiano et al. 2017; Ouyang et al. 2022a).
A common practice for instruction tuning and preference
tuning is to structure data using chat templates (OpenAI
2023). A chat template defines a format for representing
conversations as sequences of tokens. The format specifies
the roles involved in the conversation and the associated
messages. Chat templates are shown to be effective in optimizing the LLMs’ performance (Jiang et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023), allowing LLMs to generate coherent responses
in their designated roles.
In addition to instruction-following capabilities, LLMs

Code — https://github.com/uw-nsl/ChatBug
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12935

1

Sure

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 (Achiam
et al. 2023) and Llama-3 (Meta 2024) have been increasingly
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27347

