The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Complex Heterogeneous Multimodal Fake News via Social Latent
Network Inference
Mingxin Li, Yuchen Zhang, Haowei Xu, Xianghua Li* , Chao Gao, Zhen Wang
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{mingxinli, yc20011204, hwxu}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {li xianghua, cgao, w-zhen}@nwpu.edu.cn

Fake News
Real News

Abstract
With the diversification of online social platforms, news dissemination has become increasingly complex, heterogeneous,
and multimodal, making the fake news detection task more
challenging and crucial. Previous works mainly focus on
obtaining social relationships of news via retweets, limiting the accurate detection when real cascades are inaccessible. Given the proven assessment of the spreading influence of events, this paper proposes a method called HML
(Complex Heterogeneous Multimodal Fake News Detection
method via Latent Network Inference). Specifically, an improved social latent network inference strategy is designed
to estimate the maximum likelihood of news influences under the same event. Meanwhile, a novel heterogeneous graph
is built based on social attributes for multimodal news under different events. Further, to better aggregate the relationships among heterogeneous multimodal features, this paper
proposes a self-supervised-based multimodal content learning strategy, to enhance, align, fuse and compare heterogeneous modal contents. Based above, a personalized heterogeneous graph representation learning is designed to classify
fake news. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the SOTA in real social media
news datasets.

retweet

retweet

retweet

retweet

retweet

retweet

t

(a) Propagation in Twitter (X) and Weibo.
Hot of News
Edit
Real Relationship
Unsure Relationship

t
(b) Unsure relationships in TikTok, Instagram and YouTube.

Figure 1: Differences in news dissemination across social
media platforms.

ing methods are mainly classified into two aspects, social
relationship-based (Shu et al. 2020) and semantic featurebased (Wang et al. 2018). In the first stage, the social
relationship is mainly represented between different news
through graphs. In recent years, the methods have been used
primarily for mining the social cascades through commenting and retweeting mechanism (Cheng et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2023; Yin et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2024). Graph structure mining is performed through GNN-based methods to
accomplish the node classification or graph classification
tasks to predict fake news. Further, related works focus on
the learning and mining of attribute graphs, fusing graph
and modal information for classification tasks (Nguyen et al.
2020; Phan, Nguyen, and Hwang 2023). For the other stage,
existing methods mainly rely on extracting, fusing (Zhou,
Wu, and Zafarani 2020; Nan et al. 2021), and enhancing
different modal data (Zhu et al. 2023; Qi et al. 2021). To
avoid simple feature fusion engineering, some researchers
perform information integrity through fact checking (Vo and
Lee 2018), reading interest (Wu, Liu, and Zhang 2023), external knowledge (Hu et al. 2021), etc. These methods have
been confirmed to achieve good results.

Introduction
Nowadays, complex heterogeneous multimodal news (e.g.
short videos) has spread and proliferated rapidly due to their
sharing nature on social media platforms (Gao, Liu, and
Gao 2023; Zheng 2023). However, the increasing sophistication of forgery techniques has resulted in a large number of multimodal fake news flooding the Internet. These
news may involve picture synthesis, audio and video editing, and the application of artificial intelligence technology,
making it difficult for audiences to distinguish the real from
the fake, and posing a serious challenge to the dissemination
of information and social opinion (Bu et al. 2023; Bhargava
et al. 2023). Therefore, it is an urgent and pressing task to
study the detection of complex heterogeneous multimodal
fake news.
To detect the increasingly complex and varied fake news,
some studies have been proposed. To summarize, exist* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

433

