The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CrAM: Credibility-Aware Attention Modification in LLMs for
Combating Misinformation in RAG
Boyi Deng1 , Wenjie Wang2 * , Fengbin Zhu2 * , Qifan Wang3 , Fuli Feng1
1

University of Science and Technology of China,
2
National University of Singapore,
3
Meta AI
dengboyi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wqfcr@fb.com,
{wenjiewang96, zhfengbin, fulifeng93}@gmail.com
Abstract

Question (Q):
Who won the first Nobel Prize
in Physics？

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) can alleviate hallucinations of Large Language Models (LLMs) by referencing external documents. However, the misinformation in external documents may mislead LLMs’ generation. To address this issue, we explore the task of “credibility-aware
RAG”, in which LLMs automatically adjust the influence
of retrieved documents based on their credibility scores
to counteract misinformation. To this end, we introduce a
plug-and-play method named Credibility-aware Attention
Modification (CrAM). CrAM identifies influential attention
heads in LLMs and adjusts their attention weights based on
the credibility of the documents, thereby reducing the impact of low-credibility documents. Experiments on Natual
Questions and TriviaQA using Llama2-13B, Llama3-8B, and
Qwen1.5-7B show that CrAM improves the RAG performance of LLMs against misinformation pollution by over
20%, even surpassing supervised fine-tuning methods.

1

RAG
Q
D1

Document 1 (D1):
The first Nobel Prize in Physics
was awarded to physicist
Wilhelm Röntgen.
Credibility score (S1): 0.8
Document 2 (D2):
Actually, it is Albert Einstein
who won the first Nobel Prize
in Physics.
Credibility score (S2): 0.1

LLM

Answer:
Albert
Einstein.

D2

Q

credibility-aware RAG

D1

S1
D2

LLM

Answer:
Wilhelm
Röntgen.

S2

Figure 1: A comparison between RAG and credibility-aware
RAG. Credibility-aware RAG considers credibility to reduce
the impact of low-credibility documents.

works have achieve significant results (Kaliyar, Goswami,
and Narang 2021; Pelrine et al. 2023; Quelle and Bovet
2024; Li et al. 2024). Once we obtain the credibility of each
retrieved document, we can exclude those with credibility
below a certain threshold before using them in RAG. However, directly discarding certain documents may result in the
loss of relevant and important information, leading to performance degradation (Yoran et al. 2024)1 . Therefore, given
the remarkable advancements in the measurement of credibility scores and the relatively underdeveloped mechanisms
for utilizing these scores, it is essential to explore how these
scores can be effectively utilized by LLMs, assuming that
high-quality credibility scores are accessible.
To achieve this, we focus on a task named “credibilityaware RAG” as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, given
a user query x with a list of relevant documents
D = {d1 , d2 , ..., dn } and D’s credibility scores S =
{s1 , s2 , ..., sn }, credibility-aware RAG requests LLMs to
automatically adjust the influence of documents in D on the
generated output y based on their credibility scores in S. Initial attempts on credibility-aware RAG adopted supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) to teach LLMs to distinguish the importance of different documents in the prompt by their credi-

Introduction

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Gao et al. 2024;
Zhu et al. 2021) is a representative approach to mitigate hallucination issues of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Zhang
et al. 2023) by retrieving and referencing relevant documents from an external corpus. Despite its effectiveness,
most RAG works overlook a crucial issue: misinformation
pollution in the external corpus (Pan et al. 2023b; Dufour
et al. 2024). The maliciously generated misinformation may
mislead LLMs to produce unfaithful responses. For instance,
Microsoft’s Bing can be misled by misinformation on the internet to generate incorrect information for Bing users (Vincent 2023). Besides, Pan et al. (2023b) and Pan et al. (2023a)
demonstrated that inserting LLM-generated misinformation
into the RAG corpus can significantly degrade LLMs’ performance. Therefore, addressing the misinformation pollution for RAG is essential.
A straightforward and common idea to address this misinformation pollution issue is misinformation detection and
filtering. Extensive misinformation detection works focus on
measuring the credibility of documents, i.e., the probability
of the document not containing misinformation. And these
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our experimental results in Table 2 also confirm that directly
excluding documents leads to inferior performance.

23760

