The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

STGC-NeRF: Spatial-Temporal Geometric Consistency for LiDAR Neural
Radiance Fields in Dynamic Scenes
Shangshu Yu* 1 , Xiaotian Sun* 2,3 , Wen Li* 2,3 , Qingshan Xu1† , Zhimin Yuan2,3 ,
Sijie Wang1 , Rui She4 , Cheng Wang2,3†
2

1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
4
Beihang University, China
shangshu.yu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
While Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have advanced the
frontiers of novel view synthesis (NVS) using LiDAR data,
they still struggle in dynamic scenes. Due to the low frequency and sparsity characteristics of LiDAR point clouds,
it is challenging to spontaneously learn a dynamic and consistent scene representation from posed scans. In this paper, we propose STGC-NeRF, a novel LiDAR NeRF method
that combines spatial-temporal geometry consistency to enhance the reconstruction of dynamic scenes. First, we propose
a temporal geometry consistency regularization to enhance
the regression of time-varying scene geometries from lowfrequency LiDAR sequences. By estimating the pointwise
correspondences between synthetic (or real) and real frames
at different times, we convert them into various forms of temporal supervision. This alleviates the inconsistency caused
by moving objects in dynamic scenes. Second, to improve
the reconstruction of sparse LiDAR data, we propose spatial geometric consistency constraints. By computing multiple neighborhood feature descriptors incorporating geometric
and contextual information, we capture structural geometry
information from sparse LiDAR data. This helps encourage
consistent direction, smoothness, and detail of the local surface. Extensive experiments on the KITTI-360 and nuScenes
datasets demonstrate that STGC-NeRF outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in both geometry and intensity accuracy for
dynamic LiDAR scene reconstruction.

Figure 1: Outdoor rendering results (a) (b) for LiDAR depth
(left) and intensity (right). Compared to our STGC-NeRF,
LiDAR-NeRF (Tao et al. 2023) and LiDAR4D (Zheng et al.
2024) struggle to reconstruct accurate results in dynamic regions and sparse areas (red boxes). (c) is the LiDAR point
cloud from different timestamps t and t + 1.

Yang et al. 2023) usually overlook the physical properties of
LiDAR sensors, leading to geometric errors in NVS.
With the unprecedented success of neural radiance fields
(NeRFs) (Mildenhall et al. 2021), it has emerged as a
promising way for LiDAR NVS and 3D scene reconstruction. LiDAR NeRFs (Tao et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Hu
et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2024a; Tao et al.
2024) implicitly represent the 3D scene and synthesize novel
views through volume rendering within a continuous representation space. Compared to LiDAR simulators, LiDAR
NeRFs consider two-way transmittance and beam width of
LiDAR, enabling high-fidelity LiDAR scene synthesis.
Despite the initial success, LiDAR NeRFs still struggle
to accurately re-simulate dynamic real-worlds (Tao et al.
2023; Huang et al. 2023). Recent LiDAR NeRFs (Zheng
et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024) propose implicit dynamic scene
representation by using 4D space-time or background-object

Code — https://github.com/PSYZ1234/STGC-NeRF

Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) for LiDAR data in dynamic
scenes involves learning time-varying scene representations
from a set of posed LiDAR scans to generate unseen frames.
It is crucial for various applications in autonomous driving (Li et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024; Fang et al. 2024a)
and robotics (Dong et al. 2019; Fang et al. 2023, 2024b).
Conventional LiDAR simulators (Manivasagam et al. 2020;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9644

