The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Instruct Where the Model Fails: Generative Data Augmentation via
Guided Self-contrastive Fine-tuning
Weijian Ma1 * , Ruoxin Chen2 , Keyue Zhang2 , Shuang Wu2 , Shouhong Ding2
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
mawj22@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Data augmentation is expected to bring about unseen features
of training set, enhancing the model’s ability to generalize
in situations where data is limited. Generative image models trained on large web-crawled datasets such as LAION
are known to produce images with stereotypes and imperceptible bias when used to augment training data, owing to
dataset misalignment and the generator’s ignorance of the
downstream model. We improve downstream task awareness
in generated images by proposing a task-aware fine-tuning
strategy that actively detects failures of downstream task in
the target model to fine-tune the generation process between
epochs. The dynamic fine-tuning strategy is achieved by (1)
inspecting misalignment between generated data and original
data via VLM captioners and (2) adjusts both prompts and
diffusion model so that the strategy dynamically guides the
generator by focusing on the detected bias of VLM. This is
done via re-captioning the overfitted data as well as finetuning the diffusion trajectory in a contrastive manner. To cooperate with the VLM captioner, the contrastive fine-tuning
process dynamically adjusts different parts of the diffusion
trajectory based on detected misalignment, thus shifting the
the generated distribution away from making the downstream
model overfit. Our experiments on few-shot class incremental
learning show that our instruction-guided finetuning strategy
consistently assists the downstream model with higher classification accuracy compared to generative data augmentation
baselines such as Stable Diffusion and GPT-4o, and state-ofthe-art non-generative strategies.

Figure 1: Method outline. Our proposed data augmentation
strategy dynamically adjusts augmented images between
epochs. The strategy consists of a VLM captioner and a
diffusion-based image generator, which is guided by the failures of the validation set. The generative augmenter adjusts
image augmentations from general semantics to inexpressible details.

to tell the data intrinsics from unnecessary contents, preventing the model from overfitting on unrelated characteristics of
training set (Baird 1995; Shorten and Khoshgoftaar 2022).
Traditionally, data augmentation applies handwritten
rules to transform the input data by introducing diverse variations such as rotations, translations, or noise to generate
new data (LeCun et al. 1998). Such techniques force the
model to focus on the consistent underlying patterns across
different versions of the same data. This to some extent
aligns with the principle of learning robust features, but the
variation still lies in superficial stages such as colors and textures. For augmentations under different semantics, such as a
cat with different poses or a person in different backgrounds,
such augmentation methods still suffer.
The recent advances of generative models (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020) have profoundly changed the data creation
process. Generative models are now being leveraged to create synthetic data, which is particularly valuable in scenarios where labeled data is scarce. Text-to-image models,
such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022), enables the
generation of high-quality images that retain essential features of the original data while introducing controlled variations. However, the bias of diffusion models remains fixed

Introduction
The selection of practice content is a central issue in the
educational process and a subject of ongoing scientific research (QIN et al. 2023; Council 2002; Meijers and Verbeek
2020). For training neural networks when data is not sufficient, data augmentation is a commonly-used technique. In
this case, human use rules or generative models to generate
more content, which introduces variations to training data
while remaining meaningful and invariant features (LeCun
et al. 1998). These methods now serve as a critical technique in machine learning, particularly when training data
is scarce or hard to obtain. The aim of data augmentation is
* Work partly done during an internship at Youtu Lab, Tencent.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5991

