The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Clustering Convolutional Neural Network
Tanzhe Li1,2 , Baochang Zhang3,4 , Jiayi Lyu5 , Xiawu Zheng1,2 , Guodong Guo6 , Taisong Jin1,2,7 †
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Effcient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen
University, China.
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China.
3
Hangzhou Research Institute, School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China.
4
Nanchang Institute of Technology, China.
5
School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
6
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China.
7
Key Laboratory of Oracle Bone Inscriptions Information Processing, Ministry of Education of China, Anyang Normal
University, China.
litanzhe@stu.xmu.edu.cn,{jintaisong,zhengxiawu}@xmu.edu.cn, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

main building blocks due to the superior performance over
larger convolution kernels with equivalent parameters and
computational cost. Recently, Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Touvron et al. 2021a; Wang et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2021; Touvron et al. 2021b) have achieved remarkable success in computer vision by leveraging global or large
local receptive field of attention (Vaswani et al. 2017), which
has resulted in a period where CNNs have been overshadowed by the success of Vision Transformers.
It is time for CNNs to fight back. Inspired by the success
of Vision Transformers, some recent studies (Trockman and
Kolter 2022; Liu et al. 2022; Woo et al. 2023; Ding et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2023) have revisited the use of large convolution kernels, such as the famous ConvNeXt (Liu et al. 2022)
, which utilizes 7 × 7 deep separable convolution (Howard
et al. 2017; Chollet 2017) to increase receptive field and
incorporates a series of improvements that enable CNNs
to achieve competitive performance against ViTs. More recently, some studies (Smith et al. 2023; Woo et al. 2023)
have demonstrated that CNNs achieve performance comparable to or even better than Vision Transformers in largescale supervised pre-training and unsupervised pre-training
vision tasks. This challenges researchers’ previous perception that CNNs are not as effective as Vision Transformers
in handling large-scale data.
Although the modern CNNs have greatly improved by
leveraging larger receptive fields of 7 × 7 convolution kernels , ConvNeXt (Liu et al. 2022) shows that larger 9×9 and
11 × 11 convolution kernels can result in performance saturation and decline, which indicates that convolution kernels
that are too dense are not conducive to feature extraction.
Despite the subsequent RepLKNet (Ding et al. 2022) and
SLaK (Liu et al. 2023) expanding the kernel to an astonishing 31 × 31 and 51 × 51 through reparameterization (Ding
et al. 2021) and sparse decomposition, this super-sized kernel only brings a minor performance enhancement while the
computational cost is difficult to accept. Thus, the 7 × 7 convolution kernel is still the norm for CNN-based backbones.
However, the basic modeling scheme of 7 × 7 convolution
still operates within a fixed-size local window, which limits
the global receptive field of CNNs and is not flexible for cap-

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been playing
a dominant role in computer vision. However, the existing approaches of using local window modeling in popular CNNs lack flexibility and hinder their ability to capture
long-range dependencies of objects in an image. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel CNN architecture, termed Dynamic Clustering Convolutional Neural Network (DCCNeXt). The proposed DCCNeXt takes a unique
approach by employing global clustering to group image
patches with similar semantics into clusters that are then convolved using the shared convolution kernels. To address the
high computational complexity of global clustering, the feature vectors from each patch’s subspace are extracted for efficient clustering, which makes the proposed model widely
compatible with the downstream vision tasks. The extensive experiments of image classification, object detection,
instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation on the
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed DCCNeXt
outperforms the mainstream Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), Vision Transformers (ViTs), Vision Multi-layer Perceptrons (MLPs), Vision Graph Neural Networks (GNNs),
and Vision Mambas (ViMs). We anticipate that this study will
provide a new perspective and a promising avenue for the design of convolutional neural networks.

Code — https://github.com/ltzovo/DCCNeXt

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1998)
have been proposed for handwritten digit recognition in
1998. However, due to limitations in computational power
and available data, it was not until AlexNet (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) won the 2012 ImageNet challenge that CNNs gained widespread attention and sparked
the deep learning revolution. For a considerable period of
time, CNNs (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016;
Huang et al. 2017; Tan and Le 2019; Howard et al. 2017)
architectures commonly utilize 3 × 3 convolution kernels as
†The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18448

