The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Elevating Flow-Guided Video Inpainting with Reference Generation
Suhwan Cho1, * , Seoung Wug Oh2 , Sangyoun Lee1 , Joon-Young Lee2
1

Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
Adobe Research, San Jose, California, USA
{chosuhwan, syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr, {seoh, jolee}@adobe.com
2

Abstract

lier works train a generative model based on 3D convolutions (Wang et al. 2019; Chang et al. 2019a,b) using adversarial loss. Although these methods are plausible for hallucination, they often fail to maintain temporal consistency due
to limited temporal window size. Some attempts address this
limitation with temporal relation reasoning through attention
mechanisms (Oh et al. 2019; Zeng, Fu, and Chao 2020; Liu
et al. 2021) or homography transformation (Lee et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2020; Lao et al. 2021). However, these methods
fail to generate plausible content when there is no reference
available in the video. In a coupled approach, there is always
ambiguity between propagation and generation for the best
results, making it difficult to balance the two.
Conversely, flow-based methods (Xu et al. 2019; Kang,
Oh, and Kim 2022; Kim et al. 2019) achieve great success
in producing high-quality VI results by adopting a decoupled framework. They compute optical flows to propagate
content between frames and utilize a separate image inpainting model to synthesize non-observable content. However,
the difficulty of pixel propagation implementation becomes
a bottleneck for flow-based approaches, affecting both quality and efficiency. For instance, FGVC (Gao et al. 2020) uses
a per-pixel flow tracing algorithm that loses sub-pixel accuracy. E2 FGVI (Li et al. 2022) and ProPainter (Zhou et al.
2023) use a recurrent pixel warping algorithm that preserves
sub-pixel accuracy but introduces re-sampling artifacts due
to repeated color sampling.
In this study, we propose a practical and powerful VI
system named reference-guided video inpainting (RGVI),
which overcomes the limitations of existing flow-based approaches. We introduce a new pixel propagation algorithm
by combining flow tracing and grid warping to avoid resampling artifacts while maintaining sub-pixel accuracy.
Specifically, we warp optical flows instead of color values
and pull the color value from the matching pixel in a oneshot manner. Additionally, we propose a propagation verification method to detect areas where propagation is unreliable. We also introduce a simple and effective trick to
prevent common errors in flow-based approaches by providing the mask of the occluding object, thus preventing color
bleeding artifacts from inaccurate optical flows.
We argue that the potential of our decoupled framework is
fully realized when used in conjunction with a strong generative model for reference generation. We adopt Stable Dif-

Video inpainting (VI) is a challenging task that requires effective propagation of observable content across frames while simultaneously generating new content not present in the original video. In this study, we propose a robust and practical VI
framework that leverages a large generative model for reference generation in combination with an advanced pixel propagation algorithm. Powered by a strong generative model, our
method not only significantly enhances frame-level quality
for object removal but also synthesizes new content in the
missing areas based on user-provided text prompts. For pixel
propagation, we introduce a one-shot pixel pulling method
that effectively avoids error accumulation from repeated sampling while maintaining sub-pixel precision. To evaluate various VI methods in realistic scenarios, we also propose a highquality VI benchmark, HQVI, comprising carefully generated
videos using alpha matte composition. On public benchmarks
and the HQVI dataset, our method demonstrates significantly
higher visual quality and metric scores compared to existing
solutions. Furthermore, it can process high-resolution videos
exceeding 2K resolution with ease, underscoring its superiority for real-world applications.

Code — https://github.com/suhwan-cho/RGVI

1

Introduction

With the recent growth of video content creation and consumption, there is a high demand for technology that can
edit original video content. Video inpainting (VI) is one
of the essential video editing steps that allows content creators to remove certain areas or objects from existing videos
and fill them with plausible content. While image inpainting
has recently made breakthroughs based on diffusion models, VI technology has not kept pace. The challenge is that
even with strong generation capabilities, maintaining original video content and temporal consistency remains difficult.
To design a powerful VI system, the algorithm needs to effectively propagate observable content across frames while
simultaneously generating new, non-observable content that
does not appear in the video.
Most existing methods approach propagation and generation in a coupled manner through end-to-end training. Ear* This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2527

