The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

When Open-Vocabulary Visual Question Answering Meets Causal Adapter:
Benchmark and Approach
Feifei Zhang1 * , Zhaoyi Zhang1 , Xi Zhang2 , Changsheng Xu3, 4, 5
1

Tianjin University of Technology
2
Alibaba Group
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
feifeizhang@email.tjut.edu.cn, zhaoyiz0606@gmail.com, zx443053@alibaba-inc.com, csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

What sport is the
man doing
in the picture ?

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a multifaceted task that
integrates computer vision and natural language processing
to produce textual answers from images and questions. Existing VQA benchmarks predominantly adhere to a closed-set
paradigm, limiting their ability to address arbitrary, unseen
answers, and thus falling short in real-world scenarios. To address this limitation, we introduce the Open-Vocabulary Visual Question Answering (OVVQA) benchmark, specifically
designed to evaluate models under open-world conditions
by assessing their performance on both base classes (seen,
common answers) and novel classes (unseen, rare answers).
In conjunction with this benchmark, we propose a modelagnostic Causal Adapter to combat the inherent bias found
in current VQA tasks. Our approach leverages front-door adjustment to enhance causal reasoning, significantly improving model performance on novel categories while maintaining accuracy on base classes. Additionally, we introduce an
adaptive transfer loss to facilitate the transfer of more knowledge from the pretrained model to our OVVQA task. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets validate the superiority of our method over existing state-of-the-art approaches,
demonstrating its robust generalization and adaptability in
open-world VQA scenarios.

skyblue

skyblue

baseball man
skyblue
......
......
Train
Test
(1) Closed-set VQA

baseball

man

badminton
......
novel
......
citizen
Train
Test
(2) Open -vocabulary VQA

baseball

(a)

man

......

base

Q: Who is riding a Q: Who is riding a
motorcycle next to the motorcycle?
silver car on the road？ A: a person
A: a person
GT: skeleton man

(1)

(b)

(2)

(3)

Figure 1: (a) Closed-set VQA vs Open-Vocabulary VQA;
(b) Experimental results comparing baseline, existing finetuning models, and our method on base and novel classes
(1); Biased predictions in OVVQA tasks (2-3).

fixed list and impeding their ability to handle unseen concepts (e.g., badminton, citizen). This constraint diminishes
model effectiveness in open-world scenarios, where answer
distributions are highly varied and dynamic. Moreover, current closed-set approaches often treat each benchmark sample equivalently, assessing model performance based on
overall average recognition rates. This methodology encourages models to prioritize common, high-frequency vocabulary, which may not reflect the challenges posed by
real-world applications that usually involve rare or novel
terms. Consequently, these benchmarks fail to fully assess a model’s true performance and ability to generalize to practical applications. To overcome these limitations,
we propose a new evaluation benchmark for VQA, termed
Open-Vocabulary Visual Question Answering (OVVQA).
OVVQA is designed to better align with open-world conditions and to provide a more accurate assessment of a
model’s multimodal reasoning abilities. Unlike traditional
closed-set VQA benchmarks, as shown on the right of
Fig. 1(a), OVVQA includes both base and novel classes.

Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a typical multimodal
task and has drawn increasing interest over the past few
years (Khan and Fu 2024; Li et al. 2024a), which can automatically generate a textual answer given a question and
an image. This field holds significant promise for improving
our ability to integrate visual and textual information. The
application of VQA in areas such as intelligent robotics and
assistive technology can be particularly impactful, for example, in enhancing user interactions with automated systems.
While the VQA community has achieved substantial
progress, the benchmarks employed thus far have predominantly adhered to the closed-set setting (Li et al. 2024b;
Wang et al. 2024a). As depicted in Fig. 1(a), these benchmarks rely on a predefined set of candidate answers (e.g.,
baseball, skyblue), restricting models to select from this
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9887

