The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GRPose: Learning Graph Relations for Human Image Generation
with Pose Priors
Xiangchen Yin1,5 , Donglin Di2 , Lei Fan3 , Hao Li2 , Wei Chen2* ,
Gouxiaofei2 , Yang Song3 , Xiao Sun4 , Xun Yang1*
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Space AI, Li Auto
3
University of New South Wales
4
Hefei University of Technology
5
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
yinxiangchen@mail.ustc.edu.cn {didonglin,lihao43,chenwei10,gouxiaofei}@lixiang.com
{lei.fan1,yang.song1}@unsw.edu.au sunx@hfut.edu.cn xyang21@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

cess is unstable and the training heavily depends on the distribution of the source images. Recently, Stable Diffusion
(SD) (Rombach et al. 2022) and its variants (Podell et al.
2023) have been developed to address these limitations, in
which high-fidelity human images are synthesized with the
help of a prompt. Considering the data availability and computation costs, controllable diffusion models (Zhang, Rao,
and Agrawala 2023; Mou et al. 2024) further introduce a
learnable control branch into the frozen SD model, enabling
spatial control of the generative results based on the provided conditions, e.g., depth maps and segmentation masks.
In recent years, ControlNet (Zhang et al. 2023) has
emerged as a new benchmark by fine-tuning the frozen SD
model with trainable copy parameters, enabling spatial control through conditional inputs. HumanSD (Ju et al. 2023b)
adopts a heat-guided loss to achieve pose control. While
these methods synthesize images with satisfactory semantics
and style, they are still struggling to produce high-quality
output based on the pose priors, often resulting in unrealistic body alignment (as shown in Figure 1). A key challenge
in existing approaches is the poor alignment with the given
pose priors. We observed that these methods incorporate human pose information into frozen generative models based
on Euclidean space, which inadequately models the nonlinear and higher-order relationships between different parts of
pose priors, particularly in terms of joint connections and
overall coordination.
In this study, we propose to capture the topological relationships among different pose parts by leveraging a graph
structure to extract intrinsic associations. We propose a
framework named Graph Relation Pose (GRPose) to guide
the process of stable diffusion. We follow the ControlNet
framework that utilizes both a text prompt and a pose prior to
generate human images, and primarily fine-tune the Adapter
which is a set of trainable copy parameters. We aim to
establish a graph topological structure on pose priors and
latent representations, adopting Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf et al. 2016; Han et al. 2022) to effectively capture the higher-order relationships between different pose parts. We introduce a graph construction mechanism called the Progressive Graph Integrator (PGI). PGI

Recent methods using diffusion models have made significant progress in human image generation with various control signals such as pose priors. However, existing efforts are
still struggling to generate high-quality images with consistent pose alignment, resulting in unsatisfactory output. In this
paper, we propose a framework that delves into the graph relations of pose priors to provide control information for human image generation. The main idea is to establish a graph
topological structure between the pose priors and latent representation of diffusion models to capture the intrinsic associations between different pose parts. A Progressive Graph
Integrator (PGI) is designed to learn the spatial relationships
of the pose priors with the graph structure, adopting a hierarchical strategy within an Adapter to gradually propagate information across different pose parts. Besides, a pose perception loss is introduced based on a pretrained pose estimation
network to minimize the pose differences. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments conducted on the HumanArt and LAION-Human datasets clearly demonstrate that our
model can achieve significant performance improvement over
the latest benchmark models.

Code — https://xiangchenyin.github.io/GRPose

1

Introduction

Human image generation aims to synthesize high-quality
images under specific conditions based on a series of
prompts, such as canny edge, pose and depth (Yang et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2024a). Its diverse applications range from
animation (Corona et al. 2024) and game production (Pan
et al. 2024) to other fields. Early methods (Men et al. 2020;
Ma et al. 2017) primarily adopted variational autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013) or Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2020), leveraging a source image to synthesize target images with specific human attributes. Although these methods achieve control through the reference appearance, the synthesis proCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Wei Chen and Xun Yang are co-corresponding authors. The
work was done within intern at Li Auto.

9526

