The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffGrasp: Whole-Body Grasping Synthesis Guided by Object Motion
Using a Diffusion Model
Yonghao Zhang1,2 * , Qiang He1,2 * , Yanguang Wan1,2 , Yinda Zhang3 , Xiaoming Deng1,2† ,
Cuixia Ma1,2† , Hongan Wang1,2
1

Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Google
{zhangyonghao2022, heqiang2022, wanyanguang2021, xiaoming, cuixia, hongan}@iscas.ac.cn,
yindaz@google.com
Abstract
Generating high-quality whole-body human object interaction motion sequences is becoming increasingly important in
various fields such as animation, VR/AR, and robotics. The
main challenge of this task lies in determining the level of involvement of each hand given the complex shapes of objects
in different sizes and their different motion trajectories, while
ensuring strong grasping realism and guaranteeing the coordination of movement in all body parts. Contrasting with existing work, which either generates human interaction motion
sequences without detailed hand grasping poses or only models a static grasping pose, we propose a simple yet effective
framework that jointly models the relationship between the
body, hands, and the given object motion sequences within a
single diffusion model. To guide our network in perceiving
the object’s spatial position and learning more natural grasping poses, we introduce novel contact-aware losses and incorporate a data-driven, carefully designed guidance. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art method and generates plausible results.

Figure 1: DiffGrasp generates whole-body human grasp sequence with realistic finger-object contact, conditioned on
3D object shape and object motion sequence.
Song et al. 2024; Ghosh et al. 2023a), object motion keypoints (Li, Wu, and Liu 2023; Li et al. 2023b; Taheri et al.
2022), and initial frames (Xu et al. 2023; Kulkarni et al.
2023) to synthesize whole-body motion sequences or collaborative motion sequences. However, these works are not capable of generating satisfactory grasp sequences, especially
for small objects because of the more intricate shapes of the
object and the more flexible manipulations involved. In the
domain of fine-grained grasping, GRIP (Taheri et al. 2023)
and COOP (Zheng et al. 2023b) can generate natural single
frame whole-body grasping results based on the 3D positions of different small objects. However, these works are
unable to generate realistic natural sequence results due to
the lack of temporal smoothness modeling.
For generating realistic whole-body human object grasp
motion sequences, there are three key challenges: first, the
range of motion of the body and the range of motion of the
hands are at two different spatial scales in speed and fineness, resulting in great difficulty to accurately model both
motions together within a single model;
second, when grasping objects of different sizes, shapes
and motions, the strategies for using either a single hand
or both hands can be distinct due to complex grasp pattern
with twice degree-of-freedom of both hands; finally, once an
object is grasped, the contacting hand must maintain stable

Project Page — https://iscas3dv.github.io/DiffGrasp/

Introduction
Capturing, synthesizing, and controlling human motion
plays a key role in many areas such as animation, VR/AR,
and robotics. However, the movement of the human body
is complex, especially the movement of hands. Hands are
used in almost every scene of our daily life, from interacting
with small objects like playing with toys or picking up and
inspecting a phone, to handling larger objects like moving
boxes or using the laptop with both hands. Manipulating different objects also necessitates different involvement of both
hands, and controlling the motion of two hands is incredibly
complex and nuanced. Realistically modeling such intricate
interactions can greatly benefit downstream applications.
Existing work on human object interaction has made
significant progress in modeling whole-body motion sequences, leveraging natural language (Diller and Dai 2024;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10320

