The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AnalogCoder: Analog Circuit Design via Training-Free Code Generation
Yao Lai1 , Sungyoung Lee2 , Guojin Chen3 , Souradip Poddar2 ,
Mengkang Hu1 , David Z. Pan2 , Ping Luo1
1

2

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United States
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
pluo@cs.hku.hk, dpan@ece.utexas.edu

# of Passed Design Tasks

Abstract
Analog circuit design is a significant task in modern chip
technology, focusing on the selection of component types,
connectivity, and parameters to ensure proper circuit functionality. Despite advances made by Large Language Models (LLMs) in digital circuit design, the complexity and
scarcity of data in analog circuitry pose significant challenges. To mitigate these issues, we introduce AnalogCoder,
the first training-free LLM agent for designing analog circuits through Python code generation. Firstly, AnalogCoder
incorporates a feedback-enhanced flow with tailored domainspecific prompts, enabling the automated and self-correcting
design of analog circuits with a high success rate. Secondly,
it proposes a circuit tool library to archive successful designs
as reusable modular sub-circuits, simplifying composite circuit creation. Thirdly, extensive experiments on a benchmark
designed to cover a wide range of analog circuit tasks show
that AnalogCoder outperforms other LLM-based methods. It
has successfully designed 20 circuits, 5 more than standard
GPT-4o. We believe AnalogCoder can significantly improve
the labor-intensive chip design process, enabling non-experts
to design analog circuits efficiently.

Easy
Medium
Hard

Figure 1: Leaderboard of LLM analog circuit design.
LLMs are ranked by the number of analog circuits they design successfully. It displays several designs and lists the
LLMs that successfully created them.

Pei et al. 2024), and the writing of design scripts (Wu et al.
2024; Liu et al. 2023a). LLMs can convert natural language
descriptions of digital circuit design tasks into Verilog code,
a programming language for designing digital circuits. Once
the code is generated, it can be assessed for correctness by
LLMs or human experts, who attempt to fix errors by analyzing error information and simulation outputs (Blocklove
et al. 2023; Thakur et al. 2023b; Tsai, Liu, and Ren 2023;
Yao et al. 2024). Due to the scant representation of Verilog in
the public data for training (Guo et al. 2024), LLMs may not
perform as well in generating Verilog code as they do with
widely-used programming languages such as C and Python,
despite ongoing improvement efforts (Pei et al. 2024). Similarly, generating design flow scripts is another form of code
generation, converting natural language descriptions of design requirements into script files. These scripts, written in
Python or Tcl, facilitate the chip design process by invoking
APIs at various stages (Ousterhout 1993; Wu et al. 2024; Liu
et al. 2023a). These design flow scripts typically implement
straightforward logic to transform fundamental workflows
into a series of API calls. However, these works are mainly
for digital circuit design, as listed in Table 1.
Analog circuit design presents significantly more challenges than digital circuit design (Johns and Martin 2008;
Razavi 2000a; Allen, Dobkin, and Holberg 2011), leaving
the field less explored by LLM-aided methods. The primary

Code — https://github.com/laiyao1/AnalogCoder

Introduction
Analog circuits, essential for processing real-world signals
such as temperature, pressure, sound, and light, are indispensable in modern integrated circuits. They facilitate accurate sensing, amplification, and filtering, which is crucial
for linking digital systems with physical environments. This
functionality underpins reliable data acquisition and signal
processing across diverse applications.
The success of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam
et al. 2023) has brought new opportunities for automatic
chip design (Zhong et al. 2023). Existing related research
primarily focuses on two tasks: the generation and correction of Verilog codes (Blocklove et al. 2023; Chang et al.
2023; Thakur et al. 2023a,b; Fu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b;
Lu et al. 2024; Tsai, Liu, and Ren 2023; Liu et al. 2023c;
This work is done while the first author is a visiting student at UT
Austin. The corresponding authors are Ping Luo and David Z. Pan.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

379

