The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revisiting Multimodal Emotion Recognition in Conversation from the Perspective
of Graph Spectrum
Wei Ai1 , Fuchen Zhang1 , Yuntao Shou1 , Tao Meng1 * , Haowen Chen2* , Keqin Li3
1

College of Computer and Mathematics, Central South University of Forestry and Technology, 410004, China
2
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, 410082, China
3
Department of Computer Science, State University of New York, 12561, USA
{aiwei, mengtao, hwchen}@hnu.edu.cn, fuchen.zhang@csuft.edu.cn, shouyuntao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, lik@newpaltz.edu
Ross

Abstract
Efficiently capturing consistent and complementary semantic features in context is crucial for Multimodal Emotion
Recognition in Conversations (MERC). However, limited by
the over-smoothing or low-pass filtering characteristics of
spatial graph neural networks, are insufficient to accurately
capture the long-distance consistency low-frequency information and complementarity high-frequency information of
the utterances. To this end, this paper revisits the task of
MERC from the perspective of the graph spectrum and proposes a Graph-Spectrum-based Multimodal Consistency and
Complementary collaborative learning framework GS-MCC.
First, GS-MCC uses a sliding window to construct a multimodal interaction graph to model conversational relationships
and designs efficient Fourier graph operators (FGO) to extract long-distance high-frequency and low-frequency information, respectively. FGO can be stacked in multiple layers,
which can effectively alleviate the over-smoothing problem.
Then, GS-MCC uses contrastive learning to construct selfsupervised signals that reflect complementarity and consistent semantic collaboration with high and low-frequency signals, thereby improving the ability of high and low-frequency
information to reflect genuine emotions. Finally, GS-MCC inputs the coordinated high and low-frequency information into
the MLP network and softmax function for emotion prediction. Extensive experiments have proven the superiority of the
GS-MCC architecture proposed in this paper on two benchmark data sets.

u1

Carol
Where's Ben? (Neutral)
He's sleeping. (Neutral)

u3

Ahh. Ooh, is this a, is this a bad time? (Surprise)
Umm, yeah, actually, Susan's gonna be home
any minute, it's kinda an anniversary. (Joy)

u5

u4

Oh! I thought you guys got married in uh,
January? (Surprise)
It's not that kind of anniversary. (Neutral)

u7

u2

u6

Ah! Oh. (Surprise)

Figure 1: An example of a multimodal conversation from
the MELD dataset. MERC aims to identify each utterance’s
emotion label (e.g., Neutral, Surprise, Joy).

Unlike traditional unimodal or non-conversational emotion recognition (Gerczuk et al. 2021; Deng and Ren 2021),
MERC requires joint conversational context and multimodal
information modeling to achieve consistency and complementary semantic capture within and between modalities
(Zhang et al. 2024). Fig. 1 gives an example of a multimodal conversation between two people, Ross and Carol,
from the MELD dataset. As shown in utterance u4 , Carol
has a “joy” emotion, which is vaguely reflected in textual
features but more evident in visual or auditory features reflecting the complementary semantics between modalities.
In addition, it is difficult to identify the emotion of “Surprise” from the utterance u7 alone. However, due to the potential consistency of conversational emotions, it can be accurately inferred based on previous utterances. Therefore,
the key to multimodal conversational emotion recognition
is to capture the consistency and complementary semantics
between multimodal information by utilizing the conversational context and emotional dependence between speakers
to reveal the speaker’s genuine emotion.

Introduction
With the continuous development of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), the multimodal emotion recognition task
in conversation (MERC) has recently received extensive research attention (Majumder et al. 2019; Ghosal et al. 2019;
Ai et al. 2024). MERC aims to identify the emotional state
of each utterance using textual, acoustic, and visual information in the conversational context (Lian et al. 2023; Yang
et al. 2024), which is crucial for multimodal conversational
understanding and an essential component for building intelligent HCI systems (Hu et al. 2021; Mai et al. 2022). As
shown in Fig. 1, MERC needs to recognize the emotion of
each multimodal utterance in the conversation.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11418

