The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Selective Forgetting: Advancing Machine Unlearning Techniques and
Evaluation in Language Models
Lingzhi Wang 1 , Xingshan Zeng2 * , Jinsong Guo3 , Kam-Fai Wong4,5 , Georg Gottlob6
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
3
Unlimidata Ltd, United Kingdom
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
5
MoE Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, China
6
University of Calabria, Italy
wanglingzhi@hit.edu.cn, zeng.xingshan@huawei.com, jinsong.guo@unlimidata.com,
kfwong@se.cuhk.edu.hk, georg.gottlob@unical.it
Normal Deletion Query (containing only
personal or sensitive information)

Abstract
Bob

This paper explores Machine Unlearning (MU), an emerging
field that is gaining increased attention due to concerns about
neural models unintentionally remembering personal or sensitive information. We present S E UL, a novel method that enables selective and fine-grained unlearning for language models. Unlike previous work that employs a fully reversed training objective in unlearning, S E UL minimizes the negative
impact on the capability of language models, particularly in
terms of generation. Furthermore, we introduce two innovative evaluation metrics, sensitive extraction likelihood (S-EL)
and sensitive memorization accuracy (S-MA), specifically
designed to assess the effectiveness of forgetting sensitive information. In support of the unlearning framework, we propose efficient automatic online and offline sensitive span annotation methods. The online selection method, based on language probability scores, ensures computational efficiency,
while the offline annotation involves a two-stage LLM-based
process for robust verification. In summary, this paper contributes a novel selective unlearning method (S E UL), introduces specialized evaluation metrics (S-EL and S-MA) for
assessing sensitive information forgetting, and proposes automatic online and offline sensitive span annotation methods
to support the overall unlearning framework and evaluation.

𝑞! :

… Please email Bob at Bob@xxx.com ...

𝑞" :

…Bob is currently a third-year student at
xxx University Junior High School ...
Deletion Query in Attack (injecting common
sense or knowledge into the query)

𝑞!# :

… Please email Eve at Eve@xxx.com.
Earth is round ...

𝑞"# : …Eve is currently a third-year student at
Eve
xxx University Junior High School.
(Attacker)
Trump is the 45th President of
the United States...

Figure 1: Illustration of knowledge injection attack.

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the European Union and the PIPEDA privacy legislation in Canada.
This right mandates that companies erase personal data upon
user request. Furthermore, while removing data from backend databases is straightforward, it poses a challenge for
neural models as the relationship between the model weights
and the data is unclear.
Given the identified necessities and challenges in unlearning, particularly in the context of large language models,
researchers have focused on machine unlearning to make
trained models forget specific data. While many prior works
(Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto 2020a,b; Mehta et al. 2022)
in machine unlearning address computer vision classification tasks, fewer target generation tasks in NLP. Wang et al.
(2023) propose a general machine unlearning framework,
but it relies on additional model training, which is costly
for language models. Meanwhile, Jang et al. (2023) introduces sequential knowledge unlearning for language models, utilizing a reversed language modeling learning objective. However, employing a fully reversed training objective
in unlearning can significantly impact the language model’s
generation capability.
In contrast to Jang et al. (2023), which fully reverses the
training loss of instances for forgetting, we propose a selec-

Introduction
Machine Unlearning (MU) (Romero, Barrio, and Belanche
2007; Karasuyama and Takeuchi 2009; Cao and Yang 2015)
has increasingly attracted the attention of researchers. The
focus on MU stems primarily from the fact that neural models are trained on data mainly sourced from the Internet,
and the trained model may permanently “remember” personal or sensitive information contained in the training data.
Concerns about the leakage of personal sensitive data from
neural networks have intensified, especially following the
breakthrough of language models, which exhibit incredible
capabilities in data generation. Meanwhile, the “right to be
forgotten” has been legislated in many countries, such as the
* Xingshan Zeng is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

843

