The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Resource Constrained Pathfinding with Enhanced Bidirectional A* Search
Saman Ahmadi1 , Andrea Raith2 , Guido Tack3 , Mahdi Jalili1
1
School of Engineering, RMIT University, Australia
Department of Engineering Science, University of Auckland, New Zealand
3
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia
saman.ahmadi@rmit.edu.au, a.raith@auckland.ac.nz, guido.tack@monash.edu, mahdi.jalili@rmit.edu.au
2

Abstract

those labels whose resource consumption is not more than
half of the resource budget, while enabling the construction of complete paths by joining forward and backward
labels. The authors reported that the guided search of A*
helps RCBDA* perform faster in large graphs when compared to the conventional RSCP methods of Lozano and
Medaglia (2013) and Sedeño-Noda and Alonso-Rodrı́guez
(2015). Nevertheless, it still leaves several instances with a
single resource constraint unsolved, even after a five-hour
timeout. BiPulse (Cabrera et al. 2020) is another bidirectional search framework that parallelizes the branch-andbound Pulse procedure of Lozano and Medaglia (2013).
BiPulse utilizes a queueing approach to explore branches
longer than a specific depth limit separately in a breadthfirst search manner. The authors reported better performance
with BiPulse compared to RCBDA*, though no direct comparison was made as RCBDA*’s runtimes were scaled from
the original paper. Both RCBDA* and BiPulse were recognized with awards (Golden and Shier 2021).
Quite recently, the unidirectional A*-based constrained
search proposed in Ren et al. (2023), called ERCA*, has
demonstrated superior performance compared to BiPulse.
Ren et al. adapted their multi-objective search algorithm
EMOA* (Ren et al. 2022) to RCSP, and proposed a solution that can reduce the constrained search effort by integrating binary search trees into pruning strategies. Although not
compared against RCBDA*, ERCA* was reported to outperform BiPulse by several orders of magnitude. The two
recent WCBA* (Ahmadi et al. 2022) and WCA* (Ahmadi
et al. 2024c) algorithms can also be seen as heuristic-guided
approaches to RCSP, but their application is limited to instances with only a single constraint (the weight constrained
variant). Both algorithms were reported to perform faster
than RCBDA* and BiPulse.
This paper introduces an enhanced bidirectional A*
search algorithm for RCSP, called RCEBDA*. Built on the
basis of perimeter search with bidirectional A*, our proposed algorithm leverages the recent advancements in both
constrained and multi-objective search, and adopts optimized dominance pruning and path matching procedures
that help reduce the search effort substantially. Experimental results on benchmark instances reveal that RCEBDA*
can effectively solve more instances than the state of the art,
achieving speed-ups above two orders of magnitude.

The classic Resource Constrained Shortest Path (RCSP)
problem aims to find a cost optimal path between a pair of
nodes in a network such that the resources used in the path are
within a given limit. Having been studied for over a decade,
RCSP has seen recent solutions that utilize heuristic-guided
search to solve the constrained problem faster. Building upon
the bidirectional A* search paradigm, this paper introduces a
novel constrained search framework that uses efficient pruning strategies to allow for accelerated and effective RCSP
search in large-scale networks. Results show that, compared
to the state of the art, our enhanced framework can significantly reduce the constrained search time, achieving speedups of over to two orders of magnitude.

Introduction
Often studied in the context of network optimization, the Resource Constrained Shortest Path (RCSP) problem seeks to
find a cost-optimal path between two nodes in a network
such that the resource usage of the path is within a given
limit. Its applications span a wide range of domains. As
a core problem, RCSP can be modelled to find minimum
time paths for an unmanned aerial vehicle such that the total
cumulative noise disturbance created by the vehicle along
its trajectory is within an allowable noise disturbance level
(Cortez 2022). As a subroutine, RCSP appears as a form of
pricing problem in column generation (a solving technique
in linear programming) for routing and scheduling applications (Parmentier, Martinelli, and Vidal 2023). The problem
has been shown to be NP-hard (Handler and Zang 1980).
RCSP is a well-studied topic in the AI and mathematical optimization literature. A summary of conventional solutions to RCSP (methods that solve the problem to optimality) can be found in Pugliese and Guerriero (2013) and Ferone et al. (2020). Among the recent solutions, the RCBDA*
algorithm of Thomas, Calogiuri, and Hewitt (2019) is a label
setting method that explores the network bidirectionally using heuristic-guided A* search. Built on the bidirectional dynamic programming algorithm of Righini and Salani (2006),
RCBDA* defines an explicit perimeter for the search of each
direction by evenly distributing the resource budget between
the directions. More precisely, each direction explores only
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26878

