The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Conditional Feature Importance with Generative Modeling Using Adversarial
Random Forests
Kristin Blesch* 1,2 , Niklas Koenen* 1,2 , Jan Kapar1,2 , Pegah Golchian1,2 ,
†
Lukas Burk1,2 , Markus Loecher3 , Marvin N. Wright 1,2,4
1
Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research & Epidemiology – BIPS, Germany
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Bremen, Germany
3
Department of Business and Economics, Berlin School of Economics and Law, Germany
4
Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
{blesch, koenen, kapar, golchian, burk, wright}@leibniz-bips.de, markus.loecher@hwr-berlin.de
2

Abstract

ual observations, like Shapley additive explanations (Lundberg and Lee 2017), or a feature importance focus on the
model’s overall behavior, yielding global-level explanations.
A crucial distinction in feature importance concepts is
between conditional and marginal viewpoints (Strobl et al.
2008; Watson and Wright 2021): Marginal feature importance evaluates a feature’s impact irrespective of other features included in the model, whereas conditional feature importance takes the predictive information of other features
into account. The presence of dependency structures, which
real-world datasets frequently exhibit, plays a pivotal role
in this distinction because a feature’s impact on the prediction given, i.e., on top of the predictive information provided
by correlated features, alters the importance score attributed
(Watson and Wright 2021). To that end, it is worth highlighting that also in-between measures exist, e.g., conditioning
on only few features as in relative feature importance (König
et al. 2021) or having a parameter that alters the ”strictness”
of the conditional distribution regarding the degree of extrapolation allowed (see further our discussion on tree-depth
within cARFi in Secs. 3 and 4.1). Overlooking such nuances
poses a pitfall that can result in misinterpretations (Molnar
et al. 2022). However, determining marginal, conditional, or
in-between notions of feature importance in practice necessitates suitable and ready-to-use methods.
Especially methods for model-agnostic post hoc conditional feature importance measurement on a global level of
explanation urge for improvement. Recap that such methods aim to evaluate the change in a model’s performance
when erasing the feature of interest’s predictive information from the dataset, while accounting for the information provided by other features (Fisher, Rudin, and Dominici 2019; Watson and Wright 2021). Approaches may
suggest removing the feature of interest from the model altogether, but this commonly involves computationally expensive model refits (Lei et al. 2018). More commonly, approaches rely on strategies that remove the dependency on
the target while maintaining the features’ joint distributional
behavior. These methods aim to evaluate the change in predictive performance when replacing the feature of interest’s
values xj with x̃j that respect the conditional distribution
p(xj |XC = xC ), where XC indicates the features to con-

This paper proposes a method for measuring conditional feature importance via generative modeling. In explainable artificial intelligence (XAI), conditional feature importance assesses the impact of a feature on a prediction model’s performance given the information of other features. Modelagnostic post hoc methods to do so typically evaluate changes
in the predictive performance under on-manifold feature
value manipulations. Such procedures require creating feature values that respect conditional feature distributions,
which can be challenging in practice. Recent advancements
in generative modeling can facilitate this. For tabular data,
which may consist of both categorical and continuous features, the adversarial random forest (ARF) stands out as a
generative model that can generate on-manifold data points
without requiring intensive tuning efforts or computational
resources, making it a promising candidate model for subroutines in XAI methods. This paper proposes cARFi (conditional ARF feature importance), a method for measuring
conditional feature importance through feature values sampled from ARF-estimated conditional distributions. cARFi
requires only little tuning to yield robust importance scores
that can flexibly adapt for conditional or marginal notions of
feature importance, including straightforward extensions to
condition on feature subsets and allows for inferring the significance of feature importances through statistical tests.

Code — https://github.com/bips-hb/cARFi paper

1

Introduction

Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) aims to shed light
on the opaque behavior of machine learning algorithms,
which includes assessing the importance of features for
a predictive algorithm. Model-agnostic post hoc methods
attribute scores to input features according to their relevance for the prediction in an arbitrary, already fitted supervised machine learning model (Molnar 2020; Murdoch
et al. 2019). Refined conceptualizations include, for example, methods aiming for insights on the prediction of individ* These authors contributed equally.
†

M. Loecher and M.N.Wright share last authorship.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15596

