The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Extension-Based Argument-Ranking Semantics:
Social Rankings in Abstract Argumentation
Lars Bengel1 , Giovanni Buraglio2 , Jan Maly3,2 , Kenneth Skiba1
1

Artificial Intelligence Group, University of Hagen, Hagen, Germany
2
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Wien, Austria
3
Institute of Data, Process and Knowledge Management, WU Vienna University of Economics and Business, Wien, Austria
lars.bengel@fernuni-hagen.de, giovanni.buraglio@tuwien.ac.at, jan.maly@tuwien.ac.at, kenneth.skiba@fernuni-hagen.de
Abstract

first introduced in the economics literature (Moretti and
Öztürk 2017), in order to judge the performance of individuals based on the success of groups that they were involved in,
and has received significant attention from economists and
computer scientists (Khani, Moretti, and Öztürk 2019; Haret
et al. 2018; Bernardi, Lucchetti, and Moretti 2019; Suzuki
and Horita 2024). Unfortunately, semantics that only distinguish between sets of arguments that are jointly acceptable
and the ones that are not do not provide enough information to construct a fine-grained ranking of arguments by applying a social ranking function. Closer to our needs, Skiba
et al. (2021) recently introduced so-called extension-ranking
semantics that refine and extend classical argumentation semantics by providing a partial ranking over sets of arguments. We employ social ranking functions to this ranking
to compare single arguments based on how often an argument can be found in a better extension. Thus, an argument
is preferred to another in the resulting argument-ranking if it
contributes to making a larger number of sets acceptable (to
a higher degree). Indeed, in this setting social rankings captures a notion of contribution relative to a specific semantics.
Unfortunately, as mentioned, extension-ranking semantics only provide a partial ordering, while social ranking
functions generally take total orders as input. We therefore
first generalize the theory of social ranking functions to allow for partial orders, using the so-called rank of a set.
We then show that, by applying the right social ranking
functions to an extension-ranking semantics, we can define
argument-ranking semantics that are a refinement of the traditional skeptical/credulous acceptance of arguments, both
in spirit and in a strict technical sense. More precisely, we
show that by applying the lexicographic excellence operator introduced by Bernardi, Lucchetti, and Moretti (2019) to
the extension-ranking semantics of Skiba et al. (2021) we
generate an argument ranking such that all skeptically accepted arguments are ranked before all credulously accepted
arguments, which are, in turn, ranked before all rejected arguments. More generally, we show which axiomatic properties are sufficient and necessary for a social ranking operator
to give rise to such a ranking (Section 4). Additionally, we
show that the argument-ranking semantics induced by the
lexicographic excellence operator satisfies these properties
and is thus an example of an argument-ranking semantics
that satisfies our refinement property. We conclude by dis-

In this paper, we introduce a new family of argument-ranking
semantics which can be seen as a refinement of the classification of arguments into skeptically accepted, credulously
accepted and rejected. To this end we use so-called social
ranking functions which have been developed recently to rank
individuals based on their performance in groups. We provide
necessary and sufficient conditions for a social ranking function to give rise to an argument-ranking semantics satisfying
the desired refinement property.

1

Introduction

One of the core problems of computational models of argumentation is to classify the quality of arguments in the
context of a larger discussion. In abstract argumentation,
this is usually achieved by checking whether an argument
is contained in a set of jointly acceptable arguments, called
extensions, according to one of several well-established semantics. While these semantics provide a natural way to
rank arguments based on the larger context of the debate at
hand, they only allow us to distinguish three types of arguments: the ones that are skeptically accepted, i. e. that are
contained in every extension; the ones that are credulously
accepted, i. e. that are contained in at least one extension;
and the ones that are rejected, i. e. that are not contained
in any extension. For this reason, more fine-grained ways
of comparing arguments have been proposed, namely the so
called argument-ranking semantics (Cayrol and LagasquieSchiex 2005; Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2013; Amgoud et al.
2016; Bonzon et al. 2016; Heyninck, Raddaoui, and Straßer
2023). However, generally, such argument-ranking semantics are technically quite distinct from the extension-based
classifications of arguments that are more commonly used.
In this paper, we propose a new way of ranking arguments
which can be seen as a true refinement of the classification in skeptically, credulously and not accepted arguments.
To this end, we combine two strands of literature that have
emerged recently, namely extension-ranking semantics and
social ranking functions, in a novel way. Intuitively, social
ranking functions allow us to rank elements based on the
quality of sets they are contained in. These functions were
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14790

