The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Toward Efficient Data-Free Unlearning
Chenhao Zhang1 , Shaofei Shen1 , Weitong Chen2 , Miao Xu1 *
1

University of Queensland
2
University of Adelaide
chenhao.zhang@uq.edu.au, shaofei.shen@uq.edu.au, weitong.chen@adelaide.edu.au, miao.xu@uq.edu.au

Abstract

data might also be inaccessible due to legal restrictions. Despite these challenges in data access, requests for unlearning
tasks such as forgetting specific concepts or classes of data
can still be initiated; this scenario, where unlearning is required without access to the original or similar training data,
is termed data-free unlearning.
An existing method addressing data-free unlearning is
Generative Knowledge Transfer (GKT) (Chundawat et al.
2023), which utilizes Data-free Knowledge Distillation (Micaelli and Storkey 2019) to selectively transfer knowledge
from a trained model to an unlearned model. Both data-free
unlearning and data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD)
train a generator with the principle of synthesizing new samples that simulate the original training distribution, which
can be achieved by harnessing the capabilities of the welltrained model, and followed by the knowledge distillation (Chen et al. 2019; Choi et al. 2020; Do et al. 2022).
With meaningful synthetic samples in hand, GKT selectively distil only the necessary retaining knowledge by filtering out synthetic samples potentially belonging to the forgetting class. Specifically, it excludes samples where the probability associated with forgetting classes as outputted by the
logits exceeds a very low threshold before distillation. This
filtering strategy can ensure that samples involved in distillation contain minimal forgetting class information and effectively filter out forgetting knowledge.
Despite selective distillation being addressed, the training principle of DFKD’s generator, which with the aim
of synthesizing “not yet seen” data for student networks,
can present a novel challenge in unlearning scenarios. Intuitively, in the context of unlearning, forgetting class samples will inevitably be the “not yet seen” data for the student network, resulting the generator increasingly producing
a significant number of samples from the forgetting class. As
shown in Figure 1, when the filtering strategy is employed,
the generator can synthesize an increasing number of forgetting class samples. Consequently, the large volume of
filtered-out potential forgetting class samples significantly
reduces the pool of data available for distillation, leading to
inefficiencies. Furthermore, this filtering impedes the distillation process by inadvertently excluding logits outputs from
other classes, which are crucial for knowledge transfer and
represent a key advantage of knowledge distillation that relies on these outputs instead of hard labels.

Machine unlearning without access to real data distribution
is challenging. The existing method based on data-free distillation achieved unlearning by filtering out synthetic samples containing forgetting information but struggled to distill the retaining-related knowledge efficiently. In this work,
we analyze that such a problem is due to over-filtering,
which reduces the synthesized retaining-related information.
We propose a novel method, Inhibited Synthetic PostFilter
(ISPF), to tackle this challenge from two perspectives: First,
the Inhibited Synthetic, by reducing the synthesized forgetting information; Second, the PostFilter, by fully utilizing the
retaining-related information in synthesized samples. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed ISPF effectively
tackles the challenge and outperforms existing methods.

Code — https://github.com/ChildEden/ISPF
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13790

1

Introduction

Machine unlearning (Bourtoule et al. 2021; Nguyen et al.
2022; Xu et al. 2024) is an emerging paradigm that enables
machine learning models to selectively forget training data,
primarily to enhance user privacy and comply with regulations (Garg, Goldwasser, and Vasudevan 2020; BUKATY
2019), or to correct errors within the dataset (Cao and Yang
2015; Marchant, Rubinstein, and Alfeld 2022). Existing unlearning methods typically require access to the original
training data to accurately discern which information needs
to be removed (the “forgetting” data) and which must be preserved (the “retaining” data). This access is crucial for precisely identifying the parameters impacted by the forgetting
data, ensuring that only these parameters are adjusted (Fan
et al. 2023; Foster, Schoepf, and Brintrup 2024) while the
functionality of the model is maintained for the retaining
data (Thudi et al. 2022; Kurmanji et al. 2023). However, in
practice, the original training data may not always be available due to reasons such as compliance with privacy laws
that mandate data deletion, or organizational policies aimed
at optimizing storage efficiency. Moreover, alternative data
sources that share a similar distribution with the training
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22372

