The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Backdoor Attacks against No-Reference Image Quality Assessment Models
via a Scalable Trigger
Yi Yu1 , Song Xia1 , Xun Lin2 , Wenhan Yang3 * , Shijian Lu1 , Yap-Peng Tan1 , Alex Kot1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{yuyi0010, xias0002}@e.ntu.edu.sg, linxun@buaa.edu.cn, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, {shijian.Lu, eyptan, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

et al. 2020), compare signal distortions with reference images, NR-IQA models aims to simulate human perceptual
judgment to assess the quality of a image without a reference
image. NR-IQA is adopted in a wide range of applications as
evaluation criterion such as image transport systems (Fu et al.
2023), video compression (Rippel et al. 2019), and image
restoration (Zhang et al. 2019), highlighting its pivotal role
in real-world image processing algorithms. Leveraging the
capabilities of DNNs, recent NR-IQA models (Yang et al.
2022) have achieved remarkable consistency with humans.
Alongside the impressive performance of DNNs, concerns
about their security have grown (Liang et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2022, 2024b; Xia et al. 2024a,b; Wang et al. 2024a,b). Adversarial attacks (AA) on NR-IQA models have recently received
considerable attention. These attacks aim to substantially alter
predicted scores with imperceptible perturbations applied to
input images. Despite the insights provided by these attacks
in NR-IQA models, they exhibit several intrinsic shortcomings: 1) Some attacks (Zhang et al. 2022) assume a white-box
scenario, wherein the attacker has full access to the model
and its parameters, limiting their practical utility in the real
world. 2) Certain attacks (Korhonen and You 2022), relying
on surrogate models to generate adversarial examples and
transfer them to the target model, often suffer from reduced
effectiveness in limited transferability. 3) The generation of
adversarial examples is formulated as an optimization problem, requiring substantial computational resources and time
to iteratively optimize solutions for each sample. 4) Most
attacks (Zhang et al. 2022, 2023) aim to create untargeted
attacks, focusing on inducing significant deviations rather
than shifting predictions to a specific target.
To tackle these challenges, we consider an alternative
threat: backdoor attacks (BA), which are more efficient and
require no white-box access to the model . In this scenario, the
adversary can inject a stealthy backdoor into the target model
corresponding to a unique trigger during training (Saha, Subramanya, and Pirsiavash 2020; Fang and Choromanska 2022;
Yu et al. 2023, 2024a,c; Liu et al. 2024b; Zheng et al. 2024),
enabling the compromised model to function normally on benign samples but exhibit malicious behavior when presented
with samples containing the trigger during inference. Data
poisoning is the prevailing method for executing BA (Chen
et al. 2017), whereby the adversary compromises specific
training samples to embed the backdoor. Models trained on

No-Reference Image Quality Assessment (NR-IQA), responsible for assessing the quality of a single input image without
using any reference, plays a critical role in evaluating and optimizing computer vision systems, e.g., low-light enhancement.
Recent research indicates that NR-IQA models are susceptible
to adversarial attacks, which can significantly alter predicted
scores with visually imperceptible perturbations. Despite revealing vulnerabilities, these attack methods have limitations,
including high computational demands, untargeted manipulation, limited practical utility in white-box scenarios, and
reduced effectiveness in black-box scenarios. To address these
challenges, we shift our focus to another significant threat and
present a novel poisoning-based backdoor attack against NRIQA (BAIQA), allowing the attacker to manipulate the IQA
model’s output to any desired target value by simply adjusting
a scaling coefficient α for the trigger. We propose to inject the
trigger in the discrete cosine transform (DCT) domain to improve the local invariance of the trigger for countering trigger
diminishment in NR-IQA models due to widely adopted data
augmentations. Furthermore, the universal adversarial perturbations (UAP) in the DCT space are designed as the trigger,
to increase IQA model susceptibility to manipulation and improve attack effectiveness. In addition to the heuristic method
for poison-label BAIQA (P-BAIQA), we explore the design
of clean-label BAIQA (C-BAIQA), focusing on α sampling
and image data refinement, driven by theoretical insights we
reveal. Extensive experiments on diverse datasets and various
NR-IQA models demonstrate the effectiveness of our attacks.

Code and appendix — https://github.com/yuyi-sd/BAIQA

Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved superior performance in computer vision (He et al. 2016), including Image Quality Assessment (IQA) (Zhang et al. 2021).
IQA aims to predict image quality in line with human perception, categorized into Full-Reference (FR-IQA) and NoReference (NR-IQA) models based on access to reference
images. While FR-IQA techniques, such as SSIM (Wang
et al. 2004), LPIPS (Zhang et al. 2018), and DISTS (Ding
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9698

