The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VFM-Adapter: Adapting Visual Foundation Models for Dense Prediction with
Dynamic Hybrid Operation Mapping
Zheng Chen1 , Yu Zeng1 , Zehui Chen1 , Hongzhi Gao1 , Lin Chen1 ,
Jiaming Liu2 , Feng Zhao1 *
1

MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Peking University
{chenzheng, zy18803425504, lovesnow, hongzhigao, chlin}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
jiamingliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

Adapter Tuning

Although pre-trained large vision foundation models (VFM)
yield superior results on various downstream tasks, full
fine-tuning is often impractical due to its high computational cost and storage requirements. Recent advancements
in parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) of VFM for image
classification show significant promise. However, the application of PEFT techniques to dense prediction tasks remains
largely unexplored. Our analysis of existing methods reveals
that the underlying premise of utilizing low-rank parameter
matrices, despite their efficacy in specific applications, may
not be adequately suitable for dense prediction tasks. To this
end, we propose a novel PEFT learning approach tailored for
dense prediction tasks, namely VFM-Adapter. Specifically,
the VFM-Adapter introduces a hybrid operation mapping
technique that seamlessly integrates local information with
global modeling to the adapter module. It capitalizes on the
distinct inductive biases inherent in different operations. Additionally, we dynamically generate parameters for the VFMAdapter, enabling flexibility of feature extraction given specific inputs. To validate the efficacy of VFM-Adapter, we conduct extensive experiments across object detection, semantic segmentation, and instance segmentation tasks. Results on
multiple benchmarks consistently demonstrate the superiority
of our method over previous approaches. Notably, with only
three percent of the trainable parameters of the SAM-Base
backbone, our approach achieves competitive or even superior performance compared to full fine-tuning. The code will
be available.

Image
Dataset

Training

Transformer
Layer

……

Adapter

Transformer
Layer

Image
Dataset

Det/Seg
Head

Adapter

VFM-Adapter (Ours)
Transformer
Layer

Freezing

Training
……

Hybrid Operation Mapping

Transformer
Layer

Freezing

Det/Seg
Head

Hybrid Operation Mapping

Dynamic Parameter Generation

Figure 1: Characteristics of Our Proposed VFM-adapter.
Adapter tuning freezes the parameters of the pre-trained
model while exclusively training the parameters of the
adapter and prediction head. In contrast, we harness the
power of Hybrid Operation Mapping (HOM) to seamlessly
aggregate global and local features, thereby effectively capturing comprehensive contextual information. Moreover, we
employ Dynamic Parameter Generation (DPG) to dynamically synthesize adaptive parameters tailored to the HOM
module. This innovative approach confers exceptional flexibility in our feature extraction process, transcending the constraints imposed by previous adapter-based methods.

et al. 2023; Oquab et al. 2023; Kirillov et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2021; Zou et al. 2023) due to the impressive demonstrations from both language (Floridi and Chiriatti 2020; Touvron et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2022) and vision (Chen et al.
2023; Radford et al. 2021) communities.
Despite the claim of strong zero-shot abilities by these
models (Fang et al. 2023; Oquab et al. 2023; Kirillov et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2021), we empirically find that simply utilizing the output features derived from these VFM still suffers
inferior performance on various downstream tasks, especially on dense visual predictions. Fully fine-tuning the entire backbone and task-specific heads can revitalize VFM’s
performance. However, as network parameters continue to
scale up, this strategy becomes unsustainable due to the
enormous computational demands, including GPU memory and extended training periods. Moreover, dedicating a
unique, parameter-heavy VFM to each dataset is both inefficient and impractical. Consequently, devising an effective

Introduction
With the rapid development of computer vision, a wide spectrum of deep neural networks emerged, promoting massive
progress in various applications, e.g., object detection (Ren
et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2017; Wang, Bochkovskiy, and Liao
2023; Tian et al. 2019; Carion et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2024),
semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015;
Chen et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2018; Xie
et al. 2021), and depth estimation (Patil et al. 2022; Yang
et al. 2022; Mi, Di, and Xu 2022; Guizilini et al. 2023;
Ma et al. 2022). Recently, there has been an increasing research interest in vision foundation models (VFM) (Fang
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2385

