The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Flow Factorization for Efficient Generative Flow Networks
Jiashun Liu1 * , Chunhui Li1 * , Cheng-Hao Liu2 , Dianbo Liu3 , Qingpeng Cai4 , Ling Pan1†
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Mila-Québec AI Institute, McGill University
3
National University of Singapore
4
Kuaishou Technology

proportionally to the return R(x). Unlike RL, GFlowNets
model all the modes of the reward function, enabling the
discovery of high-quality and diverse candidates.

Abstract
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) is a new family of
probabilistic samplers for generating objects under an unnormalized reward distribution. It has emerged as a promising framework for learning stochastic policies that generate
high-quality and diverse discrete objects proportional to their
rewards, surpassing traditional reward-maximizing reinforcement learning methods. However, existing GFlowNets often
suffer with data efficiency due to the direct parameterization of
edge flows or dependence on backward policies that are challenging to specify or optimize, especially in high-dimensional
action spaces. While the recent development of GFlowNets
has primarily focused on developing alternative loss functions, we introduce a novel approach by exploring enhanced
flow representations from an architectural perspective. In this
paper, we propose to factorize the conventional edge flows
into separate state flow and edge-based allocation streams. By
introducing an effective method to synergistically combine
these two streams to estimate the flows, we develop Bifurcated
Generative Flow Networks (BN), a practical implementation
to improve learning efficiency. We conduct extensive experiments on various standard benchmarks, and results show that
BN significantly improves learning efficiency and effectiveness compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01901

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has made remarkable
progress in recent years, particularly in the domain of
games (Mnih et al. 2015; Vinyals et al. 2019). While RL typically aims to maximize the reward function and learn the optimal policy, this singular focus may not always yield the most
desirable outcomes in many practical applications where the
diversity of generated states is crucial, e.g., molecule discovery (Bengio et al. 2021), combinatorial optimization (Zhang
et al. 2023b, 2024), and large language models (Li et al.
2023; Hu et al. 2023). In contrast, Generative Flow Networks
(GFlowNets) (Bengio et al. 2021) offer a novel approach
as probabilistic samplers that learn a stochastic policy for
generating compositional objects x ∈ X with probability
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author, email: lingpan@ust.hk
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26833

Figure 1: Upon factorizing the conventional edge flows in
Flow Matching (Bengio et al. 2021) into the state flow and
the edge-based allocation streams, the disparities in attention
between these streams across various states are illustrated
via the Penicillin discovery task. The red circle with a red
halo signifies the attention of the edge-based allocation at the
current state, while the blue circle with a blue halo denotes
the focus of the state flow stream.
GFlowNets training can be conceptualized as satisfying
the flow consistency constraint in a water flow network (Bengio et al. 2023), ensuring that incoming flows from parent
states F (sparent → s) match the state flow F (s), and equal
to outgoing flows to children states F (s → schild ), with terminal flows set to returns R(x). Flow Matching (Bengio et al.
2021) pioneered the conversion of this constraint into a practical loss function for training neural networks that directly

