The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EfficientVMamba: Atrous Selective Scan for
Light Weight Visual Mamba
Xiaohuan Pei* , Tao Huang∗ , Chang Xu
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
{xiaohuan.pei, t.huang, c.xu}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Prior efforts in light-weight model development mainly centered on CNN and Transformer-based designs yet faced persistent challenges. CNNs adept at local feature extraction
compromise resolution while Transformers offer global reach
but escalate computational demands O(N 2 ). This ongoing
trade-off between accuracy and efficiency remains a significant hurdle. Recently, state space models (SSMs), such as
Mamba, have shown outstanding performance and competitiveness in various tasks such as language modeling and computer vision, while reducing the time complexity of global
information extraction to O(N ). Inspired by this, this work
proposes to explore the potential of visual state space models in light-weight model design and introduce a novel efficient model variant dubbed EfficientVMamba. Concretely,
EfficientVMamba integrates a atrous-based selective scan
approach by efficient skip sampling, constituting building
blocks designed to harness both global and local representational features. Additionally, we investigate the integration
between SSM blocks and convolutions, and introduce an efficient visual state space block combined with an additional
convolution branch, which further elevate the model performance. Experimental results show that, EfficientVMamba
scales down the computational complexity while yields competitive results across a variety of vision tasks. For example,
EfficientVMamba-S with 1.3G FLOPs improves Vim-Ti with
1.5G FLOPs by a large margin of 5.6% accuracy on ImageNet.

Figure 1: Lightweight Model Performance Comparison on
ImageNet. EfficientVMamba outperforms previous work
across various model variants in terms of both accuracy and
computational complexity.
Li et al. 2022a), has demonstrated competitive performance
to Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) in sequence modeling tasks such as language modeling. Inspired by this, some
works (Zhu et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024b; Ruan and Xiang
2024; Xing et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024a) are pioneering in
introducing SSMs into vision tasks. Among these methods,
Vmamba (Liu et al. 2024b) stands out by introducing an
SS2D method to preserve 2D spatial dependencies by scanning images from multiple directions.
However, the impressive performance achieved by these
various architectures usually comes from the scaling up of
model sizes, making a critical challenge in applying them
on resource-constrained devices. In pursue of light-weight
models, many studies have been conducted to reduce the resource consumption of vision models while keeping a competitive performance. Early works on efficient CNNs mainly
focus on narrowing the original convolutional block with efficient group convolutions (Howard et al. 2017; Sandler et al.
2018), light skipping connections (Ma et al. 2018; Han et al.
2020), e.t.c. While recently, due to the remarkable success
of including the global representation ability of Transformers into vision tasks, some works are proposed to reduce the
computation complexity of ViTs (Liu et al. 2021; Tu et al.

Code — https://github.com/TerryPei/EfficientVMamba

Introduction
Convolutional networks, exemplified by models such as
ResNet (He et al. 2016), Inception (Szegedy et al. 2017),
and EfficientNet (Tan and Le 2019a), and Transformerbased networks, such as Swin-Transformer (Liu et al. 2021),
Beit (Bao et al. 2021), and Resformer (Zamir et al. 2022)
have been extensively applied to visual tasks including image classification, detection, and segmentation, achieving
remarkable results. Recently, Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023),
a network based on state-space models (SSMs) (Gu et al.
2021; Gu, Goel, and Ré 2021; Gupta, Gu, and Berant 2022;
* Equal contributions.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6443

