The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SocialSim: Towards Socialized Simulation of Emotional Support Conversation
Zhuang Chen1,2 * , Yaru Cao3 * , Guanqun Bi2† , Jincenzi Wu4 , Jinfeng Zhou2 ,
Xiyao Xiao5 , Si Chen6 , Hongning Wang2 , Minlie Huang2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
2
CoAI Group, DCST, IAI, BNRIST, Tsinghua University
3
Northwest Minzu University
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
Lingxin AI
6
Academy of Arts & Design, Tsinghua University
zhchen18@foxmail.com, biguanqun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous Simulation

Emotional support conversation (ESC) helps reduce people’s
psychological stress and provide emotional value through interactive dialogues. Due to the high cost of crowdsourcing a
large ESC corpus, recent attempts use large language models for dialogue augmentation. However, existing approaches
largely overlook the social dynamics inherent in ESC, leading to less effective simulations. In this paper, we introduce
SocialSim, a novel framework that simulates ESC by integrating key aspects of social interactions: social disclosure
and social awareness. On the seeker side, we facilitate social disclosure by constructing a comprehensive persona bank
that captures diverse and authentic help-seeking scenarios.
On the supporter side, we enhance social awareness by eliciting cognitive reasoning to generate logical and supportive
responses. Building upon SocialSim, we construct SSConv,
a large-scale synthetic ESC corpus of which quality can even
surpass crowdsourced ESC data. We further train a chatbot on
SSConv and demonstrate its state-of-the-art performance in
both automatic and human evaluations. We believe SocialSim
offers a scalable way to synthesize ESC, making emotional
care more accessible and practical.

Seeker’s Brief Situation

Supporter’s Response Pattern

Socialized Simulation
Social Disclosure
Social Awareness
age
gender
personality
occupation
topic
question
description
emotion
attempt
goal

Seeker’s
Thought
Seeker
Persona
Bank

Seeker’s
Action

Supporter
Cognitive
Reasoning
Seeker’s
Situation

Supporter’s
Strategy

Figure 1: SocialSim recognizes ESC as a social activity and
simulates it with both social disclosure and awareness.

With the advent of large language models (LLMs) like
GPT-4 (Achiam et al. 2023) and LLaMA (Touvron et al.
2023), recent studies have made progress in using LLMs to
augment dialogue data for ESC (Zheng et al. 2023a,b). However, these approaches largely neglect the inherently social
nature of ESC, resulting in a noticeable gap between synthetic and crowdsourced corpora. Drawing on theories of social intelligence (Albrecht 2009), as shown in Figure 1, we
identify two main areas where this gap arises. 1) Seeker’s
social disclosure. Existing methods provide very limited
seeker demographics, such as a very brief description of the
help-seeking situation, which restricts the specificity and diversity of the dialogues. 2) Supporter’s social awareness.
The current focus is primarily on replicating example dialogues rather than engaging in the thinking process as human
supporters should. This reliance on external response patterns, rather than internal cognitive reasoning, reduces the
depth and relevance of the simulated dialogues.
To address these challenges, we propose SocialSim, a
framework designed for socialized simulation of emotional
support conversations. 1) On the seeker side, we facilitate social disclosure via persona realism. Specifically, we

Introduction
Emotional support conversation (ESC) is a form of communication aimed at providing comfort, understanding, and
encouragement to someone who is experiencing emotional
distress or facing challenging situations (Beebe et al. 2002).
ESC is widely used in various domains, including therapy
(Rogers 1995), counseling (Sutton and Stewart 2017), peer
support programs (Mead 2014), and online mental health
services (Riva 2004). To train machine systems for ESC,
Liu et al. (2021a) collect an ESConv corpus by employing
crowdsourcing workers to act as seekers and supporters engaging in conversations on predetermined topics. However,
the high cost of crowdsourcing limits both the number of
conversations and the diversity of topics in such corpora.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1274

