The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Human-in-the-loop or AI-in-the-loop?
Automate or Collaborate?
Sriraam Natarajan1 , Saurabh Mathur1 * , Sahil Sidheekh1 * ,
Wolfgang Stammer2,3 , Kristian Kersting2,3
1
University of Texas at Dallas,
Technical University of Darmstadt,
3
Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.ai), Darmstadt, Germany
2

Abstract

1. An AI system that recommends content to users (say
videos). If a human intervenes in such a system, they provide feedback/guidance by either correcting inappropriate content (as a trusted ally) or by providing malicious/inappropriate content (as an adversary). In either case, the
AI agent optimizes its internal function, considers the human feedback, and decides on the appropriate action (in
this case, showing the relevant content).
2. As a second example, consider an AI system that assists
a physician who is treating a diabetic patient for a knee
injury and prescribes oral steroids to mitigate pain. AI
could now intervene based on its internal objective function, domain constraints, and knowledge and suggest that
since the patient has diabetes, the physician should reconsider their recommendation. The physician can then
inform the system that the patient is in acute pain and reducing that is important or, in contrast, that the patient
did not inform the physician and hence will change her
prescription.
Indeed, in either of these cases, the AI system interacts
with the human expert, assimilates knowledge, updates its
constraints, makes internal computations, and then provides
suggestions. However, although these two systems appear
quite similar at the outset, there is a crucial difference in
the role of decision-making authority and control. In the former case, AI is in charge of decision-making and takes additional inputs from the human expert. Arguably, these can be
“richer” inputs than treating the human as a “mere labeler”.
Still, the human is not the decision-maker, while the AI actually is. In the latter case, the human is in control of the full
system. The presence of AI inside this system only makes
the process more efficient and possibly more effective. However, the full system exists independent of the presence of
AI. This difference is critical.
Consider the problem of evaluation. Clearly, evaluating a
system based only on its performance (say accuracy or some
other function of precision/recall) will benefit the HIL system but not the AI 2 L system, as argued by van Amsterdam
et al. (2024). More importantly, during deployment, the issues that the AI 2 L systems must address and reason with
can be significantly different from HIL systems.
In the rest of this blue sky paper, we first present these
two systems in greater detail showing their similarities and
differences. We argue strongly that when designing systems

Human-in-the-loop (HIL) systems have emerged as a promising approach for combining the strengths of data-driven machine learning models with the contextual understanding of
human experts. However, a deeper look into several of these
systems reveals that calling them HIL would be a misnomer,
as they are quite the opposite, namely AI-in-the-loop (AI 2 L)
systems: the human is in control of the system, while the AI is
there to support the human. We argue that existing evaluation
methods often overemphasize the machine (learning) component’s performance, neglecting the human expert’s critical
role. Consequently, we propose an AI 2 L perspective, which
recognizes that the human expert is an active participant in
the system, significantly influencing its overall performance.
By adopting an AI 2 L approach, we can develop more comprehensive systems that faithfully model the intricate interplay between the human and machine components, leading
to more effective and robust AI systems.

Introduction
Since the time of the “advice taker” (McCarthy 1959, 1968),
there has been a significant interest in building humanallied AI systems. Different paradigms and different techniques such as active learning (Settles 2009), knowledgebased learning (Towell and Shavlik 1994; Fung, Mangasarian, and Shavlik 2002), explanatory interactive learning (Schramowski et al. 2020; Stammer, Schramowski, and
Kersting 2021), advice-taking (DeJong and Mooney 1986;
Baffes and Mooney 1996; Odom et al. 2015), weak/distant
supervision (Natarajan et al. 2014; Ratner et al. 2017), human feedback (Maclin et al. 2005; Wiewiora, Cottrell, and
Elkan 2003; Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999; Griffith et al.
2013) and preference elicitation (Boutilier 2002; Boutilier
et al. 2004; Chen and Pu 2012; Toni et al. 2024) etc., to name
a few, have been developed for this important and challenging task. Many of these directions have been presented under
the umbrella of Human-in-the-loop (HIL) systems. We take
a deeper look at these systems and ask the question if they
are truly HIL systems.
To understand the difference, let us consider two simple
examples:
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28594

