The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Monotonicity: On the Convergence of Learning Algorithms in Standard
Auction Games
Martin Bichler, Stephan B. Lunowa, Matthias Oberlechner, Fabian R. Pieroth, Barbara Wohlmuth
Technical University of Munich
School of Computation, Information and Technology,
Arcisstr. 21, 80333 Munich, Germany
{bichler, stephan.lunowa, oberlech, fabian.pieroth, wohlmuth}@cit.tum.de
Abstract

this field do not have simple dominant strategies for bidding
truthfully. The celebrated Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG)
mechanism was shown to be unique in this respect in the
widely used standard model with independent private values
and quasi-linear (i.e., payoff maximizing) bidders (Green
and Laffont 1977). However, for various reasons, the VCG
mechanism is rarely used in practice (Ausubel, Milgrom
et al. 2006). Therefore, it is essential to understand nontruthful equilibrium strategies in markets more generally.
Participants in auction games do not have complete but
only distributional information about the valuations of competing market participants. The value of competing bidders
is modeled as a draw from an atomless distribution function.
An equilibrium bid function then determines how much they
bid based on their value draw and their knowledge of the
prior distribution. The first-price sealed-bid auction in the
symmetric and independent prior values model provides a
textbook example, where the first-order conditions lead to
an ordinary differential equation that admits a closed-form
solution for the BNE bid function (Krishna 2009).
Unfortunately, despite the enormous academic attention auction theory has received, BNE strategies are only
known for very restricted, simple market models. For bidders with non-uniform or interdependent valuation distributions, multiple objects, or non-quasilinear (i.e., non-payoffmaximizing) utility functions, we typically do not know an
explicit equilibrium bid function. Even for simple combinatorial auctions with two objects only, one needs to make
strong assumptions to find closed-form solutions (Kokott,
Bichler, and Paulsen 2019). The equilibrium problem often leads to a system of non-linear differential equations for
which we have no exact mathematical solution theory. Beyond analytical solutions, numerical techniques for solving
differential equations turned out to be challenging and have
received only limited attention. Fibich and Gavish (Fibich
and Gavish 2011) criticize the inherent numerical instability
of standard techniques used in this field.

Equilibrium problems in Bayesian auction games can be described as systems of differential equations. Depending on the
model assumptions, these equations might be such that we do
not have a rigorous mathematical solution theory. The lack of
analytical or numerical techniques with guaranteed convergence for the equilibrium problem has plagued the field and
limited equilibrium analysis to rather simple auction models such as single-object auctions. Recent advances in equilibrium learning led to algorithms that find equilibrium under a wide variety of model assumptions. Monotonicity and
the Minty condition are the known sufficient conditions for
learning algorithms to converge to an equilibrium in games.
Not much is known about convergence of learning algorithms
beyond these conditions. We analyze first- and second-price
auctions where simple learning algorithms consistently converge to an equilibrium. The analysis is challenging, because
these properties need to be shown in infinite dimensions. Interestingly, we show that neither monotonicity nor pseudoor quasi-monotonicity holds for the respective variational inequalities (VIs). The second-price auction’s equilibrium is a
Minty-type solution, but the first-price auction is not. However, the analysis via infinite-dimensional VIs allows us to get
ex-post guarantees for gradient-based algorithms. We show
that the Bayes–Nash equilibrium is the unique solution to
the VI within the class of uniformly increasing bid functions,
which ensures that gradient-based algorithms attain the equilibrium in case of convergence, as also observed in numerical
experiments.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.15398

Introduction
The Nash equilibrium is the central solution concept in noncooperative game theory (Nash et al. 1950). Nash’s original
idea was extended to games with incomplete information
(Harsanyi 1967). Today, the analysis of Bayes–Nash equilibrium (BNE) is key to the study of auctions, contests, and
many other economic models, where the strategic complexity for participants arises from their uncertainty about the
preferences of competitors (Vickrey 1961).
Auction theory studies allocation and prices on markets
with self-interested participants in equilibrium. Such predictions are important because most market institutions in

Equilibrium Learning
Equilibrium learning is an alternative numerical approach to
finding equilibrium, as compared to standard techniques for
solving differential equations. This literature examines what
kind of equilibrium arises as a consequence of a relatively
simple process of learning and adaptation, in which agents

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13649

