The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Toward Verifiable Instruction-Following Alignment for Retrieval-Augmented
Generation
Guanting Dong1 , Xiaoshuai Song2 , Yutao Zhu1 , Runqi Qiao2 , Zhicheng Dou1 * , Ji-Rong Wen1
1

2

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{dongguanting, dou}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Following natural instructions is crucial for the effective
application of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems. Despite recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs), research on assessing and improving instructionfollowing (IF) alignment within the RAG domain remains
limited. To address this issue, we propose VIF-RAG, an
automated, scalable, and verifiable synthetic pipeline for
instruction-following alignment in RAG systems. We start
by manually crafting a minimal set of atomic instructions
(<100) and developing combination rules to synthesize and
verify complex instructions for a seed set. We then use supervised models for instruction rewriting while simultaneously
generating code to automate the verification of instruction
quality via a Python executor. Finally, we integrate these instructions with extensive RAG and general samples, scaling
up to a high-quality VIF-RAG-QA dataset (>100k) through
automated processes. To further bridge the gap in instructionfollowing auto-evaluation for RAG systems, we introduce
FollowRAG Benchmark, which includes approximately 3K
test samples, covering 22 categories of general instruction
constraints and four knowledge-intensive QA datasets. Due
to its robust pipeline design, FollowRAG can seamlessly integrate with different RAG benchmarks. Using FollowRAG
and eight widely-used IF and foundational abilities benchmarks for LLMs, we demonstrate that VIF-RAG markedly
enhances LLM performance across a broad range of general
instruction constraints while effectively leveraging its capabilities in RAG scenarios. Further analysis offers practical insights for achieving IF alignment in RAG systems.

Figure 1: The instruction-following tasks for LLMs in RAG.

a promising solution, empowering LLMs to leverage reliable information from retrieved documents, thereby returning high-quality responses (Lewis et al. 2020).
In real-world interaction scenarios, users often deviate
from standard templates when posing questions, instead of
imposing diverse instructions on model outputs to meet specific task requirements (Chung et al. 2024; Dong et al. 2022).
Consequently, improving instruction-following (IF) capabilities is foundational to the effective application of LLM and
RAG systems. The core goal of IF is to enable models to
adapt to the diverse intents of users, which has garnered
widespread attention in the LLM community.
Existing efforts on instruction-following alignment primarily focus on multi-grained evaluation and high-quality
instruction data synthesis to enhance LLMs’ natural
instruction-following capabilities (Zhou et al. 2023; Wen
et al. 2024). However, in complex RAG scenarios, the diverse knowledge introduced by retrieval-augmented techniques presents significant challenges for LLMs in effectively handling complex instructions (Figure 1). After supervised fine-tuning on high-quality general and knowledgeintensive QA datasets, LLMs demonstrate robust performance in both IF and RAG tasks. However, these capabilities do not always generalize well to instruction-following
tasks under RAG scenarios and may even conflict with
the performance of other fundamental abilities (Dong et al.
2024b). Unfortunately, research on instruction-following in

Code — https://github.com/dongguanting/FollowRAG
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.09584

Introduction
The advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI 2023; Yang et al. 2024) has profoundly revolutionized a variety of real-world tasks expressed in natural language (Wei et al. 2022). However, they still suffer from hallucinations and factual inconsistencies (Bang et al. 2023),
impacting the authenticity of generated answers. RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) has gained recognition as
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23796

