The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Normal-NeRF: Ambiguity-Robust Normal Estimation for Highly Reflective Scenes
Ji Shi, Xianghua Ying* , Ruohao Guo, Bowei Xing, Wenzhen Yue
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
sjj118@pku.edu.cn, xhying@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

the reflection direction about the surface normal, rather than
the viewing direction itself. Later works further employ advanced reflection-aware appearance models, such as Microfacet Reflectance Model (Mai et al. 2023) and Whitted-Style
Ray Tracing (Zeng et al. 2023). While these advanced reflection models are capable of representing complex reflections,
achieving accurate reflection modeling remains a challenge
due to the inherent shape ambiguity on highly reflective surfaces.
We observe that surface normals are critical in nearly all
reflection-aware appearance models. Previous works typically derive surface normals based on the negative normalized gradient of the density field, which we term the “density gradient”. However, this approach becomes unreliable
on highly specular surfaces, as NeRF tends to fake specular reflections with foggy artifacts embedded behind the surfaces (Verbin et al. 2022). This phenomenon prevents the
density values from monotonicly increasing towards the object’s interior, resulting inconsistent gradient directions, as
illustrated in Figure 1(a).
In this paper, we propose an ambiguity-robust normal estimation pipeline to enhance NeRF’s capability in reconstructing and rendering highly reflective scenes. To address the
unreliability in conventional normal estimation approaches,
we introduce the concept of “transmittance gradient”, which
can provide accurate normal estimates even under conditions of ambiguous shape predictions. Instead of calculating the gradient of the density, we compute the gradient of
the transmittance, which is naturally monotonic along any
specific ray, as illustrated in Figure 1(b). Furthermore, we
observe that reflection-aware appearance models generally
prefer locally smooth surface normals, whereas NeRF tends
to reconstruct a steep density field to achieve sharper object
boundaries. To address this conflict, we propose a dual activated densities module that accommodates the distinct requirements of both the surface normals and the density field.
Additionally, we design a stop-gradient warmup strategy for
the predicted normal loss to prevent it from impeding the
optimization of the density field.
By integrating a reflection-aware appearance model, our
model achieves robust reconstruction and high-fidelity rendering in highly reflective scenes. Our key contributions can
be summarized as follows:

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) often struggle with reconstructing and rendering highly reflective scenes. Recent advancements have developed various reflection-aware appearance models to enhance NeRF’s capability to render specular reflections. However, the robust reconstruction of highly
reflective scenes is still hindered by the inherent shape ambiguity on specular surfaces. Existing methods typically rely
on additional geometry priors to regularize the shape prediction, but this can lead to oversmoothed geometry in complex scenes. Observing the critical role of surface normals
in parameterizing reflections, we introduce a transmittancegradient-based normal estimation technique that remains robust even under ambiguous shape conditions. Furthermore,
we propose a dual activated densities module that effectively
bridges the gap between smooth surface normals and sharp
object boundaries. Combined with a reflection-aware appearance model, our proposed method achieves robust reconstruction and high-fidelity rendering of scenes featuring both
highly specular reflections and intricate geometric structures.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on various datasets.

Code — https://github.com/sjj118/Normal-NeRF

Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) has
been extensively studied for its powerful 3D scene reconstruction and rendering capabilities. NeRF utilizes multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) to encode a 3D scene into continuous fields of volume density and view-dependent radiance. Despite NeRF’s proficiency in capturing fine geometric structures and smoothly varying view-dependent appearance, it often fails to accurately represent highly specular reflections, as the high-frequency view-dependent appearance
prevents NeRF from eliminating the shape-radiance ambiguity (Zhang et al. 2020).
Recent studies attempt to enhance NeRF’s capability in
rendering reflective scenes by incorporating reflection-aware
appearance models. Ref-NeRF (Verbin et al. 2022) reparameterizes the view-dependent radiance as a function of
* Xianghua Ying is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to identify
6869

