The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EyEar: Learning Audio Synchronized Human Gaze Trajectory
Based on Physics-Informed Dynamics
Xiaochuan Liu* 1 , Xin Cheng* 1 , Yuchong Sun1 , Xiaoxue Wu1 , Ruihua Song1† , Hao Sun1† ,
Denghao Zhang2†
1

Gaoling School of Artifcial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Department of Psychology, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
{liuxiaochuan, chengxin000, ycsun, wuxiaoxue1102, rsong, haosun, zdh}@ruc.edu.cn
Only Image

Abstract
Imitating how humans move their gaze in a visual scene is a
vital research problem for both visual understanding and psychology, kindling crucial applications such as building alive
virtual characters. Previous studies aim to predict gaze trajectories when humans are free-viewing an image, searching
for required targets, or looking for clues to answer questions
in an image. While these tasks focus on visual-centric scenarios, humans move their gaze also along with audio signal
inputs in more common scenarios. To fill this gap, we introduce a new task that predicts human gaze trajectories in a visual scene with synchronized audio inputs and provide a new
dataset containing 20k gaze points from 8 subjects. To effectively integrate audio information and simulate the dynamic
process of human gaze motion, we propose a novel learning
framework called EyEar (Eye moving while Ear listening)
based on physics-informed dynamics, which considers three
key factors to predict gazes: eye inherent motion tendency, vision salient attraction, and audio semantic attraction. We also
propose a probability density score to overcome the high individual variability of gaze trajectories, thereby improving the
stabilization of optimization and the reliability of the evaluation. Experimental results show that EyEar outperforms all
the baselines in the context of all evaluation metrics, thanks
to the proposed components in the learning model.

1

Image +
Search Target / Visual Question
Search for a bin.
/ Is there a bin?

(a) Free-viewing

(b) Visual Searching / VQA
Image + Synchronized Audio

Human Subjects

Gaze Trajectory
(c) Audio Synchronized Viewing (Ours)

Figure 1: Different from existing tasks which predict gazes
in situations such as (a) humans free-viewing an image, or
(b) searching for required targets or clues to answer questions in an image, our proposed task (c) aims to predict human gaze in a more common scenario where humans receive
synchronized audio signals when directing their gaze.
audio stimuli. To bridge this gap, we propose a new task:
predicting a gaze trajectory in an audio synchronized viewing scene. We contribute to this task from both dataset and
algorithm perspectives.
From the dataset perspective, we construct a new dataset
with 20k gaze points from 8 subjects, using eye tracking devices to trace the subjects’ scanpaths over the image when
they hear an audio clip. Our dataset has a much longer
average gaze sequence length and duration than existing
datasets, making it more challenging and valuable for learning long-range human gaze trajectories.
From the algorithm perspective, we solve two major challenges. The first challenge is how to effectively integrate audio information in this multimodal scenario, with a proper
framework that considers the dynamical physics of eye
movement (C1). The second challenge is that different people have diverse gaze trajectories, making the collected data
have high individual variability (C2). This makes the commonly used Mean Square Error (MSE) loss confused and
raises a challenge for the stability of optimization. Existing
evaluation metrics based on Euclidean distance also lack re-

Introduction

Predicting human gaze trajectory within a visual scene is
an important research problem for a range of research communities, including visual understanding, human behavior,
psychology, etc. It is also crucial for some downstream applications, such as building virtual characters that are alive
and more interactive. As shown in Figure 1, existing studies of gaze trajectory prediction aim to predict gaze sequences (a.k.a. scanpaths) when human are free-viewing images (Jiang et al. 2015) or webpages (Shen and Zhao 2014),
searching for required objects in an image (Mondal et al.
2023; Yang et al. 2020), or collecting clues for answering
visual questions (Chen, Jiang, and Zhao 2021).
While existing tasks focus on visual-centric scenarios, the
gaze trajectory of humans can be affected by both visual and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1429

