The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Taylor Series-Inspired Local Structure Fitting Network for Few-shot Point Cloud
Semantic Segmentation
Changshuo Wang1 , Shuting He2 , Xiang Fang3∗ , Meiqing Wu1∗ , Siew-Kei Lam1,3 * , Prayag Tiwari4
1

Cyber Security Research Center (CYSREN), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
School of Information Technology, Halmstad University, Sweden
wangchangshuo1@gmail.com, shuting.he@sufe.edu.cn, xfang9508@gmail.com, meiqingwu@ntu.eud.sg,
assklam@ntu.edu.sg, prayag.tiwari@ieee.org
Abstract
Few-shot point cloud semantic segmentation aims to accurately segment ”unseen” new categories in point cloud scenes
using limited labeled data. However, pretraining-based methods not only introduce excessive time overhead but also overlook the local structure representation among irregular point
clouds. To address these issues, we propose a pretrainingfree local structure fitting network for few-shot point cloud
semantic segmentation, named TaylorSeg. Specifically, inspired by Taylor series, we treat the local structure representation of irregular point clouds as a polynomial fitting problem
and propose a novel local structure fitting convolution, called
TaylorConv. This convolution learns the low-order basic information and high-order refined information of point clouds
from explicit encoding of local geometric structures. Then,
using TaylorConv as the basic component, we construct two
variant of TaylorSeg: a non-parametric TaylorSeg-NN and
a parametric TaylorSeg-PN. The former can achieve performance comparable to existing parametric models without pretraining. For the latter, we equip it with an Adaptive PushPull (APP) module to mitigate the feature distribution differences between the query set and the support set. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of the proposed
method. Notably, under the 2-way 1-shot setting, TaylorSegPN achieves improvements of +2.28% and +4.37% mIoU on
the S3DIS and ScanNet datasets respectively, compared to the
previous state-of-the-art methods.

Support

DGCNN
Query

Support Mask

Support
Feat.

Support

Backbone

w/o pre-training
TaylorSeg

Query

Backbone

Query-Guided
Prototype
Correction Module

Query
Feat.
Support Mask

Corrected Prototypes
Prediction
Cosine
Similarity

Initial Prototypes
Corrected Prototypes

Support
Feat.
Query
Feat.

Adaptation
Pull-Push Module

Prediction
Cosine
Similarity

Figure 1: Top: Most existing methods are based on finetuning a pre-trained DGCNN, followed by using query features to guide and align the prototype features. This strategy
is not only time-consuming but also overlooks the importance of local structure representation. Bottom: We propose
a new backbone for point cloud tasks that requires no pretraining and possesses strong local structure representation
capabilities. Additionally, we design an APP module that effectively aligns query features with prototype features.

(Fei et al. 2024b,a; Fang, Easwaran, and Genest 2024; Fang
et al. 2025; Yu et al. 2024), particularly in tasks involving complex scene understanding (Tang et al. 2022a, 2024,
2022c; Feng et al. 2023). However, constructing large-scale,
accurately annotated datasets requires enormous time and
human resources, limiting the widespread applicability of
these methods in real-world scenarios (Fang et al. 2023b,
2024b,c; Ning et al. 2023a,b). Moreover, existing methods
often struggle to maintain good generalization when faced
with unseen new categories. Therefore, achieving efficient
and accurate point cloud semantic segmentation with limited
annotated data while endowing models with the ability to
recognize unseen categories has become a critical research
challenge.
To address these challenges, few-shot learning strategies
(Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017) have gained widespread
attention as an effective method to alleviate the issue of data
scarcity. The core idea of few-shot learning is to achieve ef-

Code — https://github.com/changshuowang/TaylorSeg

1

Pre-trained
DGCNN
Initialization

Introduction

Point cloud semantic segmentation (Zhang et al. 2023b,
2024b,a) is an essential task in numerous computer vision
applications, such as autonomous driving (Wang et al. 2025;
Fei et al. 2024d,c), robotics (Soori, Arezoo, and Dastres
2023; Hu et al. 2024, 2023), and augmented reality (Sereno
et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2024b). This task involves accurately assigning each point in the three-dimensional space
to a specific semantic category. Recent advances in deep
learning have led to significant improvements in many tasks
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7527

