The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Exemplar-based Framework for Chinese Text Recognition
Zhao Zhou1,2 * , Xiangcheng Du1 * , Yingbin Zheng2† , Xingjiao Wu3 , Cheng Jin1,4†
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Videt Lab, Shanghai, China
3
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
4
Innovation Center of Calligraphy and Painting Creation Technology, MCT, China
{zzhou21, xcdu22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, zyb@videt.cn, xjwu@pharm.ecnu.edu.cn, jc@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

Exemplar
Bank

This paper introduces a novel exemplar-based framework for
reading Chinese texts in natural scene or document images.
We present the Deep Exemplar-based Chinese Text Recognizer, which is structured to first identify candidate characters
as exemplars from each text-line, and subsequently recognize them by retrieving analogous exemplars from a database.
With text-line level annotations, we design the exemplar discovery network to simultaneously recognize texts and capture
individual character positions in a weak-supervision manner.
The exemplar retrieval module is then crafted to identify the
most similar exemplar and propagate the corresponding character label. This enables us to effectively rectify the misrecognized characters and boost the performance of scene text
recognition. Experiments on four scenarios of Chinese texts
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework.

Direct Ranking

Indexing
田

粉

...

Qu

er y

Exemplar Retrieval
Initial Retrieval List

1st:利

2nd:莉 3rd:莉

...

芜

Projection

...

Exemplar Discovery Network
Fusion

…
Database Images

Introduction

Refined List
1st:莉

Input
Image

2nd:莉 3rd:利

...

Result: 莉

Figure 1: DECTR pipeline. We take the second exemplar of
the input image to show the steps during exemplar retrieval,
and the same process will also be applied to other exemplars.

We tackle the problem of Chinese text recognition, which
aims to read Chinese texts in natural scenes or documents.
Along with the advances in deep convlutional networks, recent years have witnessed remarkable progress in text recognition. Many text recognition methods have made designs
on the recognition of English texts, and a common belief for
the state-of-the-art text recognizers is the use of sequence
modeling for the text-line. While the English language represents semantic primitives with combination of letters from
the Latin alphabet, Chinese is a logographic script with its
characters representing a meaning or concept. Notably, there
are a much larger lexicon with rich stroke patterns and many
morphologically similar characters.
In this paper, we present a novel text representation and
training framework based solely on character-level information we call Deep Exemplar-based Chinese Text Recognizer (DECTR). Instead of the sequence modeling such as
the recurrent network to handle text sequences (Shi, Bai,
and Yao 2017; Fang et al. 2021), we are inspired by the
pipeline of image retrieval (Noh et al. 2017; Radenović,
Tolias, and Chum 2018; Weinzaepfel et al. 2022), and the

framework is built upon candidate Chinese character exemplars being selected and recognized along with our algorithmic pipeline. Figure 1 illustrates our approach. Starting from
training image set with text-line level annotations, an exemplar discovery network is designed to simultaneously recognize texts and estimate individual character positions in a
weak-supervision manner. With an image going through this
network, we define its exemplars as the output positions and
regional features of potential characters; the corresponding
character label prediction is considered as a pseudo label for
the exemplar. The exemplar bank is composed of character
exemplars and labels extracted from the training data or textline images from other sources. We further introduce the
exemplar retrieval module, where the exemplars extracted
from the testing image are sent to retrieve in the exemplar
bank and the label of the matched exemplar is propagated.
The highlight of the proposed framework is threefold.
First, the framework fully utilizes character-level information and variations for the Chinese texts. Our recognition system can boost performance by adding items into
the exemplar bank under the exemplar discovery-retrieval

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10896

