The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BearLLM: A Prior Knowledge-Enhanced Bearing Health Management
Framework with Unified Vibration Signal Representation
Haotian Peng1, 2, 3, 4 * , Jiawei Liu1, 2, 3 * , Jinsong Du1, 2 ,3 , Jie Gao1, 2, 3† , Wei Wang1, 2, 3† ,
1

Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, China
2
Liaoning Liaohe Laboratory, Shenyang, China
3
Key Laboratory on Intelligent Detection and Equipment Technology of Liaoning Province, Shenyang, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{penghaotian, liujiawei, jsdu, gaojie, wangwei2}@sia.cn
Multiple Multiple Multiple
Conditions Methods Tasks

Abstract
We propose a bearing health management framework leveraging large language models (BearLLM), a novel multimodal
model that unifies multiple bearing-related tasks by processing user prompts and vibration signals. Specifically, we introduce a prior knowledge-enhanced unified vibration signal
representation to handle various working conditions across
multiple datasets. This involves adaptively sampling the vibration signals based on the sampling rate of the sensor, incorporating the frequency domain to unify input dimensions,
and using a fault-free reference signal as an auxiliary input.
To extract features from vibration signals, we first train a fault
classification network, then convert and align the extracted
features into word embedding, and finally concatenate these
with text embedding as input to an LLM. To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we constructed the first
large-scale multimodal bearing health management (MBHM)
dataset, including paired vibration signals and textual descriptions. With our unified vibration signal representation,
BearLLM using one set of pre-trained weights achieves stateof-the-art performance on nine publicly available fault diagnosis benchmarks, outperforming specific methods designed
for individual datasets. We provide a dataset, our model, and
code to inspire future research on building more capable industrial multimodal models.

Dataset
#1

Dataset
#2

{
……

M1

Diag.

M2
……

RUL
……

M3

Detect

M4
……

Diag.
……

(a) Existing bearing health
management framework

Detect
BearLLM
……
(262 Conditions)

Diag.
Treat
Risk
……

(b) Our Proposed bearing
health management framework

Figure 1: Comparison of existing bearing health management frameworks (Chaleshtori and Aghaie 2024; Ni et al.
2024) with our proposed approach. Our BearLLM replaces
the complex operations of designing methods tailored to different conditions and tasks.
adaptation, and generalization have attracted widespread attention. Domain adaptation enables a model trained on one
source domain to perform well on different but related target domains by reducing the domain shift or discrepancy
(Wu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022), but it suffers from low
accuracy when the source and target domains are categoryinconsistent (e.g., transitioning from working condition C1
with four fault types to C2 with five types). Domain generalization aims to extract domain-invariant features to improve performance on unseen domain (Li et al. 2020; Zheng
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022a), but it is often constrained
to a limited number of working conditions with small differences, e.g., fewer than ten working conditions in (Chen et al.
2022b; Lin et al. 2023). These purely data-driven methods
often fail to strike an optimal balance between high accuracy and strong generalization for fault diagnosis.
In this paper, we propose a prior knowledge-enhanced
bearing large language model (BearLLM), which can unify
multiple bearing health management tasks over hundreds
of different working conditions from multiple datasets, as
shown in Fig. 1 (b). To handle various working conditions,
we introduce a prior knowledge-enhanced unified vibration signal representation. Unlike most fault diagnosis methods that use fixed-length input segments, we sample vibration signals as variable-length but fixed-duration segments.
These duration-consistent segments are then converted to the

Code — https://github.com/SIA-IDE/BearLLM

1

{

Multiple
Tasks

Our MBHM
Dataset

Introduction

Bearings are the core components of mechanical rotating
equipment but have high failure rates due to complex operational and environmental conditions (Wang et al. 2020b).
Bearing health management (e.g., anomaly detection, fault
diagnosis, and maintenance recommendations) is of great
practical significance in industrial safety production to reduce economic losses and maintenance costs (Peng et al.
2022; Xiao et al. 2022; Ruan et al. 2023).
Current bearing health management frameworks rely on
designing specialized methods for different working conditions and tasks, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). To apply specific
methods to complex real-world industrial scenarios, domain
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19866

