The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HandDiffuse: Generative Controllers for Two-Hand Interactions via Diffusion
Models
Pei Lin
ShanghaiTech University, School of Information Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
linpei2024@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing hands datasets are largely short-range and the interaction is weak due to the self-occlusion and self-similarity of
hands, which can not yet fit the need for interacting hands
motion generation. To rescue the data scarcity, we propose
HandDiffuse12.5M, a novel and real dataset that consists of
temporal sequences with strong two-hand interactions. HandDiffuse12.5M has the largest scale and richest interactions
among the existing two-hand datasets. We further present
a strong baseline method HandDiffuse for the controllable
motion generation of interacting hands using various controllers. Specifically, we apply the diffusion model as the
backbone and design two motion representations for different
controllers. To reduce artifacts, we also propose Interaction
Loss which explicitly quantifies the dynamic interaction process. Our HandDiffuse enables various applications, i.e., motion in-betweening and trajectory controled generation. Experiments show that our method outperforms the state-of-theart techniques in motion generation. The vivid two-hand motions generated by our method can also construct synthetic
datasets and enhances the accuracy of existing hand motion
capture algorithms.

Figure 1: Overview: The proposed HandDiffuse12.5M
benchmark dataset consists of temporal sequences with
strong interaction. Based on it, we propose HandDiffuse,
a strong baseline for the motion generation of interacting
hands.

Datasets — https://handdiffuse.github.io/

Introduction
The tightly interacting hands play a crucial role in human
emotional expression and communication, serving as a vital
component for physical interaction with oneself. Controllable hand motion generation not only enhances the experience of augmented reality/virtual reality (AR/VR) but also
help robotics and avatars to express their emotion in another
dimension.
So far, lots of works have emerged in the field of human
body motion generation (Tevet et al. 2022b; Zhang et al.
2022a; Chen et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023), but the generation of temporal hands motions in strong interaction remains blank as the lack of strong interacting hands datasets.
However, the dataset acquisition is time-consuming and expensive due to the interacting hands present self-occlusion,
self-similarity, and complex articulations.
There are only a few datasets (Tzionas et al. 2016; Moon
et al. 2020; Zuo et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a; Moon et al.

2023) focusing on hands with strong interactions. Most of
them, i,e, InterHand2.6M (Moon et al. 2020), Two-hand
500K (Zuo et al. 2023) and RenderIH (Li et al. 2023a), provides large-scale discrete frames but the available temporal
sequences remain sparse. The severe lack of sufficient temporal motions makes them unsuitable for the motion generation task of two-hand interactions. Only recently, the concurrent work Re:InterHand (Moon et al. 2023) provides largescale interaction data, yet it focuses on the motion capture
of interacted hands under diverse lighting conditions.
To break the data scarcity, in this paper, we first contribute
a real dataset, HandDiffuse12.5M, which focuses on capturing diverse temporal sequences with strong two-hand interactions. Our dataset consists of various modalities, including
synchronous 50-view videos, 3D key points, and hand poses.
It covers interacting hand motions in random and complex
poses, daily communications, finger dances, and Chinese
daily sign language with 250K temporal frames(≈ 2 hours),
resulting in roughly 12.5M pictures. To address the issue

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5280

