The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Implicit Location-Caption Alignment via Complementary Masking
for Weakly-Supervised Dense Video Captioning
Shiping Ge1 * , Qiang Chen2 , Zhiwei Jiang1† , Yafeng Yin1 , Liu Qin2 , Ziyao Chen2 , Qing Gu1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Tencent WeChat, Guangzhou, China
shipingge@smail.nju.edu.cn, ethanqchen@tencent.com, {jzw, yafeng}@nju.edu.cn,
{stenliu, yateschen}@tencent.com, guq@nju.edu.cn
Video
𝑽

Abstract

GT Captions
Event 🔥
𝑪
Localization

Weakly-Supervised Dense Video Captioning (WSDVC) aims
to localize and describe all events of interest in a video
without requiring annotations of event boundaries. This setting poses a great challenge in accurately locating the temporal location of event, as the relevant supervision is unavailable. Existing methods rely on explicit alignment constraints between event locations and captions, which involve complex event proposal procedures during both training and inference. To tackle this problem, we propose a
novel implicit location-caption alignment paradigm by complementary masking, which simplifies the complex event proposal and localization process while maintaining effectiveness. Specifically, our model comprises two components: a
dual-mode video captioning module and a mask generation
module. The dual-mode video captioning module captures
global event information and generates descriptive captions,
while the mask generation module generates differentiable
positive and negative masks for localizing the events. These
masks enable the implicit alignment of event locations and
captions by ensuring that captions generated from positively
and negatively masked videos are complementary, thereby
forming a complete video description. In this way, even under weak supervision, the event location and event caption
can be aligned implicitly. Extensive experiments on the public datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms existing
weakly-supervised methods and achieves competitive results
compared to fully-supervised methods.

Reconstruction Loss
𝑳′

Event
Captioning

𝑪′

Event 🔥
Localization
𝑽

Captioning Loss

𝑳′′
Locations

(a) Iterative Segment Reconstruction
𝑽

𝑽

External
Proposal
Detectors
(Teachers)

𝑳′

Cross-Modal
Matching

🔥

Event
Localization
(Student)

𝑳′′

𝑪

Knowledge Distillation

(b) Distillation and Matching
𝑽
Event 🔥
Localization

Mask
Positive
Event
'
𝑴
Masking Captioning

'
𝑪
Complementary:
'+𝑪
%=𝑪
𝑪

𝑳′
Negative
Event
%
𝑴 Masking Captioning

𝑪

%
𝑪

(c) Complementary Masked Captioning (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparison of our complementary masking
paradigm with previous paradigms for event localization.

task, which only relies on video-level captions and does not
require extensive temporal location annotations for training,
has been proposed and appears to be more feasible for practical applications (Duan et al. 2018). However, the lack of
supervision on event localization poses a great challenge in
accurately locating the events in the video.
To address this problem, existing methods attempt to align
event locations and captions using alignment constraints
like reconstruction loss or cross-modal matching loss (Duan
et al. 2018; Chen and Jiang 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Choi,
Chen, and Yoon 2023). These approaches primarily fall into
two categories: Iterative Segment Reconstruction (Figure
1(a)) and Distillation and Matching (Figure 1(b)). The first
type involves a reconstruction cycle where event localization and captioning are interdependent, aiming to minimize
reconstruction error (Duan et al. 2018; Chen and Jiang 2021;
Choi, Chen, and Yoon 2023). The second type employs external proposal detectors to guide localization and uses met-

Code — https://github.com/ShipingGe/ILCACM

Introduction
Dense Video Captioning (DVC) is a challenging task that
aims to generate a series of temporally localized captions
to describe the various events in a video (Krishna et al.
2017). It extends traditional video captioning by providing
a more comprehensive understanding of the video content,
making it particularly useful for applications such as video
understanding, video summarization, and video search (Li
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023). Recently,
the Weakly-Supervised Dense Video Captioning (WSDVC)
* Work done during an internship at Tencent WeChat.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3113

