The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exact Algorithms for Multiagent Path Finding with Communication Constraints
on Tree-Like Structures
Foivos Fioravantes1 , Dušan Knop1 , Jan Matyáš Křišťan1 , Nikolaos Melissinos1 , Michal Opler1
1

Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic
{foivos.fioravantes, dusan.knop, kristja6, nikolaos.melissinos, michal.opler}@fit.cvut.cz

Abstract

the other hand, applications in a video game movement of
agents (Snape et al. 2012) should require near-connectivity,
since we want the group of virtual soldiers to move in a mob.
It should also be noted that the communication constraints
we consider are born as a natural first step towards further
understanding and providing new insights into solving the
MAPF problem in the distributed setting. We believe that
such a setting, where each agent needs to do some local
computation taking into account only a partial view of the
network and the subset of the other agents that are withing
its communication range, is rather natural and worth investigating. Such a framework is particularly well-suited for exploring the emergence of swarm intelligence through agent
cooperation.
The complexity of the M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING
problem increases significantly when the movement and
communication graphs are independent of each other. In
fact, under these conditions, the problem is PSPACEcomplete (Tateo et al. 2018). This raises a natural question: Is the problems’ complexity equally severe when the
movement and communication graphs are related? For instance, if we assume that communication among agents occurs within the same space they are navigating, it is reasonable to model the communication graph as identical to the
movement graph. Alternatively, we could consider scenarios
where the communication graph is a derivative of the movement graph, such as its third power, allowing agents to communicate over a distance of three edges in the original graph.
However, the problem stays PSPACE-complete even if the
agents move in a subgraph of a 3D grid and the communication is based on radius (Calviac, Sankur, and Schwarzentruber 2023).
We refer the reader to the next section for the formal definitions.
Both M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING and M ULTIAGENT
PATH F INDING WITH C OMMUNICATION C ONSTRAINT
problems are systematically studied; most researchers deal
with the hardness using specific algorithms or heuristics.
The most popular approaches to find optimal solutions are
using the A* algorithm (e.g. (Sharon et al. 2015, 2013))
or ILP solvers (e.g. (Yu and LaValle 2013)). Another popular line of research used the Picat language (Zhou, Kjellerstrand, and Fruhman 2015; Barták et al. 2017). A wide range
of heuristics is commonly used, such as those based on lo-

Consider the scenario where multiple agents have to move in
an optimal way through a network, each one towards their
ending position while avoiding collisions. By optimal, we
mean as fast as possible, which is evaluated by a measure
known as the makespan of the proposed solution. This is the
setting studied in the M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING problem.
In this work, we additionally provide the agents with a way
to communicate with each other. Due to size constraints, it
is reasonable to assume that the range of communication of
each agent will be limited. What should be the trajectories of
the agents to, additionally, maintain a backbone of communication? In this work, we study the M ULTIAGENT PATH F IND ING WITH C OMMUNICATION C ONSTRAINT problem under
the parameterized complexity framework.
Our main contribution is three exact algorithms that are efficient when considering particular structures for the input network. We provide such algorithms for the case when the communication range and the number of agents (the makespan
resp.) are provided in the input and the network has a tree
topology, or bounded maximum degree (has a tree-like topology, i.e., bounded treewidth resp.). We complement these results by showing that it is highly unlikely to construct efficient
algorithms when considering the number of agents as part of
the input, even if the makespan is 3 and the communication
range is 1.

Introduction
The M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING (MAPF for short) problem is a well-known challenge in the field of planning and
coordination. It involves navigating multiple agents through
a topological space, often modeled as an undirected graph,
to reach their respective destinations. In many real-world
scenarios, additional constraints on the agents’ movements
are required. One such constraint is the communication constraint, which requires agents to maintain a connected set
of vertices in a communication graph as they move; this
is then the M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING WITH C OMMU NICATION C ONSTRAINT (MAPFCC for short) problem.
This requirement can arise, for example, from the need to
constantly communicate with a human operator (Amigoni,
Banfi, and Basilico 2017). Sometimes, only a periodic connection might be sufficient (Hollinger and Singh 2012). On
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23177

