The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OTLRM: Orthogonal Learning-based Low-Rank Metric for Multi-Dimensional
Inverse Problems
Xiangming Wang1 , Haijin Zeng2 * , Jiaoyang Chen1 ,
Sheng Liu3 , Yongyong Chen1 * , Guoqing Chao4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
Gent University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Weihai)
xmwang28@gmail.com
Abstract

tensor. However, the tensor rank is still not well defined.
Various definitions of the tensor rank are not deterministic
and all have specific advantages and limitations. For example, the CANDECOMP PARAFAC (CP) rank (Carroll and
Chang 1970) is defined as the number of rank-1 tensors obtained by the CP decomposition. Since computing the CP
decomposition of a tensor is NP-hard and finding its accurate
convex approximation is challenging, CP rank may not be
appropriate to give solutions tailored to practical application
areas. Additionally, Tucker rank (Tucker 1966; Sun, Vong,
and Wang 2022) is based on the tensor unfolding scheme,
which unfolds the tensor into matrices along different dimensions. As a result, it leads to a broken structure of the
original tensor, and such an unfolding describes the correlation between only one mode of the tensor and all other
modes (one mode versus the rest), which may bring undesirable results to the tensor reconstruction. Overall, how to
define an appropriate tensor rank in different tensor decompositions is a problem worth discussing and analyzing.
With the tensor-tensor product (t-product) (Kernfeld,
Kilmer, and Aeron 2015) gradually becoming a comprehensive approach for tensor multiplication, the tensor Singular
Value Decomposition (t-SVD) (Zhang et al. 2014; Lu et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2024) which constructs the original tensor
as the t-product of two orthogonal tensors and an f -diagonal
tensor, has received widespread attention and research. Explicitly, the t-product is defined in a transform domain based
on an arbitrary invertible linear transform. Given a tensor
X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 and a transform matrix L ∈ Rn3 ×n3 , the
transformed tensor L(X ) can be formulated as
L(X ) = X ×3 L,
(1)
where ×3 denotes the mode-3 tensor product. Following
the definition, t-SVD can be defined in the transform domain, which captures the low-rank structure of the tensor.
Based on some fixed linear invertible transforms such as
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) (Zhang and Aeron 2016)
and Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) (Lu 2021), current
transforms have theoretical guarantees, yet are fixed and not
data-adaptive, which cannot fit different data instances well.
Under various t-SVD definitions of the transform domain,
there are many algorithms and models for solving the lowrank problem. Since directly minimizing the tensor tubal
rank of a tensor is an NP-hard problem, the tensor nuclear

In real-world scenarios, complex data such as multispectral
images and multi-frame videos inherently exhibit robust lowrank property. This property is vital for multi-dimensional inverse problems, such as tensor completion, spectral imaging
reconstruction, and multispectral image denoising. Existing
tensor singular value decomposition (t-SVD) definitions rely
on hand-designed or pre-given transforms, which lack flexibility for defining tensor nuclear norm (TNN). The TNNregularized optimization problem is solved by the singular
value thresholding (SVT) operator, which leverages the tSVD framework to obtain the low-rank tensor. However, it
is quite complicated to introduce SVT into deep neural networks due to the numerical instability problem in solving the
derivatives of the eigenvectors. In this paper, we introduce a
novel data-driven generative low-rank t-SVD model based on
the learnable orthogonal transform, which can be naturally
solved under its representation. Prompted by the linear algebra theorem of the Householder transformation, our learnable
orthogonal transform is achieved by constructing an endogenously orthogonal matrix adaptable to neural networks, optimizing it as arbitrary orthogonal matrices. Additionally, we
propose a low-rank solver as a generalization of SVT, which
utilizes an efficient representation of generative networks to
obtain low-rank structures. Extensive experiments highlight
its significant restoration enhancements.

Code — https://github.com/xianggkl/OTLRM
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11165

Introduction
Real-world multi-dimensional data, such as multispectral
images (MSIs), videos, and Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) data, are usually affected by unpredictable factors
during capture and transmission. To reconstruct the original
tensors, many tasks are extended under different observations, such as Tensor Completion (TC) (Qin et al. 2022; Mai,
Lam, and Lee 2022), spectral imaging (Cai et al. 2022), and
spectral denoising (Wang et al. 2022a).
Current approaches have achieved outstanding results
benefiting from the low-rank nature of the original data
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21278

