The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging Group Classification with Descending Soft Labeling for
Deep Imbalanced Regression
Ruizhi Pu1 * , Gezheng Xu1 , Ruiyi Fang1 , Bing-Kun Bao2 , Charles Ling1† , Boyu Wang1†
1

2

Department of Computer Sceince, Western University
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Abstract
Deep imbalanced regression (DIR), where the target values
have a highly skewed distribution and are also continuous, is
an intriguing yet under-explored problem in machine learning. While recent works have already shown that incorporating various classification-based regularizers can produce
enhanced outcomes, the role of classification remains elusive in DIR. Moreover, such regularizers (e.g., contrastive
penalties) merely focus on learning discriminative features of
data, which inevitably results in ignorance of either continuity or similarity across the data. To address these issues, we
first bridge the connection between the objectives of DIR and
classification from a Bayesian perspective. Consequently, this
motivates us to decompose the objective of DIR into a combination of classification and regression tasks, which naturally
guides us toward a divide-and-conquer manner to solve the
DIR problem. Specifically, by aggregating the data at nearby
labels into the same groups, we introduce an ordinal groupaware contrastive learning loss along with a multi-experts regressor to tackle the different groups of data thereby maintaining the data continuity. Meanwhile, considering the similarity between the groups, we also propose a symmetric descending soft labeling strategy to exploit the intrinsic similarity across the data, which allows classification to facilitate
regression more effectively. Extensive experiments on realworld datasets also validate the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: Comparison between previous works and ours.
Upper) Previous methods directly incorporated classification regulations (Gong, Mori, and Tung 2022; Zhang et al.
2023). Bottom) We propose a descending soft labeling to
leverage the classification to help DIR (Different colors denote different groups of data).

accurate imbalanced label density, such as label distribution smoothing (LDS), feature distribution smoothing (FDS)
(Yang et al. 2021) and re-weighting (Cui et al. 2019; Branco,
Torgo, and Ribeiro 2017). Meanwhile, (Ren et al. 2022) proposed a balanced Mean Square Error (B-MSE) loss to accommodate the imbalanced distribution in the label space.
Recent works incorporated classification regularizers with
the Mean Square Error (MSE) in DIR, such as contrastive
regularization (Zha et al. 2023a; Keramati, Meng, and Evans
2023), entropy regularization (Zhang et al. 2023), and feature ranking regularization (Gong, Mori, and Tung 2022),
which have achieved significant performance improvements.
Moreover, (Pintea et al. 2023) formalized the relation between the balanced and imbalanced regression and empirically investigated how classification can help regression.
Although incorporating classification regularizers in DIR
has already achieved enhanced output, the relationship between the objectives of classification and DIR remains elusive. In the meantime, these classification regularizers would
also force the model to focus more on the discriminative fea-

Appendix — https://github.com/RuizhiPu-CS/Group-DIR

Introduction
Data imbalance exists ubiquitously in real-world scenarios,
posing significant challenges to machine learning tasks as
certain labels may be less observed than others or even
missed during training. Although the imbalanced problem
has been extensively studied in the field of classification (He
and Garcia 2009), how to tackle deep imbalanced regression
(DIR) is still under-explored.
Due to the continuity of the label space and the dependence of data across nearby targets (Yang et al. 2021),
previous solutions in DIR primarily focused on estimating
* Email: rpu2@uwo.ca
†

Corresponding author, email: bwang@csd.uwo.ca
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19978

