The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DEEPTalk: Dynamic Emotion Embedding for Probabilistic Speech-Driven 3D
Face Animation
Jisoo Kim1 * , Jungbin Cho1 * , Joonho Park2 , Soonmin Hwang1 , Da Eun Kim2 , Geon Kim2 ,
Youngjae Yu1†
1

Yonsei University
GIANTSTEP Inc.
{jisoo6687, whwjdqls99, smsm0307, yjy}@yonsei.ac.kr
{joonho.park, daeun.kim, geon.kim}@giantstepcorp.com
2

Abstract
Speech-driven 3D facial animation has garnered lots of attention thanks to its broad range of applications. Despite
recent advancements in achieving realistic lip motion, current methods fail to capture the nuanced emotional undertones conveyed through speech and produce monotonous facial motion. These limitations result in blunt and repetitive
facial animations, reducing user engagement and hindering
their applicability. To address these challenges, we introduce
DEEPTalk, a novel approach that generates diverse and emotionally rich 3D facial expressions directly from speech inputs. To achieve this, we first train DEE (Dynamic Emotion Embedding), which employs probabilistic contrastive
learning to forge a joint emotion embedding space for both
speech and facial motion. This probabilistic framework captures the uncertainty in interpreting emotions from speech
and facial motion, enabling the derivation of emotion vectors from its multifaceted space. Moreover, to generate dynamic facial motion, we design TH-VQVAE (Temporally
Hierarchical VQ-VAE) as an expressive and robust motion
prior overcoming limitations of VAEs and VQ-VAEs. Utilizing these strong priors, we develop DEEPTalk, a talking
head generator that non-autoregressively predicts codebook
indices to create dynamic facial motion, incorporating a novel
emotion consistency loss. Extensive experiments on various
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
creating diverse, emotionally expressive talking faces that
maintain accurate lip-sync. Our project page is available at
https://whwjdqls.github.io/deeptalk.github.io/

Figure 1: Overview of DEEPTalk. Starting with an emotional speech input (left), we extract probabilistic emotion
embeddings (depicted as blobs), and sample from these embeddings to generate diverse emotional facial animations
aligned with the input speech (right).

and unexpressive facial expressions. Since facial expressions are crucial for conveying nonverbal cues, this limitation significantly reduces their effectiveness in scenarios requiring realistic interactions, such as interactions with nonplayer characters in games or emotionally responsive virtual
chatbots. Therefore, it is essential to focus on enhancing the
full range of facial expressions, not just the lip movements.
Previous studies on talking faces have generated expressions using either emotion labels (Daněček et al. 2023; Gan
et al. 2023; Pan et al. 2023; Ji et al. 2021) or reference expressions (Ji et al. 2022; Tan et al. 2024; Ma et al. 2023a;
Liang et al. 2022). Using emotion labels provides expressive but limited outcomes, while reference expressions offer
more diversity at the cost of needing numerous expressive
references. Moreover, both approaches fail to capture vocal nuances, often leading to misalignment between facial
expressions and speech. As shown in Figure 1, the phrase
”That’s just what I needed!” can carry different meanings
based on the emotion it conveys (e.g., happiness or anger),
emphasizing the importance of facial expressions that reflect
the intended sentiment. Without this alignment, expressions
may appear unnatural from spoken words, contributing to
uncanny valley effect (Wang, Lilienfeld, and Rochat 2015).

Introduction
Speech-driven 3D facial motion generation has a wide range
of applications, encompassing avatar animation for game or
cinematic productions, virtual chatbots, and immersive virtual meetings within virtual reality environments. Despite
substantial advancements in accurate lip synchronization
with speech, as demonstrated by recent research (Richard
et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2022; Xing et al. 2023; Stan, Haque,
and Yumak 2023), most of these methods still produce blunt
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4275

