The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DisCo: Graph-Based Disentangled Contrastive Learning for Cold-Start
Cross-Domain Recommendation
Hourun Li* 1,2 , Yifan Wang* 3 , Zhiping Xiao4† , Jia Yang2 , Changling Zhou2 ,
Ming Zhang1† , Wei Ju5†
1

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
PKU-Anker LLM Lab, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Computer Center, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
School of Information Technology & Management, University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China
4
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
5
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
{lihourun, yangj, zclfly, mzhang cs}@pku.edu.cn,
yifanwang@uibe.edu.cn, patxiao@uw.edu, juwei@scu.edu.cn
Abstract

Overlapping
Users

Recommender systems are widely used in various real-world
applications, but they often encounter the persistent challenge of the user cold-start problem. Cross-domain recommendation (CDR), which leverages user interactions from
one domain to improve prediction performance in another,
has emerged as a promising solution. However, users with
similar preferences in the source domain may exhibit different interests in the target domain. Therefore, directly transferring embeddings may introduce irrelevant source-domain
collaborative information. In this paper, we propose a novel
graph-based disentangled contrastive learning framework to
capture fine-grained user intent and filter out irrelevant collaborative information, thereby avoiding negative transfer.
Specifically, for each domain, we use a multi-channel graph
encoder to capture diverse user intents. We then construct the
affinity graph in the embedding space and perform multi-step
random walks to capture high-order user similarity relationships. Treating one domain as the target, we propose a disentangled intent-wise contrastive learning approach, guided by
user similarity, to refine the bridging of user intents across
domains. Extensive experiments on four benchmark CDR
datasets demonstrate that DisCo consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art baselines, thereby validating the effectiveness of both DisCo and its components.

Source
Domain

User Preference
Similarity

Target
Domain

Intent 1

Score
Score
Score

Intent 2

Intent 3

Similarity with

Intent 3

Target

Similarity with

Score

Intent 2

Score

Score
Score

Intent 1

Score

Source
Intent 2

Transfer

Figure 1: An illustration of user similarity distortion in CDR.
Users may share diverse intents across domains. As a result,
for the target user u, some users (i.e., u1 , u3 ) may have similar preferences in the source domain but differ significantly
in the target domain, leading to negative transfer.
items, has seen significant success in recommendation systems. However, these CF-based methods persistently suffer
from the cold-start problem, where new users lack sufficient
observed interactions, making it challenging to learn effective representations for recommendations.
To alleviate the above issue, cross-domain recommendation (CDR) has garnered considerable attention in recent
years. The main idea of CDR methods is to leverage user
interaction data from related domains to improve prediction
accuracy in the target domain. A particularly challenging aspect is cold-start CDR, where users have interactions with
items in one domain but not in the other. Traditional Embedding and Mapping (EMCDR) paradigms (Man et al. 2017;
Kang et al. 2019; Salah, Tran, and Lauw 2021) encode user
preferences in two domains separately and learn a mapping
function from the source to the target domain, which often
overlooks the diverse user-specific preferences (Wang et al.

Introduction
The rapid expansion of Internet services has deeply integrated online platforms into our daily lives, resulting in an
enormous increase in digital information (Zhu et al. 2016;
Zhang, Liu, and Wang 2020; Wang et al. 2022d,b; Ju et al.
2022; Qu et al. 2024; Ju et al. 2024a). Consequently, personalized recommender systems are crucial for guiding users
through extensive options to identify items that align with
their preferences. Collaborative Filtering (CF), which models relationships between users and dependencies among
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12049

