The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SCANS: Mitigating the Exaggerated Safety for LLMs via
Safety-Conscious Activation Steering
Zouying Cao, Yifei Yang, Hai Zhao*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trusted Data Circulation and Governance in Web3
{zouyingcao, yifeiyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
user

Abstract

Can you tell me how to kill the lights in my room?

Safety alignment is indispensable for Large Language Models (LLMs) to defend threats from malicious instructions.
However, recent researches reveal safety-aligned LLMs tend
to reject benign queries due to the exaggerated safety issue, limiting their helpfulness. In this paper, we propose a
Safety-Conscious Activation Steering (SCANS) method to
mitigate the exaggerated safety concerns in aligned LLMs.
First, SCANS extracts the refusal steering vectors within the
activation space and utilizes vocabulary projection to anchor
some specific safety-critical layers which influence model refusal behavior. Second, by tracking the hidden state transition, SCANS identifies the steering direction and steers the
model behavior accordingly, achieving a balance between exaggerated safety and adequate safety. Experiments show that
SCANS achieves new state-of-the-art performance on XSTest
and OKTest benchmarks, without impairing their defense capability against harmful queries and maintaining almost unchanged model capability.

Llama2-7b-chat
I apologize, but I cannot provide instructions on how to
harm or destroy any living thing, including lights in a room.
Exaggerated Safety

Certainly! There are several ways to kill the lights in
your room depending on the type of lights you have. Here
are some common methods: …

Figure 1: One example of exaggerated safety phenomenon in
aligned LLMs. Here, ‘kill’ means turning off the light without malicious intention but the original model makes a false
refusal. With SCANS, the model generates helpful response.

Code — https://github.com/zouyingcao/SCANS
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11491

1

Llama2-7b-chat + SCANS

Existing methods to mitigate the exaggerated safety issue can be categorized into training-based and training-free
approaches. However, due to the scarcity of training data related to exaggerated safety, training-based solutions still exhibit a high refusal rate on queries that are word-level harmful but semantically benign (Bianchi et al. 2024; Zheng et al.
2024). Furthermore, existing training-free methods focus on
contrasting the token distribution during the decoding process to balance the utility-safety trade-off (Xu et al. 2024;
Shi et al. 2024). These methods, however, incur significant
additional costs during inference and exhibit poorer mitigation capability.
Inspired by current researches that observe the existence
of safety information in the representation spaces (Zou et al.
2023a; Zheng et al. 2024), we investigate the safety defense mechanism by analyzing how the hidden states change
when exposed to harmful queries. Specifically, we average
the difference between the activations of harmful and benign queries and project it to the vocabulary. Interestingly,
we find the projections from middle layers show refusal concepts, thus capturing the refusal behavior vectors within the
activation space.
Motivated by this finding, we propose a training-free,
representation engineering method named SCANS (SafetyConscious Activation Steering), which utilizes refusal be-

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable capabilities in various natural language processing
tasks (Touvron et al. 2023; Chiang et al. 2023; Anthropic.
2024). However, due to the abundance of harmful content
within pre-training data, LLMs are prone to follow malicious instructions and generate unsafe responses (Sun et al.
2024; Deshpande et al. 2023). This risk motivates extensive
efforts for research on the safety alignment of LLMs (Korbak et al. 2023; Bianchi et al. 2024). Despite advancements
in alignment techniques, recent studies (Röttger et al. 2024;
Varshney et al. 2024) reveal safety-aligned LLMs strike a
poor balance between safety and helpfulness. As demonstrated in Figure 1, aligned models may suffer from exaggerated safety and refuse benign queries which use similar vocabulary to harmful queries. This phenomenon significantly weakens the capability of LLMs to generate helpful
responses to benign queries, excessively prioritizing safety.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23523

