The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ERL-MPP: Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning with Multi-head Puzzle
Perception for Solving Large-scale Jigsaw Puzzles of Eroded Gaps
Xingke Song1 , Xiaoying Yang1 , Chenglin Yao1 , Jianfeng Ren12 * , Ruibin Bai12 , Xin Chen3 , Xudong
Jiang4
1
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham Ningbo China, China
Nottingham Ningbo China Beacons of Excellence Research and Innovation Institute,
University of Nottingham Ningbo China, China
3
Intelligent Modelling & Analysis Group, School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
4
School of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{Xingke.Song, Xiaoying.Yang, Chenglin.Yao, Jianfeng.Ren, Ruibin.Bai}@nottingham.edu.cn, Xin.Chen@nottingham.ac.uk,
EXDJiang@ntu.edu.sg
2

SD2RL

Abstract

Accuracy
50.0%

ERL-MPP (ours)

Solving jigsaw puzzles has been extensively studied. While
most existing models focus on solving either small-scale puzzles or puzzles with no gap between fragments, solving largescale puzzles with gaps presents distinctive challenges in
both image understanding and combinatorial optimization. To
tackle these challenges, we propose a framework of Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning with Multi-head Puzzle Perception (ERL-MPP) to derive a better set of swapping actions
for solving the puzzles. Specifically, to tackle the challenges
of perceiving the puzzle with gaps, a Multi-head Puzzle Perception Network (MPPN) with a shared encoder is designed,
where multiple puzzlet heads comprehensively perceive the
local assembly status, and a discriminator head provides a
global assessment of the puzzle. To explore the large swapping action space efficiently, an Evolutionary Reinforcement
Learning (EvoRL) agent is designed, where an actor recommends a set of suitable swapping actions from a large action
space based on the perceived puzzle status, a critic updates
the actor using the estimated rewards and the puzzle status,
and an evaluator coupled with evolutionary strategies evolves
the actions aligning with the historical assembly experience.
The proposed ERL-MPP is comprehensively evaluated on the
JPLEG-5 dataset with large gaps and the MIT dataset with
large-scale puzzles. It significantly outperforms all state-ofthe-art models on both datasets.

Huge
Gap

18.6%

Size of
Gaps

Large
Scale
Jigsaw

Noisy pairwise
correlation

Explosion of
number of
permutations

11.7%

5.1%

13.3%
5.0%

25 pieces
12 pixel gap

70 pieces
4 pixel gap

70 pieces
2 pixel gap

3.3%

8.3%

150 pieces
Number
2 pixel gap
of Pieces

Figure 1: Huge gaps and a large amount of fragments impose great challenges on puzzle solvers. The proposed ERLMPP significantly outperforms the previous best performing
SD2 RL (Song et al. 2023a) on four different types of puzzles, e.g., puzzles with as large as 12-pixel gaps, or puzzles
with as many as 150 pieces of fragments.

ing (Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015; Noroozi and Favaro
2016; Ren et al. 2023), video spatial understanding (Yang
et al. 2022), fine-grained visual classification (Du et al.
2020), and image super-resolution (Ma et al. 2021).
Most methods focus on solving puzzles with no gaps or
very small gaps between fragments (Son, Hays, and Cooper
2019; Bridger, Danon, and Tal 2020; Li et al. 2022), and
utilize the boundary information to infer the pairwise relations between fragments. However, in real-world applications, there are often gaps on artifacts due to damage
or erosion (Paumard, Picard, and Tabia 2020; Song et al.
2023a), making the boundary similarity unavailable. This
paper tackles the problem of solving Large-scale Jigsaw
Puzzles of Eroded Gaps (L-JPEG). Challenges are two-fold.
1) Visual perception of fragments under gaps. Large gaps
make the methods based on the boundary information ineffective, resulting in noisy estimation of relations between
adjacent fragments. 2) A huge search space for optimization strategy. The number of permutations increases exponentially with the number of puzzle pieces, coupled with
the uncertainty in pairwise relations, making the puzzle re-

Introduction
Jigsaw puzzles are popular entertainment and intellectual
challenges. Solving jigsaw puzzles has been related to a
wide range of applications, e.g., geometric analysis (Harel,
Shahar, and Ben-Shahar 2024), boundary information understanding (Gallagher 2012), and image semantic understanding (Song et al. 2023a). In particular, automatic puzzle
solving has been extensively studied in archaeology (Nada
and Jan 2015) and cultural heritage restoration (Derech, Tal,
and Shimshoni 2021), which greatly releases the burden
of archaeologists. The developed techniques have been applied beyond puzzle reassembly, e.g., self-supervised learn* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6968

