The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Making Large Vision Language Models to Be Good Few-Shot Learners
Fan Liu1 * , Wenwen Cai1 , Jian Huo1 , Chuanyi Zhang1 * , Delong Chen2 , Jun Zhou3
1
Hohai University, China
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
3
Griffith University, Australia
fanliu@hhu.edu.cn, caiwenwen@hhu.edu.cn, huojian@hhu.edu.cn, zhangchuanyi@hhu.edu.cn, delong.chen@connect.ust.hk,
jun.zhou@griffith.edu.au
2

Abstract
Few-shot classification (FSC) is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision that involves recognizing novel
classes from limited data. While previous methods have focused on enhancing visual features or incorporating additional modalities, Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs)
offer a promising alternative due to their rich knowledge
and strong visual perception. However, LVLMs risk learning specific response formats rather than effectively extracting useful information from support data in FSC. In this paper, we investigate LVLMs’ performance in FSC and identify key issues such as insufficient learning and the presence of severe position biases. To tackle above challenges,
we adopt the meta-learning strategy to teach models “learn to
learn”. By constructing a rich set of meta-tasks for instruction fine-tuning, LVLMs enhance the ability to extract information from few-shot support data for classification. Additionally, we further boost LVLM’s few-shot learning capabilities through label augmentation (LA) and candidate selection
(CS) in the fine-tuning and inference stages, respectively. LA
is implemented via a character perturbation strategy to ensure the model focuses on support information. CS leverages
attribute descriptions to filter out unreliable candidates and
simplify the task. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
approach achieves superior performance on both general and
fine-grained datasets. Furthermore, our candidate selection
strategy has been proven beneficial for training-free LVLMs.

Figure 1: The challenges of FSL. Typical models often suffer from poor generalization, leading to incorrect classifications. Directly applying LVLMs to FSL also encounters position bias that models favor the first option they encounter.

2023) integrate powerful language models with advanced visual encoders. They obtain rich perceptual capabilities and
comprehensive knowledge via training on extensive multimodal data. They also have in-cotext learning ability that
learns from demonstrations and becomes potentially suitable
for FSC. However, researchers (Tai et al. 2024) have found
that current LVLMs can hardly link unseen image-text pairs
and recognize novel categories from support samples. It results from that models tend to focus on specific answer formats instead of grasping the provided information.
Nevertheless, previous works did not explore the base-tonovel experimental setup in FSC, where inference classes do
not overlap with training classes. In this paper, we attempt to
evaluate the performance of LVLMs in a base-to-novel fewshot setting. We observed that LVLMs could hardly utilize
the information from support samples and achieved suboptimal performance. Through the examination of their outputs, we noticed a position bias: LVLMs tend to favor the
first few candidate answers they encounter. Position bias has
proven to be a prevalent issue of modern Large Language
Models (LLMs) which likely stems from a combination of
training data patterns (Hsieh et al. 2024), the left-to-right
structure of causal transformers (Zheng et al. 2023b), specific models and tasks (Zheng et al. 2023a). LVLMs may
inherit this problem from their core LLM component and
cannot effectively leverage support information in the fewshot task. Given the challenges LVLMs face in FSC, we

Code — https://github.com/HUOUO7/MLVLM-FSL

1

Introduction

Few-shot classification (FSC), a specific application of fewshot learning (FSL) (Wang et al. 2020), draws inspiration
from human learning capabilities. It enables models to classify even previously unseen classes using minimal labeled
data. Typical research focused on training robust visual embedding networks (Vinyals et al. 2016) or leveraging additional attributes (Reed et al. 2016) to mitigate the lack of
supervision. Nevertheless, the small amount of data tends to
result in unsatisfying generalization.
Recently, Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) like
GPT-4V (Achiam et al. 2023) and Qwen-VL (Bai et al.
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5415

