The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EPERM: An Evidence Path Enhanced Reasoning Model
for Knowledge Graph Question and Answering
Xiao Long1 , Liansheng Zhuang1 * , Aodi Li1 , Minghong Yao1 , Shafei Wang2
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, China
longxiao1997@mail.ustc.edu.cn; lszhuang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

in knowledge graph question answering tasks (Jiang et al.
2022). Currently, retrieval-augmented methods (Wu et al.
2023; Sun et al. 2023; Ding et al. 2024) are popular ones
that combine LLMs and KGs for KGQA tasks. Usually, they
involve two steps. First, they retrieve the question-related
triplets or paths as contextual knowledge from the raw KGs.
Then, they leverage these contexts for the LLM to generate
the answers. Although retrieval-augmented methods exploit
the ability of LLMs for reasoning and have achieved promising results in KGQA tasks (Wu et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2023),
they still suffer from the following issues. First, they usually
treat the different retrieval information equally to reason the
answer, ignoring the differences between retrieved information. Second, the retrieval-augmented generation methods
usually treat the retrieval and reasoning processes separately
in model learning. The coupling between the retrieval and
reasoning processes of the model is low, and there is a lack
of a unified framework to model KGQA tasks.

Due to the remarkable reasoning ability, Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in
knowledge graph question answering (KGQA) tasks, which
find answers to natural language questions over knowledge
graphs (KGs). To alleviate the hallucinations and lack of
knowledge issues of LLMs, existing methods often retrieve the
question-related information from KGs to enrich the input context. However, most methods focus on retrieving the relevant
information while ignoring the importance of different types
of knowledge in reasoning, which degrades their performance.
To this end, this paper reformulates the KGQA problem as a
graphical model and proposes a three-stage framework named
the Evidence Path Enhanced Reasoning Model (EPERM) for
KGQA. In the first stage, EPERM uses the fine-tuned LLM
to retrieve a subgraph related to the question from the original knowledge graph. In the second stage, EPERM filters out
the evidence paths that faithfully support the reasoning of the
questions, and score their importance in reasoning. Finally,
EPERM uses the weighted evidence paths to reason the final
answer. Since considering the importance of different structural information in KGs for reasoning, EPERM can improve
the reasoning ability of LLMs in KGQA tasks. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that EPERM
achieves superior performances in KGQA tasks.

Introduction
Question answering over knowledge graph (KGQA) has garnered significant attention in recent years. It aims to find
answers for natural language questions based on knowledge
graphs (KGs), such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) and
Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014), which are built
from a large number of triplets consisting of (head entity, relation, tail entity). Since the natural language questions often
contain compositional semantics (Lan et al. 2022), exactly
understanding the semantic information in the question and
identifying the structured knowledge in KGs is very important for KGQA tasks.
Recently, as large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI 2023;
Hadi et al. 2023) have demonstrated impressive ability to understand natural language and reasoning abilities in many
NLP tasks, LLMs have also shown impressive performance
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12282

Inspired by the above insights, this paper reformulates the
knowledge graph question answering task as a probabilistic
graphical model (Koller and Friedman 2009), and proposes
a novel framework named Evidence Path Enhanced Reasoning Model (EPERM), which considers the importance of
different structural information when reasoning the question
answers. Our EPERM involves the subgraph retrieval stage,
the evidence path finding stage, and the answer prediction
stage. Specifically, in the first stage, the subgraph retriever
is proposed to retrieve a subgraph related to the question
from the original knowledge graphs. In the second stage,
the proposed evidence path finder first generates a series of
weighted plans that faithfully support the reasoning of the
questions. Then it scores and filters out the weighted evidence path in the subgraph based on the weighted plans. In
the final stage, the answer predictor is proposed to use the
weighted evidence path to reason the final answer. Since the
weight of each evidence path represents the importance of the
structural information for reasoning the problem, EPERM
can better leverage them to reason the answer. In addition, we
design joint fine-tuning strategies to learn the parameters in
the retrieval and reasoning processes. Finally, since the entire
question-answering process is described as a probabilistic
graphical model, EPERM exhibits greater coupling between
the retrieval and reasoning stages. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows.

