The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

World Knowledge-Enhanced Reasoning Using Instruction-Guided Interactor
in Autonomous Driving
Mingliang Zhai1,2,3 , Cheng Li1,3 , Zengyuan Guo3 , Ningrui Yang1,3 , Xiameng Qin3 ,
Sanyuan Zhao1 , Junyu Han3 , Ji Tao3 , Yuwei Wu2,1 * , Yunde Jia2,1
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
3
Chongqing Changan Automobile Co., Ltd.
{zhaimingliang, licheng, ningrui, zhaosanyuan, wuyuwei, jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn
{guozy, qinxm, hanjunyu, taoji}@changan.com.cn
2

Abstract
The Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) with extensive world knowledge have revitalized autonomous driving, particularly in reasoning tasks within perceivable regions. However, when faced with perception-limited areas
(dynamic or static occlusion regions), MLLMs struggle to effectively integrate perception ability with world knowledge
for reasoning. These perception-limited regions can conceal
crucial safety information, especially for vulnerable road
users. In this paper, we propose a framework, which aims to
improve autonomous driving performance under perceptionlimited conditions by enhancing the integration of perception
capabilities and world knowledge. Specifically, we propose
a plug-and-play instruction-guided interaction module that
bridges modality gaps and significantly reduces the input sequence length, allowing it to adapt effectively to multi-view
video inputs. Furthermore, to better integrate world knowledge with driving-related tasks, we have collected and refined
a large-scale multi-modal dataset that includes 2 million natural language QA pairs, 1.7 million grounding task data. To
evaluate the model’s utilization of world knowledge, we introduce an object-level risk assessment dataset comprising
200K QA pairs, where the questions necessitate multi-step
reasoning leveraging world knowledge for resolution. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our proposed
method.

(a) Risk caused by occlusion of moving objects

(b) Risks present in static environments

Figure 1: Examples of dynamic and static environments
risks. (a) The bus in motion severely obstructs the line of
sight, resulting in the black sedan being hidden, which significantly increases the risk of a traffic accident in an unprotected scenario. (b) Buildings in static scenes can also become occluding objects. For example, in a construction site
scene, the construction gate blocks the workers behind the
gate.

tors leading to severe accidents. These occluded areas may
conceal information crucial to road safety, especially for undetected vulnerable road users, such as pedestrians and cyclists, who are particularly susceptible to the effects of these
occlusions. We consider that a promising solution is to utilize instruction-guided extraction of highly aggregated visual embeddings to fully leverage the world knowledge encoded in multi-modal large language models for inference.
Currently, methods utilizing MLLMs for driving tasks are
primarily categorized into the following three types: 1. Finetuning MLLMs (Wang et al. 2024a; Ding et al. 2024; Wen
et al. 2023; Sima et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2023; Fu et al. 2024)
directly for tasks such as prediction and planning. 2. The
dual-branch system (Tian et al. 2024b; Ding et al. 2023;
Mei et al. 2024) for separating and managing tasks based
on real-time requirements, addressing time constraints with
fast and slow branches. 3. The training-free method (Dewangan et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024b; Ma et al. 2023)
based on the chain of thought. These three types of methods have shown promising results, but there are two main

Introduction
The Multi-modal Large Models (MLLMs) alleviates the
limitations of expert knowledge and training data diversity in traditional autonomous driving systems. Recent research (Wen et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023; Tian et al. 2024b;
Chen et al. 2024a; Sima et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2024a; Ding et al. 2024; Bai et al. 2024; Tian et al.
2024a) have made significant progress in understanding and
reasoning about perceivable regions. However, there remain
deficiencies in handling perception-limited regions, e.g., occluded areas caused by dynamic or static obstacles such as
bus and buildings. As shown in Figure 1, autonomous driving systems typically plan and control only within the perceived areas, while hidden potential risks are critical fac* Corresponding author: Yuwei Wu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9842

