The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimizing Heat Alert Issuance with Reinforcement Learning
Ellen M. Considine*1 , Rachel C. Nethery1 , Gregory A. Wellenius2 ,
Francesca Dominici1 , Mauricio Tec*1,3
1

2

Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health
3
Department of Computer Science, Harvard University
*ellen considine@g.harvard.edu, mauriciogtec@hsph.harvard.edu
Abstract

Various challenges stand in the way of solving this problem. First, issuing too many heat alerts may lead to alert fatigue (Nahum-Shani et al. 2017) and health-protective resource depletion on both individual and community/institutional levels. Sequential decision-making (SDM) methods
offer a promising yet unexplored avenue for tackling this issue. Second, despite representing a significant health threat
on the population scale, local health impacts of heat—and
therefore heat alerts—are small and easily confounded in
observational data sets (Weinberger et al. 2021). Rare events
and low signal (small effects) have been shown to challenge
algorithmic decision-making (Frank, Mannor, and Precup
2008; Romoff et al. 2018). Third, mainstream SDM methods
are not suitable for spatially heterogeneous settings in which
a single policy is not equally effective in all regions or dynamically changing contexts (Padakandla 2021). However,
attempting to identify independent policies for each location
drastically reduces the amount of available historical data.
In this paper, we lay the foundation for addressing these
challenges by introducing a framework for optimizing heat
alert issuance using reinforcement learning (RL). RL allows
learning SDM policies for determining when to issue heat
alerts, aiming to minimize the population health risk as a
negative reward signal. The ultimate vision for this vein of
research is deploying data-driven policies to alert the public
about extreme heat events (and, eventually, other environmental exposures such as extreme cold or wildfire smoke).
In addition to our analysis breaking ground towards this
goal, a variety of follow-up work is facilitated by the publication of our SDM environment in an open-source Python
package, weather2alert1 , compatible with the Gymnasium framework for RL (Towers et al. 2023). This challenging, data-driven environment can be used as a benchmark.
Further, our methodology to create this environment can be
used as a blueprint for other RL simulators, particularly for
problems with exogenous state space components and multiple locations or individuals.
The two main components of our heat alerts RL framework are visualized in Figure 1 and summarized below.
First, we create a realistically challenging SDM environment for heat alert issuance, structured as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) under a budget constraint. Key compo-

A key strategy in societal adaptation to climate change is using alert systems to prompt preventative action and reduce the
adverse health impacts of extreme heat events. This paper implements and evaluates reinforcement learning (RL) as a tool
to optimize the effectiveness of such systems. Our contributions are threefold. First, we introduce a new publicly available RL environment enabling the evaluation of the effectiveness of heat alert policies to reduce heat-related hospitalizations. The rewards model is trained from a comprehensive
dataset of historical weather, Medicare health records, and socioeconomic/geographic features. We use scalable Bayesian
techniques tailored to the low-signal effects and spatial heterogeneity present in the data. The transition model uses real
historical weather patterns enriched by a data augmentation
mechanism based on climate region similarity. Second, we
use this environment to evaluate standard RL algorithms in
the context of heat alert issuance. Our analysis shows that
policy constraints are needed to improve RL’s initially poor
performance. Third, a post-hoc contrastive analysis provides
insight into scenarios where our modified heat alert-RL policies yield significant gains/losses over the current National
Weather Service alert policy in the United States.

Code —
https://github.com/NSAPH-Projects/heat-alerts RL
Simulator —
https://github.com/NSAPH-Projects/weather2alert
Extended version (with appendices) —
https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14196

1

Introduction

Extensive evidence links exposure to extreme heat to increases in morbidity and mortality (Ebi et al. 2021). Heat
alerts are a practical and low-cost intervention to mitigate
these effects (Ebi et al. 2004) by encouraging protective
measures such as hydrating more, avoiding physical exertion
outdoors, and opening cooling centers. However, studies investigating the effectiveness of heat alerts have observed
mixed results (Weinberger et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2023). Developing methods to optimize the issuance of heat alerts for
public health is an open problem.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

27922

https://github.com/NSAPH-Projects/weather2alert

