The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Autonomous LLM-Enhanced Adversarial Attack for Text-to-Motion
Honglei Miao1 , Fan Ma2 , Ruijie Quan3 , Kun Zhan1 * , Yi Yang2
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
kzhan@lzu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2022a; Zhang et al. 2023). Some models (Athanasiou et al. 2022; Barquero, Escalera, and Palmero
2024; Lee, Moon, and Lee 2023; Qing et al. 2023) even extend the motions for several minutes while satisfying given
conditions. Among these motion generation models, text-tomotion (T2M) (Tevet et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Guo et al.
2022a; Zhang et al. 2023; Athanasiou et al. 2022; Barquero,
Escalera, and Palmero 2024; Qing et al. 2023) attracts significant attention from the community due to the accessibility
of text prompts that align with human expression.
Generating motions that closely correspond to textual descriptions and are nearly the same as those in the real physical
world is becoming increasingly feasible. However, allowing
models to freely generate motions conditioned on arbitrary
text prompts poses more significant security risks than textto-image (T2I). When they are applied to downstream tasks,
such capabilities can be maliciously exploited by attackers.
For example, in animation or movie production (Qing et al.
2023), they are used to create more realistic harmful content
involving pornography or violence. The risks increase when
using generated motions as part of humanoid controllers (Luo
et al. 2023), as when deployed on robots, posing potential
threats to human safety.
Despite the growing focus on T2M, safety concerns remain under-researched. The most work focuses on the safety
of T2I (Millière 2022; Struppek, Hintersdorf, and Kersting 2023; Liu et al. 2023a). These researches largely focus
on how character- or word-level modifications to benign
prompts could induce unintended output from the models.
Early work (Millière 2022; Struppek, Hintersdorf, and Kersting 2023) mainly explored the existence of this phenomenon,
until the RIATIG (Liu et al. 2023a) is inspired by them to
propose targeted attacks against image generation models to
raise awareness of potential security risks to T2I. However,
existing studies search for adversarial attacks by modifying
words to unusual personal names, locations, or other proper
nouns, which is overlooked in image generation but appears
clearly out of place for motion tasks, making attacks more easily detectable. Additionally, unlike the abundant image-text
pairs available for image tasks, the limited data for motions
makes it challenging to accurately measure the similarity
between different motions, posing further difficulties for targeted attacks on T2M models. They make the findings of T2I
safety difficult to apply directly to the motion domain.

Human motion generative models have enabled promising
applications, but the ability of text-to-motion (T2M) models
to produce realistic motions raises security concerns if exploited maliciously. Despite growing interest in T2M, limited
research focus on safeguarding these models against adversarial attacks, with existing work on text-to-image models
proving insufficient for the unique motion domain. In the
paper, we propose ALERT-Motion, an autonomous framework that leverages large language models (LLMs) to generate
targeted adversarial attacks against black-box T2M models.
Unlike prior methods that modify prompts through predefined
rules, ALERT-Motion uses the knowledge of LLMs of human motion to autonomously generate subtle yet powerful
adversarial text descriptions. It comprises two key modules:
an adaptive dispatching module that constructs an LLM-based
agent to iteratively refine and search for adversarial prompts;
and a multimodal information contrastive module that extracts semantically relevant motion information to guide the
agent’s search. Through this LLM-driven approach, ALERTMotion produces adversarial prompts querying victim models
to produce outputs closely matching targeted motions, while
avoiding obvious perturbations. Evaluations across popular
T2M models demonstrate ALERT-Motion’s superiority over
previous methods, achieving higher attack success rates with
stealthier adversarial prompts. This pioneering work on T2M
adversarial attacks highlights the urgency of developing defensive measures as motion generation technology advances,
urging further research into safe and responsible deployment.

1

Introduction

Human motion generation is a task that aims at producing
natural and realistic human motions. It drives advancements
in downstream applications such as animation and movie
production, virtual human construction, robotics, and humanrobot interaction (Zhu et al. 2023). In recent years, with the
development of deep learning, especially the growth of generative models such as the Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013), and diffusion model (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020), trained models have become capable
of generating very natural motions (Tevet et al. 2023; Chen
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6144

