The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PrivDNFIS: Privacy-preserving and Efficient Deep Neuro-Fuzzy
Inference System
Hao Ren 1 2 3 , Xiao Lan 1 2 3 , Rui Tang 1 2 3 * , Xingshu Chen 1 2 3 †
1

2

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China.
Key Laboratory of Data Protection and Intelligent Management (Sichuan University), Ministry of Education, China.
3
Cyber Science Research Institute, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
hao.ren, lanxiao, tangrscu, chenxsh@scu.edu.cn
Abstract

This integration enables precise and transparent decisionmaking, especially in healthcare and legal contexts (Talpur
et al. 2023). DNFIS leverages rule-based representations and
intuitive linguistic variables for clarity, with proven high performance in fusing a DNN for feature extraction with a fuzzy
system for classification (Yeganejou et al. 2023).
Despite the benefits of DNFIS, privacy concerns pose
significant obstacles to its development. When users send
inference requests to third-party model owners, they must
share their original input, risking their privacy. In the case
of DNFIS, input privacy is critical in scenarios like medical
diagnosis. Users may upload sensitive health data to leverage the system’s capability for handling uncertainty and imprecision in decision-making. A breach in such cases could
reveal private health records, leading to severe personal data
leakage. Therefore, safeguarding input privacy for model inference services like DNFIS is critical and urgently needed,
as mandated by regulations like GDPR (Lu et al. 2021).
Related Work Preserving input privacy in DNN model
inference services has been extensively studied by both AI
and security communities (Liu et al. 2021). The main objective of a privacy-preserving inference (PI) scheme is to compute inference results without accessing the original input. A
promising approach involves using advanced cryptographic
tools like fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) (Fan and
Vercauteren 2012; Viand, Jattke, and Hithnawi 2021) and
secure multiparty computation (MPC) (Hastings et al. 2019;
Rathee et al. 2020). These methods allow the server to evaluate inference functions on the encrypted input. FHE supports
arbitrary computation on ciphertexts without decryption or
interaction (Viand, Jattke, and Hithnawi 2021), but its processing of non-linear functions is computationally intensive.
Therefore, state-of-the-art (SOTA) PI schemes (Rathee et al.
2020; Huang et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2025) often use FHE for
linear function evaluations and MPC for non-linear functions, such as ReLU and softmax. While MPC has lower
computational overhead than FHE, it incurs higher communication costs and requires multiple interaction rounds
(Hastings et al. 2019). Due to the complexity of DNNs and
cryptographic techniques, the existing PI scheme (Huang
et al. 2022) takes over two minutes to process a single query,
indicating room for efficiency improvements.
To our knowledge, PI for DNFIS has not been explored in
existing work. This paper seeks to initiate this topic and en-

Deep Neuro-Fuzzy Inference Systems (DNFIS) seamlessly
fuse neural networks with the fuzzy inference system enabling intricate decision-making and knowledge representation, while upholding a commendable degree of adaptability and interpretability. However, the challenge of privacypreserving inference (PI) over DNFIS has remained largely
uncharted, with no prior research addressing this critical issue. In this paper, we embark on an exploration of this
issue. We introduce an efficient and secure PI framework
for DNFIS, named PrivDNFIS, which leverages the postquantum lattice-based homomorphic encryption to implement secure computation protocols for PI over DNFIS. Our
work incorporates several non-trivial performance enhancements. Firstly, it consolidates multiple elements of input feature vectors into a single message, reducing encryption/decryption overhead. Secondly, building upon this novel encoding approach, PrivDNFIS can perform ciphertext aggregation and vector-vector inner production without necessitating time-consuming ciphertext rotation operations. Thirdly,
we replace the softmax function in the DNFIS layer with
a quadratic function to further enhance inference efficiency,
without compromising the inference accuracy. Under the
given threat model, we provide formal security proof for
PrivDNFIS. In comprehensive experimental results, PrivDNFIS demonstrates an approximately 1.9 to 4.4 times reduction in end-to-end time cost compared to the benchmark.

Introduction
Background Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; He et al. 2016) excelling in areas
like image recognition, natural language processing (NLP),
and medical diagnosis (Jin et al. 2024). However, their
complexity, involving billions of connection weights, introduces challenges in understanding and trust. This necessitates explainable AI (Talpur et al. 2023; Yeganejou, Dick,
and Miller 2019) to provide human-friendly explanations
and build trust. A promising solution is deep neuro-fuzzy
inference systems (DNFIS) (Yeganejou, Dick, and Miller
2019; Yeganejou et al. 2023), which combine deep learning’s pattern recognition with fuzzy logic’s interpretability.
* The corresponding author.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20174

