The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hansel: Output Length Controlling Framework for Large Language Models
Seoha Song* , Junhyun Lee* † , Hyeonmok Ko
Samsung Research
{seoha.song, junhyun8.lee, felix.ko}@samsung.com

Abstract

How many words are there in the following:
”The visualizations help readers understand the concept.”

Despite the great success of large language models (LLMs),
efficiently controlling the length of the output sequence still
remains a challenge. In this paper, we propose Hansel, an efficient framework for length control in LLMs without affecting
its generation ability. Hansel utilizes periodically outputted
hidden special tokens to keep track of the remaining target
length of the output sequence. Together with techniques to
avoid abrupt termination of the output, this seemingly simple
method proved to be efficient and versatile, while not harming
the coherency and fluency of the generated text. The framework can be applied to any pre-trained LLMs during the finetuning stage of the model, regardless of its original positional
encoding method. We demonstrate this by finetuning four different LLMs with Hansel and show that the mean absolute
error of the output sequence decreases significantly in every
model and dataset compared to the prompt-based length control finetuning. Moreover, the framework showed a substantially improved ability to extrapolate to target lengths unseen
during finetuning, such as long dialog responses or extremely
short summaries. This indicates that the model learns the general means of length control, rather than learning to match
output lengths to those seen during training.

There are 10 words in the sentence ”The
visualizations help readers understand the
concept.”
Why don’t you try again? Maybe by
counting the words one by one.
Sure, here’s another attempt at counting
the words in the sentence ”The visualizations and examples in this paper help
readers understand the concept”:
1. The
2. visualizations
3. help
4. readers
5. understand
6. the
7. concept
There are 7 words in total.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14033

Figure 1: An example conversation with GPT. We have
edited the example sentence for brevity.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have shown great promise
in generating coherent and fluent text, making them useful
for a variety of tasks (Arivazhagan et al. 2019; Karpukhin
et al. 2020; Lewis et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020). However,
a number of challenges still remain for LLMs, including the
difficulty of efficiently controlling the length of the output
sequence. Length control of the output sequence has practical importance in the real-world application of LLMs. Setting the length determines the level of details to include in
the output, which is desired both in the aspect of content and
system interface. While this task seems relatively mundane
compared to the emergent abilities of LLMs, to the best of
our knowledge length control has yet to be achieved even

for the larger LLMs (Achiam et al. 2023; Anil et al. 2023;
Touvron et al. 2023) with hundreds of billions of parameters.
A couple of specific examples where length control is useful would be i) a news app where articles are accompanied
by AI-generated summaries, or ii) a voice assistant that can
tune the amount of information to be spoken. For the news
app, the default length should be concise enough to fit the
system interface, and the user may want to tune the summarization length to include or drop details. Even for simple voice assistant tasks such as telling the weather, “rain at
noon” may be sufficient but sometimes precipitation or temperature might be needed. These examples show the benefits
of various outputs from the identical input and controlling
them is important and useful.
The study of length control dates back to the pretransformer era. Kikuchi et al. (2016) first suggested feeding

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25146

