The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-Supervised Collaborative Information Bottleneck for Text Readability
Assessment
Jinshan Zeng1 * , Xianglong Yu1 , Xianchao Tong1 , Wenyan Xiao2
1

Jiangxi Normal University
Jiangxi University of Science and Technology
jinshanzeng@jxnu.edu.cn, xianglongyu@jxnu.edu.cn, xianchaotong@jxnu.edu.cn,wy.xiao@jxust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

readability level according to empirical formulas with respect to some linguistic features, while the kind of statistical
machine learning methods mainly focuses on yielding the
readability level by training some statistical models such as
support vector machines (SVM) with handcrafted linguistic
features (Sung et al. 2015). Due to the limited representation capability of these linguistic features (also called surface features), both kinds of readability formula and statistical machine learning methods cannot yield satisfactory performance, especially for some complex texts.
Inspired by the powerful representation ability of neural
networks, neural language models have been widely favored
by researchers for readability assessment (Azpiazu and Pera
2019; Deutsch, Jasbi, and Shieber 2020; Tseng et al. 2019;
Zeng et al. 2022). Azpiazu and Pera (2019) proposed a multilingual readability assessment model (Vec2Read) based on
the hierarchical attention network (HAN) (Yang et al. 2016).
This method combines word part of speech (POS) and morphological tags, and utilizes hierarchical information to generate word- and sentence-level attention scores for creating
text representations. Later, some novel deep models based
on the pre-trained model have been suggested in the literature (Deutsch, Jasbi, and Shieber 2020; Tseng et al. 2019;
Zeng et al. 2022), with the emergence of pre-trained models
such as Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2019). Tseng et al. (2019) adopted the pre-trained
BERT for the text readability assessment. Zeng et al. (2022)
integrated the pre-trained BERT into the HAN architecture
and proposed a novel deep model for readability assessment
by introdcing soft labels for ordinal regression.
Despite the impressive performance of the kind of neural models, their performance is generally limited by the insufficient training corpora. To alleviate this issue, recent research turns to the direction of combining linguistic features
and deep features for readability assessment, i.e., hybrid automatic readability assessment (ARA) models called in the
literature (Deutsch, Jasbi, and Shieber 2020; Lee, Jang, and
Lee 2021; Li, Wang, and Wu 2022; Zeng et al. 2023, 2024).
There are two key ingredients for the kind of hybrid ARA
models, i.e., feature extraction and fusion. The literature
(Deutsch, Jasbi, and Shieber 2020; Lee, Jang, and Lee 2021)
exploited the pre-trained language models such as BERT
(Devlin et al. 2019) to extract the deep feature, and fed deep
and linguistic features simultaneously into a statistical ma-

Text readability assessment involves categorizing texts based
on readers’ comprehension levels. Hybrid automatic readability assessment (ARA) models, combining deep and linguistic features, have recently attracted rising attention due
to their impressive performance. However, existing hybrid
ARA models generally ignore the specific-intrinsic information of deep and linguistic representations, and cannot
fully explore their common-intrinsic information. In this paper, we introduce a self-supervised collaborative information bottleneck (SCIB) module for ARA to address these issues. Specifically, we collaboratively consider both specificintrinsic and common-intrinsic information of the linguistic
representation and various levels of deep representations including the document-, sentence- and word-level deep representations, and yield their refined representations via a selfsupervised information bottleneck scheme. Extensive experiments are conducted on four English and two Chinese corpora
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model. Experimental results show that the proposed model outperforms
state-of-the-art models in terms of four important evaluation
metrics, and the suggested SCIB module can effectively capture the specific- and common-intrinsic information.

Introduction
The assessment of text readability is designed to determine
the complexity of a given text, helping readers select materials that match their comprehension level (McLaughlin
1969; Klare 2000). This not only caters to individual language skills, cognitive abilities, and developmental stages
but also extends its utility to diverse sectors such as text recommendations, the crafting of clinical informed consents,
and the publishing of books.
With the continuous advancement of readability research,
a series of readability assessment methods have been developed, including readability formulas (Dale and Chall 1948;
Kincaid et al. 1975) , statistical machine learning methods
(Dell’Orletta, Montemagni, and Venturi 2011; Sung et al.
2015), and neural language modeling methods (Deutsch,
Jasbi, and Shieber 2020; Tseng et al. 2019; Zeng et al. 2022).
The kind of readability formula methods mainly yields the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25814

