The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The (Exact) Price of Cardinality for Indivisible Goods: A Parametric Perspective*
Alexander Lam1 , Bo Li2 , Ankang Sun2
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
alexlam@cityu.edu.hk, comp-bo.li@polyu.edu.hk, ankang.sun@polyu.edu.hk
2

1
n th of their utility for the entire set of items, and in a bal-

Abstract

anced allocation, the goods are spread out among the agents
as evenly as possible, so that the number of items received
by each agent differs by at most one. The latter notion of balancedness is a natural constraint which may be imposed by
the central decision maker due to its simplicity and ease of
implementation, without requiring knowledge of the agents’
utilities. However, this constraint may severely degrade the
social welfare of the allocation. This is particularly true in
instances where agents have low utility for a large number
of items, rather than highly valuing a small subset of items,
motivating the need for a weaker, more variable notion of
‘cardinal fairness’.
The main focus of our paper is on the constraint of cardinality, a generalization of balancedness which imposes an
upper limit of k on the number of items an agent may receive from the allocation.1 The cardinality constraint is commonly applied in practice. For example, when a university
provides funding to support PhD students, it is typical to impose a limit on the number of students each professor can
supervise, due to fairness concerns. Intuitively, the potential
loss of welfare decreases as k increases. The central decision maker may vary the parameter of k to achieve their desired tradeoff between the level of balancedness and the social welfare of the cardinality-constrained allocation. More
generally, the items may also be partitioned into disjoint categories, where each category j has its own cardinality constraint of kj . However, the exact effect of the value of k on
the social welfare objectives remains unclear, leading to the
following research question which we address in this paper:

We adopt a parametric approach to analyze the worst-case
degradation in social welfare when the allocation of indivisible goods is constrained to be fair. Specifically, we are
concerned with cardinality-constrained allocations, which require that each agent has at most k items in their allocated
bundle. We propose the notion of the price of cardinality,
which captures the worst-case multiplicative loss of utilitarian or egalitarian social welfare resulting from imposing the
cardinality constraint. We then characterize tight or almosttight bounds on the price of cardinality as exact functions of
the instance parameters, demonstrating how the social welfare improves as k is increased. In particular, one of our main
results√refines and generalizes the existing asymptotic bound
of Θ( n) on the price of balancedness. We also further extend our analysis to the problem where the items are partitioned into disjoint categories, and each category has its own
cardinality constraint. Through a parametric study of the price
of cardinality, we provide a framework which aids decision
makers in choosing an ideal level of cardinality-based fairness, using their knowledge of the potential loss of utilitarian
and egalitarian social welfare.

1

Introduction

The allocation of indivisible goods to a set of agents is a
ubiquitous problem in our society, capturing a number of
real-world scenarios. For example, an inheritance may involve indivisible goods such as jewelry, cars, and estates,
and food banks are constantly faced with the task of allocating donations to people in need. In a corporate setting,
equipment and human resources such as developers and designers need to be assigned to various projects and departments. These real-world scenarios often involve constraints
which are imposed on the allocation, which may make the
allocation difficult to compute, or prevent it from being socially optimal.
The most commonly studied constraint in resource allocation is the requirement that the allocation should be fair to
the agents (Amanatidis et al. 2023). Fairness constraints can
be expressed in several different ways: a proportional allocation guarantees that each of the n agents receives at least

What is the worst-case (multiplicative) loss of social
welfare when there is a limit on the number of items
each agent can receive in an allocation, and how does
the loss change as the limit is varied?
In particular, we aim to quantify this loss in an exact
sense, as opposed to the asymptotic bounds which are common in the literature. This helps with making a more informed decision on the cardinality constraint values, particularly in scenarios where the number of agents and/or items
is small.
1

Note that the cardinality constraint is equivalent to balancedness when m ∈ {kn − k + 1, kn − k + 2, . . . , kn}, where m is
the total number of items.

* The author names are ordered alphabetically.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13985

