The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Efficient and Intelligent Laser Weeding: Method and Dataset for Weed
Stem Detection
Dingning Liu1 * , Jinzhe Li1 * , Haoyang Su1 * , Bei Cui2† , Zhihui Wang3 , Qingbo Yuan2 ,
Wanli Ouyang1 , Nanqing Dong1†
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
Yazhouwan National Laboratory
3
Dalian University of Technology
{liudingning, dongnanqing}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Weed control is a critical challenge in modern agriculture, as
weeds compete with crops for essential nutrient resources,
significantly reducing crop yield and quality. Traditional
weed control methods, including chemical and mechanical
approaches, have real-life limitations such as associated environmental impact and efficiency. An emerging yet effective
approach is laser weeding, which uses a laser beam as the
stem cutter. Although there have been studies that use deep
learning in weed recognition, its application in intelligent
laser weeding still requires a comprehensive understanding.
Thus, this study represents the first empirical investigation of
weed recognition for laser weeding. To increase the efficiency
of laser beam cut and avoid damaging the crops of interest,
the laser beam shall be directly aimed at the weed root. Yet,
weed stem detection remains an under-explored problem. We
integrate the detection of crop and weed with the localization of weed stem into one end-to-end system. To train and
validate the proposed system in a real-life scenario, we curate and construct a high-quality weed stem detection dataset
with human annotations. The dataset consists of 7,161 highresolution pictures collected in the field with annotations of
11,151 instances of weed. Experimental results show that the
proposed system improves weeding accuracy by 6.7% and
reduces energy cost by 32.3% compared to existing weed
recognition systems.

Error
Distance

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Weed detection with YOLOv7: Yellow dashed
lines mark bounding box diagonals, indicating the geometric center, while the blue dot shows the ground-truth weed
stem location. (b) Close-up of the red-boxed region, highlighting misalignment between the bounding box center and
the ground-truth point. (c) In laser weeding, better weed detection performance (lower mAP) does not always mean better weed stem detection (lower Euclidean Distance).

Code & Dataset —
https://github.com/open-sciencelab/WeedStemDetection

Introduction
Sustainable agricultural management is essential for addressing global hunger and achieving the UN’s “Zero
Hunger” goal and the principle of “Leaving No One Behind” (LNOB) (United Nations 2023). Effective weed control plays a non-trivial role in maintaining food security, as
weeds compete with crops for critical resources such as water, nutrients, and sunlight, which directly affects crop yield
and quality.

Current weed control methods are generally categorized
into chemical weeding and mechanical weeding. Chemical
methods usually use toxic substances to inhibit or destroy
weeds at various growth stages, including those applied before or after weeds emerge. Although effective against different weed types, these methods can negatively influence
the crop quality and inevitably cause chemical soil degradation, resulting in environmental pollution (Zhang 1996a,b;
Tanveer et al. 2003). Instead, mechanical weed control meth-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28204

