The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HOGSA: Bimanual Hand-Object Interaction Understanding with 3D Gaussian
Splatting Based Data Augmentation
Wentian Qu1,2 , Jiahe Li1,2 , Jian Cheng1,2 , Jian Shi3,2 , Chenyu Meng1,2 ,
Cuixia Ma1,2 , Hongan Wang1,2 , Xiaoming Deng1,2 * , Yinda Zhang4 *
1

Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Google
{wentian2019, lijiahe2021, chengjian, cuixia, hongan,xiaoming}@iscas.ac.cn,
jian.shi@ia.ac.cn, mengchenyu21@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yindaz@google.com
Abstract
Understanding of bimanual hand-object interaction plays an
important role in robotics and virtual reality. However, due
to significant occlusions between hands and object as well
as the high degree-of-freedom motions, it is challenging
to collect and annotate a high-quality, large-scale dataset,
which prevents further improvement of bimanual hand-object
interaction-related baselines. In this work, we propose a new
3D Gaussian Splatting based data augmentation framework
for bimanual hand-object interaction, which is capable of
augmenting existing dataset to large-scale photorealistic data
with various hand-object pose and viewpoints. First, we use
mesh-based 3DGS to model objects and hands, and to deal
with the rendering blur problem due to multi-resolution input
images used, we design a super-resolution module. Second,
we extend the single hand grasping pose optimization module for the bimanual hand object to generate various poses
of bimanual hand-object interaction, which can significantly
expand the pose distribution of the dataset. Third, we conduct an analysis for the impact of different aspects of the proposed data augmentation on the understanding of the bimanual hand-object interaction. We perform our data augmentation on two benchmarks, H2O and Arctic, and verify that our
method can improve the performance of the baselines.

Figure 1: We propose a new 3DGS-based data augmentation
framework for bimanual hand-object interaction to augment
existing dataset with various hand-object pose and viewpoints. Our method can improve the performance of the
baselines, and achieve more accurate pose and contact.

Project Page — https://iscas3dv.github.io/HOGSA/

Introduction

To address the challenges of data scarcity and inaccurate 3D annotations, existing work has explored data augmentation methods with synthetic data under conventional
rendering pipelines (Corona et al. 2020; Jian et al. 2023;
Yang et al. 2022). However, these approaches usually require complex and time-consuming 3D scanning and postprocessing to capture high-quality shapes and texture maps
of the hand and object, and additional blending weights of
hand is necessary for augmentation, which requires substantial expertise (Romero, Tzionas, and Black 2022; Deng
et al. 2021). Moreover, capturing a realistic texture map
(i.e. subtle details and natural appearance) from observed
images is difficult, thus it often results in rendering results that lack realism (Qian et al. 2020). Recently, benefitting from the scene representation ability, neural rendering methods such as NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2021) and

Understanding of the bimanual hand-object interaction (Fan
et al. 2023; Kwon et al. 2021), especially the estimation of
the pose and the contact relationship, plays an increasingly
important role in robotics and virtual reality applications.
One of the most popular approaches to address this problem
is deep learning methods, which require large-scale bimanual hand-object interaction dataset with rich annotations.
However, due to significant occlusions and high-degree-offreedom motions of the interaction, it is still challenging to
collect and annotate a high-quality dataset, which prevents
further improvement of the task.
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6639

