The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Auditing and Enforcing Conditional Fairness via Optimal Transport
Mohsen Ghassemi* 1 , Alan Mishler* 1 , Niccolò Dalmasso* 1 , Luhao Zhang* 2 ,
Vamsi K. Potluru1 , Tucker Balch1 , Manuela Veloso1
1
J.P.Morgan AI Research
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University
{mohsen.ghassemi, alan.mishler, niccolo.dalmasso}@jpmchase.com, luhao.zhang@jhu.edu
2

Abstract
Conditional demographic parity (CDP) is a measure of the
demographic parity of a predictive model or decision process
when conditioning on an additional feature or set of features.
Many algorithmic fairness techniques exist to target demographic parity, but CDP is much harder to achieve, particularly
when the conditioning variable has many levels and/or when
the model outputs are continuous. The problem of auditing
and enforcing CDP is understudied in the literature. In light of
this, we propose novel measures of conditional demographic
disparity (CDD) which rely on statistical distances borrowed
from the optimal transport literature. We further design and
evaluate regularization-based approaches based on these CDD
measures. Our methods, FairBiT and FairLeap, allow us to target CDP even when the conditioning variable has many levels.
When model outputs are continuous, our methods target full
equality of the conditional distributions, unlike other methods
that only consider first moments or related proxy quantities.
We validate our approaches on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic decision-making has an increasing impact on
individuals’ lives, in areas such as finance, healthcare, and
hiring. The growing field of algorithmic fairness aims to
define, measure, and prevent discrimination in such systems.
Much of the early work in algorithmic fairness adopted as
a fairness criterion demographic parity (DP) (aka statistical
parity), which requires the outputs of a model or decision
process to be statistically independent of a sensitive feature
such as race, gender, or disability status (Calders, Kamiran,
and Pechenizkiy 2009; Kamiran and Calders 2010; Kamiran, Karim, and Zhang 2012). Demographic parity remains
arguably the most widely studied fairness criterion to date
(Hort et al. 2024), but it can permit an algorithm to behave
in intuitively unfair ways (Dwork et al. 2012; Hardt, Price,
and Srebro, Nathan 2016). Consider the hypothetical loan approval process summarized in Table 1. The overall approval
rate is 50% for both male and female applicants, but within
each income level, males are more likely to get approved. If
applicants within income levels are equally qualified, then
this process appears to discriminate against females.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16808

Conditional demographic parity (CDP) instead requires
independence of the output and the sensitive feature conditional on a legitimate or explanatory feature or set of features,
such as income in the loan example (Zliobaite, Kamiran, and
Calders 2011; Kamiran, Žliobaitė, and Calders 2013). One
way to achieve CDP is to use only the legitimate features as
model inputs, but this may result in unacceptably poor predictive performance. When the legitimate features have a small
number of levels, CDP can also be satisfied by maintaining
a separate model for each subgroup defined by values of the
legitimate feature and applying a method that targets DP to
each subgroup. However, this approach may be infeasible
when the legitimate feature has many levels.
To our knowledge, there is only one existing method designed to target conditional demographic parity even in the
presence of many-valued legitimate features and/or continuous outputs (Xu et al. 2020). This method uses a regularizer
that is derived from a particular characterization of conditional independence. We show, however, that except when
the regularizer is exactly zero, minimizing this quantity does
not provide guarantees with respect to the actual disparities.
Additionally, quantifying (un)fairness in the sense of conditional demographic parity remains underexplored in the
literature. As it is generally impossible to exactly satisfy
a fairness criterion without sacrificing model performance
(Corbett-Davies et al. 2017; Zhao and Gordon 2019), it is
crucial to define appropriate measures of conditional demographic disparity (CDD), i.e. to quantify violations of CDP
for the purposes of model comparison and selection.

Income Level
High Income
Medium Income
Low Income
Overall

Approval Rate

Applicants

Male

Female

Male

Female

80%
60%
40%
50%

60%
40%
20%
50%

10%
30%
60%
100%

60%
30%
10%
100%

Table 1: Toy example illustrating a process which satisfies
demographic parity but not conditional demographic parity.
Males and females have the same marginal (“Overall”) loan
approval rate (50%), but within each income level, males
have higher approval rates than females.

