The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fed-DFA: Federated Distillation for Heterogeneous Model Fusion Through the
Adversarial Lens
Zichen Wang, Feng Yan, Tianyi Wang, Cong Wang* ,
Yuanchao Shu, Peng Cheng, Jiming Chen
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
{withnorman, yanfeng555, wty1998, cwang85, ycshu, lunarheart, cjm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

2020; Zhu, Hong, and Zhou 2021; Cho et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2022). Inherited from knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015), FD is model-agnostic — it replaces parameterized model fusion (McMahan et al. 2017)
by matching client predictions with the consensus logits and
minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, thereby
transferring the “dark knowledge” (additional information
embedded in soft probabilities) among the participants. The
seminal work of FedDF (Lin et al. 2020) has shown empirically that FD achieves a comparative performance of
FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) while enabling knowledge
transfer among the heterogeneous models.
However, KD typically suffers from the infamous capacity gap problem when the student finds it hard to mimic
the predictive distribution of the teacher (Son et al. 2021;
Mirzadeh et al. 2020; Zhu and Wang 2021a). Since FD inherits the algorithmic backbone from KD but distills in a
distributed, online fashion, would the capacity gap still persist in FD, and in what forms? Previous works have yet to
give sufficient insights under federated settings (Lin et al.
2020).
Motivated by these fundamental quests, we first present
empirical findings of a complex, mutual influence between
the light and heavyweight models — lightweight models
progress at an inevitable cost of degrading the heavyweight
models and over-parameterized networks (potential teachers) no longer guarantee high performance in FD. Such disparity becomes more prominent and difficult to rectify when
the consensus is aggregated on unlabeled public data (Zhu,
Hong, and Zhou 2021; Cho et al. 2022). If misclassified by
the majority, the consensus would mislead model convergence towards a wrong direction, and degrade the overall
performance (Du et al. 2020).
Prior works use logit variance to re-weight sample importance in distillation (Cho et al. 2022). Unfortunately, our implementation implies a weak correlation between logit variance and the true labels with a high false positive rate (wrong
predictions could have higher variance as well). Blindly enlarging the weights of these samples would mislead the consensus. Are there other measures that can characterize the
heterogeneous model capacity more reliably? In this paper,
we orchestrate K-step PGD attack as a proxy (Zhang et al.
2020) and build it into the FD pipeline to quantify instancespecific boundary margins that work for a mixture of convo-

Most of the federated learning techniques are limited to homogeneous model fusion. With the rapid growth of smart applications on resource-constrained edge devices, it becomes
a barrier to accommodate their heterogeneous computing
power and memory in the real world. Federated Distillation
is a promising alternative that enables aggregation from heterogeneous models. However, the effectiveness of knowledge
transfer still remains elusive under the shadow of distinct representation power from heterogeneous models. In this paper,
we approach from an adversarial perspective to characterize
the decision boundaries during distillation. By leveraging Kstep PGD attacks, we successfully model the dynamics of the
closest boundary points and establish a quantitative connection between the predictive uncertainty and boundary margin. Based on these findings, we further propose a new loss
function to make the distillation attend to samples close to
the decision boundaries, thus learning from more informed
logit distributions. The extensive experiments over CIFAR10/100 and Tiny-ImageNet demonstrate about 0.5-3.5% improvement of accuracy under different IID and non-IID settings, with only a small increment of computational overhead.

Introduction
Today’s Federated Learning (FL) framework mainly aggregates knowledge from the homogeneous models (McMahan
et al. 2017). However, in practice, the misalignment of computation time and memory capacity across heterogeneous
edge devices often leads to the problems of load imbalance
and memory error (Wang, Yang, and Zhou 2021), which
makes such one-model-fits-all design incompatible with the
real-world demands. Model personalization aims to leverage
heterogeneous models to balance the varying capacities and
constraints on edge devices. A straightforward solution is to
find commonalities in sub-model structures (Diao, Ding, and
Tarokh 2020; Horvath et al. 2021; Alam et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2023), but these methods are still confined to the same
model family and incompatible with the full-fledged heterogeneous model fusion such as transferring the knowledge
between convolution and vision transformers.
Federated Distillation (FD) is a viable way to accommodate heterogeneous models (Li and Wang 2019; Lin et al.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21429

