The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CUQDS: Conformal Uncertainty Quantification Under Distribution Shift for
Trajectory Prediction
Huiqun Huang1 , Sihong He2 , Fei Miao1 *
1

University of Connecticut
University of Texas at Arlington
{huiqun.huang, fei.miao}@uconn.edu, sihong.he@uta.edu
2

Abstract

Various uncertainty quantification methods have been
proposed for trajectory prediction. One popular approach
is to estimate the distribution (e.g., Laplace distribution or
Gaussian distribution) of future trajectories of target vehicles
by direct modeling methods (Zhou et al. 2022; Mao et al.
2023; Zhu et al. 2023; Salzmann et al. 2020). However, this
method often overlooks the impact of model limitation (the
restricted ability of models to represent the real-time trajectories data) and the consequence overconfident uncertainty
estimation in the inference stage. Another popular approach
is to calibrate the preliminary estimated uncertainty in the inference stage by the statistical-based methods. Specifically,
methods such as split conformal prediction (CP) (Shafer and
Vovk 2008; Lindemann et al. 2023) provide confidence intervals that guarantee to contain the ground truth target data
with a predefined probability. However, they are not applicable to the situations under distribution shift.

Trajectory prediction models that can infer both future trajectories and their associated uncertainties of the target vehicles
are crucial for safe and robust navigation and path planning of
autonomous vehicles. However, the majority of existing trajectory prediction models have neither considered reducing
the uncertainty as one objective during the training stage nor
provided reliable uncertainty quantification during inference
stage, especially under potential distribution shift. Therefore, in this paper, we propose the Conformal Uncertainty
Quantification under Distribution Shift framework, CUQDS,
to quantify the uncertainty of the predicted trajectories of existing trajectory prediction models under potential data distribution shift, while improving the prediction accuracy of
the models and reducing the estimated uncertainty during the
training stage. Specifically, CUQDS includes 1) a learningbased Gaussian process regression module that models the
output distribution of the base model (any existing trajectory
prediction neural networks) and reduces the estimated uncertainty by an additional loss term, and 2) a statistical-based
Conformal P control module to calibrate the estimated uncertainty from the Gaussian process regression module in an
online setting under potential distribution shift between training and testing data. Experimental results on various state-ofthe-art methods using benchmark motion forecasting datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed design.

A

B

Introduction
Accurately and efficiently predicting the future trajectories
of the target vehicles is pivotal for ensuring the safety of path
planning and navigation of autonomous systems in dynamic
environments (Hu et al. 2023; Kedia, Zhou, and Karumanchi
2023). However, trajectory uncertainly due to the changing external surrounding environments (e.g., road networks,
neighborhood vehicles, passengers, and so on) or intrinsic
intention changes of drivers, can lead to both trajectory distribution shift that change over time and overconfidence in
the output of trajectory prediction models. It remains challenging to predict the distribution of the future trajectories of
the target vehicles (rather than focusing solely on point estimates), and to quantify the predicted trajectory uncertainty
under potential distribution shift.

Ground truth trajectory

Predicted trajectory

Uncertainty interval

Figure 1: Illustration of the importance of a good uncertainty
interval estimation for the predicted trajectories of the target
vehicles.
In this paper, we propose CUQDS, i.e., Conformal
Uncertainty Quantification under Distribution Shift framework, to quantify the output uncertainty of existing trajectory prediction models under distribution shift, while improving the prediction accuracy of the models and reducing the estimated uncertainty. The proposed CUQDS frame-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17422

