The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Utilize the Flow before Stepping into the Same River Twice: Certainty Represented
Knowledge Flow for Refusal-Aware Instruction Tuning
Runchuan Zhu12 * , Zhipeng Ma3 * , Jiang Wu1 * † ,
Junyuan Gao14 , Jiaqi Wang1 , Dahua Lin1 , Conghui He1‡
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
Peking University
3
Southwest Jiaotong University
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhurunchuan, wujiang, gaojuanyuan, wangjiaqi, lindahua, heconghui}@pjlab.org.cn,
mazhipeng1024@my.swjtu.edu.cn
Case of Over-Refusal

Abstract

Initial Model

Wrong

Correct

RAIT

Refusal-Aware Instruction Tuning (RAIT) enables Large
Language Models (LLMs) to refuse to answer unknown questions. By modifying responses of unknown questions in the
training data to refusal responses such as “I don’t know”,
RAIT enhances the reliability of LLMs and reduces their hallucination. Generally, RAIT modifies training samples based
on the correctness of the initial LLM’s response. However,
this crude approach can cause LLMs to excessively refuse
answering questions they could have correctly answered,
the problem we call over-refusal. In this paper, we explore
two primary causes of over-refusal: Static conflict occurs
when similar samples within the LLM’s feature space receive differing supervision signals (original vs. modified “I
don’t know”). Dynamic conflict arises as the LLM’s evolving
knowledge during SFT enables it to answer previously unanswerable questions, but the now-answerable training samples
still retain the original “I don’t know” supervision signals
from the initial LLM state, leading to inconsistencies. These
conflicts cause the trained LLM to misclassify known questions as unknown, resulting in over-refusal. To address this issue, we introduce Certainty Represented Knowledge Flow for
Refusal-Aware Instructions Tuning (CRaFT). CRaFT centers
on two main contributions: First, we additionally incorporate
response certainty to selectively filter and modify data, reducing static conflicts. Second, we implement preliminary rehearsal training to characterize changes in the LLM’s knowledge state, which helps mitigate dynamic conflicts during
the fine-tuning process. We conducted extensive experiments
on open-ended question answering and multiple-choice question task. Experiment results show that CRaFT can improve
LLM’s overall performance during the RAIT process.

Previous Method Correct

Ours(CRaFT)

Correct

Refusal Wrong
Reduce
Over-Refusal
Refusal Wrong

Before
RAIT

In which city would
you find Chicago
O'Hare International
Airport?

Chicago. (Correct)
In which city would
you find Chicago
O'Hare International
Airport?

After
RAIT

I don’t know. (Refusal)

Figure 1: Previous RAIT methods resulted in significant
over-refusal, while our CRaFT mitigates this issue, enhancing the LLM’s reliability and helpfulness.

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Language Model (LLM) technology has
made significant progress, becoming an important milestone
towards AGI (Achiam et al. 2023; Dubey et al. 2024; Touvron et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024). However, current LLMs
often output fabricated information, which is referred to as
hallucinations (Ji et al. 2023). This phenomenon severely
limits the usefulness and reliability of LLMs. An important
reason for the occurrence of hallucinations is that when exposed to questions beyond their internal knowledge (i.e., unknown questions), LLMs may forcefully generate responses
(Kang et al. 2024). Ideally, the reliable LLM should actively
refuse to answer questions it doesn’t know to avoid incorrect
responses (Wen et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024b). Recent studies
have shown (Yang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024; Xu et al.
2024a; Cheng et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024a; Bai et al. 2023;
Cheng et al. 2024) that Refusal-Aware Instruction Tuning
(RAIT) can enable LLMs to refuse answering questions beyond their knowledge.
The RAIT process can be described as follows: the initial LLM answers all questions in the train set Dsrc . Based
on response accuracy, samples are split into two groups.
Correct responses are labeled as vanilla samples Dvan , with
unchanged answers, while incorrect responses are replaced
with ”I don’t know,” forming the IdK samples Didk . The
combined RAIT data Drait = Dvan ∪Didk is used to fine-tune
the LLM, improving its ability to refuse unknown questions.

Code & Data — https://github.com/opendatalab/CRaFT
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06913
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Project lead.
Corresponding author (heconghui@pjlab.org.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

26157

