The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fair Division with Social Impact
Michele Flammini1,2 , Gianluigi Greco2 , Giovanna Varricchio2
1

Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
2
University of Calabria, Rende, Italy
michele.flammini@gssi.it, gianluigi.greco@unical.it, giovanna.varricchio@unical.it

Abstract

with more complex scenarios, e.g., endowing agents with
entitlements (Suksompong 2025; Chakraborty et al. 2021;
Aziz, Ganguly, and Micha 2023; Hoefer, Schmalhofer, and
Varricchio 2024) or introducing additional constraints (Bilò
et al. 2022; Barman et al. 2023; Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk,
and Niedermeier 2022).
In most of this literature, the focus has been put on achieving fairness for the involved agents, possibly subject to efficiency, without considering any kind of externality. However, there are many scenarios in which allocating resources
has an impact on society. We can imagine, for example, there
are some green strategies that the government must assign
to companies. A company will profit from implementing the
strategy (as companies more sensitive to green aspects are
increasingly appealing to customers), while the implementation will positively impact society by reducing emissions.
Companies judge the outcome based solely on the profit
they and other companies can attain, whereas society aims
to maximize the overall reduction of emissions.
With this paper, we expand the scope of fair division of
indivisible goods incorporating the concept of social impact.
Our goal is twofold: To ensure fairness among agents and
guarantee a high social impact.

In this paper, we consider the problem of fair division of indivisible goods when the allocation of goods impacts society. Specifically, we introduce a second valuation function for
each agent, determining the social impact of allocating a good
to the agent. Such impact is considered desirable for the society – the higher, the better. Our goal is to understand how to
allocate goods fairly from the agents’ perspective while maintaining society as happy as possible. To this end, we measure
the impact on society using the utilitarian social welfare and
provide both possibility and impossibility results. Our findings reveal that achieving good approximations, better than
linear in the number of agents, is not possible while ensuring
fairness to the agents. These impossibility results can be attributed to the fact that agents are completely unconscious
of their social impact. Consequently, we explore scenarios
where agents are socially aware, by introducing related fairness notions, and demonstrate that an appropriate definition
of fairness aligns with the goal of maximizing the social objective.

Introduction
Fair division is a fundamental research area at the intersection of economics and computer science. In the last decade,
it turned out to be a particularly active field due to its applications to several real-world contexts. It focuses on distributing resources (goods) among individuals (agents) in a fair
manner according to their valuations. To achieve fairness,
various criteria have been studied, including envy-freeness
(EF) (Foley 1966), where every agent weakly prefers her
bundle over the bundle received by any other, and proportionality (PROP) (Steinhaus 1948), where every agent values her bundle at least as much as her proportional share,
that is, the value she attributes to the whole set of goods
normalized by the number of agents. Unfortunately, in indivisible settings, EF and PROP allocations do not always
exist. Consequently, several relaxations have been considered. These include, but are not limited to, the up to one
(Budish 2011), up to any (Caragiannis et al. 2019), epistemic
(Aziz et al. 2018; Caragiannis et al. 2023), and randomized
(Aziz et al. 2023) variants of EF, PROP, and related notions. The fair division model has also been extended to deal

Our Contribution. We refer to the preliminaries for the
formal definition of the considered fairness criteria.
In this work, we aim at determining the loss in efficiency
(expressed by the utilitarian welfare w.r.t. the social impact of agents, i.e., the sum of the social impact of agents)
while pursuing fairness. In particular, we estimate the Price
of Fairness (PoF), that is, the worst-case ratio between the
value of the maximum utilitarian welfare and the maximum
utilitarian welfare achievable by a fair solution. Besides determining suitable bounds for several fairness notions, we
also provide efficient algorithms for computing the corresponding approximately optimal and fair allocations. An
overview of our results for n agents is given in Table 1.
For all the fairness notions we considered, an approximation better than linear in the number of agents is not possible.
This can be attributed to the fact that agents are unconscious
of their social impact. We therefore investigate which kind
of consciousness on the agents’ side allows the existence of
fair and optimal outcomes. To this end, we introduce the notion of socially aware envy-freeness (sEF) and establish that

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13856

