The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Inheriting Generalized Learngene for Efficient Knowledge Transfer
across Multiple Tasks
Yuankun Zu1,2 , Shiyu Xia1,2 , Xu Yang1,2 * , Qiufeng Wang1,2 , Han Zhang3 , Xin Geng1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{zyk0418, shiyu xia, xuyang palm, qfwang, zhann, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2024; Zhao et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2024). In practical applications, it is essential to deploy and train models with different architectures for handling diverse tasks, where transferring well-learned knowledge from large pretrained models to compact target ones becomes increasingly important.
Techniques such as knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015) are frequently employed for this
purpose, enhancing performance and training efficiency (Wu
et al. 2023; Mistry 2024). Despite the success, it also faces
several challenges, including the phenomenon of negative
transfer when source and target tasks exhibit significant domain differences, which may harm the performance of the
student model (Yang, Huang, and Wei 2023; Go et al. 2024).
Furthermore, when we need student models with different
architectures or sizes, repeated distillation processes are necessary as shown in Fig. 1(b).
To address this issue, a new framework Learngene was
proposed (Wang et al. 2022; Xia et al. 2024a), which first
extracts condensed knowledge termed as learngene from a
well-trained ancestry model, and then inherit it into small
or middle-sized descendant models to address downstream
tasks, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The existing work Heur (Wang
et al. 2022) extracts some integral layers as learngene according to gradient information during training. TLEG (Xia
et al. 2023) proposes to linearly expand learngene layers
to compose variable-depth descendant models. Learngene
Pool (Shi et al. 2023) builds a pool of transformer layers
by distillation and stiches them to create descendant models.
SWS (Xia et al. 2024b) explores learngene in a multi-stage
weight sharing way. Take a closer look at the Learngene
framework, we note that descendant models frequently face
various tasks, each also with varying architectures, which
highlights the importance of generalization for learngene to
enhance the adaptability and flexibility of descendant models across different tasks and architectures. However, existing methods extract learngene without considering the generalization across different tasks and architectures, greatly
limiting its capability.
To this end, our study explores extracting and inheriting
learngene which can be generalized to different model architectures for handling diverse vision tasks. Previous research suggests that large kernel convolutional neural networks (CNNs) exhibit significant generalization potential

In practical applications, it is often necessary to transfer
knowledge from large pretrained models to small ones with
various architectures for tackling different tasks. The Learngene framework, proposed recently, firstly extracts one compact module termed as learngene from a large well-trained
model, after which learngene is used to build descendant
models for handling diverse tasks. In this paper, we aim
to explore extracting and inheriting learngene which can be
generalized across different model architectures and tasks,
remaining understudied in previous works. Inspired by the
existing observations that large kernel convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) exhibit significant generalization potential
across various architectures and tasks, we propose a novel
two-stage Learngene method termed CLKG (Convolutional
Learngene for Knowledge Generalization), which inherits
convolutional kernels containing generalized knowledge as
learngene to build diverse models for multiple tasks. Specifically, we construct an auxiliary model comprised of small
kernels and train it through dense feature distillation to inherit the feature extraction ability from large kernel CNNs.
After distillation, we select certain kernels from the auxiliary model as learngene based on three criteria: direct kernel extraction, priority to edge kernels, and continuous kernel selection. Subsequently, we adapt learngene according to
the width of the descendant models and use it to initialize
the backbone part of descendant models. Experiments on diverse vision tasks such as image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation demonstrate the superiority
of CLKG. For example, compared with from scratch training,
it brings 2.89% improvements on VOC12+SBD, and reduces
around 2x training data volume and training epochs to achieve
better results. Furthermore, compared to knowledge distillation method, CLKG significantly reduces negative transfer on
certain datasets, e.g. , achieves 1.88% performance improvements on NAO dataset despite domain differences.

Introduction
Deep neural networks demonstrate remarkable performance
across a wide variety of computer vision tasks (Shu, Meng,
and Xu 2023; Wichmann and Geirhos 2023; Yang et al.
* Co-corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23090

