The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RLPF: Reinforcement Learning from Prediction Feedback for User
Summarization with LLMs
Jiaxing Wu, Lin Ning, Luyang Liu, Harrison Lee, Neo Wu, Chao Wang,
Sushant Prakash, Shawn O’Banion, Bradley Green, Jun Xie
Google DeepMind
jxwu@google.com

Abstract

language space are reusable across any LLM for downstream tasks without needing to re-train the LLM. In addition, natural language summaries are interpretable and editable, offering users more scrutability and control over their
personalized experiences.
Generating user summaries is inherently challenging because user activities lack a ground-truth summary, and their
quality is subjective and difficult to define. Existing techniques share a common shortfall: they offer no guarantee
that generated summaries will support downstream personalization tasks—a critical function. Each approach also has
unique drawbacks. Heuristic methods that extract subsets
of activities fail to capture the breadth of user preferences
and often produce less readable results. While prompt engineering is popular, pretrained models are not tailored to user
data, and crafting effective prompts is both time-consuming
and unscalable. Supervised fine-tuning is impractical due to
nonexistent training datasets and the privacy concerns associated with collecting such data. Finally, RLHF or RLAIF
methods rely on human or AI evaluators, but their judgments
remain subjective without standardized criteria.
To overcome the challenges of generating natural language user summaries, we propose RLPF: Reinforcement
Learning from Prediction Feedback (illustrated in Figure 1),
which includes three components:

LLM-powered personalization agent systems employ Large
Language Models (LLMs) to predict users’ behavior from
their past activities. However, their effectiveness often hinges
on the ability to effectively leverage extensive, long user historical data due to its inherent noise and length of such data.
Existing pretrained LLMs may generate summaries that are
concise but lack the necessary context for downstream tasks,
hindering their utility in personalization systems. To address
these challenges, we introduce Reinforcement Learning from
Prediction Feedback (RLPF). RLPF fine-tunes LLMs to generate concise, human-readable user summaries that are optimized for downstream task performance. By maximizing
the usefulness of the generated summaries, RLPF effectively
distills extensive user history data while preserving essential information for downstream tasks. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates significant improvements in both extrinsic downstream task utility and intrinsic summary quality,
surpassing baseline methods by up to 22% on downstream
task performance and achieving an up to 84.59% win rate
on Factuality, Abstractiveness, and Readability. RLPF also
achieves a remarkable 74% reduction in context length while
improving performance on 16 out of 19 unseen tasks and/or
datasets, showcasing its generalizability. This approach offers
a promising solution for enhancing LLM personalization by
effectively transforming long, noisy user histories into informative and human-readable representations.

1

• Summarization Model: A model is trained to generate
succinct user summaries from raw activity data.
• Prediction-based Reward Model: To compute a reward, we measure the effectiveness of the generated summaries in downstream prediction tasks.
• Feedback Loop: The reward is then used to update the
summarization model with RL, with an additional reward
to encourage shorter lengths. This feedback loop guides
the summarization model to continuously refine its ability to produce summaries that are not only concise but
also highly effective for their intended applications.

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown great promise
for personalized prediction by leveraging historical activity
data (Liu et al. 2023; Lyu et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023). However, the inherent noise and length of user data pose obstacles to their effective utilization in LLM-powered systems.
Natural language user summaries offer several advantages
over using raw user activity data. First, they improve inference efficiency over using raw user data due to their compact nature. Second, they offer the potential to improve performance on downstream tasks by distilling user activities
and reducing noise. Representing user context through natural language also offers several advantages over embeddingbased representations. User representations in the natural

RLPF offers a win-win solution: it enables the creation of
high-quality user summaries without the need for resourceintensive and potentially privacy-compromising human intervention. By directly optimizing the summarization process for downstream prediction performance, we ensure that
the generated summaries are both compact and directly relevant to the tasks they are meant to support. Furthermore,

Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25488

