The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Continuous-Time Supermartingale Certificates
Grigory Neustroev1 , Mirco Giacobbe2 , Anna Lukina1
1

Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands
2
University of Birmingham, UK
g.neustroev@tudelft.nl, m.giacobbe@bham.ac.uk, a.lukina@tudelft.nl

Abstract
We introduce for the first time a neural-certificate framework for continuous-time stochastic dynamical systems. Autonomous learning systems in the physical world demand
continuous-time reasoning, yet existing learnable certificates
for probabilistic verification assume discretization of the
time continuum. Inspired by the success of training neural
Lyapunov certificates for deterministic continuous-time systems and neural supermartingale certificates for stochastic
discrete-time systems, we propose a framework that bridges
the gap between continuous-time and probabilistic neural certification for dynamical systems under complex requirements.
Our method combines machine learning and symbolic reasoning to produce formally certified bounds on the probabilities that a nonlinear system satisfies specifications of reachability, avoidance, and persistence. We present both the theoretical justification and the algorithmic implementation of our
framework and showcase its efficacy on popular benchmarks.

6
101

4

2

0

2

4

6

20

15

10

5

0

5

10

15

20

10 1

Figure 1: A neural supermartingale certificate for the
continuous-time stochastic inverted pendulum. Darker colors indicate higher probability for the system trajectories
(sampled in white) to reach and remain in the green rectangle, while avoiding the red rectangles.

Code — https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14537003
Extended version —
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.17432

Introduction
Ensuring safety is paramount to the alignment and governance of autonomous learning systems. Providing verifiable
guarantees of compliance with safety requirements is essential for building trust between a system, its users, and the
regulators. This is especially critical when the system is deployed in the physical world, where it can cause harm. A
central challenge in designing autonomous learning systems
is developing control policies that ensure the desired spatial
and temporal behavior. These objectives include reaching
a specific target region (reachability), consistently avoiding
unsafe regions (avoidance), reaching and remaining within a
safe region (persistence), and combinations thereof.
Autonomous systems often face multiple probabilistic uncertainties, leading to noisy model parameters or stochastic system evolution. Safe control design for the most general models—nonlinear continuous-time stochastic dynamical systems—provides formal guarantees for systems operating in uncertain physical environments. Powerful techniques for achieving this are based on Lyapunov functions,

which serve as a potential-energy characterization for differential equations and, under certain conditions, become formal proof certificates for desired behavioral properties. Initially introduced for the asymptotic stability analysis of deterministic systems with respect to an equilibrium (Kalman
and Bertram 1959), Lyapunov functions have been generalized to stochastic dynamical systems (Blumenthal and
Getoor 1968) and extended into formal certificates for reachability, avoidance (known as barrier certificates), and persistence properties (Prajna, Jadbabaie, and Pappas 2004).
Computing proof certificates analytically is a hard problem for nonlinear systems, which has traditionally required
manual effort and considerable expertise. This approach
is feasible when a system design is familiar to an engineer. However, for autonomous learning systems with
embedded neural networks, whose internals are often not
human-comprehensible, the construction of proof certificates must be automated. The best-known algorithms for
their construction are based on sum-of-square programming
(Papachristodoulou and Prajna 2002; Topcu, Packard, and

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
27538

