The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Trustworthiness of Graph Neural Networks with Rank-Based
Conformal Training
Ting Wang1 , Zhixin Zhou2 , Rui Luo1 *
1

Department of Systems Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Alpha Benito Research, Los Angeles, USA
t.wang123@outlook.com, zzhou@alphabenito.com, ruiluo@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

Instead of relying solely on uncalibrated predicted distribution µ(y|x), CP constructs a prediction set that informs a
plausible range of estimates aligned with the true outcome
distribution p(y|x). The post-training calibration step make
the output prediction sets provably include the true outcome
with a user-specified coverage of 1 − α. A conformity score
function is the key component for CP to quantify the agreement between the input and the candidate label.
Some studies have draw attention to the application of
CP to graph-structured data (Clarkson 2023; H. Zargarbashi,
Antonelli, and Bojchevski 2023; Lunde 2023; Lunde, Levina, and Zhu 2023; Marandon 2024). However, CP usually
suffer inefficiency when there are no well-calibrated probabilities, with the intuition that larger prediction sets covers
higher uncertainty. How to achieve desirable efficiency beyond validity is still a noteworthy challenge. Existing studies (Sadinle, Lei, and Wasserman 2019; Romano, Sesia, and
Candes 2020) are typically changing the definition of the
conformity scores for inefficiency reduction. The challenge
is that CP is always used as a post-training calibration step,
thus hindering its ability of underlying model to adapting to
the prediction sets.
Recently, (Stutz et al. 2022; Bellotti 2021) try to using
CP as a training step to make model parameter θ dependent with the calibration step, so as to modifying prediction sets towards reducing inefficiency. However, the integration of conformal training and GNNs still remain largely
unexplored. The very resent work (Huang et al. 2023) proposed a conformal graph neural network which develops a
topology-aware calibration step during training. Differently,
we focus this problem with two lines. One is that a suitable
conformity score is applied for GNNs who often struggle
with miscalibration predictions (Wang et al. 2021). Another
is that a conformal training framework based on the differentiable variant of this conformity score is designed to adjust
the prediction sets along with model parameters’ optimization.
In conclusion, our contributions are two-fold. First, we
propose a novel rank-based conformity scores that emphasizes the rank of prediction probabilities which is more robust to GNNs. Second, we develops a calibration step during training for adjusting the prediction sets along with
the model parameters. We demonstrate that the rank-based
conformal prediction method we introduce is performance-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has been widely used in a
variety of fields because of their great potential in representing graph-structured data. However, lacking of rigorous uncertainty estimations limits their application in high-stakes.
Conformal Prediction (CP) can produce statistically guaranteed uncertainty estimates by using the classifier’s probability estimates to obtain prediction sets, which contains the true
class with a user-specified probability. In this paper, we propose a Rank-based CP during training framework to GNNs
(RCP-GNN) for reliable uncertainty estimates to enhance the
trustworthiness of GNNs in the node classification scenario.
By exploiting rank information of the classifier’s outcome,
prediction sets with desired coverage rate can be efficiently
constructed. The strategy of CP during training with differentiable rank-based conformity loss function is further explored
to adapt prediction sets according to network topology information. In this way, the composition of prediction sets can be
guided by the goal of jointly reducing inefficiency and probability estimation errors. Extensive experiments on several
real-world datasets show that our model achieves any predefined target marginal coverage while significantly reducing
the inefficiency compared with state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/CityU-T/RCP-GNN

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has been widely used in
many applications, such as weather forecasting (Lam et al.
2023), drug discovery (Li, Huang, and Zitnik 2022) and
recommendation systems (Wu et al. 2022). However, predictions made by GNNs are inevitably present uncertainty.
Though to understand the uncertainty in the predictions they
produce can help to enhance the trustworthiness of GNNs
(Huang et al. 2023), most existing uncertainty quantification
(UQ) methods can not be easily adopted to graph-structured
data (Stadler et al. 2021). Among various UQ methods, Conformal Prediction (CP) is an effective approach for achieving
trustworthy GNNs (Wang et al. 2024). It relaxes the assumption of existing UQ methods, making it suitable for graphstructured data.
* Corresponding author:
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21261

