The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Quantifying Misalignment Between Agents: Towards a Sociotechnical
Understanding of Alignment
Aidan Kierans1 , Avijit Ghosh2,1 , Hananel Hazan3 , Shiri Dori-Hacohen1
1

University of Connecticut
2
Hugging Face
3
Tufts University
aidan.kierans@uconn.edu, avijit.g@uconn.edu, hananel@hazan.org.il, shiridh@uconn.edu
Abstract

et al. 2024), which may include a complex mix of AI agents
and humans, potentially holding a dizzying array of competing and often conflicting goals. Critch and Krueger posed
the question, “where could one draw the threshold between
‘not very well aligned’ and ‘misaligned’[..]?” (2020, pg. 14),
while Lazar and Nelson call for a “sociotechnical approach
to AI safety,” stating unequivocally that “no group of experts
(especially not technologists alone) should unilaterally decide
what risks count, what harms matter, and to which values safe
AI should be aligned” (2023). To consider the alignment of
AI in its sociotechnical environment, we need to expand our
definitions of alignment toward a sociotechnical, agent-based
understanding that accounts for the complexity of real-world
systems in an increasingly AI-agentic world. The question
emerges: with whom are agents aligned or misaligned, and
on what areas? The alignment of an AI agent or system might
be with an adversary, rather than with the developers and/or
owners of it; and the alignment—or lack thereof—might be
context-, user-, or agent-dependent.
To that end, we propose a novel probabilistic model of misalignment that is predicated on the population of agents being
observed (whether human, AI, or any combination thereof),
as well as the problem area at hand and, by extension, the
agents’ values and sense of importance regarding that area.
To do so, we extend and adapt a model of contention from
computational social science (Jang, Dori-Hacohen, and Allan
2017) and apply the adapted model to the alignment problem.
Our contributions in this paper are as follows:

Existing work on the alignment problem has focused mainly
on (1) qualitative descriptions of the alignment problem; (2)
attempting to align AI actions with human interests by focusing on value specification and learning; and/or (3) focusing on a single agent or on humanity as a monolith. Recent
sociotechnical approaches highlight the need to understand
complex misalignment among multiple human and AI agents.
We address this gap by adapting a computational social science model of human contention to the alignment problem.
Our model quantifies misalignment in large, diverse agent
groups with potentially conflicting goals across various problem areas. Misalignment scores in our framework depend on
the observed agent population, the domain in question, and
conflict between agents’ weighted preferences. Through simulations, we demonstrate how our model captures intuitive
aspects of misalignment across different scenarios. We then
apply our model to two case studies, including an autonomous
vehicle setting, showcasing its practical utility. Our approach
offers enhanced explanatory power for complex sociotechnical
environments and could inform the design of more aligned AI
systems in real-world applications.

Code —
https://github.com/RIET-lab/quantifying-misalignment
Appendices — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.04231

1

Introduction

In recent years, growing concerns have emerged about the
AI alignment problem (e.g. Russell 2019; Christian 2020).
Russell (Russell 2019) made the bold yet compelling claim
that social media AI is already misaligned with humanity
(e.g. through extensive disinformation spread). As agentic
AI systems are growing in importance and increasingly deployed (Kapoor et al. 2024), concerns about misalignment of
agent-based systems have grown (Chan et al. 2023; Gabriel
et al. 2024). Yet with few exceptions (e.g. Critch and Krueger
2020), much prior work focuses on single AI settings (Ji
et al. 2024), on value specification and learning (Critch and
Krueger 2020; Leike et al. 2018), or centers technosolutionist fixes. A healthier alternative would set a sociotechnical
lens (Lazar and Nelson 2023) on multi-agent settings (Gabriel
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We introduce a novel mathematical model of misalignment which accounts for a population of human and AI
agents, and which is parameterized by problem areas, allowing any pair of agents to be simultaneously aligned
and misaligned. Our model affords explanatory power for
the complexity of real-world, sociotechnical settings in
which AI agents are deployed.
2. We simulate a set of worlds with a variety of agents, problem areas, and goals in order to study key drivers of misalignment under our model.
3. We showcase important features of our model in two case
studies that are difficult to account for in previous models,
namely, (a) a shopping recommender system and (b) a precrash autonomous vehicle (AV) decision-making setting.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: after

27365

