The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Confounding-Robust Deferral Policy Learning
Ruijiang Gao1 , Mingzhang Yin2
1

Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75082
2
Warrington College of Business, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611
ruijiang.gao@utdallas.edu, mingzhang.yin@warrington.ufl.edu

Abstract
Human-AI collaboration has the potential to transform various
domains by leveraging the complementary strengths of human
experts and Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems. However,
unobserved confounding can undermine the effectiveness
of this collaboration, leading to biased and unreliable
outcomes. In this paper, we propose a novel solution to
address unobserved confounding in human-AI collaboration
by employing sensitivity analysis from causal inference. Our
approach combines domain expertise with AI-driven statistical
modeling to account for potentially hidden confounders. We
present a deferral collaboration framework for incorporating
the sensitivity model into offline policy learning, enabling the
system to control for the influence of unobserved confounding
factors. In addition, we propose a personalized deferral
collaboration system to leverage the diverse expertise of
different human decision-makers. By adjusting for potential
biases, our proposed solution enhances the robustness and
reliability of collaborative outcomes. The empirical and
theoretical analyses demonstrate the efficacy of our approach
in mitigating unobserved confounding and improving the
overall performance of human-AI collaborations.

1

Introduction

In recent years, policy learning has emerged as a powerful tool for learning and optimizing decision-making policies across a diverse range of applications, including healthcare, finance, and marketing (Imbens 2024). One of the most
promising avenues for leveraging machine learning is policy learning on observational data (Athey and Wager 2021),
which aims to infer optimal decision rules from historical
data without the need for costly randomized experiments.
Observational data, generated from real-world systems, is
abundant and easily accessible, making it an attractive source
for training models that can guide policy decisions.
Many algorithms have been proposed for efficient policy
learning from observational data (Joachims, Swaminathan,
and de Rijke 2018; Gao et al. 2021b; Kallus 2021), usually
under the unconfoundness assumption. It assumes no hidden
confounders that simultaneously influence both the treatment
assignment and individual outcomes (Rubin 1974). This assumption is defensible in certain domains such as automated
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14238

recommendation or pricing systems (Biggs, Gao, and Sun
2021) where we have full control of the historical algorithm,
but may rarely hold true for domains where the observational
data is generated by human decision-makers.
Consider a healthcare scenario, where observational data is
generated by human experts as the electronic health records
(EHRs). These records contain a wealth of information about
patients’ medical histories, treatments, and outcomes to inform policy learning for personalized medical interventions.
However, human experts, such as physicians, may seek additional information when making decisions about patient care,
such as the patient’s lifestyle, mental well-being, or other
contextual factors like the bedside information that might influence their decision-making process as well as the patient’s
health outcomes. This additional information, though crucial
for decision-making, may not be recorded in the EHRs, leading to potential confounding issues in the observed data. For
example, a physician may prescribe specific medication to
patients with a specific lifestyle, so the observed treatment
might be confounded by the potentially unrecorded lifestyle
factor. In this case, the unobserved confounding can result in
suboptimal actions and reduce the reliability of learned policies. In the causal inference literature, the marginal sensitivity
model has been proposed under the unmeasured confounding to bound the possible value of the true propensity score
(Tan 2006). This idea was recently applied to policy learning
without humans in the loop (Kallus and Zhou 2021).
In this paper, we propose a human-AI collaboration system that learns a policy robust to unmeasured confounding.
The system uses a deferral component to decide task allocations to human experts or algorithms. The learned policy
improves over the algorithm-alone and the human-alone approaches. Supposing the historical data in our motivating
example are all generated by human decision-makers, an
AI-only algorithm is likely to be inferior to humans in cases
where external information, such as patients’ lifestyles, is
necessary for optimal decision-making. The benefit of human
involvement stands out in the confounding setting as human
decision-makers are adept at making choices based on (unobserved) confounding factors (Holstein et al. 2023). In contrast,
a human-only system often incurs a high operation cost. An
essential problem is how to jointly learn a rule to choose
decision-makers and a rule to assign treatment once the AI
system is chosen, especially when the observed data have

