The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-Domain Trajectory Association Based on Hierarchical Spatiotemporal
Enhanced Attention Hypergraph
Chenlong Wu1,2 , Ze Wang1,2 * , Keqing Cen1,2 , Yude Bai1,2 , Jin Hao3
1

2

School of Software, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligence Technology and Systems, Tiangong University, Tianjin, China
3
Boya Triz (Tianjin) Technology Co., Ltd., Tianjin, China
{wuchenlong, wangze, cenkeqing, baiyude}@tiangong.edu.cn, hao.jin@live.cn
Abstract

trajectory representation should describe users’ spatiotemporal movement patterns and capture high-order correlations
between cross-domain trajectories. Trajectory representation learning has long been a prominent topic in spatiotemporal data mining and natural language processing (Wang
et al. 2024) (Bai et al. 2020). This study summaries several trajectory representation models, noting that while these
models improve user trajectory representation by capturing
spatiotemporal relations, they exhibit three limitations.
① Current methods rely on frameworks such as Recurrent Neural Networks (Medsker, Jain et al. 2001) and Long
Short-Term Memory networks (Graves and Graves 2012) to
define trajectory sequences, such as TULVAE (Zhou et al.
2018), TULER (Gao et al. 2017), DeepTUL (Miao et al.
2020), DPLink (Feng et al. 2019), and TULAM (Li et al.
2024). Although RNNs and LSTMs are advantageous in
handling sequential data, they are inefficient in capturing
long-term dependencies, especially with lengthy or irregularly spaced trajectories. Additionally, they struggle to gain
higher-order implicit relations in dynamic trajectories.
② Existing user trajectory analysis often employs linear layers to merge local and global information, as seen
in methods such as AttnTUL (Chen et al. 2024), MVMN
(Zhang, Lai, and Wang 2020), CAT-ART (Li et al. 2023),
and MSTHN (Lai et al. 2023). However, these linear layers
fail to fully capture the complex and dynamic interactions
inherent in trajectories and cannot combine the macro- and
micro-semantics of user behavior. The mechanisms for information fusion need to be further explored.
③ LBSN datasets contain noisy records, leading to spatial
and temporal inconsistencies across different services (Chen
et al. 2018). The behavioral patterns and features of the same
user’s trajectories differ across service providers, influenced
by factors such as sampling rates and time intervals. Such
variations affects the accuracy of user identity linkage.
To address these challenges, we propose a Hierarchical Spatio-Temporal Enhanced Attention Hypergraph Network (StarNet) for enhancing accuracy in user identity
linkage. StarNet comprises a local spatiotemporal enhanced graph neural network module, a global spatiotemporal enhanced hypergraph network module, and a fusionenhanced association module. The local module learns features within trajectories and multi-dimensional data, enhancing the model’s understanding of local trajectory char-

Identifying and linking the same users across different social platforms is crucial for understanding user behavior and
preferences. However, cross-domain datasets exhibit diverse
characteristics, such as varying check-in frequencies, significant disparities in data precision, and distinct distributions.
Existing trajectory representations rely on recurrent neural
network, which fails to dynamically learn multi-dimensional
feature relations and capture high-order associations. Furthermore, current methods for integrating trajectory information fails to capture the complex relations and dynamic
variations among cross-domain mobility trajectories. To this
end, we propose the Hierarchical Spatio-Temporal Enhanced
Attention Hypergraph Network (StarNet). This model dynamically regulates the multi-dimensional features of trajectories through a locally enhanced spatiotemporal graph neural
network. Meanwhile, StarNet employs a hypergraph network
enhanced by a global spatiotemporal to capture high-order associations between cross-domain trajectories. The fusion enhancement association integrates local and global information, which enables this model to link user identities. Extensive experiments on two well-known LBSN cross-domain
datasets reveal that StarNet outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in the accuracy of user identity linkage.

Introduction
Location-Based Social Networks (LBSNs) encompass comprehensive data on user interactions, spatiotemporal tags,
and contextual semantics (Cen et al. 2024). Analyzing this
heterogeneous data is pivotal for understanding user preferences. Through cross-domain user identity linking, mobile
app providers can fully analyze user behavior to achieve precise personalized recommendations, such as suggesting services and products of interest to users. However, differences
in user behavior and characteristics across various platforms
preclude a comprehensive understanding of user individuality and interests through a separate social medium. Therefore, cross-dataset user identity linkage is essential for gaining a deeper understanding of user behavior while enabling
personalized services.
The key step in cross-domain user identity linkage is
learning representations of mobility trajectories. Effective
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12854

