The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CG-TGAN: Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks with
Graph Neural Networks for Tabular Data Synthesizing
Seungcheol Lee* , Moohong Min
Sungkyunkwan University
cheol11111@g.skku.edu, iceo@skku.edu

Abstract

is risky. To address this problem, generating realistic synthetic data can significantly benefit many AI applications by
making data sharing safer and more accessible.
The mainstream of existing research in tabular data synthesizing is using GAN(Goodfellow et al. 2014) or diffusion(Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) models. The research using
diffusion model(Kotelnikov et al. 2023; Lee, Kim, and Park
2023) uses fully connected layers for constructing a tabular
data synthesizing model. The models using GAN can be categorized by which layers are used to construct the generator
and discriminator of GAN. In previous studies(Park et al.
2018; Zhao et al. 2021, 2022), the rationale for using convolutional layers was that local features could be extracted better than fully connected layers. However, when using convolutional layers, the order of tabular data columns can change
the results, even though the order of columns is not meaningful. Moreover, the difficulty of extracting combined features
between different columns depends on the closeness of column orders. In other words, the results of extracting features
from tabular data using convolutional layers are not invariant from the order of columns. We wanted to find a better
and more intuitive way to learn relationships between tabular data columns.
We started our research with the hypothesis that “if
we convert tabular data to graph-structured data and construct the tabular data synthesizer model with graph neural networks(GNN), we could generate better synthetic
data.” Our hypothesis was inspired by the Structural Causal
Model(SCM)(Pearl 2009). A SCM M can be represented
with a triplet < U, V, F >. U is a set of exogenous
variables, V is a set of endogenous variables, and F =
{f1 , f2 , · · · , fn } is a set of functions which are mapping
from U to V. Using SCM, if we know the parent nodes of
node i we can assign a value to vi like as vi ← fi (pai , ui ).
Unfortunately, the causal relationships between tabular data
columns are not generally known, and learning them is
very difficult. Therefore, it is impractical to implement a
generative model with a probabilistic graph model such as
Bayesian networks because they rarely meet the prerequisite
of having a causal graph of tabular data. However, we are interested in the significant context of being able to generate
data from a graph, which led us to the above hypothesis.
To prove our hypothesis, we propose CG-TGAN, a conditional GAN(CGAN)(Mirza and Osindero 2014) that uses

Data sharing is necessary for AI to be widely used, but sharing sensitive data with others with privacy is risky. To solve
these problems, it is necessary to synthesize realistic tabular data. In many cases, tabular data contains a mixture of
continuous, mixed, categorical columns. Moreover, columns
of the same type may have multimodal distribution or be
highly imbalanced. These issues make it challenging to synthesize tabular data. The synthesized tabular data should reflect the relational meaning between columns of tabular data,
so modeling the probability distribution of tabular data is a
non-trivial task. Traditional tabular data synthesizing models are based on GAN or diffusion models and are built using fully connected or convolutional layers. However, fully
connected layers have the disadvantage of low inductive bias,
and convolutional layers are not invariant to the column order
of tabular data. Therefore, we assume that converting tabular data into graph-structured data and using a graph neural
network would produce better synthetic data than using fully
connected layers or convolutional layers. Our study aims to
show that GANs constructed with graph neural networks can
outperform existing GAN models using fully connected layers or convolutional layers. We propose CG-TGAN, a conditional GAN built using graph neural networks. To learn how
to synthesize realistic data, the graph neural networks in the
discriminator and generator learn graph-level tasks and nodelevel tasks together. The discriminator of CG-TGAN learns a
graph-level task to distinguish between real and synthetic data
and node-level tasks to predict the value of the target node.
CG-TGAN’s generator learns a graph-level task to synthesize
an overall graph similar to real data and node-level tasks to
learn how to synthesize a fake graph with the proper relation
between nodes. In this paper, we show that CG-TGAN outperforms GAN-based models and is comparable to diffusionbased models.

Introduction
For AI to be applied in many fields, data sharing is necessary. Tabular data is widely used in many tasks, such as online advertising, recommendation, fraud detection, medical
treatment, etc.(Luo et al. 2020) However, sharing sensitive
data that contains private information or corporate security
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18145

