The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Knowledge-Enhanced Hierarchical Heterogeneous Graph for Personality
Identification with Limited Training Data
Yuxuan Song1, 2 , Qiudan Li1 * , Yilin Wu2, 1 , David Jingjun Xu3 , Daniel Dajun Zeng1, 2
1

The State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China
2
The School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Information Systems, College of Business, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
songyuxuan2023, qiudan.li, wuyilin2022@ia.ac.cn, davidxu@cityu.edu.hk, zengdaniel@outlook.com
Abstract
Pair 1

Personality identification plays important roles in understanding user behavior and offering foresight ability for downstream applications. The key challenge is how to address the
scarcity of labeled personality data. Recently, some studies
have adopted data augmentation and prompt learning to perform personality identification. However, they still heavily
require a large amount of labeled data to learn an appropriate distance strategy, which limits the generalization and
flexibility of the model. This study proposes a knowledgeenhanced hierarchical heterogeneous graph model, which
adopts a global multi-view graph node encoding to acquire
comprehensive personality features and their inherent associations, where three types of knowledge including part-ofspeech (POS) tag, entity, and Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count (LIWC) are introduced. Then, a hierarchical heterogeneous graph with a “post-word-diverse knowledge” structure is constructed for each post to obtain enhanced representation. Finally, a relation guided representation optimization that considers intra-user relationships and inter-label relationships is further developed to learn more discriminative
semantic representation. Experimental results on three widely
used datasets demonstrate that the model outperforms stateof-the-art methods when training with only 100 samples (approximately 1% of the total data set).

Pair 2
Traits

User 1
oh nice! I love what you
did with the wires :D
Were you able to get
rid of it? Or did you
make peace with it?
EXT AGR OPN

User 2
Woooooow I love what
you did to love song!!
Oh well then sir what
are you listening to?
NEU OPN

Table 1: An example of two pairs of posts from two users
with different personality traits.

graphical models (Wang et al. 2020; Ramezani, FeiziDerakhshi, and Balafar 2022; Li et al. 2024) to exploit all
labeled data to learn text representations. Although these
methods have achieved success, personality labels are limited in real-world scenarios. To address the data scarcity
problem, some studies have recently adopted data augmentation and prompt learning to perform personality identification. Zhu et al. (2024) and Zhu et al. (2022) construct
heterogeneous graphs on the basis of user text and Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) lexicon. Different contrastive loss strategies between unlabeled data (Zhu et al.
2024) and between text graphs (Zhu et al. 2022) are designed
for data enhancement. Moreover, Wen et al. (2023) uses the
T5 model for fine-tuning and prompt learning. Hu et al.
(2024) enhances the pre-trained model using the knowledge
generated by the large model. These strategies may be affected by the illusion of large models.
The above methods fail to model external information that
embodies grammatical and semantic content, such as partof-speech (POS) tag, entity, and writing styles. Moreover,
their utilization of the psychological knowledge embedded
in LIWC also needs to be strengthened. During the graph
learning process, node representations are updated by the
external information solely at a global level, resulting in low
update efficiency. Furthermore, they overlook the dynamic
interaction between users and the generated representation.
A large amount of labeled data is still needed to determine
an appropriate distance measurement strategy.
Table 1 shows two pairs of posts from two different users.
For text pair 1, these two users all express admiration and affection, and this similarity between posts reflects the shared

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet, social media has
provided a quick channel for users to express their opinions on events and products. The voice of the customer
(VOC) contains personality data, which reflects life choices,
health, and happiness. Automatic personality identification
from such data can enhance the explainability and foresight
for applications, such as proactive policy prediction (Yang,
Lau, and Abbasi 2023) and personalized recommendations
(Yang et al. 2022), thus attracting widespread attention in
the fields of artificial intelligence, cognitive psychology, and
business intelligence.
Most personality identification methods mainly focus on
using pre-training methods (Reimers and Gurevych 2019;
Jiang, Zhang, and Choi 2020; Leonardi et al. 2020) and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1529

