The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Eliminating Majority Illusion is Easy
Jack Dippel1 , Max Dupré la Tour1 , April Niu1 , Sanjukta Roy2 , Adrian Vetta1
1

2

McGill University
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
jack.dippel@mail.mcgill.ca
max.duprelatour@mail.mcgill.ca
yuexing.niu@mail.mcgill.ca,
sanjukta@isical.ac.in
adrian.vetta@mcgill.ca

Abstract

v1

Majority illusion is a phenomenon in social networks wherein
the decision by the majority of the network is not the same as
one’s personal social circle’s majority, leading to an incorrect perception of the majority in a large network. We present
polynomial-time algorithms which completely eliminate majority illusion by altering as few connections in the network
as possible. Eliminating majority illusion ensures each neighbourhood in the network has at least a 1/2-fraction of the majority winner. This result is surprising as partially eliminating
majority illusion is NP-hard. We generalize the majority illusion problem to an arbitrary fraction p and show that the problem of ensuring all neighbourhoods in the network contain at
least a p-fraction of nodes consistent with a given preference
is NP-hard, for nearly all values of p.

v4

v2

v3

v5

v6

v8

v9

v7

Figure 1: A network in which every node suffers illusion.

majority illusion because their underlying network topology has a social determinant. For example, homophily, the
tendency for humans to connect with similar people, contributes to the creation of information bubbles and polarization (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001).
Another topical example of majority illusion concerns
vaccinations (Johnson et al. 2020). Here node colours may
indicate vaccinated or unvaccinated. If a personal decision
to vaccinate oneself is influenced by the actions of people in your local social network, then misinformation may
have significant consequences. Moreover, a smaller number
of influential high degree nodes may suffice to cause major distortions. An illusion can occur even when there are
more than two alternatives and each node selects one alternative. If alternative blue is the majority winner, then a
node under illusion has strictly less blue neighbors compared to red neighbors (neighbors selecting any of the nonwinning alternatives). Indeed, this observation indicates the
relevance of illusion to advertising, campaigning, and influence maximization (Becker, D’Angelo, and Ghobadi 2023;
Zhou and Zhang 2021). Moreover, the effects of illusion
have been studied in many disparate areas, including voting theory (Bara, Lev, and Turrini 2021; Castiglioni, Ferraioli, and Gatti 2020; Doucette et al. 2019; Wilder and
Vorobeychik 2018), participatory budgeting and the alloca-

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/html/2407.20187v1

Introduction
Perceptions are liable to become distorted on a social network. An example of this is the friendship paradox (Feld
1991): on average, a person has fewer friends than their
friends do.1 Similarly, on average, a researcher is less productive than their co-authors (Eom and Jo 2014; Benevenuto, Laender, and Alves 2006). This network characteristic, whereby local observations can lead to erroneous
conclusions regarding a global state, was dubbed majority
illusion by Lerman et al. (Lerman, Yan, and Wu 2016). The
nomenclature relates to situations where a minority viewpoint is perceived to be the majority viewpoint (Stewart et al.
2019).
One of the simplest manifestation of majority illusion
concerns elections. Let’s model a two-party election by a
graph G = (V, E) where each node represents a voter
and each edge connects two voters that are neighbours (or
friends). Furthermore, imagine party preference is given by
a colouring function f : V → {B, R}. If there are more blue
nodes than red nodes then we say blue is the majority. A
node v ∈ V is then under (majority) illusion if it has strictly
more red neighbours than blue neighbours. There exist instances where every node is under illusion; see Figure 1.
Network topology can have a big impact on misinformation. Indeed, electoral networks are very susceptible to

Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This is a simple consequence of the fact that a higher degree
node appears in more neighbourhoods than a lower degree node.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial

13763

