The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VLScene: Vision-Language Guidance Distillation for Camera-Based
3D Semantic Scene Completion
Meng Wang, Huilong Pi* , Ruihui Li, Yunchuan Qin, Zhuo Tang* , Kenli Li
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China
{willem, liruihui, phl880217, qinyunchuan, ztang, lkl}@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Camera-based 3D semantic scene completion (SSC) provides
dense geometric and semantic perception for autonomous
driving. However, images provide limited information making the model susceptible to geometric ambiguity caused by
occlusion and perspective distortion. Existing methods often lack explicit semantic modeling between objects, limiting their perception of 3D semantic context. To address
these challenges, we propose a novel method VLScene:
Vision-Language Guidance Distillation for Camera-based
3D Semantic Scene Completion. The key insight is to use
the vision-language model to introduce high-level semantic priors to provide the object spatial context required for
3D scene understanding. Specifically, we design a visionlanguage guidance distillation process to enhance image features, which can effectively capture semantic knowledge from
the surrounding environment and improve spatial context
reasoning. In addition, we introduce a geometric-semantic
sparse awareness mechanism to propagate geometric structures in the neighborhood and enhance semantic information
through contextual sparse interactions. Experimental results
demonstrate that VLScene achieves rank-1st performance on
challenging benchmarks—SemanticKITTI and SSCBenchKITTI-360, yielding remarkably mIoU scores of 17.52 and
19.10, respectively.

Figure 1: Our method uses vision-language model guidance
distillation versus the previous image-based method.

reliance on 3D data often necessitates the use of specialized
and expensive depth sensors, which limits the broader application of SSC algorithms. Recently, many researchers (Cao
and de Charette 2022; Li et al. 2023c,a; Jiang et al. 2024;
Wang and Tong 2024; Xue et al. 2024) have explored the
use of camera-based approaches to recover dense 3D geometric structures and semantic information.
In Figure 1, existing methods commonly depend on 2D3D view transformations to construct 3D representations
from image features, and utilise complex 3D models for
geometric and semantic inference. Nevertheless, the limited information available from images renders these models
susceptible to geometric ambiguities caused by occlusions
and perspective distortions. Inferring geometry without sufficient visual input requires leveraging semantic knowledge
of the surrounding environment and reasoning about the spatial context. Given these limitations, we consider the question: How can high-level semantic priors be utilized to improve semantic representation and spatial context?
In this paper, we propose a novel camera-based SSC
method: VLScene, Vision-Language Guidance Distillation for Camera-based 3D Semantic Scene Completion.
VLScene leverages a vision-language model to extract highlevel semantic priors, enhancing semantic representation
and spatial context through distillation. As shown in the yellow box in Figure 2(a), semantic and spatial structure priors are obtained through vision-language models. The position and category of the person behind the car are ac-

Code — https://github.com/willemeng/VLScene

Introduction
The field of 3D perception faces new challenges with the
emergence of autonomous driving. Autonomous vehicles
need to predict the surrounding environment accurately to
ensure safe navigation and obstacle avoidance. The Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) (Song et al. 2017; Roldao,
de Charette, and Verroust-Blondet 2020; Yan et al. 2021)
task aims to forecast the semantic occupancy of every voxel
in the entire 3D scene based on limited observations.
Most existing SSC (Rist et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2018;
Guo and Tong 2018; Li et al. 2020; Roldao, de Charette,
and Verroust-Blondet 2020; Yan et al. 2021) solutions rely
on input RGB images and corresponding 3D data to predict volume occupancy and semantic labels. However, the
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7808

