The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cascaded Diffusion Models for Virtual Try-On: Improving Control and Resolution
Guangyuan Li1 * , Yongkang Wang1 * , Junsheng Luan1 , Lei Zhao 1† ,
Wei Xing 1† , Huaizhong Lin 1† , Binkai Ou2 ,
2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
Innovation Research & Development, BoardWare Information System Limited
{cslgy, wykang, cszhl, wxing, linhz}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous virtual try-on methods have employed ControlNet
architecture in exemplar-based inpainting diffusion models
to guide the generation of try-on images, preserving the garment’s features and enhancing the realism of the generated
images. While these methods have maintained the identity
of the garment and improved the naturalness of the generated images, they still face the following limitations: (1) For
garments with complex features, such as intricate text, patterns, and uncommon styles, they struggle to retain these
detailed features in the generated try-on images. (2) They
are limited to generating try-on images at a maximum resolution of 1K, which may not meet the demands of realworld scenarios, where higher resolutions might be required.
To address the aforementioned issues, in this paper, we propose a Cascaded Diffusion Model for virtual try-on to enhance both image controllability and resolution. We call it
CDM-VTON. Specifically, we design two diffusion models: the Multi-Conditioned Diffusion Model (MC-DM) and
the Super-Resolution Diffusion Model (SR-DM). The former generates low-resolution try-on images while preserving the garment’s complex features, and the latter enhances
the resolution of these images. Additionally, we incorporate
a multi-control integration module in the MC-DM, which injects multiple control conditions into a frozen denoising UNet to ensure that the generated try-on images retain complex
garment features. Our experimental results demonstrate that
our method outperforms previous approaches in preserving
garment details and generating authentic virtual try-on images, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Input (Person)

Input (Garment)

LaDI-VTON

DCI-VTON

StableVITON

CAT-DM

IDM-VTON

Ours

Figure 1: We compare our method with diffusion-based virtual try-on methods at 2K resolution. We use the DiffBIR
method to perform super-resolution reconstruction on the
generated results of the comparison methods. Specifically,
the generated try-on images have an initial resolution of
512×384, and after super-resolution reconstruction, the resolution of the images is increased to 2048×1536. As can be
seen, compared to other methods, our approach generates
2K try-on images with superior detail retention and realism, particularly in the depiction of garment textures, where
it maximally preserves their intricate details. Best viewed
when zoomed in.

Introduction
Image-based virtual try-on (VTON) is an important computer vision task that aims to generate seamless photos of a
person wearing target garments by inputting images of the
person and the target garments. Due to its convenience and
potential to provide personalized shopping experiences for
e-commerce users, there is significant interest in generating
realistic virtual try-on images. The key challenges VTON
faces are how to naturally match the garments to the human body in various poses and gestures while maintaining

the patterns and textures of the garments without distortion
(Han et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018).
Previous image-based VTON methods (Choi et al. 2021;
Ge et al. 2021; He, Song, and Xiang 2022; Lee et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2023) mainly relied on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014).
These methods initially deform the garment image to align
with the given person image, and then integrate the warped
garment image with the person image in a generator for synthesis. However, GAN-based VTON methods face the following issues: (1) The deformation methods (Duchon 1977;
Jaderberg et al. 2015; Li, Huang, and Loy 2019) they use

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4689

