The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RepeatLeakage: Leak Prompts from Repeating as Large Language Model
is a Good Repeater
Yu Peng1, 2 , Lijie Zhang1, 2 , Peizhuo Lv1, 2 * , Kai Chen1, 2 *
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{pengyu, zhanglijie, lvpeizhuo, chenkai}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

models have emerged. Examples include numerous userconstructed Poe (Poe 2024) hosting platforms and the GPT
Store (OpenAI 2024a), which features both official and usercustomized chatbots. These applications receive user input,
concatenate it with their internal system prompt, and send
it to the backend LLM, which then returns the response
to the application. These applications facilitate continuous
user interaction to solve various tasks. For instance, in the
GPT Store’s Website Generator application, users repeatedly describe their desired styles, and the Website Generator
(OpenAI 2024b) continuously produces different web pages
based on the user requirements. In Poe’s Zombie Survival
application (charlielezekiel 2024), users input their next actions, and Zombie Survival generates descriptions of potential zombie attacks and the surrounding environment based
on these actions. Given that the performance of these applications depends heavily on their prompts, developers often
keep these prompts confidential, viewing them as intellectual property. For example, the system prompts used in GPT
Store applications are hidden, and developers actively seek
to prevent users from accessing these prompts (SingularityKChen 2024). Therefore, stealing system prompt of LLMbased applications compromises the developer’s intellectual
property.

With the development of large language models (LLMs),
numerous online applications based on these models have
emerged. As system prompts significantly influence the performance of LLMs, many such applications conceal their system prompts and regard them as intellectual property. Consequently, numerous efforts have been made to steal these
system prompts. However, for applications that do not publicly disclose their system prompts, previously stolen prompts
have low confidence. This is because previous methods rely
on confirmation from application developers, which is unrealistic since developers may be unwilling to acknowledge
that their system prompts have been leaked. We observed a
phenomenon: when an LLM performs repetitive tasks, it accurately repeats based on the context rather than relying on
its internal model parameters. We validated this phenomenon
by comparing the results of two different inputs—repetitive
tasks and knowledge-based tasks—under conditions of normal execution, contaminated execution, and partially restored
execution. By contaminating the input nouns and then partially restoring them using data from the normal execution’s intermediate layers, we measured the accuracies of
both task types across these three execution processes. Based
on this phenomenon, we propose a high-confidence leakage
method called RepeatLeakage. By specifying the range that
the model needs to repeat and encouraging the model not to
change the format, we manage to extract its system prompt
and conversation contexts. We validated the repetition phenomenon on multiple open-source models and successfully
designed prompts using RepeatLeakage to leak contents from
the actual system prompts of GPT-Store and publicly available ChatGPT conversation contexts. Finally, we tested RepeatLeakage in real environments such as ChatGPT web, successfully leaking their system prompts and conversation contexts.

Previous work has investigated the leakage of prompt
instructions. Perez et al. (2022) and Zhang et al. (2024)
propose such prompt leaking attacks on LLM applications.
More specifically, they manually construct prompts for
prompt leakage using expert knowledge. Perez et al. (2022)
utilized 35 base prompts from OpenAI’s example pages as
leakage targets, while Zhang et al. (2024) conducted attack
tests using conversation histories between users and ChatGPT, employing the DeBERTa (He et al. 2021) model to
detect the authenticity of extracted prompts. Additionally,
Yang et al. (2024) designed a novel attack framework called
PRSA, which infers the prompt intentions of large language
models by analyzing input-output content to generate alternative prompts with the same functionality. However, when
dealing with applications that do not publicly disclose their
system prompts, such as those in GPT-Store and Poe, these
works find it challenging to validate the authenticity of the
stolen prompts without confirmation from the application
developers. This reliance on developer confirmation leads to
low confidence in the authenticity of the stolen content.

Code — https://github.com/Zonax40/RepeatLeakage

Introduction
With the advent of large language models (LLMs) such as
GPT (Brown et al. 2020) and LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023),
a growing number of online applications based on these
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26335

