The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Hardness of Training Deep Neural Networks Discretely
Ilan Doron-Arad
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
ilan.d.a.s.d@gmail.com

Abstract

Rivest 1988; Megiddo 1988) and recent developments obtained strong hardness results for various special cases of the
training problem (e.g., (Goel et al. 2021; Boob, Dey, and Lan
2022; Bertschinger et al. 2023; Froese and Hertrich 2024)).
For the above results, it sufficed to consider two-layer networks which already capture the hardness of the problem.
On the other hand, less is known about deeper neural networks, which adhere to substantially stronger capabilities in
practice (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). Obtaining lower bounds of training as a function of the network
depth is considered a prominent question in previous works
(e.g., (Goel et al. 2021; Froese and Hertrich 2024)). In addition, the complexity of the discrete variant of the problem, in
which the parameters are taken from a given finite set of options, has remained less explored despite its theoretical and
practical significance.
In this paper, we aim to narrow the gaps described above,
by theoretically studying the following questions. (i) In
polynomially solvable settings for shallow networks (e.g.,
fixed dimension and dataset size, etc.), how difficult is training on deeper networks? (ii) What are the complexity differences between training on discrete versus continuous parameter spaces? (iii) In particular, can we obtain a hardness
results stronger than NP-completeness for training on a discrete parameter space? such results exist for two-layer networks in the continuous parameter space (Bertschinger et al.
2023; Abrahamsen, Kleist, and Miltzow 2021). We start by
formally describing the problem.

We study neural network training (NNT): optimizing a neural network’s parameters to minimize the training loss over a
given dataset. NNT has been studied extensively under theoretic lenses, mainly on two-layer networks with linear or
ReLU activation functions where the parameters can take any
real value (here referred to as continuous NNT (C-NNT)).
However, less is known about deeper neural networks, which
exhibit substantially stronger capabilities in practice. In addition, the complexity of the discrete variant of the problem
(D-NNT in short), in which the parameters are taken from a
given finite set of options, has remained less explored despite
its theoretical and practical significance.
In this work, we show that the hardness of NNT is dramatically affected by the network depth. Specifically, we show
that, under standard complexity assumptions, D-NNT is not
in the complexity class NP even for instances with fixed dimensions and dataset size, having a deep architecture. This
separates D-NNT from any NP-complete problem. Furthermore, using a polynomial reduction we show that the above
result also holds for C-NNT, albeit with more structured instances. We complement these results with a comprehensive
list of NP-hardness lower bounds for D-NNT on two-layer
networks, showing that fixing the number of dimensions, the
dataset size, or the number of neurons in the hidden layer
leaves the problem challenging. Finally, we obtain a pseudopolynomial algorithm for D-NNT on a two-layer network
with a fixed dataset size.

Extended version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13057

Neural Network Training (NNT)

1

Introduction

We define the decision problem of whether a given neural
network can be optimally trained. This problem is occasionally referred to as empirical risk minimization (ERM) but
hereafter will be called neural network training (NNT). The
definition captures both discrete and continuous parameter
spaces with arbitrary activation and loss functions on an arbitrary directed acyclic graph.

Deep neural networks are among the leading tools in machine learning today, with an astonishingly vast range of applications (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). Neural networks require training: optimizing the weights and biases on a given dataset. While minimizing the generalization
error is the primary goal, a fundamental algorithmic challenge is to minimize the training loss on the given dataset.
Neural network training has been studied extensively
from a theoretical perspective. NP-hardness proofs have
been known for over three decades (Judd 1988; Blum and

Input: We are given a directed acyclic graph N = (V =
{s} ∪ H ∪ T, E) (i.e., the network), where s, H, T are the
input vertex (source), the hidden layers (neurons), and the
output vertices, respectively. The depth of the network is the
longest path from the input to an output and a layer is a
maximal subset of vertices with the same distance from the

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16363

