The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual-calibrated Co-training Framework for Personalized Federated
Semi-Supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Delin Pan1 , Jiansong Fan1 , Jie Zhu1 , Lihua Li2 , Xiang Pan1,3 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China
Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Instrumentation, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
3
The PRC Ministry of Education Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Healthcare, Wuxi, Jiangsu
214122, China
6233115017@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn, fan jiansong@163.com, 6233110009@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn
lilh@hdu.edu.cn, xiangpan@jiangnan.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Federated Semi-Supervised Learning (FSSL) has emerged as
a crucial topic in medical image analysis, allowing multiple
medical institutions to collaboratively train a global model
using limited labeled data. However, existing FSSL methods
focus solely on an effective combination of federated learning and semi-supervised learning, ignoring the heterogeneity
of client data and the inadaptability of semi-supervised methods in diverse environments, which leads to knowledge bias
in local models and impedes stable convergence. To this end,
we explore the application of personalization in FSSL and
propose a novel dual-calibrated co-training framework. To
adapt to the unique feature distribution of client data, we consider collaborative relationships among clients to aggregate a
personalized model for each client. We further build a dualstudent architecture with the personalized model and private
local model on the client side, which encourages model disagreement for co-training while enhancing participant privacy. Most importantly, we design dual calibration strategies that adaptively optimize the model: Local calibration improves the boundary discrimination of the local model by dynamically replacing pseudo-label boundary patches; Global
calibration corrects model direction based on the real-time
perception of the biases between local dual-student models.
Experimental results show the effectiveness of our method
on a private medical dataset and two public medical datasets.

Figure 1: Illustration of the existing FSSL method and our
PFSSL method. Existing methods simply combine semisupervised methods with federated averages, while our
method considers collaborative relationships and aggregates
a personalized model for each client.

scenarios, it is difficult for medical institutions to provide
enough medical image annotations due to constraints such
as limited available expertise, time, and the high costs of
data annotation. Obtaining pixel-level annotations on a large
scale is undoubtedly a significant challenge, especially for
segmentation tasks that require pixel-level detail. To handle
this problem, many researchers have considered an effective
combination of FL and semi-supervised learning. This innovative paradigm allows multiple clients to utilize limited
labeled data and abundant unlabeled data to facilitate collaborative model training in a distributed environment (Jeong
et al. 2020; Liang et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2021).
In previous attempts, federated semi-supervised learning
(FSSL) has been extensively studied. FedIRM (Liu et al.
2021) addresses the deficiency of task knowledge at unlabeled clients by extracting useful information through interclient relation matching. FedCD (Liu, Wu, and Qin 2024)
introduced a class awareness balance module to explore balanced learning of rare classes in unlabeled clients. Although
these methods have considered the inter-client relationships
to facilitate knowledge transfer between labeled and unlabeled data, their performance still faces two significant challenges: data heterogeneity among multiple clients and the
inadaptability of semi-supervised methods in distributed environments. As depicted in Figure 2, the main reasons for
performance degradation in traditional FSSL methods are
two-fold: 1) data heterogeneity may cause the aggregated
model to absorb varied experiences, leading to catastrophic
knowledge forgetting and repetitive local self-training pat-

Code —
https://github.com/Medical-AI-Lab-of-JNU/PFSSL

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has garnered considerable attention
recently in medical image analysis, which enables multiple
medical institutions (i.e., clients) to train a shared global
model without centralizing data (McMahan et al. 2017;
Konečnỳ et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2020). By ensuring patient
data privacy while meeting the necessity for collaborative
learning in the healthcare field, FL provides a way for more
precise diagnoses (Antunes et al. 2022). Despite the potential of FL, the requirement for a large amount of fully labeled data restricts its practicality. In real-world medical
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6272

