The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Unbiased Deepfake Detection via Token-Level Shuffling and Mixing
Xinghe Fu1 * , Zhiyuan Yan2 * , Taiping Yao2† , Shen Chen2 , Xi Li1†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
xinghefu@zju.edu.cn, {zhiyuanyan, taipingyao, kobeschen}@tencent.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Forged
(a) Spurious Correlation at Inference (biased model)
1. Position Bias:
2. Content Bias:

The generalization problem is broadly recognized as a critical challenge in detecting deepfakes. Most previous work
believes that the generalization gap is caused by the differences among various forgery methods. However, our investigation reveals that the generalization issue can still occur
when forgery-irrelevant factors shift. In this work, we identify two biases that detectors may also be prone to overfitting: position bias and content bias, as depicted in Fig. 1.
For the position bias, we observe that detectors are prone to
“lazily” depending on the specific positions within an image
(e.g., central regions even no forgery). As for content bias,
we argue that detectors may potentially and mistakenly utilize forgery-unrelated information for detection (e.g., background, and hair). To intervene in these biases, we propose
two branches for shuffling and mixing with tokens in the latent space of transformers. For the shuffling branch, we rearrange the tokens and corresponding position embedding for
each image while maintaining the local correlation. For the
mixing branch, we randomly select and mix the tokens in the
latent space between two images with the same label within
the mini-batch to recombine the content information. During
the learning process, we align the outputs of detectors from
different branches in both feature space and logit space. Contrastive losses for features and divergence losses for logits are
applied to obtain unbiased feature representation and classifiers. We demonstrate and verify the effectiveness of our
method through extensive experiments on widely used evaluation datasets.

Fake

Model’s Attn. Ground Truth
𝑵𝑵

HairBG.

Unforged

… +

Forged

Model’s Attn. Ground Truth
𝑵𝑵

Forged

… +

Fake ✓

Model relies on the center region
Fake

Unforged

Real 

Model fails to capture artifacts at mouth

… +

Fake ✓
Fake 
Real 

Unexpected correlation between
the attention and the content

(b) Intervention at Training (our unbiased model)

Token-level Mixing

Token-level Shuffling
…

Fake ✓

+

Fake ✓

Figure 1: We present two identified biases in deepfake detection: (1) position bias and (2) content bias. (a) For position
bias, we discover that the detector may focus more on the
image center, regardless of whether the forgery is present.
For content bias, we observe that detectors mistakenly concentrate on the forgery-irrelevant features (e.g., background
and hair). These biases can cause spurious correlations and
lead to a biased detector; (b) Our method intervenes in the
biases and helps establish a more robust model.

but often falter in cross-dataset scenarios where there is a
distribution gap between the training and testing data. The
prevalent explanation for this generalization problem, as
suggested in previous works (Luo et al. 2021; Yan et al.
2023a), is models’ overfitting to specific forgery. These
works argue that generalization failure primarily occurs because the forgery methods applied in training and testing
data are not identical, leading many subsequent studies (Yan
et al. 2024a; Chen et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2024b) to address
this issue from various methodological perspectives.
In this paper, we discover that the generalization problem
persists even when identical forgery techniques are applied.
Through our initial investigations, we identify two biases in
deepfake detection: position bias and content bias. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we observe that, for position bias, detectors tend to “lazily” rely on the central region of the image
for detection. Concerning content bias, we find that the detector might mistakenly and inadvertently use specific content combinations for detection, e.g., background, hair, or

Introduction
Deepfake technology has become prominent due to its ability to create impressively realistic visual content. However,
this technology can also be exploited for harmful purposes,
such as violating personal privacy, disseminating false information, and undermining trust in digital media. Considering
these potential threats, there is an urgent need to develop a
reliable deepfake detection system.
Most of earlier deepfake detectors (Li and Lyu 2018;
Yang, Li, and Lyu 2019; Qian et al. 2020; Gu et al. 2021)
demonstrate effectiveness in the scenario of within-dataset
* These authors contributed equally.
†

These are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3040

