The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motion-Zero: A Zero-Shot Trajectory Control Framework of Moving Object
for Diffusion-Based Video Generation
Changgu Chen1 Junwei Shu1 , Gaoqi He1 , Changbo Wang2 * , Yang Li1 * ,
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
{52215901006, 51265902091}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {gqhe, cbwang, yli}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,

Abstract

diverse generation of video outputs by the user. To obtain
variety over the generated video with more control capability,
i.e. trajectories of moving objects, several methods (Wang
et al. 2023d,c; Yin et al. 2023) harness a substantial dataset
of motion and trajectory pairs to train the baseline models.
Although the results are very impressive and promising, these
methods are solely applicable to the base models on which
they were trained and cannot be applied to other models directly. Furthermore, all of these methods require extensive
training and significant computational resources, preventing
ordinary users from using them.
Nevertheless, the fundamental text-to-video diffusion models (Blattmann et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023) have undergone an extremely large scale training dataset (Bain et al.
2021; Xue et al. 2022). Theoretically, the pre-trained model
should inherently have learned extensive knowledge about
the dynamics of a variety of object movements. However, the
semantics of the latent space in different modules of a video
diffusion model are not explicitly defined, which makes it difficult to manually control generated video in desired motion
dynamics. To some extent, the methods mentioned above try
to align and define those latent spaces in the baseline model
by training with additional labeled datasets, and successfully
harnessing the intrinsic knowledge of pre-trained models to
control the motion. In addition, we observe that the initial
noise plays a significant inspirational role in the generation
of the videos. The same initial noise tends to produce videos
with similar content. With these two characteristics, we can
manipulate the trajectory of moving objects.
In this paper, we propose a zero-shot trajectory control
framework, Motion-Zero, to guide the motion of generated
objects in video. Our proposed method can be easily applied
to pre-trained video diffusion model while achieving universality and plug-and-play capabilities of controlling. To this
end, we first design an Initial Noise Prior Module to provide noises based on the motion trajectories given by the user.
Then, inspired by the fact that the values of the cross-attention
map within the U-Net largely determine the generation location of the subject mentioned in the prompt (Xie et al. 2023;
Epstein et al. 2023), Spatial Constraints with an attention similarity loss over these attention maps are proposed to achieve
precise manipulation of object positioning within individual frames. Furthermore, we observe that merely imposing
spatial constraints on the positions of objects can negatively

Recent large-scale pre-trained diffusion models have demonstrated a powerful generative ability to produce high-quality
videos from detailed text descriptions. However, exerting control over the motion of objects in videos generated by any
video diffusion model remains a challenging problem. In this
paper, we propose a novel zero-shot moving object trajectory
control framework, Motion-Zero, to enable arbitrary singleobject-trajectory control for the text-to-video diffusion model.
To this end, an initial noise prior module is designed to provide a position-based prior to improve the stability of the
appearance of the moving object and the accuracy of position. In addition, based on the attention map of the U-Net,
spatial constraints are directly applied to the denoising process of diffusion models, which further ensures the positional
consistency of moving objects during the inference. Furthermore, temporal consistency is guaranteed with a proposed
shift temporal attention mechanism. Our method can be flexibly applied to various state-of-the-art video diffusion models
without any training process. Extensive experiments demonstrate our proposed method can control the motion trajectories
of arbitrary objects while preserving the original ability to
generate high-quality videos.

Introduction
In recent years, the generative capabilities of diffusion models
have been widely recognized in both text-to-image (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Rombach
et al. 2022; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020) and text-to-video
domains (Guo et al. 2023; Ho et al. 2022). Although these
video models are capable of producing high-definition, highresolution, and fluid video animations, the dynamic motion
trajectories of the generated objects are relatively random in
existing text-to-video models (Blattmann et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2023). Thus, accurate control of an object’s motion
trajectories in a generated video remains rudimentary.
Various strategies have been proposed to address this problem. Some methods (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023; Wu
et al. 2023a) try to control the trajectory of the moving object
by providing a detailed conditional motion sequence, such
as a dancing skeleton. However, the cost of acquiring conditional control sequences is non-negligible and inhibits the
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2016

