The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generative Planning with 3D-vision Language Pre-training for End-to-End
Autonomous Driving
Tengpeng Li1,2 , Hanli Wang1,2∗ , Xianfei Li3 , Wenlong Liao3 , Tao He3,4 , Pai Peng3∗
1

College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
3
COWAROBOT, China
4
School of Electronic Engineering, University of South China, Hunan, China
hanliwang@tongji.edu.cn, pengpai sh@163.com
Abstract

Autonomous driving is a challenging task that requires perceiving and understanding the surrounding environment for
safe trajectory planning. While existing vision-based endto-end models have achieved promising results, these methods are still facing the challenges of vision understanding,
decision reasoning and scene generalization. To solve these
issues, a generative planning with 3D-vision language pretraining model named GPVL is proposed for end-to-end autonomous driving. The proposed paradigm has two significant aspects. On one hand, a 3D-vision language pre-training
module is designed to bridge the gap between visual perception and linguistic understanding in the bird’s eye view. On
the other hand, a cross-modal language model is introduced
to generate holistic driving decisions and fine-grained trajectories with perception and navigation information in an autoregressive manner. Experiments on the challenging nuScenes
dataset demonstrate that the proposed scheme achieves excellent performances compared with state-of-the-art methods. Besides, the proposed GPVL presents strong generalization
ability and real-time potential when handling high-level commands in various scenarios. It is believed that the effective,
robust and efficient performance of GPVL is crucial for the
practical application of future autonomous driving systems.

Figure 1: (a) The existing end-to-end autonomous driving
framework only utilizes visual information to complete perception, prediction and planning tasks. (b) The emerging
LLM-injected autonomous driving models merely introduce
2D visual features and use time-consuming LLM for planning decision. (c) The designed scheme focuses on 3Dvision language pre-training and conducts the planning by
a language generation style.

Introduction

interpretability and difficulty in convergence. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), most schemes (Hu et al. 2022, 2023; Jiang
et al. 2023) utilize the sensor information to integrate multiple vision tasks (e.g., 3D object detection and motion prediction) in one network to enhance planning performance.
However, these vision-only approaches struggle to incorporate contextual cues for safe decision-making and require
further optimization. With the rapid development of large
language models (LLM), the outstanding reasoning ability
has attracted much interest and promoted applications in the
autonomous driving area. As presented in Fig. 1(b), several
recent methods (Xu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023b) introduce multi-modal large language models (MLLM) to produce driving explanations and language-injected planning
results. Nonetheless, these models pre-trained on 2D visionlanguage datasets struggle with understanding the complex
3D spatial relations in driving scenarios. Therefore, several effective strategies are designed to overcome above challenges, such as directly using the detected 3D bounding box-

Autonomous driving is a challenging task that requires a
profound understanding about the surrounding environment
of autonomous vehicles to ensure safety and efficient realworld deployment. An excellent autonomous driving system
must have the capacity to comprehensively perceive the driving environment and precisely make the planning decision
based on the road information.
Recently, several end-to-end autonomous driving frameworks are proposed and achieve promising results, by understanding the driving scenes with sensor data and outputting planning decisions. Some early methods (Codevilla et al. 2019; Prakash, Chitta, and Geiger 2021) directly obtain the predicted planning trajectories without thorough understanding of driving scenes, resulting in limited
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4950

