The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Moonshine: Distilling Game Content Generators into Steerable Generative Models
Yuhe Nie* 1 , Michael Middleton* 1 , Tim Merino1 Nidhushan Kanagaraja1 Ashutosh Kumar1
Zhan Zhuang†2,3 Julian Togelius†1
1

New York University Game Innovation Lab, Brooklyn, New York, USA
2
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR China
yn2273@nyu.edu, Michael.Middleton@nyu.edu, tm3477@nyu.edu, nk3755@nyu.edu, ak10514@nyu.edu,
12250063@mail.sustech.edu.cn, Julian@Togelius.com
Abstract

in its simplest form, controllability can be selecting a map
size or number of enemies. While this basic level of control may be suitable for some applications, it can be limiting in others. On the opposite end of the spectrum is textconditioned content generation. In this form, any idea that
can be expressed through natural language can serve as guidance for a generator. The rise of Text-to-Image (T2I) models
has demonstrated the value of such flexible means of control over content generation. While Text-to-Image capabilities have improved massively in recent years, these models
are not well suited for many game-content generation tasks,
where each game has a unique set of constraints.
Procedural Content Generation via Machine Learning
(PCGML) (Summerville et al. 2018) uses machine learning models to learn from existing game content and generate diverse artifacts. However, a common challenge for
PCGML methods is the lack of quality data for training. This
challenge is exacerbated when training controllable generators, which require diverse and descriptive labels for the
data. To enable text-conditioned PCGML, the demand for
large, richly labeled datasets becomes even greater. Data labeling, requiring significant human labor, is often infeasible
for most game developers.
To address this hurdle, we propose a novel approach that
integrates traditional PCG algorithms with the capabilities
of Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate large synthetic datasets for text-conditioned PCGML. Specifically,
we leverage the PCG algorithm from the game Brogue
(Walker 2019) to create a diverse collection of game maps
and automatically generate descriptive labels for each, referenced from a small set of human examples. This synthetic dataset is then used to train two Text-to-game-Map
(T2M) generative models: the Five-Dollar Model (Merino
et al. 2023), which is a feed-forward model, and a Discrete
Diffusion Model, which will be explained in detail in this
paper. The outputs of these models are evaluated through
both quantitative and qualitative metrics. Ultimately, our approach enables generative models to replicate the behavior
of a black-box PCG algorithm using only its generated artifacts, while incorporating natural language text conditioning.
This approach can be viewed as a form of knowledge distillation —— traditionally used to transfer the capabilities of

Procedural Content Generation via Machine Learning
(PCGML) has enhanced game content creation, yet challenges in controllability and limited training data persist. This
study addresses these issues by distilling a constructive PCG
algorithm into a controllable PCGML model. We first generate a large amount of content with a constructive algorithm
and label it using a Large Language Model (LLM). We use
these synthetic labels to condition two PCGML models for
content-specific generation, the Five-Dollar Model and the
Discrete Diffusion Model. This neural network distillation
process ensures that the generation aligns with the original algorithm while introducing controllability through plain text.
We define this text-conditioned PCGML as a Text-to-gameMap (T2M) task, offering an alternative to prevalent text-toimage multi-modal tasks. We compare our distilled models
with the baseline constructive algorithm. Our analysis of the
variety, accuracy, and quality of our generation demonstrates
the efficacy of distilling constructive methods into controllable text-conditioned PCGML models.

Keywords: Procedural Content Generation, Synthesis Generation, Multimodal Machine Learning, Text-to-game-Map
Generation
Datasets —
huggingface.co/datasets/DolphinNie/dungeon-dataset

Introduction
Procedural Content Generation (PCG) is crucial to many
types of video games, including roguelikes and other games
that are designed around infinite content variety. PCG is also
important for empowering users and designers to create various types of game content. Many games feature generators
for content such as quests, maps, levels, and items. These
generators are built on different algorithms and underlying
principles, including search, constraint satisfaction, machine
learning, and hand-crafted rules.
An important concern in content generation is controllability. Many content generators feature this to some degree;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14344

