The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UrbanWaste: In-the-Bin Dataset for Waste Disposal Inspection with
Multi-Granularity Hierarchical Labels
Zhuoqi Ma1,2 , Zejun You1,2 , Yang Dong1,2 , Yukai Liu2 , Xiyue Gao2 , Qiguang Miao1,2 *
1

Xi’an Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Vision
2
School of Computer Science and Technology
Xidian University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710126, China
zhuoqima@xidian.edu.cn, qgmiao@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

ing and disposal can significantly reduce the burden of manual handling downstream and improve recycling efficiency.
However, due to insufficient oversight, some residents fail
to adhere to standard classification procedures. As a result, a
significant portion of waste sorting still depends on manual
labor, which is both inefficient and poses health risks due to
extended exposure to hazardous or unsanitary materials.
This issue has already attracted widespread attention.
Some cities have hired supervisors to monitor residents’
waste classification. This manual supervision is not only
costly, but adversely affect the health of the supervisors. Additionally, Qiu et al. (Qiu et al. 2022) have proposed using
X-ray technology to inspect garbage bags. Although X-rays
have excellent penetration capabilities, installing the equipment at every community disposal point would require a significant financial investment. Moreover, requiring residents
to run their trash through an X-ray machine before disposal
can be overly cumbersome.
Recent advancements in object detection and segmentation have spurred the development of waste classification
algorithms (Mittal et al. 2016; Rabano et al. 2018; Ruiz
et al. 2019), aimed at identifying misclassified waste objects. However, the limited data and label abundance in existing datasets have significantly constrained the practicality of these methods. Some waste classification datasets feature clean, uncluttered backgrounds (Thung and Yang 2016;
Koskinopoulou et al. 2021), which poses generalization
challenges for models trained solely on such data when applied to realistic waste management systems. Furthermore,
several in-the-wild datasets primarily focus on the classification of a few recyclable waste categories (Bashkirova et al.
2022; Proença, Quintas, and Dias 2020; Koskinopoulou
et al. 2021), thus failing to encompass the diverse range of
urban waste categories.
These observations inspired us to propose UrbanWaste,
an image dataset focusing on in-the-bin waste detection and
segmentation, as illustrated in Figure 1. UrbanWaste comprises 25,254 images taken from inside garbage bins in actual residential areas. Based on the household waste classification guidelines in Shanghai, China (Zhou et al. 2019), we
establish a hierarchical labeling system and annotated solid
objects, with finally an average of 5.54 labeled instances per
image. UrbanWaste is designed to mirror the real-world di-

Our world faces the challenge of efficiently and responsibly
managing the ever-growing volume of urban waste. Many
countries and regions have implemented categorized trash
bins and require residents to sort their waste according to
specified criteria. Proper waste classification by residents significantly reduces the workload in the waste disposal process. However, due to the lack of effective supervision during classification, the quality of waste sorting is often compromised. This misclassification can lead to higher pollution risks, lower recycling rates, and increased waste management costs and difficulties. To address this issue, we propose using images captured from within trash bins to supervise garbage delivery. We introduce UrbanWaste, an image
dataset specifically designed for in-the-bin waste detection
and segmentation. The dataset includes 25,254 RGB images
and 140,008 annotated items, featuring dense annotations and
multi-granularity labels across 193 distinct waste categories.
We evaluated state-of-the-art segmentation models to understand their generalization and performance on UrbanWaste.
Based on this dataset, we developed a comprehensive workflow for waste classification inspection, which has been deployed in real-world districts to assess the system’s effectiveness. We hope UrbanWaste will inspire new directions in AI
research for environmental sustainability.

Dataset — https://github.com/zma029/UrbanWaste

Introduction
As urbanization and population growth accelerate globally,
the surge in urban waste is putting significant pressure on
urban infrastructure and living environments. Governments
and organizations are compelled to adopt more robust measures, such as waste sorting systems and recycling initiatives. However, improper waste management reduces recycling efficiency and increases costs of downstream waste
processing. Faced with the escalating waste crisis, devising
effective waste sorting and management strategies to mitigate environmental impacts is an urgent priority.
In the waste management pipeline, the first step is the
sorting of residential waste. Proper household waste sort* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28231

