The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Generalizable Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection via Perspective
Rendering
Hao Lu1,2 , Yunpeng Zhang3 , Guoqing Wang4 , Qing Lian2 , Dalong Du3 , Yingcong Chen1,2,*
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
PhiGent Robotics
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract

gained tremendous attention for the MC3D-Det task (Ma
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022; Jiang et al. 2024). Despite the efficacy of multicamera information fusion strategies, their performance
drops severely when the testing environment is significantly
different from the training ones.
Two promising directions to alleviate the aforementioned
challenge are domain generalization (DG) and unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA). DG methods typically
disentangle and eliminate the domain-specific features
to improve the generalization capability of unseen
domains (Wang et al. 2023a). As for UDA, recent
advancements address the domain shifts by generating
pseudo labels (Li et al. 2022c; Yuan et al. 2023; Yang et al.
2021; Sun et al. 2024; Cheng and Sun 2024; Jiang et al.
2022) or aligning latent features distribution (Xu et al.
2023b; Wang et al. 2023d; Sun 2024). However, the limited
availability of training data across various viewpoints,
camera settings, and environmental conditions poses a
formidable challenge for visual perception striving to learn
robust perspective- and environment-independent features.
Our observations indicate that 2D detection in a
single-view (camera plane) often demonstrates better
generalization capabilities than multi-camera 3D object
detection on the BEV plane, primarily due to inaccurate
depth estimation, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). However,
directly establishing 2D-to-3D consistency in cross-domain
scenarios faces the following challenges: (1) Relying solely
on existing viewpoints in the source domain for supervision
hampers the network to learn perspective-invariant features,
especially for different camera parameters (Lian et al. 2022;
Yang et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023e). Hence, leveraging the
results of 3D projection is necessary to constrain rendering
from a broader range of viewpoints. (2) Due to the absence
of 2D supervision in the target domain, it is essential to
employ a robust 2D detector.
To address the aforementioned issues, we rethink the two
key steps in MC3D-Det task: multi-view image features
extraction and BEV space transformation. These steps are
prone to overfitting due to limited viewpoints, camera
parameters, and similar environments, leading to a sharp
decrease in generalization performance on cross-domain
protocols. We turn these above spatial biases into the bias
of a single perspective and define it as the perspective bias.

Detecting and localizing objects in 3D space using multiple
cameras, known as Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection
(MC3D-Det), has gained prominence with the advent
of bird’s-eye view (BEV) approaches. However, these
methods often struggle with the serious domain gaps
caused by various viewpoints and environments between
the training and testing domains. To address this challenge,
we propose a novel framework that aligns 3D detection
with 2D camera plane results by perspective rendering,
thus achieving consistent and accurate results when facing
serious domain shifts. Our approach consists of two main
steps in both source and target domains: 1) rendering
diverse view maps from BEV features by leveraging implicit
foreground volumes and 2) rectifying the perspective bias
of these maps. This design promotes the learning of
perspective- and context-independent features, crucial for
accurate object detection across varying viewpoints, camera
parameters, and environmental conditions. Notably, our
model-agnostic approach preserves the original network
structure without incurring additional inference costs,
facilitating seamless integration across various models and
simplifying deployment. Worth noting is that our approach
achieves satisfactory results in real data when trained
only with virtual datasets, eliminating the need for real
scene annotations. Experimental results on both Domain
Generalization (DG) and Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA) demonstrate its effectiveness.
Code —
https://github.com/EnVision-Research/Generalizable-BEV

Introduction
Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection (MC3D-Det) refers to
the task of detecting and localizing objects in 3D space using
multiple cameras (Ma et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022a). Through
the complementary information of multi-view images from
various perspectives, MC3D-Det emerges as a potent
approach, yielding heightened precision and robust object
detection results, especially in scenarios where objects may
be occluded or partially visible from certain viewpoints.
In recent years, bird’s-eye view (BEV) approaches have
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5811

