The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Incomplete Multi-View Multi-Label Classification via Diffusion-Guided
Redundancy Removal
Shilong Ou1 , Zhe Xue1 * , Lixiong Qin1 , Yawen Li1 , Meiyu Liang1 , Junjiang Wu1 , Xuyun Zhang2 ,
Amin Beheshti2 , Yuankai Qi2 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Macquarie University, Australia
{osl, xuezhe, lxqin, meiyu1210, wujunjiang}@bupt.edu.cn, {xuyun.zhang, amin.beheshti, yuankai.qi}@mq.edu.au,
warmly0716@126.com
Abstract

stance, the RGB and HSV views of the same scene possess a large amount of similar structural information. At
the same time, each view inevitably contains noise, therefore, more views do not mean better performance. We define
this observation as the view redundancy phenomenon. Thus,
identifying and removing redundant views is important for
achieving better final performance. RMVC (Tao et al. 2018)
employs the squared χ2 distance for clustering, aiming to
ensure that the performance of multiple views is not inferior to that of a single view; DSMVC (Tang and Liu 2022)
proposes a method for safely adding views, by discarding
newly added views that contain more noise than supplementary information, thus reducing the performance degradation
brought by increasing the number of views. These methods
alleviate the issue of redundant views, but they overlook the
difference in each individual data.
On the other hand, MVMLC often encounters the issue of incomplete views or incomplete labels in real-world
datasets. For example, a particular view of an image may be
missing due to damage to the sensor, and multimedia content on social platforms can be under-annotated by users. To
tackle the challenges of incomplete views and incomplete
labels, recent innovations include the development of deep
contrastive networks (Trosten et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2023a),
transformer (Liu et al. 2023b) and deep graph-based networks (Li et al. 2024). These methods proficiently handle
the incomplete multi-view multi-label data within datasets;
however, they still fail to make full use of the data distribution knowledge inherent in the views and labels present in
the datasets, rendering them unable to overcome the performance limitations introduced by incompleteness.
To address these issues, we introduce DiffSumm, a
redundancy-driven diffusion model for multi-view multilabel classification. Specifically, we design a view encoding module to transform the original views into latent space
vectors for multi-label classification, referred to as summary vectors. Subsequently, we design a label-guided diffusion module to recover summary vectors for data containing
missing views. Thereafter, we design a redundant view identification strategy that utilizes the synthetic summary vectors
and their pseudo-labels to identify and remove redundant
views, and then regenerates new synthetic summary vectors
and pseudo-labels with the removed versions to manifest
the data distribution knowledge of the synthetic summary

Incomplete multi-view multi-label classification aims to accurately predict labels for each sample in the face of some
missing views. Due to its widespread presence in real-world
scenarios, it has become an extensively researched topic. In
addition to the challenges brought by missing views, it also
encounters issues caused by redundant views, whose inclusion fails to make a positive contribution to performance. In
this paper, we make the first attempt to take advantage of
diffusion models to address the missing view problem and
design a strategy to identify and remove redundant views.
Specifically, we train a diffusion model conditioned on the
pseudo-labels to recover information of missing views. The
learned diffusion model can carry data distribution knowledge in training split to the data. Regarding redundant identification strategy, it is designed by considering both the additional information of views and the classification difficulty
level of samples, thereby adaptively identifying and removing
redundant views. We conduct extensive experiments on five
datasets, and the proposed method achieves favorable performance against several state-of-the-art methods on the multiview multi-label classification task.

Introduction
Multi-view data, which involves the collection of data from
different media, is ubiquitously present in the real world
(Zhang et al. 2013b; Wang et al. 2021). Multi-label data
(Sun et al. 2024), capable of representing complex relationships in the real world, is also becoming prevalent. Based on
the characteristics of the data, multi-view multi-label learning is proposed (Fang and Zhang 2012), where the data under this scenario includes information from multiple views
while concurrently belonging to several categories. Multiview multi-label learning has garnered considerable research
interest (Liu et al. 2015; Tan et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2022).
Among this, the problem of multi-view multi-label classification (MVMLC) stands as a primary focus of investigation.
It necessitates the extraction of features from the views and
the fusion of these features, followed by mapping them onto
the label space.
In real-world scenarios, observations from different views
of an object or event are not entirely independent. For in* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19758

