The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MergeNet: Knowledge Migration across Heterogeneous Models, Tasks, and
Modalities
Kunxi Li1 * , Tianyu Zhan1 * , Kairui Fu1 * , Shengyu Zhang1† , Kun Kuang1 ,
Jiwei Li1 , Zhou Zhao1 , Fan Wu2 , Fei Wu1
1
Zhejiang University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{kunxili,3200105641,fukairui.fkr, sy zhang, kunkuang, jiwei li, zhaozhou, wufei}@zju.edu.cn,fwu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
2

(a) Knowledge Distillation

Abstract

Teacher Prediction

In this study, we focus on heterogeneous knowledge transfer across entirely different model architectures, tasks, and
modalities. Existing knowledge transfer methods (e.g., backbone sharing, knowledge distillation) often hinge on shared
elements within model structures or task-specific features/labels, limiting transfers to complex model types or tasks.
To overcome these challenges, we present MergeNet, which
learns to bridge the gap of parameter spaces of heterogeneous
models, facilitating the direct interaction, extraction, and application of knowledge within these parameter spaces. The
core mechanism of MergeNet lies in the parameter adapter,
which operates by querying the source model’s low-rank parameters and adeptly learning to identify and map parameters into the target model. MergeNet is learned alongside both
models, allowing our framework to dynamically transfer and
adapt knowledge relevant to the current stage, including the
training trajectory knowledge of the source model. Extensive
experiments on heterogeneous knowledge transfer demonstrate significant improvements in challenging settings, where
representative approaches may falter or prove less applicable.

or

Feature
Map
Feature
Map

Feature
KD

(b) Backbone Sharing

Logit
KD

Parameter
Sharing

or

Student Prediction

(c) MergeNet

Parameters

(d)
Base

any

67

Parameter Sharing
KD

Heterogeneous
Knowledge Transfer

Parameter
Adapter

65

MergeNet

63
Parameters

61

Figure 1: (a)-(c): Compare knowledge distillation, backbone
sharing, and our proposed MergeNet. The orange arrows
represent the flow of knowledge. (d): The parameter sharing
method is ineffective for heterogeneous knowledge transfer,
and in fact, may lead to a loss of accuracy due to the incompatibility of knowledge.

Introduction
In an era where edge computing devices are ubiquitous,
the deployment of deep neural networks (DNNs) on such
devices is often constrained by limited computational resources and storage capacity. This limitation typically necessitates the utilization of smaller neural network architectures, which, while computationally economical, often compromise performance. A promising approach to mitigate this
limitation involves the strategic transfer of knowledge from
larger, more capable models to these constrained counterparts. A prime example of this approach is knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al. 2015; Beyer et al. 2022; Shen et al.
2021). This technique involves training a compact student
model to mimic the output logic or intermediate layer representations of a more comprehensive teacher model, thereby
improving its accuracy. Transfer learning (Zhuang et al.
2020; He et al. 2021; HassanPour Zonoozi and Seydi 2023)
offers another approach, commonly through the pre-training

and fine-tuning workflow, where knowledge learned during
pre-training on large-scale datasets is applied to downstream
tasks via backbone sharing. However, these methods typically require similar task types or model architectures, which
can limit their applicability. For instance, in diverse Internet of Things (IoT) applications, devices often face varying
computational resources and tasks, making it difficult to find
matching models for knowledge transfer. Therefore, facilitating heterogeneous knowledge transfer across different
model architectures, tasks, and modalities remains a pressing challenge that needs to be addressed.
Unlike previous methods, we consider knowledge transfer
between models from a different perspective. We focus on
the inherent properties of model parameters, regarding them
as the natural carriers of knowledge. An intuitive method
is to adopt the idea of parameter sharing, similar to Cai
et al. (2021) by putting the smaller model into the larger
one, making it a subset of the larger model for additional
supervision. We test the effectiveness of parameter sharing on two models with different architectures, ResNet50

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4824

