The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Counterexample Guided Program Repair Using Zero-Shot Learning and
MaxSAT-based Fault Localization
Pedro Orvalho1 * , Mikoláš Janota2 , Vasco M. Manquinho3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
2
CIIRC, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czechia
3
INESC-ID, IST, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
pedro.orvalho@cs.ox.ac.uk, mikolas.janota@cvut.cz, vasco.manquinho@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Abstract

ence courses, providing personalized and timely feedback
on introductory programming assignments (IPA S) and software projects has become a significant challenge, requiring
substantial time and effort from faculty (Orvalho, Janota,
and Manquinho 2024c, 2022b).
Automated Program Repair (APR) has emerged as a
promising solution to this challenge, aiming to deliver automated, comprehensive, and personalized feedback to students about their programming errors (Gulwani, Radicek,
and Zuleger 2018; Ahmed et al. 2022; Wang, Singh, and
Su 2018; Hu et al. 2019). Traditional semantic APR techniques based on Formal Methods (FM), while providing
high-quality fixes, are often slow and may struggle when
the correct implementation diverges significantly from the
erroneous one (Contractor and Rivero 2022). These APR approaches do not guarantee minimal repairs, as they align an
incorrect submission with a correct implementation for the
same IPA. If the alignment is not possible, these tools return
a structural mismatch error, leaving the program unrepaired.
In the past decade, there has been a surge in Machine Learning (ML) techniques for APR (Gupta et al. 2017; Mesbah
et al. 2019; Gupta, Kanade, and Shevade 2019; Yasunaga
and Liang 2020; Rolim et al. 2017; Pu et al. 2016; Bhatia,
Kohli, and Singh 2018; Orvalho et al. 2023). ML-based approaches require multiple correct implementations to generate high-quality repairs, and need considerable time and resources to train on correct programs. While these approaches
generate repairs more quickly, they often produce imprecise
and non-minimal fixes (Wang, Singh, and Su 2018).
More recently, Large Language Models (LLM S) trained
on code (LLMC S) have shown great potential in generating
program fixes (Joshi et al. 2023; Xia, Ding, and Zhang 2023;
Jin et al. 2023; Wei, Xia, and Zhang 2023; Fan et al. 2023;
Xia, Wei, and Zhang 2023; Zhang et al. 2024; Phung et al.
2023). LLM-based APR can be performed using zero-shot
learning (Xia and Zhang 2022), few-shot learning (Zhang
et al. 2024) or fine-tuned models (Jin et al. 2023). Finetuned models are the most commonly used, where the model
is trained for a specific task. Conversely, zero-shot learning refers to the ability of a model to correctly perform a
task without having seen any examples of that task during
training. Few-shot learning refers to the LLM S’s ability to
perform tasks correctly with only a small number of examples provided. Furthermore, the ability to generalize using

Automated Program Repair (APR) for introductory programming assignments (IPA S) is motivated by the large number
of student enrollments in programming courses each year.
Since providing feedback on programming assignments requires substantial time and effort from faculty, personalized automated feedback often involves suggesting repairs
to students’ programs. Symbolic semantic repair approaches,
which rely on Formal Methods (FM), check a program’s execution against a test suite or reference solution, are effective but limited. These tools excel at identifying buggy parts
but can only fix programs if the correct implementation and
the faulty one share the same control flow graph. Conversely,
Large Language Models (LLM S) are used for program repair
but often make extensive rewrites instead of minimal adjustments. This tends to lead to more invasive fixes, making it
harder for students to learn from their mistakes. In summary,
LLM S excel at completing strings, while FM-based fault localization excel at identifying buggy parts of a program.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach that combines the
strengths of both FM-based fault localization and LLM S, via
zero-shot learning, to enhance APR for IPA S. Our method
uses MaxSAT-based fault localization to identify buggy parts
of a program, then presents the LLM with a program sketch
devoid of these buggy statements. This hybrid approach follows a Counterexample Guided Inductive Synthesis (CEGIS)
loop to iteratively refine the program. We ask the LLM to
synthesize the missing parts, which are then checked against
a test suite. If the suggested program is incorrect, a counterexample from the test suite is fed back to the LLM for revised
synthesis. Our experiments on 1,431 incorrect student programs show that our counterexample guided approach, using
MaxSAT-based bug-free program sketches, significantly improves the repair capabilities of all six evaluated LLM S. This
method allows LLM S to repair more programs and produce
smaller fixes, outperforming other configurations and stateof-the-art symbolic program repair tools.

Code — https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14517771

Introduction
Every year, thousands of students enroll in programmingoriented courses. With the rapid growth of Computer Sci* Part of this work was conducted at INESC-ID, IST, UL.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

649

