The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Content-Aware Balanced Spectrum Encoding in Masked Modeling for Time Series
Classification
Yudong Han1,2 * , Haocong Wang1 * , Yupeng Hu1† , Yongshun Gong1 , Xuemeng Song3 , Weili Guan4
1

School of Software, Shandong University,
2
Beijing Institute of Technology,
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University,
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{hanyudong.sdu, sduwhc, sxmustc, honeyguan}@gmail.com, {huyupeng, ysgong}@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract
Due to the superior ability of global dependency, transformer
and its variants have become the primary choice in Masked
Time-series Modeling (MTM) towards time-series classification task. In this paper, we experimentally analyze that existing transformer-based MTM methods encounter with two
under-explored issues when dealing with time series data: (1)
they encode features by performing long-dependency ensemble averaging, which easily results in rank collapse and feature homogenization as the layer goes deeper; (2) they exhibit distinct priorities in fitting different frequency components contained in the time-series, inevitably leading to spectrum energy imbalance of encoded feature. To tackle these
issues, we propose an auxiliary content-aware balanced decoder (CBD) to optimize the encoding quality in the spectrum space within masked modeling scheme. Specifically, the
CBD iterates on a series of fundamental blocks, and thanks
to two tailored units, each block could progressively refine
the masked representation via adjusting the interaction pattern based on local content variations of time-series and learning to recalibrate the energy distribution across different frequency components. Moreover, a dual-constraint loss is devised to enhance the mutual optimization of vanilla decoder
and our CBD. Extensive experimental results on ten timeseries classification datasets show that our method nearly surpasses a bunch of baselines. Meanwhile, a series of explanatory results are showcased to sufficiently demystify the behaviors of our method.

Figure 1: (a) Comparison of rank of interaction matrix across
different layers of the encoder in vanilla MTM and our
method; (b) Energy distribution comparison of raw data, reconstructed results of vanilla MTM, and that of our method.

et al. 2022), Masked Time-series Modeling (MTM), randomly masks a portion of input timestamps, and then reconstructs the invisible timestamps based on the visible ones.
Recently, transformer and its variants have become the predominant choice in MTM, and achieve new state-of-theart performance on various classification benchmarks (Dong
et al. 2023; Cheng et al. 2023). This greatly attributes to
its powerful modeling ability of long-range dependency between different timestamps, which facilitates learning the
context-aware feature.
Despite their promising performance towards representation learning, these transformer-based methods overlook
two potential problems: (1) feature homogenization. Several studies (Dong, Cordonnier, and Loukas 2021; Han
et al. 2023a, 2024) point out that the feature encoded
by transformer-based backbone easily incurs rank collapse
due to the long-dependency ensemble averaging (Park and
Kim 2022), and we experimentally conclude that this phenomenon also exists when encoding the time-series data.
As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), we showcase the learned interaction matrix and calculate their ranks from the encoder
of vanilla MTM (Vaswani et al. 2017) and our improved
method. We observe that vanilla MTM tends to produce
low-rank features, which manifests to encode homogenized
information and lacks sufficient semantic richness. (2) energy imbalance. Based on frequency principle (Xu 2020;
Rahaman et al. 2019) and architecture-induced frequency
preference (Park and Kim 2022), we observe that vanilla

Introduction
Time-series representation learning has emerged as a fundamental and preposed task for time-series analysis. Different from supervised learning (Han et al. 2023b, 2021;
Hu et al. 2021a,b, 2024), which heavily relies on humanlabeled ground truth, self-supervised learning (Nie et al.
2022; Tonekaboni, Eytan, and Goldenberg 2021; Ozyurt,
Feuerriegel, and Zhang 2022) has shown its flexibility using the intrinsic characteristic of data itself towards scalable representation learning. The widely embraced scheme
that initially introduced from computer vision domain (He
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17059

