The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generating Counterfactual Explanations Under Temporal Constraints
Andrei Buliga1,2 * , Chiara Di Francescomarino3 * , Chiara Ghidini2 * , Marco Montali2 * ,
Massimiliano Ronzani1 *
1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive, 18, POVO - 38123, Trento, Italy
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, via Bruno Buozzi, 1 - 39100, Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
3
University of Trento, Via Sommarive, 9, 38123 Trento, Italy
{abuliga, mronzani}@fbk.eu, c.difrancescomarino@unitn.it, {chiara.ghidini, marco.montali}@unibz.it
2

Abstract

of interest. State-of-the-art counterfactual generation methods often rely on optimisation techniques to find minimal
changes to inputs leading to altering the predicted outcome.
Existing methods do not readily apply to temporal domains, such as that of process mining (van der Aalst 2016),
where data of interest consists of traces of activities generated by executing a business/work process or a plan. Such
so-called process traces (Fionda and Greco 2018) are increasingly used in key domains like healthcare, business,
and industrial processes, where the sequencing of activities is central. The main issue in these settings is that not
all sequencings of activities make sense: traces are typically
subject to temporal constraints, that is, must comply with
temporal background knowledge expressing which dynamics are possible and which not. E.g., in a healthcare process
a patient may enter triage only upon giving privacy consent.
Systematic solutions for generating counterfactual explanations that comply with temporal background knowledge
are still lacking (Buliga et al. 2023). This is a problem
in areas such as Predictive Process Monitoring (PPM) (Di
Francescomarino and Ghidini 2022), a widely established
framework in process mining. Here, black-box predictive
models are typically used to predict the outcome of executions of business and work processes, often making interpretability a challenge. Integrating counterfactual explanations into such monitoring frameworks can enhance understanding by providing alternative trace executions to reach
a more favourable outcome, only upon guaranteeing that
such explanations make sense, that is, comply with temporal
background knowledge.
To tackle this open problem, we propose a novel optimisation based approach for generating temporally constrained
counterfactual traces, that is, counterfactual process traces
that are guaranteed to comply with temporal background
knowledge. To express such knowledge, we take the natural
choice of adopting LTLp , a temporal logic specifically designed for process traces (Fionda and Greco 2018), starting
from the well established formalism of linear temporal logic
on finite traces (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). The backbone of our approach consists in infusing automata-theoretic
techniques for LTLp /LTLf (De Giacomo et al. 2022) within a
Genetic Algorithm (GA) body. In particular, given an LTLp
formula φ and a process trace τ satisfying φ, we introduce
different strategies that inspect the automaton of φ to suit-

Counterfactual explanations are one of the prominent eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) techniques, and suggest changes to input data that could alter predictions, leading
to more favourable outcomes. Existing counterfactual methods do not readily apply to temporal domains, such as that of
process mining, where data take the form of traces of activities that must obey to temporal background knowledge expressing which dynamics are possible and which not. Specifically, counterfactuals generated off-the-shelf may violate the
background knowledge, leading to inconsistent explanations.
This work tackles this challenge by introducing a novel approach for generating temporally constrained counterfactuals, guaranteed to comply by design with background knowledge expressed in Linear Temporal Logic on process traces
(LTLp ). We do so by infusing automata-theoretic techniques
for LTLp inside a genetic algorithm for counterfactual generation. The empirical evaluation shows that the generated counterfactuals are temporally meaningful and more interpretable
for applications involving temporal dependencies.

Code — https://github.com/abuliga/AAAI2025-temporalconstrained-counterfactuals

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art Machine Learning efforts prioritise accuracy
using ensemble and deep learning techniques, but their complexity makes their input-output mappings difficult to interpret. To address this, eXplainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI) techniques have emerged, which aid in the interpretation of predictions and promoting the adoption of advanced
models (Verma, Dickerson, and Hines 2020; Guidotti 2022;
Dandl et al. 2020; Beckh et al. 2023).
Counterfactual explanations (Verma, Dickerson, and
Hines 2020; Guidotti 2022) are a key eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) technique. They provide insights into
which changes should be applied to an input instance to alter the outcome of a prediction. Such explanations are hence
particularly valuable for users who need to understand how
different attributes or actions might influence an outcome
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15622

