The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ABQ-LLM: Arbitrary-Bit Quantized Inference Acceleration for Large Language
Models
Chao Zeng * † , Songwei Liu* , Yusheng Xie* , Hong Liu, Xiaojian Wang, Miao Wei,
Shu Yang, Fangmin Chen, Xing Mei ‡
ByteDance Inc, Shenzhen, China
{zengchaocs, cfangmin}@gmail.com, {liusongwei.zju, xieyusheng.12, xing.mei}@bytedance.com

Abstract

2018), cognitive processing (Xu et al. 2023a; Hardy et al.
2023), and dialogue generation(Hu et al. 2023). However,
these models are characterized by a substantial number of
parameters, posing significant challenges in terms of memory consumption and bandwidth (Zheng et al. 2024; Kim
et al. 2023).
Post-training quantization (PTQ) effectively reduces both
computational and storage requirements. This technique significantly accelerates model inference by converting the
weights and activation values of large language models
(LLMs) from high-precision floating-point numbers to lowprecision integer values for storage, and using efficient integer matrix multiplication operators to handle the bulk of matrix multiplication computations during inference. Currently,
80% of the computation and parameter access in LLMs is
concentrated on general matrix multiplication (GEMM) and
vector multiplication (GEMV) operations, especially during autoregressive decoding, where all GEMM operations
degrade into GEMV operations due to single-token generation. Consequently, the efficiency of GEMV computation
and memory access directly determines the efficiency and
power consumption of LLM inference.
To improve GEMM/GEMV memory access efficiency,
LLMs inference typically employs a quantized inference
strategy. The current mainstream approach is weight-only
quantization, where the kernel performs actual computation
based on dequantized FP16 values. However, this approach
offers limited performance improvement in highly parallel
scenarios. To further enhance quantized inference performance, the industry is pursuing full quantization of both
weights and activation values to reduce activation memory
access and leverage higher computational power using quantized kernels, such as those from NVIDIA. However, current
industry practices in weight and activation full quantization
(WA full quantization) face several limitations. NVIDIA
provides only a limited set of hardware-accelerated instructions(Lin et al. 2024a; Ashkboos et al. 2024; Zhao et al.
2024), which constrains the design space for quantization
algorithms. Other quantization combinations (e.g., W4A8 or
W2A4) require type conversion to W8A8 or W4A4 during
computation, leading to inefficiency(Lin et al. 2024b). Furthermore, due to GEMV, additional padding calculations are
required in scenarios with a batch size less than 8, resulting
in inefficient matrix multiplication for W4A4 and W8A8. Fi-

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural language processing tasks. However, their practical application is constrained by substantial memory and computational demands. Post-training quantization (PTQ) is considered an effective method to accelerate LLMs inference.
Despite its growing popularity in LLMs model compression,
PTQ deployment faces two major challenges. First, low-bit
quantization leads to performance degradation. Second, restricted by the limited integer computing unit type on GPUs,
quantized matrix operations with different precisions cannot
be effectively accelerated. To address these issues, we introduce a novel arbitrary-bit quantization algorithm and inference framework, ABQ-LLM. It achieves superior performance across various quantization settings and enables efficient arbitrary-precision quantized inference on the GPU.
ABQ-LLM introduces several key innovations: (1) a distribution correction method for transformer blocks to mitigate distribution differences caused by full quantization of
weights and activations, improving performance at low bitwidths. (2) the bit balance strategy to counteract performance
degradation from asymmetric distribution issues at very low
bit-widths (e.g., 2-bit). (3) an innovative quantization acceleration framework that reconstructs the quantization matrix
multiplication of arbitrary precision combinations based on
BTC (Binary TensorCore) equivalents, gets rid of the limitations of INT4/INT8 computing units. ABQ-LLM can convert each component bit width gain into actual acceleration
gain, maximizing performance under mixed precision(e.g.,
W6A6, W2A8). Based on W2*A8 quantization configuration on LLaMA-7B model, it achieved a WikiText2 perplexity of 7.59 (2.17↓ vs 9.76 in AffineQuant). Compared to
SmoothQuant, we realized 1.6× acceleration improvement
and 2.7× memory compression gain.

Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
(Bubeck et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023a,b) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across various natural language benchmark, including reasoning (Clark et al. 2019,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work was done when Chao Zeng was intern at ByteDance Inc.
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

22299

