The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Event-Based Semantic Segmentation via Exploiting Frame-Event Fusion:
A Hybrid Neural Network Approach
Hebei Li1 , Yansong Peng1 , Jiahui Yuan1 , Peixi Wu1 , Jin Wang1
Yueyi Zhang1, * , Xiaoyan Sun1, 2
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{lihebei, pengyansong, yuanjiahui, wupeixi, jin01wang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, sunxiaoyan}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

70

Event cameras have recently been introduced into image semantic segmentation, owing to their high temporal resolution
and other advantageous properties. However, existing eventbased semantic segmentation methods often fail to fully exploit the complementary information provided by frames and
events, resulting in complex training strategies and increased
computational costs. To address these challenges, we propose
an efficient hybrid framework for image semantic segmentation, comprising a Spiking Neural Network branch for events
and an Artificial Neural Network branch for frames. Specifically, we introduce three specialized modules to facilitate the
interaction between these two branches: the Adaptive Temporal Weighting (ATW) Injector, the Event-Driven Sparse
(EDS) Injector, and the Channel Selection Fusion (CSF)
module. The ATW Injector dynamically integrates temporal
features from event data into frame features, enhancing segmentation accuracy by leveraging critical dynamic temporal
information. The EDS Injector effectively combines sparse
event data with rich frame features, ensuring precise temporal and spatial information alignment. The CSF module selectively merges these features to optimize segmentation performance. Experimental results demonstrate that our framework not only achieves state-of-the-art accuracy across the
DDD17-Seg, DSEC-Semantic, and M3ED-Semantic datasets
but also significantly reduces energy consumption, achieving
a 65% reduction on the DSEC-Semantic dataset.

60

Ours
HALSIE

ESS-Sup (E + F)

50

# Params

E2VID

EV-Segformer
mIoU (%)

1

EVDistill ESS

5M 10M 15M 20M

DTL

40
30

ANN + DA
ANN + SL
SNN + SL
ANN + SNN + SL

Spiking-Deeplab

20

EV-Transfer
20

40

60

80

100

Inference Energy (mJ)

120

Figure 1: Comparison of various event-based semantic segmentation methods in terms of mIoU (%) and inference energy (mJ). DA and SL represent “domain adaptation” and
“supervised learning”, respectively.
cameras particularly well-suited for applications such as autonomous driving, augmented reality, robotic vision, and
other real-time processing tasks.
Among these applications, event-based semantic segmentation (ESS) stands out for its significance in visual perception (Alonso and Murillo 2019; Sun et al. 2022; Li et al.
2024a). However, existing ESS approaches often struggle
to fully exploit the complementary information between
frames and events. Most methods transfer information from
the image domain to the event domain (Jing et al. 2024;
Xia et al. 2023; Kong et al. 2024). However, these methods
still require complex training strategies and incur significant
computational costs due to the reliance on strong encoders.
To address these challenges, Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs) have recently emerged as a promising alternative
for processing asynchronous data (Sengupta et al. 2019;
Liao et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2022).
Unlike traditional artificial neural networks, SNNs operate
with spiking neurons that transmit information via discrete
spikes. This spiking mechanism offers several inherent advantages, including reduced energy usage, accelerated inference times, and a natural fit for handling event-driven tasks
(Akopyan et al. 2015; Davies et al. 2018; Pei et al. 2019;
Furber et al. 2014). Despite these advantages, recent studies
that apply SNNs to segmentation tasks (Kim, Chough, and

Code —
https://github.com/HebeiFast/Hybrid-Segmentation

Introduction
Event cameras (Gallego et al. 2020), also known as neuromorphic cameras, are revolutionizing computer vision by
offering a pathway to next-generation performance and efficiency. Unlike traditional frame-based cameras that capture images at fixed intervals, event cameras detect changes
in pixel-level intensity asynchronously, focusing exclusively
on the dynamic elements of visual scenes (Lichtsteiner,
Posch, and Delbruck 2008). This unique capability provides
high dynamic range and low power consumption (Gehrig
and Scaramuzza 2022; Huang et al. 2023) and makes event
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18296

