The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hypergraph Attacks via Injecting Homogeneous Nodes into Elite Hyperedges
Meixia He1 , Peican Zhu1 * , Keke Tang2,3 * , Yangming Guo4 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University
3
Huangpu Research School, Guangzhou University
4
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University
meixia he@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, ericcan@nwpu.edu.cn, tangbohutbh@gmail.com, yangming g@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract
Recent studies have shown that Hypergraph Neural Networks
(HGNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Existing approaches focus on hypergraph modification attacks guided by
gradients, overlooking node spanning in the hypergraph and
the group identity of hyperedges, thereby resulting in limited
attack performance and detectable attacks. In this manuscript,
we present a novel framework, i.e., Hypergraph Attacks via
Injecting Homogeneous Nodes into Elite Hyperedges (IEAttack), to tackle these challenges. Initially, utilizing the node
spanning in the hypergraph, we propose the elite hyperedges
sampler to identify hyperedges to be injected. Subsequently,
a node generator utilizing Kernel Density Estimation (KDE)
is proposed to generate the homogeneous node with the group
identity of hyperedges. Finally, by injecting the homogeneous
node into elite hyperedges, IE-Attack improves the attack performance and enhances the imperceptibility of attacks. Extensive experiments are conducted on five authentic datasets to
validate the effectiveness of IE-Attack and the corresponding
superiority to state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: An illustration of the attack scenarios of hypergraph. (a) The same user spans multiple chat groups and chat
groups exhibit group identity in social network. (b) Current
hypergraph attack methods only involve hypergraph modification attacks and are easily detectable.

Adversarial attacks on GNNs are divided into modification attack and injection attack according to attack techniques (Wei et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2022). In modification
attack (Chang et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2023), attackers aim to
affect the performance of GNNs by modifying the attributes
or connections of nodes and edges. Conversely, due to the
high authority required by modification attack, the injection
attack has received more attention. For instance, in social
networks, injection attacks involve create new fake accounts
without the need to compromise existing accounts, thus requiring relatively low permissions. Injection attacks (Sun
et al. 2019; Zou et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2024c) inject new
nodes or edges into the graph, introducing malicious information to degrade the performance of GNNs. Nevertheless,
researches on adversarial attacks against HGNNs are limited to the hypergraph modification attack, including HyperAttack (Hu et al. 2023) and MGHGA (Chen et al. 2023).
These methods do not further consider the phenomenon of
node spanning in the hypergraph and the group identity of
hyperedges, resulting in poor attack performance and easily
detectable attacks, as illustrated in Figure 1.
By modeling higher-order relationships in the network,
hypergraphs exhibit richer graph structural features, leading
to more limitations on hypergraph attacks. First, modifying
hypergraphs requires high authority, limiting the applicability of hypergraph modification attacks. Second, the existence of node spanning in hypergraphs (Battiston et al. 2021)
implies that when the same node appears in multiple hy-

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2024a; Liu et al.
2023; Dong et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Cheng et al.
2024b) capture intricate relationships and patterns within
graph data, facilitating tasks like node classification, recommendation systems and source detection, etc. Nevertheless, with the increasing complexity and diversity of realworld networks, attention has shifted towards higher-order
networks like hypergraphs and simplicial complexes (Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016; Battiston et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2024). Subsequently, Hypergraph Neural Networks (HGNNs) (Feng et al. 2019; Bai, Zhang, and Torr
2021) are proposed to extract higher-order features from hypergraphs, significantly improving the efficiency of downstream graph-related tasks. Despite its success, GNNs and
HGNNs have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial
attacks (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018; Bojchevski and Günnemann 2019), which has attracted increasing research interest.
* P. Zhu, K. Tang, Y. Guo are joint corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

282

