The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fair Text-to-Image Diffusion via Fair Mapping
Jia Li1, 2, 4 * , Lijie Hu1, 2, 3 * , Jingfeng Zhang2, 5 , Tianhang Zheng6,7 , Hua Zhang4 , Di Wang1, 2, 3 †
1

Provable Responsible AI and Data Analytics (PRADA) Lab
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
3
SDAIA-KAUST
4
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
University of Auckland
6
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
7
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
di.wang@kaust.edu.sa
Abstract
In this paper, we address the limitations of existing text-toimage diffusion models in generating demographically fair
results when given human-related descriptions. These models
often struggle to disentangle the target language context from
sociocultural biases, resulting in biased image generation. To
overcome this challenge, we propose Fair Mapping, a flexible, model-agnostic, and lightweight approach that modifies a
pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model by controlling the
prompt to achieve fair image generation. One key advantage
of our approach is its high efficiency. It only requires updating
an additional linear network with few parameters at a low
computational cost. By developing a linear network that maps
conditioning embeddings into a debiased space, we enable the
generation of relatively balanced demographic results based
on the specified text condition. With comprehensive experiments on face image generation, we show that our method
significantly improves image generation fairness with almost
the same image quality compared to conventional diffusion
models when prompted with descriptions related to humans.
By effectively addressing the issue of implicit language bias,
our method produces more fair and diverse image outputs.

Figure 1: Fair Mapping balances demographic biases in textto-image models by minimally adjusting training to generate
more diverse images compared to outputs of Stable Diffusion.

Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion models [Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020,
Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021] have achieved remarkable performance in various applications [Dhariwal and Nichol 2021,
Wu et al. 2022, Ceylan, Huang, and Mitra 2023, Blattmann
et al. 2023, Poole et al. 2023, Tevet et al. 2023] by involving
incorporation of textual conditional elements with language
models [Ho and Salimans 2022]. With the increasing popularity among the public, the generation of diverse images
[Ouyang, Xie, and Cheng 2022] about human-related description becomes crucial, yet it remains a challenging task [Ning,
Li, and Jianlin Su 2023, Schramowski et al. 2023, Bansal
et al. 2022]. For example, when prompted to "An image of a
computer programmer" and "An image of a confident person"
to Stable Diffusion, as exemplified in Figure 1, it is obvious
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26256

that the majority of results are white male, even if there are
no specified gender or race descriptions in textual condition.
This phenomenon demonstrates that text-to-image diffusion models learned implicit correlations between demographic visual representations and textual descriptions during
training. Real-world data is often biased and incomplete, reflecting inherent stereotypes in human perceptions [Makady
et al. 2017, Bansal et al. 2022]. When training on a dataset
that includes pairs of images and texts [Schuhmann, Beaumont, and Richard Vencu 2022, Schuhmann, Vencu, and Romain Beaumont 2021], text-to-image diffusion models face
challenges in disentangling sensitive attributes such as gender
or race, from specific prompts, which potentially introduce
during denoising and lead to societal biases in generation.
Consequently, the pressing question remains: How can
unbiased inferences be made in the face of training data
that is inherently biased? Nowadays, [Orgad, Kawar, and
Belinkov 2023, Gandikota, Orgad, and Belinkov 2024] highlight text-to-image models implicitly assume sensitive attributes from the language model, where textual condition
embeddings demonstrate an inclination towards specific demographic groups. As a result, some work [Shen, Du, and
Pang 2023, Fraser, Kiritchenko, and Nejadgholi 2023] takes
fine-tune methods to control the distribution of generated
images. However, updating the parameters of the diffusion
model with expensive data collection potentially results in

