The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AFFAKT: A Hierarchical Optimal Transport Based Method for Affective Facial
Knowledge Transfer in Video Deception Detection
Zihan Ji1 , Xuetao Tian2 , Ye Liu1 *
School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Faculty of Psychology, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
ftjizihan@mail.scut.edu.cn, xttian@bnu.edu.cn, yliu03@scut.edu.cn

ACC

Abstract
The scarcity of high-quality large-scale labeled datasets poses
a huge challenge for employing deep learning models in video
deception detection. To address this issue, inspired by the
psychological theory on the relation between deception and
expressions, we propose a novel method called AFFAKT in
this paper, which enhances the classification performance by
transferring useful and correlated knowledge from a large
facial expression dataset. Two key challenges in knowledge
transfer arise: 1) how much knowledge of facial expression
data should be transferred and 2) how to effectively leverage
transferred knowledge for the deception classification model
during inference. Specifically, the optimal relation mapping
between facial expression classes and deception samples is
firstly quantified using proposed H-OTKT module and then
transfers knowledge from the facial expression dataset to deception samples. Moreover, a correlation prototype within
another proposed module SRKB is well designed to retain
the invariant correlations between facial expression classes
and deception classes through momentum updating. During
inference, the transferred knowledge is fine-tuned with the correlation prototype using a sample-specific re-weighting strategy. Experimental results on two deception detection datasets
demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed method.
The interpretability study reveals high associations between
deception and negative affections, which coincides with the
theory in psychology.

0.7

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Train

0.6

Val

0.5

Loss

1

0.4
0.3
0

20 30 40

60
Epoch

80

100

Figure 1: ACC and loss remain unchanged after 30 epochs.
29

methods (Zhang et al. 2022; Hsiao and Sun 2022; Guo et al.
2023) employed different advanced neural networks to automatically extract powerful feature representations for video
deception detection. However, their performances highly depends on the availability of high-quality labeled real data
(Chen et al. 2019). Moreover, current datasets, e.g., Real Life
Trial (RTL) (Pérez-Rosas et al. 2015), DOLOS (Guo et al.
2023), typically contain small number of annotated samples,
which poses limitations on training deep neural networks,
thereby hindering further performance improvement. Taking
PECL(visual) on DOLOS (Guo et al. 2023) as an example
(Fig. 1, refer to appendix for detailed settings), PECL(visual)
cannot obtain enough knowledge about detecting deception
due to limited data and poor feature representation. Consequently, a key question in deception detection is how to
develop a superior deep learning based method when only
limited labeled deception data is available.
To address this issue, motivated by the insights from psychological theory and previous researches that certain facial
movements and expressions are associated with deception
(Le 2016; Zuckerman, DePaulo, and Rosenthal 1981; DePaulo et al. 2003; Zloteanu 2020), we propose a hierarchical
optimal transport (Guo et al. 2022) based method for AFfective FAcial Knowledge Transfer (AFFAKT). The objective
of AFFAKT is to transfer and leverage the knowledge properly from a large-scale video facial expression recognition
(VFER) dataset (source domain) to enhance video deception
detection (target domain) model, enabling better detection
performance. Subsequently, there are two key challenges
when transferring knowledge: 1) how much knowledge of
facial expression data should be transferred and 2) how to
effectively leverage transferred knowledge for the deception
classification model during inference.
Two modules are integrated in AFFAKT to handle these
two challenges. Firstly, Hierarchical Optimal Transport
Knowledge Transfer (H-OTKT) module is devised to auto-

Introduction
Video deception detection has attracted a huge interest in various fields including law enforcement, jurisprudence, national
security, business and interviewing (Chebbi and Jebara 2023).
In the earlier days, researchers proposed several statisticbased methods (Jaiswal, Tabibu, and Bajpai 2016; Rill-Garcı́a
et al. 2019; Mathur and Matarić 2020), which utilize facial
features, such as OpenFace (Baltrusaitis et al. 2018), action
units (Jaiswal, Tabibu, and Bajpai 2016) and face landmarks
(Rill-Garcı́a et al. 2019), to achieve classification by applying
machine learning methods on facial features with statistically
significant differences. The performance of these methods
heavily relies on the expert knowledge to construct and select valid feature sets. Hereafter, several deep learning based
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1336

