The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MSSDA: Multi-Sub-Source Domain Adaptation for Diabetic
Foot Neuropathy Recognition
Yan Zhong1 , Zhixin Yan1 , Yi Xie1 , Shibin Wu2 , Huaidong Zhang1 * , Lin Shu 1 * , Peiru Zhou3
1

South China University of Technology
2
City University of Hong Kong
3
The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University

Conventional methods with
domain adaptation

Abstract

All patients
a domain

Diabetic foot neuropathy (DFN) is a critical factor leading to
diabetic foot ulcers, which is one of the most common and
severe complications of diabetes mellitus (DM) and is associated with high risks of amputation and mortality. Despite
its significance, existing datasets do not directly derive from
plantar data and lack continuous, long-term foot-specific information. To advance DFN research, we have collected a
novel dataset comprising continuous plantar pressure data to
recognize diabetic foot neuropathy. This dataset includes data
from 94 DM patients with DFN and 41 DM patients without
DFN. Moreover, traditional methods divide datasets by individuals, potentially leading to significant domain discrepancies in some feature spaces due to the absence of mid-domain
data. In this paper, we propose an effective domain adaptation method to address this proplem. We split the dataset
based on convolutional feature statistics and select appropriate sub-source domains to enhance efficiency and avoid negative transfer. We then align the distributions of each source
and target domain pair in specific feature spaces to minimize
the domain gap. Comprehensive results validate the effectiveness of our method on both the newly proposed dataset for
DFN recognition and an existing dataset.

One domain

A patient a domain

Patient 1

Patient 2

Patient 3

Our method with domain
adaptation
Discover latent
domains and select

Domain 1 Domain 2

Domain 3
Not in usage

Model training

Model training

Model training

Figure 1: Unlike conventional methods, our method aims to
discover latent domains and use the source data with some
specific domain labels to train the model but not all of them.
high pressure in certain areas, significantly contributes to
foot ulcers, with a correlation of 70% to 90%. These studies have spurred research into wearable footwear to monitor
plantar pressure data (Wang et al. 2020; Sazonov, Hegde,
and Tang 2013) and analyze real-time changes to screen
for peripheral neuropathy early, which is crucial for preventing foot ulcers. Studies on plantar pressure abnormality detection have achieved high accuracy in intra-subject
setting using artificial neural networks (Wafai et al. 2014),
SVM (Botros et al. 2016) and backpropagation neural network (Liu 2017).
DFN is a is a specific form of DPN, primarily affecting the nervous system of the feet in diabetic patients. In
the field of diabetic foot neuropathy recognition, however,
there is no dataset specifically focused on foot information. Some datasets are constructed from electronic health
records, including age and pain-related medication prescriptions (DuBrava et al. 2017) while others include more complex indicators such as patient medical history, physical examination and biochemical test results (Lian et al. 2023).
All these datasets are not directly related to foot information, lacking continuous, long-term foot-specific information. These issues motivat us to create a dataset for DFN
recognition collected using wearable shoes, which contains
more foot-specific information. We name it DFN-DS, which
includes 5-minute continuous plantar pressure data from 94
DM patients with DFN and 41 DM patients without DFN.
Although many methods perform well under intra-subject
settings, they often perform poorly under cross-subject settings due to the significant data distribution gap between in-

Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a serious non-communicable disease and a global public health issue. According to the International Diabetes Federation (Cho et al. 2018), approximately 537 million adults worldwide had diabetes in 2021,
and this number is projected to reach 693 million by 2045.
Over 30% of diabetic patients will develop diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN), with the incidence increasing with
age (van Schie 2008; Carls et al. 2011). DPN affects the autonomic, sensory, and motor nervous systems, compromising skin integrity and sensation in the feet, thereby increasing susceptibility to injury and diabetic foot ulcers (DFU)
(Fernando et al. 2013).
Early screening and proactive management can prevent
45% to 85% of foot ulcers (Association et al. 1999). Researches (Coppini et al. 2001; Kastenbauer et al. 2001) indicate that uneven plantar pressure distribution, particularly
* Corresponding author:{huaidongz, shul}@scut.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22893

