The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ACCon: Angle-Compensated Contrastive Regularizer for Deep Regression
Botao Zhao∗ , Xiaoyang Qu* , Zuheng Kang, Junqing Peng, Jing Xiao, Jianzong Wang†
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
jzwang@188.com, zhao_bot@163.com,
{quxiaoyang343, kangzuheng896, pengjq, xiaojing661}@pingan.com.cn

Abstract
In deep regression, capturing the relationship among continuous labels in feature space is a fundamental challenge that
has attracted increasing interest. Addressing this issue can prevent models from converging to suboptimal solutions across
various regression tasks, leading to improved performance,
especially for imbalanced regression and under limited sample
sizes. However, existing approaches often rely on order-aware
representation learning or distance-based weighting. In this
paper, we hypothesize a linear negative correlation between
label distances and representation similarities in regression
tasks. To implement this, we propose an angle-compensated
contrastive regularizer for deep regression, which adjusts the
cosine distance between anchor and negative samples within
the contrastive learning framework. Our method offers a plugand-play compatible solution that extends most existing contrastive learning methods for regression tasks. Extensive experiments and theoretical analysis demonstrate that our proposed
angle-compensated contrastive regularizer not only achieves
competitive regression performance but also excels in data
efficiency and effectiveness on imbalanced datasets.

Introduction
Regression, a fundamental machine learning task, is employed when the prediction target is continuous. In the last
ten years, deep regression has emerged as a more effective
approach than traditional regression methods across various
domains, including computer vision (Wang, Sanchez, and Li
2022), natural language process (Chandrasekaran and Mago
2021). Recent studies in deep regression have predominantly
focused on developing network structures for specific application scenarios (Lee et al. 2021; Chen, Ma, and Lin 2021;
Tabelini et al. 2021). However, these task-specific architectures are difficult to adapt to different tasks or domains, which
remains a non-trivial research question.
A in-depth examination of deep regression by (Lathuilière
et al. 2019) revealed that a well-tuned general-purpose network can achieve results close to the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
models, potentially obviating the need for more intricate and
specialized regression models. In a standard deep regression
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22750

learning (SDL) task, the representation is first extracted by
the backbone network and subsequently processed by passing
through a fully connected layer to generate the prediction for
the target. The mean squared error (MSE) loss (Lathuilière
et al. 2019) is broadly acknowledged as the most frequently
utilized loss function in deep regression. Additionally, researchers have explored alternative loss functions, including
L1 loss, Huber loss (Huber 1992), Tukey loss (Belagiannis
et al. 2015). In an SDL, enhancing the quality of learned
representations is a key approach to improving performance.
Given the continuous nature of regression targets, recent research in representation learning has increasingly focused on capturing the nuanced relationships within the label space. These methods can be broadly categorized into:
order-aware (Gong, Mori, and Tung 2022; Zha et al. 2024),
and distance-aware approaches (Keramati, Meng, and Evans
2024; Dai et al. 2021). Order-aware methods typically rely
on ranking-based techniques to constrain models to obtain
order-aware representations. However, these methods have
a major flaw (Fig. 1 (A), first row), as regression targets
involve not only order information but also distance information (Fig. 1 (A), second row). For example, consider face
images with ages 2, 21, 46, and 80; ranking-based methods would generally assign these labels’ representations to a
scale with equal intervals, which might incorrectly reflect the
true relationships among them. Distance-aware methods, on
the other hand, aim to maintain the representation similarity
among samples proportional to their corresponding label distances. Current distance-aware approaches commonly apply
weighted cosine similarity between the anchor and negative
pairs within the contrastive learning framework (Keramati,
Meng, and Evans 2024; Dai et al. 2021). However, we posit
that direct weighting may not be optimal due to the nonlinearity of the cosine function. This nonlinearity can lead
to unevenly distributed representations on the hypersphere,
potentially distorting the relationship between labels and features. In this paper, we introduce angle compensation as a
refinement to direct weighting, aiming to advance distanceaware representation learning in regression tasks through a
more nuanced and effective approach.
To this end, we considered building upon supervised contrastive learning (SupCon), an approach that has seen rapid
development with numerous notable contributions (Ermolov
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2020). As shown in

