The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Frequency-Aware Density Control via Reparameterization for High-Quality
Rendering of 3D Gaussian Splatting
Zhaojie Zeng1 , Yuesong Wang1 * , Lili Ju2 , Tao Guan1
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Mathematics, University of South Carolina, USA
zhaojiezeng@hust.edu.cn, yuesongwang@hust.edu.cn, ju@math.sc.edu, qd gt@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
By adaptively controlling the density and generating more
Gaussians in regions with high-frequency information, 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) can better represent scene details.
From the signal processing perspective, representing details
usually needs more Gaussians with relatively smaller scales.
However, 3DGS currently lacks an explicit constraint linking the density and scale of 3D Gaussians across the domain, leading to 3DGS using improper-scale Gaussians to
express frequency information, resulting in the loss of accuracy. In this paper, we propose to establish a direct relation
between density and scale through the reparameterization of
the scaling parameters and ensure the consistency between
them via explicit constraints (i.e., density responds well to
changes in frequency). Furthermore, we develop a frequencyaware density control strategy, consisting of densification and
deletion, to improve representation quality with fewer Gaussians. A dynamic threshold encourages densification in highfrequency regions, while a scale-based filter deletes Gaussians with improper scale. Experimental results on various
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods quantitatively and qualitatively.

Code — https://github.com/whoiszzj/FDS-GS

Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) is a significant task in computer vision, aiming to generate images from arbitrary viewpoints based on scene representations reconstructed from
captured images. Neural Field Rendering (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) has emerged as a leading solution for NVS,
renowned for its realistic rendering quality, and has inspired
numerous subsequent works (Barron et al. 2021, 2022, 2023;
Zhang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2023b). However, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023) has recently gained
attention for its combination of high-quality rendering and
speed, offering a novel point-based real-time rendering solution for NVS applications in the VR and AR industries (Xu
et al. 2023a; Deng et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2018).
In addition to the flexibility offered by organizing a set
of 3D Gaussian primitives (termed Gaussians in the following), each defined by position, opacity, spherical harmonic,

Figure 1: By linking the density and scale (the purple circle corresponds to the scale, constrained by the density),
our FDS-GS can better reflect the frequency changes than
3DGS via density control (more similar to the GT’s spectrum), achieving better render quality with fewer Gaussians.

and covariance matrix decomposed to scale and rotation, another pivotal innovation of 3DGS is its adaptive density control. As practical NVS demands accurate representation of
scene details and sparse points are commonly insufficient for
scene coverage and detail representation, using dense point
cloud as an initial input is necessary for many point-based
methods (Kopanas et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Franke
et al. 2024). The adaptive density control liberates pointbased methods from the necessity of relying on dense point
clouds as input. Consequently, 3DGS can produce high-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9833

