The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Distribution-Driven Dense Retrieval:
Modeling Many-to-One Query-Document Relationship
Junfeng Kang1 , Rui Li1 , Qi Liu1, 2 * , Zhenya Huang1, 2 ,
Zheng Zhang1 , Yanjiang Chen1 , Linbo Zhu2 , Yu Su2,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Normal University
{kangjf, ruili2000, zhangzheng, yjchen}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql, huangzhy}@ustc.edu.cn,
lbzhu@iai.ustc.edu.cn, yusu@hfnu.edu.cn
Abstract

Dense retrieval has emerged as the leading approach in information retrieval, aiming to find semantically relevant documents based on natural language queries. Given that a single document can be retrieved by multiple distinct queries,
existing methods aim to represent a document with multiple vectors. Each vector is aligned with a different query
to model the many-to-one relationship between queries and
documents. However, these multiple vector-based approaches
encounter challenges such as Increased Storage, Vector Collapse, and Search Efficiency. To address these issues, we introduce the Distribution-Driven Dense Retrieval framework
(DDR). Specifically, we use vectors to represent queries and
distributions to represent documents. This approach not only
captures the relationships between multiple queries corresponding to the same document but also avoids the need
to use multiple vectors to represent the document. Furthermore, to ensure search efficiency for DDR, we propose a dot
product-based computation method to calculate the similarity
between documents represented by distributions and queries
represented by vectors. This allows for seamless integration
with existing approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search algorithms for efficient search. Finally, we conduct extensive
experiments on real-world datasets, which demonstrate that
our method significantly outperforms traditional dense retrieval methods.

Figure 1: (a) The single vector approach represents query
and document with a single vector, subsequently aligning
the query vector with the relevant document vector. (b) The
multi-view approach involves splitting the document into
multiple vector representations, each aligning with different
queries. (c) Our method is capable of capturing the relationships between multiple queries corresponding to the same
document by representing queries as vectors and documents
as distributions.

Code — https://github.com/tojunfeng/DDR
Despite effectiveness, these methods face a challenge
where multiple different queries retrieve the same document.
As depicted in Figure 1(a), queries Q1, Q2, and Q3 all retrieve the same document Doc A. This many-to-one relationship makes it challenging for a document represented by a
single vector to effectively align with all relevant query vectors. As a result, the previous single vector-based methods
have somewhat lost their effectiveness. To address this problem, researchers have observed that queries and documents
exhibit the following characteristics (Tang et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2022; Luan et al. 2021): 1) Documents are typically
longer and contain more semantic information compared to
queries; 2) A query usually corresponds to a segment of the
target document, and one document can be retrieved by different queries. Consequently, they have proposed a multiview approach to mitigate this issue. Specifically, they have

Introduction
Dense retrieval aims to search for semantically relevant documents given a natural language query. These approaches
(Lee, Chang, and Toutanova 2019; Karpukhin et al. 2020;
Qu et al. 2021) involve transforming the input documents
and queries into dense vectors, and then performing information retrieval by calculating the similarity between these
vectors. Various methods such as pre-training (Gao and
Callan 2021; Wang et al. 2023), negative sample mining
(Xiong et al. 2021; Qu et al. 2021), and knowledge distillation (Ren et al. 2021; Santhanam et al. 2022) have been
proposed and have made great progress.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11933

