The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Consideration of AI Openness: Can Good Intent Be Abused?
Yeeun Kim1 , Hyunseo Shin1 , Eunkyung Choi1 , Hongseok Oh1 ,
Hyunjun Kim2 , Wonseok Hwang1,3 *
1

University of Seoul
Independent Researcher
3
LBox
{keeun04, hseo98, rmarud202, cxv0519}@uos.ac.kr,
harmageton@gmail.com, wonseok.hwang@uos.ac.kr
2

Abstract

these sources. This concern is particularly relevant in the legal domain, where individual decisions can lead to significant social consequences. The purpose of publishing precedents is to ensure transparency and consistency in the legal
system and reduce disputes and crime by making the consequences of criminal behavior publicly known. However,
these precedents often contain detailed descriptions of criminal acts and the judge’s criteria for sentence reduction. For
example, some datasets that provide detailed narratives on
how the leader of a phone scam syndicate recruits accomplices and deceives victims through impersonation. These
narratives also detail the organizational structure of the criminal group, the sophisticated tools employed (such as VoIP
and VPN technologies), and factors that judges consider
when reducing sentences.
These detailed crime descriptions are essential for a comprehensive understanding of cases and for finding relevant
precedents. However, paradoxically, they can be used as a
practical resource for criminals to escape punishment for
certain criminal acts. For instance, consider the following
scenario: After embezzling company funds, an individual
quickly considers ways to obscure the money trail to make
it harder for the company to detect. If they obtain information suggesting that transferring the money to an overseas
account, then converting it back through exchange, and fragmenting large sums into smaller, staged transfers while utilizing various payment methods such as cash and debit cards
can confuse the origin and destination of the funds, the criminal might make the worse decision to cleverly conceal their
crime. Other examples from severe criminal cases that are
actually generated from fine-tuned LLMs are presented in
Table 18 in the Appendix (See extended version for details,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.06537) .
A recent discussion from Bengio et al. (2023) highlights the risks associated with AI, stemming from its
rapid progress outpacing the development of governance
frameworks. In the same vein, we investigate the possibility of malicious use of precedents, a representative opensource dataset in the legal domain, supported by open-source
LLMs. To this end, we build EVE- V 11 , which consists of
200 questions and corresponding answers on criminal activities based on real Korean precedents (Hwang et al. 2022)

Open source is a driving force behind scientific advancement.
However, this openness is also a double-edged sword, with
the inherent risk that innovative technologies can be misused
for purposes harmful to society. What is the likelihood that
an open source AI model or dataset will be used to commit
a real-world crime, and if a criminal does exploit it, will the
people behind the technology be able to escape legal liability?
To address these questions, we explore a legal domain where
individual choices can have a significant impact on society.
Specifically, we build the EVE- V 1 dataset that comprises 200
question-answer pairs related to criminal offenses based on
200 Korean precedents first to explore the possibility of malicious models emerging. We further developed EVE- V 2 using
600 fraud-related precedents to confirm the existence of malicious models that can provide harmful advice on a wide range
of criminal topics to test the domain generalization ability.
Remarkably, widely used open-source large-scale language
models (LLMs) provide unethical and detailed information
about criminal activities when fine-tuned with EVE. We also
take an in-depth look at the legal issues that malicious language models and their builders could realistically face. Our
findings highlight the paradoxical dilemma that open source
accelerates scientific progress, but requires great care to minimize the potential for misuse.

1

Introduction

”Openness without politeness is violence” - Analects
of Confucius Openness plays a critical role in fostering scientific
progress. Notably, the recent swift advancements in large
language models (LLMs) have been spurred by various
open-source models (Black et al. 2022; Biderman et al.
2023; Jiang et al. 2023; Taori et al. 2023; Groeneveld
et al. 2024), datasets (Gao et al. 2020; Raffel et al. 2020;
Laurençon et al. 2022; Computer 2023), and libraries (Wolf
et al. 2020; Mangrulkar et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023; von
Werra et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2021).
On the other hand, it is equally important to be aware
of the potential risks associated with unrestricted access to
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

27374

E VIL V ICIOUS QUESTION ANSWERING S E TS

