The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LiDAR-LLM: Exploring the Potential of Large Language Models
for 3D LiDAR Understanding
∗

∗

Senqiao Yang1* , Jiaming Liu1,2 * , Renrui Zhang 3 † , Mingjie Pan1 , Ziyu Guo3 , Xiaoqi Li1 ,
Zehui Chen1 , Peng Gao4 , Hongsheng Li3 , Yandong Guo2 , Shanghang Zhang 1 ‡
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
AI2Robotics
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract

Lidar data

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) and Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) have shown promise in
instruction following and image understanding. While these
models are powerful, they have not yet been developed to
comprehend the more challenging 3D geometric and physical scenes, especially when it comes to the sparse outdoor LiDAR data. In this paper, we introduce LiDAR-LLM, which
takes raw LiDAR data as input and harnesses the remarkable reasoning capabilities of LLMs to gain a comprehensive understanding of outdoor 3D scenes. The central insight of our LiDAR-LLM is the reformulation of 3D outdoor
scene cognition as a language modeling problem, encompassing tasks such as 3D captioning, 3D grounding, 3D question answering, etc. Specifically, due to the scarcity of 3D
LiDAR-text pairing data, we introduce a three-stage training
strategy and generate relevant datasets, progressively aligning the 3D modality with the language embedding of LLM.
Furthermore, we design a Position-Aware Transformer (PAT)
to connect the 3D encoder with the LLM, which effectively
bridges the modality gap and enhances the LLM’s spatial orientation comprehension of visual features. Our experiments
demonstrate that LiDAR-LLM effectively comprehends a
wide range of instructions related to 3D scenes, achieving a
40.9 BLEU-1 score on the 3D captioning dataset, a Grounded
Captioning accuracy of 63.1%, and a BEV mIoU of 14.3%.

Lidar
Encoder

BEV Position
Embeddings

Position-Aware
Transformer

Response

Input Prompt

Response

Input Prompt

：Frozen

Introduction

Adapter

Text

Large Language
Model (LLM)
：Fine-tune

3D Captioning

3D Grounding

Q: Describe the traffic content

Q: What is at the location

A: The cars are parked in
rows, and there are people
walking around the area.

A: There is a car at the
location
[8.5,6.8,11.0,6.7,1.8,0.4,-1.9].

3D Question Answering

Zero Shot Planning

Q: What number of moving cars
Q: Are any moving bicycles

Q: what are the safe measures for
the self-driving vehicle to take

A: 5 moving cars
A: No

A: It should slightly decrease
speed without applying the
brakes, and make a minor
deviation to the left.

Figure 1: Characteristics of LiDAR-LLM. Our proposed
LiDAR-LLM takes 3D LiDAR data as input and aligns the
3D modality with the language embedding space, leveraging the exceptional reasoning capabilities of LLMs to understand outdoor 3D scenes. The bottom part showcases examples derived from our generated or employed LiDAR-text
data, covering a spectrum of 3D-related tasks.

Recently, large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al.
2023; OpenAI 2023; Brown et al. 2020) have demonstrated
significant capabilities in complex reasoning and robust conversational abilities in the field of natural language processing. Building upon LLMs, Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) (Liu et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023; et al
2022; Lin et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a), such as BLIP-2
and Flamingo, have been introduced. These models take in
more modality (e.g., 2D images) as input, enabling LLMs to

discuss and comprehend the visual scene. Despite MLLMs
excelling at processing 2D image content, their comprehension of the more challenging 3D real-world scenes remains
an open question. Understanding 3D scenes holds importance for various applications, including autonomous driving (Arnold et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2017) and robotics

* Equal contribution
†

Project leader
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

9247

