The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Is There No Such Thing as a Bad Question?
H4R: HalluciBot for Ratiocination, Rewriting, Ranking, and Routing
William Watson* , Nicole Cho* , Nishan Srishankar
J.P. Morgan AI Research
nicole.cho@jpmorgan.com

Abstract
Hallucination continues to be one of the most critical challenges in the institutional adoption journey of Large Language
Models (LLMs). While prior studies have primarily focused
on the post-generation analysis and refinement of outputs, this
paper centers on the effectiveness of queries in eliciting accurate responses from LLMs. We present HalluciBot, a model
that estimates the query’s propensity to hallucinate before generation, without invoking any LLMs during inference. HalluciBot can serve as a proxy reward model for query rewriting,
offering a general framework to estimate query quality based
on accuracy and consensus. In essence, HalluciBot investigates how poorly constructed queries can lead to erroneous
outputs - moreover, by employing query rewriting guided by
HalluciBot’s empirical estimates, we demonstrate that 95.7%
output accuracy can be achieved for multiple choice questions.
The training procedure for HalluciBot consists of perturbing
369,837 queries n times, employing n + 1 independent LLM
agents, sampling an output from each query, conducting a
Multi-Agent Monte Carlo simulation on the sampled outputs,
and training an encoder classifier. The idea of perturbation is
the outcome of our ablation studies that measures the increase
in output diversity (+12.5 agreement spread) by perturbing
a query in lexically different but semantically similar ways.
Therefore, HalluciBot paves the way to ratiocinate (76.0%
test F1 score, 46.6% in saved computation on hallucinatory
queries), rewrite (+30.2% positive class transition from hallucinatory to non-hallucinatory), rank (+50.6% positive class
transition from hallucinatory to non-hallucinatory), and route
queries to effective pipelines.

Figure 1: Comparison of traditional inference methods and
HalluciBot’s use-cases. In the former, the user inputs a query
either through a direct inference or a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) pipeline. If the output is hallucinatory, the user
must decide whether to end the session or revise the query for
successive generation rounds. In contrast, HalluciBot can be
used to assess the query’s quality before generation. Therefore, users can gain insight into the hallucination risk (“Ratiocinate”), automate the query rewriting stage through informed
feedback (“Rewrite”) or Best-of-N sampling across multiple
candidates (“Rank”), and route the query across different operating modes (“Route”), since HalluciBot is scenario-aware
(Extractive / Abstractive), potentially bypassing computationally expensive stages, such as RAG or Rewrite.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12535

1

Introduction

Despite the promising potential for a myriad of use cases,
Large Language Models (LLMs) offer limited insights into
their chain of thought (Liang et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2023;
Kojima et al. 2023) and have the propensity to hallucinate in
various circumstances (Jiang et al. 2021). Common factors
that drive hallucinations encompass high model complexity, flawed data sources, or inherent sampling randomness.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25470

Specifically, the intrinsic trade-off between greedy deterministic decoding and the creativity spawned through nucleus sampling induces a heightened propensity to hallucinate (Huang et al. 2023) - LLMs frequently advance output
quality through different sampling methods (Holtzman et al.
2020, 2018; Radford et al. 2018). The challenge of understanding hallucinations is compounded by limitations such as
the frequent inaccessibility into the LLMs’ training datasets
(Liang et al. 2022). HuggingFace’s release of its “Hallucinations Leaderboard” on January 29th, 2024 (Gao et al. 2023)
highlights the importance of resolving hallucination-related
issues via the concerted effort of evaluating different LLMs.
In this context, the majority of current studies have focused
on the post-generation phase of output analysis as expanded

