The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Graph Convolution: Multimodal Recommendation
with Topology-aware MLPs
Junjie Huang, Jiarui Qin, Yong Yu, Weinan Zhang*
Shanghai Jiao Tong Univeristy, Shanghai, China
{huangjunjie2019, wnzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Given the large volume of side information from different
modalities, multimodal recommender systems have become
increasingly vital, as they exploit richer semantic information
beyond user-item interactions. Recent works highlight that
leveraging Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) to explicitly model multimodal item-item relations can significantly
enhance recommendation performance. However, due to the
inherent over-smoothing issue of GCNs, existing models benefit only from shallow GCNs with limited representation
power. This drawback is especially pronounced when facing
complex and high-dimensional patterns such as multimodal
data, as it requires large-capacity models to accommodate
complicated correlations. To this end, in this paper, we investigate bypassing GCNs when modeling multimodal itemitem relationship. More specifically, we propose a Topologyaware Multi-Layer Perceptron (TMLP), which uses MLPs
instead of GCNs to model the relationships between items.
TMLP enhances MLPs with topological pruning to denoise
item-item relations and intra (inter)-modality learning to integrate higher-order modality correlations. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets verify TMLP’s superiority
over nine baselines. We also find that by discarding the internal message passing in GCNs, which is sensitive to node connections, TMLP achieves significant improvements in both
training efficiency and robustness against existing models.

1

(a) Time (Bars) vs. Recall (Lines) (b) t-SNE Visualization of
[MGCN(Red), FREEDOM(Yellow), FREEDOM's Item Embeddings
TMLP(Blue)]

(c) Cosine Similarity of FREEDOM's
Embeddings (2 GCN Layers)

(d) Cosine Similarity
of TMLP's Embeddings

Figure 1: Scalability issues in existing MMRS and motivation for TMLP. Models are well-trained on Amazon Sports.

ditional methods (He and McAuley 2016b; Liu, Wu, and
Wang 2017) enhance item representations by combining
multimodal features with item ID embeddings. Recently,
the growing interest in graph-based recommendation methods (Wang et al. 2019; He et al. 2020) has led to research utilizing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to capture higher-order topological structures from multimodal
features. These studies emphasize that explicitly modeling
item-item relationships can significantly improve recommendation performance (Zhang et al. 2021a, 2024). Existing models typically rely on a single-layer Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to capture these relations. Though
achieving remarkable progress, a crucial limitation is its
scalability (Yang et al. 2022). More specifically, due to the
over-smoothing issue (Chen et al. 2020; Rusch, Bronstein,
and Mishra 2023), GCNs are inherently shallow and unable to abide by the scalability law in most deep learning models (Kaplan et al. 2020; Rosenfeld et al. 2019).
This limits their capacity to handle complex multimodal
data patterns. In Figure 1, we compare the performance of
two state-of-the-art (SOTA) MMRS, FREEDOM (Zhou and

Introduction

Recommender Systems (RS) are indispensable in modern
web services, ranging from video streaming platforms to online shopping services (Lin et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024a; Xi
et al. 2024). Traditional RS (Rendle et al. 2012; He et al.
2020) primarily rely on user-item interactions to learn latent representations. However, abundant multimodal information, such as images, videos, and text descriptions related
to user and item attributes, is often left unused. This gap motivates the research of Multimodal Recommender Systems
(MMRS), which leverage rich semantic multimodal data to
improve recommendations (Wei et al. 2019).
The main challenge in MMRS lies in how to effectively incorporate multimodal features within the collaborative filtering (CF) framework (Huang et al. 2024). Tra* Weinan Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11808

