The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Solving Multiagent Path Finding on Highly Centralized Networks
Foivos Fioravantes1 , Dušan Knop1 , Jan Matyáš Křišťan1 , Nikolaos Melissinos1 , Michal Opler1 ,
Tung Anh Vu2
1

Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic
2
Computer Science Institute, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
{foivos.fioravantes, dusan.knop, kristja6, nikolaos.melissinos, michal.opler}@fit.cvut.cz, tung@iuuk.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract

agent reaches each one (Ali and Yakovlev 2024), while other
models require each agent to reach a specific, predefined position. Many models consider the centralized setting (Ma
et al. 2019; Sharon et al. 2015), while others consider the
decentralized setting (Skrynnik et al. 2024).
The version we consider, usually appearing under the
name of M ULTIAGENT PATH F INDING (MAPF for short),
consists of finding non-colliding paths for a set of agents that
move through a given graph; each agent has to move from
its source to its target vertex, both of which are predefined
and unique, in an optimal way. That is, the agents move in
such a way that the length of the schedule is minimized. To
the best of our knowledge, this problem first started appearing more than 30 years ago (Hopcroft, Schwartz, and Sharir
1984; Reif 1979).
Unsurprisingly, the MAPF problem is computationally
hard. In particular, it is NP-complete (Surynek 2010), and
the hardness holds even in planar graphs (Yu 2016). Thus,
the research community has mainly focused on heuristic algorithms that lead to efficiently solving the problem in practice. Some first positive results were based on the A∗ algorithm (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968), while, more recently, many researchers have focused on exploiting highly
efficient solvers; SAT-solvers were explored in (Surynek
et al. 2017) and SMT-solvers in (Surynek 2019, 2020). There
is also a plethora of greedy heuristic algorithms, such as the
one presented in (Phan et al. 2024) which is based on Large
Neighborhood Search. See (Stern et al. 2019) for a more
comprehensive list of approaches of this flavor.
We follow a slightly different approach to attack this
problem. Our goal is to design exact algorithms that are
guaranteed to return an optimum solution. In view of the
computational hardness of the MAPF problem, this is not
possible in the general case. But what if we consider restricted instances? Can we identify characteristics, henceforth called parameters, whose exploitation leads to efficient
algorithms? This is exactly the question that is in the core
of the parameterized analysis that has recently been initiated
for this problem (Eiben, Ganian, and Kanj 2023; Fioravantes
et al. 2024a).

The M UTLIAGENT PATH F INDING (MAPF) problem consists of identifying the trajectories that a set of agents should
follow inside a given network in order to reach their desired
destinations as soon as possible, but without colliding with
each other. We aim to minimize the maximum time any agent
takes to reach their goal, ensuring optimal path length. In this
work, we complement a recent thread of results that aim to
systematically study the algorithmic behavior of this problem, through the parameterized complexity point of view.
First, we show that MAPF is NP-hard when the given network
has a star-like topology (bounded vertex cover number) or
is a tree with 11 leaves. Both of these results fill important
gaps in our understanding of the tractability of this problem
that were left untreated in the recent work of Fioravantes et
al., Exact Algorithms and Lowerbounds for Multiagent Path
Finding: Power of Treelike Topology, presented in AAAI’24.
Nevertheless, our main contribution is an exact algorithm that
scales well as the input grows (FPT) when the topology of
the given network is highly centralized (bounded distance to
clique). This parameter is significant as it mirrors real-world
networks. In such environments, a bunch of central hubs (e.g.,
processing areas) are connected to only few peripheral nodes.

Introduction
Collision avoidance and optimal navigation are crucial in
scenarios that require a group of agents to move through
a network in an autonomous way. The real-world applications for such problems are well documented and range from
virtual agents moving through a video game level (Snape
et al. 2012), to actual robots transporting goods around a
warehouse (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008; Li et al.
2021). Agents can be required to move through simpler
topologies that span multiple “floors” (Veloso et al. 2015),
or much more complicated topologies on a single “floor”,
e.g., in Airport surface management (Morris et al. 2016).
Many different models have been proposed to capture and
solve the scenarios described above (Stern et al. 2019). This
is due in part to the ubiquity of these scenarios, but also to
the variety of slightly different requirements that each realworld application demands. For example, there are models
where a set of positions must be reached, regardless of which

Our Contribution
The first two parameters that one would hope could be exploited are the number of agents k and the makespan ℓ, i.e.,

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23186

