The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Kernel-based Multi-view Feature Selection with Robust
Self-representation and Binary Hashing
Rongyao Hu1, 2 , Jiangzhang Gan3 , Mengmeng Zhan1 , Li Li4 * , Mengling Wei1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China
2
Knowledge and Data Engineering Laboratory of Chinese Medicine, School of Information and Software Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hainan University, Haikou 570228, China
4
Computer School, Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing 100101, China
hurongyao123@gmail.com, ganjzgxnu@163.com, memos.zhan@gmail.com, 20212599@bistu.edu.cn, ml wei@126.com
Abstract

dealing with high-dimensional multi-view data often leads
to the ”curse of dimensionality” to occur. Therefore, multiview feature selection has been developed to select a small
subset of features as a substitute for the original data, offering an effective way to improve the discriminative ability of
these features (Tang et al. 2023; Fan et al. 2024).

Unsupervised multi-view feature selection involves selecting
a subset of crucial features across diverse views to diminish feature dimensionality without leveraging label information. While numerous studies may risk losing semantic information when applied to real-world multi-view datasets.
In this study, we introduce a novel model, Unsupervised
Kernel-based Multi-view Feature selection with Robust selfrepresentation and Binary hashing (UKMFS), which aims to
identify robust consistent graph representation across views
and leverage binary hashing codes to guide feature selection.
Specifically, we first explore the underlying geometry by unifying the dimension of multi-view data with non-linear kernel mapping. Then, we search for consistent graphs across
views by fusing unique graph representations of each view in
a self-representation manner. Additionally, we impose lowrank constraints on the graph of each view to mitigate noise
and unimportant parts to preserve the main structures and patterns. Furthermore, we design an unsupervised hashing feature selection model to exploit reliable binary labels across
views and weighted matrices from each view. Finally, an effective optimization method is customized to solve the formulated problem. Comprehensive experiments on public multiview datasets indicate that our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance compared with the representative comparison methods regarding the clustering and the feature selection task.

According to the usage of labels, existing strategies
for multi-view feature selection sort into three groups,
i.e., supervised-based methods (Han, Hu, and Gao 2024; Liu
et al. 2023), semi-supervised-based methods (Zhang et al.
2023; Jiang et al. 2023), and unsupervised-based methods
(Cao and Xie 2024a; Gu et al. 2023). Supervised multiview feature selection methods strongly rely on label information to supervise the modeling and feature selection, yet
they fall short in excavating the latent information hidden
in unlabeled data which results in an incomplete or inaccurate feature selection. Furthermore, as the labeling information plummets, semi-supervised multi-view feature selection
methods fuse information from both labeled and unlabeled
data, but they grapple with balancing these two categories of
data. Additionally, constructing complex algorithms to integrate labeled and unlabeled data leads to steep computational costs. Consequently, unsupervised multi-view feature
selection has garnered the focus of most researchers given
its independence from labeled data and its extensive applicability.

Introduction

For unsupervised multi-view feature selection, the important objective is effectively grasping relations within the data
across multiple views and then capitalizing on these correlations to steer the crucial task of feature selection. To
fulfill the goal of searching for these data connections and
relationships between views, existing methods turn to the
spectral graph representation way (Yang et al. 2024b; Fang
et al. 2023) and the cluster structure way (Xiang et al. 2024;
Zhao, Yang, and Nie 2023). They are always involved in a
two-step learning procedure. (1) Spectral graph representation is conducted by graph Laplacian matrix, and then both
the number of nearest neighbors and the graph representation are predefined from the original multi-view data manually. (2) Projection matrix (i.e., feature selection) is learned
from each view and is guided by the spectral graph representation across views. Although remarkable performances

With the advancement of information theory and data storage technology, high-dimensional multi-view data has become increasingly prevalent, evident in diverse applications, such as multi-pose pedestrian retrieval, multi-view image registration, and multi-functional drug molecule mining (Yu et al. 2024; Bolkart, Li, and Black 2023; Hua
et al. 2023). However, handling high-dimensional multiview data presents significant challenges since it demands
greater computational cost and incurs more storage expense.
This reality poses substantial obstacles for researchers in the
development of practical applications. Furthermore, directly
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17287

