The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Constant-Factor Distortion Mechanisms for k-Committee Election
Haripriya Pulyassary1 , Chaitanya Swamy2
1

2

School of ORIE, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Dept. of Combinatorics & Optimization, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, CANADA
hp297@cornell.edu, cswamy@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

the notion of distortion to quantify the worst-case efficiency
loss for a given social choice function.
Much of the prior work has primarily considered the utilitarian objective, which minimizes the sum of individual
costs incurred by the agents. However, this utilitarian objective may not always be the appropriate choice. For instance,
in some settings (e.g. where fairness is an important consideration), we may instead wish to consider an egalitarian
objective and minimize the maximum cost incurred by any
agent. Both objectives are special cases of the Topℓ objective, which minimizes the sum of the ℓ largest costs incurred
by agents: clearly, when ℓ = 1 and ℓ = n, we recover the
egalitarian and utilitarian objectives respectively.
In this work, we study the k-committee election problem,
wherein each agent has a preference ordering over the set of
candidates and we wish to elect a committee of k candidates,
so as to minimize the Topℓ -cost. An instance of this problem
(C, A, σ) consists of a set of n agents or voters C, a set of m
alternatives or candidates A, and a preference profile (a tuple
giving the preference ordering over A, for each agent), σ. In
line with prior work, we consider the metric setting, wherein
agents and candidates correspond to points in a metric space
specified by a distance function d : C × A → R≥0 satisfying the “triangle” inequality: for any i, j ∈ C and a, b ∈ A,
we have d(i, a) ≤ d(i, b) + d(j, b) + d(j, a). We slightly
abuse notation and use d to also denote the resulting metric.
This assumption models many applications, including those
where agents prefer alternatives that are ideologically similar to them: here d(i, a) can be interpreted as the ideological
distance between agent i and candidate a. As the preference
profile σ arises from the distance function d, it must be that
d is consistent with σ, denoted d ◁ σ: that is, for any i ∈ C
and a, b ∈ A, if i prefers a over b, denoted a ⪰i b, then
d(i, a) ≤ d(i, b).
A social choice function (SCF) f for k-committee election maps a preference profile σ to a set in Ak := {S ⊆ A :
|S| ≤ k}. The cost incurred by an agent i, when a set S of
candidates is chosen, is given by d(i, S) := mina∈S d(i, a),
i.e., the distance to the closest alternative in S. Since f does
not know the cardinal information, one would not expect f
to output the best solution for the given metric d, and the
distortion (Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006) of f quantifies the worst-case loss in solution quality that can occur
due to the fact that f does not have cardinal information.

In the k-committee election problem, we wish to aggregate
the preferences of n agents over a set of alternatives and select
a committee of k alternatives that minimizes the cost incurred
by the agents. While we typically assume that agent preferences are captured by a cardinal utility function, in many contexts we only have access to ordinal information, namely the
agents’ rankings over the outcomes. As preference rankings
are not as expressive as cardinal utilities, a loss of efficiency
is inevitable, and is quantified by the notion of distortion.
We study the problem of electing a k-committee that minimizes the sum of the ℓ-largest costs incurred by the agents,
when agents and candidates are embedded in a metric space.
This problem is called the ℓ-centrum problem and captures
both the utilitarian and egalitarian objectives. When k ≥ 2,
it is not possible to compute a bounded-distortion committee
using purely ordinal information. We develop the first algorithms (that we call mechanisms) for the ℓ-centrum problem
(when k ≥ 2), which achieve O(1)-distortion while eliciting
only a very limited amount of cardinal information via value
queries. We obtain two types of query-complexity guarantees:
O(log k log n) queries per agent, and O(k2 log2 n) queries
in total (while achieving O(1)-distortion in both cases). En
route, we give a simple adaptive-sampling algorithm for the
ℓ-centrum k-clustering problem.

1

Introduction

In many applications, we wish to aggregate the preferences
of agents in a given system and select an outcome that
maximizes social welfare (i.e. the total value gained by the
agents) or minimizes social cost (i.e. the total cost incurred
by the agents). While we typically assume that agent preferences are captured by a cardinal utility function that assigns
a numerical value to each outcome, in many contexts we
only have access to ordinal information, namely the agents’
rankings over the outcomes. There are many reasons why
such situations may arise; perhaps the most prominent is that
the agents themselves may find it difficult to place numerical values on the possible outcomes. As ordinal preference
rankings are not as expressive as cardinal utilities, a loss of
efficiency in terms of the quality of the outcome computed
is inevitable. Procaccia and Rosenschein (2006) introduced
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14062

