The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Importance Weighting Can Help Large Language Models Self-Improve
Chunyang Jiang, Chi-Min Chan, Wei XueB , Qifeng Liu, Yike GuoB
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{cjiangaq, cchanbc}@connect.ust.hk, {weixue, liuqifeng, yikeguo}@ust.hk

Abstract

LLMs (Shinn et al. 2023; Madaan et al. 2023; Vernikos et al.
2024). Among them, fine-tuning the LLM on self-generated
data appears as one of the most promising way (Gülçehre
et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2023b; Xu
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024). This formula typically includes
generating reasoning thoughts and answers on unsupervised
datasets, filtering data, and fine-tuning models on the selfgenerated data (Huang et al. 2023a). It is regarded as an
attractive approach for LLMs to self-supervise by utilizing
unlabeled data without external supervision.
The primary challenge of utilizing self-generated data
is the variability in data quality. While high-quality samples can enhance the model’s reasoning abilities, there are
low-quality samples that may detrimentally affect performance (Li and Qiu 2023). For example, an incorrectly generated answer could mislead the model. Therefore, a good
filtering strategy is decisive for effective self-improvement.
Many approaches have been proposed to address this issue. Inspired by Self-Consistency (Wang et al. 2023a),
LMSI (Huang et al. 2023a) adopts majority voting to select the most consistent answer, under the assumption that
consistency is positively related to the correctness. MoT (Li
and Qiu 2023) further introduces uncertainty to the filtering strategy, by utilizing entropy to exclude high-uncertainty
data points. Self-Alignment (Li et al. 2024) demonstrates
that prompting the LLM to self-filter is also feasible.
However, present methods mostly emphasize assessing
the correctness of generated samples, yet ignore the distribution shift problem. Specifically, the distribution of the
LLM self-generated data may differ from that of real-world
data, and fine-tuning models on samples with high distribution shift extent (DSE) may defect the resulting performance (Shumailov et al. 2023a). In this paper, we demonstrate that even self-generated samples with correct answers
can possess high DSE, potentially degrading model performance. Consequently, filtering out high DSE samples
is essential to further promote the efficacy of LLM selfimprovement.
To exclude samples with high DSE, the primary question
is how to estimate the DSE, since the actual data distribution is usually inaccessible. We note Importance Weighting
(IW) (Sugiyama, Krauledat, and Müller 2007) as a wellknown approach to address the traditional distribution shift
problem (Sugiyama and Kawanabe 2012), where the key

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capability in numerous tasks and applications. However, finetuning LLMs using high-quality datasets under external supervision remains prohibitively expensive. In response, LLM
self-improvement approaches have been vibrantly developed
recently. The typical paradigm of LLM self-improvement involves training LLM on self-generated data, part of which
may be detrimental and should be filtered out due to the unstable data quality. While current works primarily employs
filtering strategies based on answer correctness, in this paper, we demonstrate that filtering out correct but with high
distribution shift extent (DSE) samples could also benefit
the results of self-improvement. Given that the actual sample distribution is usually inaccessible, we propose a new
metric called DS weight to approximate DSE, inspired by
the Importance Weighting methods. Consequently, we integrate DS weight with self-consistency to comprehensively
filter the self-generated samples and fine-tune the language
model. Experiments show that with only a tiny valid set (up
to 5% size of the training set) to compute DS weight, our approach can notably promote the reasoning ability of current
LLM self-improvement methods. The resulting performance
is on par with methods that rely on external supervision from
pre-trained reward models.

Introduction
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have made impressive achievements on a large amount of NLP tasks and
applications (Li et al. 2023a; OpenAI 2023; Yang et al. 2023;
Li et al. 2023b). Moreover, new capabilities emerge in LLMs
with the model size scaled to hundreds of billions of parameters, especially the general reasoning capabilities (Kojima
et al. 2022). Relevant techniques like in-context few-shot
learning (Brown et al. 2020a), Chain-of-Thought prompting (Wei et al. 2022), and self-consistency (Wang et al.
2023a) were further proposed to get better performance.
Despite the remarkable capabilities of LLMs pre-trained
on the large corpus, fundamentally improving the model’s
performance still necessitates fine-tuning on a great amount
of high-quality supervised data (Huang et al. 2023a), which
is usually costly. To alleviate this problem, many works are
committed to investigating the self-improvement ability of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24257

