The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Generalizable Anomaly Detection Method in Dynamic Graphs
Xiao Yang1,2,3 , Xuejiao Zhao1,2 * , Zhiqi Shen1 *
2

1
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY), NTU, Singapore
3
Joint NTU-WeBank Research Centre on Fintech, NTU, Singapore
yangxiao.cs@gmail.com, {xjzhao,zqshen}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Graphs are extensively employed to model complex systems across various domains, such as social networks (Wang
et al. 2019), human knowledge networks (Ji et al. 2021),
e-commerce (Qu et al. 2020), and cybersecurity (Gao
et al. 2020). Although the bulk of researches focus on
static graphs, real-world graph data often evolves over
time (Skarding, Gabrys, and Musial 2021). Taking knowledge networks as an example, there is new knowledge being added to the network every month, with connections
between different concepts evolving over time. To model
and analyze graphs where nodes and edges change over
time, mining dynamic graphs gains increasing popularity in the graph analysis. Anomaly detection in dynamic
graphs (Ma et al. 2021; Ho, Karami, and Armanfard 2024)
is vital for identifying outliers that significantly deviate from
normal patterns such as anomalous edges or anomalous
nodes,including the detection of fraudulent transactions, social media spam, and network intrusions (Dou et al. 2020).
By utilizing the temporal information and relational structures inherent in dynamic graphs, researchers can more effectively identify anomalies, thereby enhancing the security
and integrity of various systems (Pourhabibi et al. 2020).

Recently, techniques based on deep learning have facilitated significant advancements in anomaly detection within
dynamic graphs. For example, methods like GDN (Deng
and Hooi 2021), StrGNN (Cai et al. 2021) focus on extracting structural information from graphs, while approaches
such as LSTM-VAE (Park, Hoshi, and Kemp 2018) and
TADDY (Liu et al. 2021) concentrate on capturing temporal information.In addition, self-supervised (Lee, Kim, and
Shin 2024) and semi-supervised (Tian et al. 2023) methods
have also been applied to dynamic graph anomaly detection.
Despite their improved performance, current deep
learning-based methods lack the crucial generalizability (Brennan 1992) needed for dynamic graph tasks across
different tasks or datasets. A model with strong generalization can adapt to different tasks without significant adjustments to its architecture or parameters, reducing the need
for retraining or redesigning for new tasks(Bai, Ling, and
Zhao 2022). Conversely, in anomaly detection, where identifying potential risks or issues is crucial, poor generalization may lead to missed critical anomalies in new scenarios, thereby diminishing the model’s reliability in realworld applications. Specifically, the inadequate encoding of
anomalous events1 in existing methods results in poor generalization. Firstly, in the absence of raw event attributes,
they fail to generate informative event encodings that accurately represent the properties of the events. For example,
SimpleDyG (Wu, Fang, and Liao 2024) nearly discards all
topological structure information, tokenizing only the nodes
while ignoring the edges, which leads to the loss of critical structural information during node prediction tasks, making it unsuitable for node anomaly detection tasks and even
less so for edge anomaly detection. The positional encoding
method in TADDY (Liu et al. 2021) may not capture structural similarities and could fail to model the structural interactions between events, as demonstrated in SAT (Chen,
O’Bray, and Borgwardt 2022). TADDY’s node positionspecific encoding may result in ambiguous structural information, leading to suboptimal results in node anomaly detection tasks. Furthermore, some methods, such as GDN (Deng
and Hooi 2021), exhibit inadequate temporal information
capture capabilities. For instance, GDN does not incorpo-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this paper, both node anomalies and edge anomalies are collectively referred to as anomalous events.

Anomaly detection aims to identify deviations from normal
patterns within data. This task is particularly crucial in dynamic graphs, which are common in applications like social
networks and cybersecurity, due to their evolving structures
and complex relationships. Although recent deep learningbased methods have shown promising results in anomaly detection on dynamic graphs, they often lack of generalizability.
In this study, we propose GeneralDyG, a method that samples temporal ego-graphs and sequentially extracts structural
and temporal features to address the three key challenges
in achieving generalizability: Data Diversity, Dynamic Feature Capture, and Computational Cost. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed GeneralDyG significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on four realworld datasets.

Code — https://github.com/YXNTU/GeneralDyG

Introduction

22001

