The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CollageNoter: Real-Time and Adaptive Collage Layout Design for
Screenshot-Based E-Note-Taking
Qiuyun Zhang 1 , Bin Guo 1 * , Lina Yao 2 , Xiaotian Qiao 3, 4 , Ying Zhang 1 , Zhiwen Yu5,1
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
CSIRO’s Data61
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
4
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University
qiuyunzhang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, guob@nwpu.edu.cn, lina.yao@data61.csiro.au, qiaoxt1992@gmail.com,
izhangying@nwpu.edu.cn, zhiwenyu@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract
To enhance the processing of complex multi-modal documents (e.g. e-books, long web pages, etc.), it is an efficient
way for users to take digital screenshots of key parts and
reorganize them into a new collage E-Note. Existing methods for assisting collage layout design primarily employ a
semantic relevance-first strategy, with arranging related contents together. Though capable, it can not ensure the visual
readability of screenshots and may conflict with human natural reading patterns. In this paper, we introduce CollageNoter
for real-time collage layout design that adapts to various
devices (e.g. laptop, tablet, phone, etc.), offering users visually and cognitively well-organized screenshot-based ENotes. Specifically, we construct a novel two-stage pipeline
for collage design, including 1) readability-first layout generation and 2) cognitive-driven layout adjustment. In addition,
to achieve real-time response and adaptive model training, we
propose a cascade transformer-based layout generator named
CollageFormer and a size-aware collage layout builder for automatic dataset construction. Extensive experimental results
have confirmed the effectiveness of our CollageNoter.

Figure 1: Comparison of tradition collage layout generation method(a) with our novel CollageNoter(b). While tradition methods tend to cause visual distortion due to their
relevance-first layout optimization strategy, CollageNoter
adopts a novel two-stage procedure including 1) data-driven
readability-first layout generation and 2) cognitive-driven
layout adjustment, which can produce visually appealing
and cognitively intuitive layouts in real-time.

Introduction
Note-taking is vital for comprehending complex information
by aggregating multiple contents into an integrated view.
When users are dealing with multi-modal digital documents
(e.g. long web pages, e-books, etc.), note-taking benefits
them from quickly processing information to creating comprehensive study summarization (Qiao, Cao, and Lau 2022).
With the increasing of various E-Note tools such as Notability 1 , Microsoft onenote 2 , etc., it is convenient for
users to capture screenshots of crucial contents and then arrange them upon a new digital canvas for note-taking. Given
the collage layout is suitable for organizing rich information (Dayama et al. 2020), existing tools provide basic collage layout assistance like automatic grid line alignment,
size adjustment, etc. However, it is still time-consuming for

users to make a well-organized layout for notes, as cognitive
coherence and readability concerns exert different influences
on the layout design. The former focuses on organizing images in a cognitive-aware manner that is easy for readers to
understand, which is related to the logical relations among
screenshots and humans’ reading habits on the collage layout. The latter seeks to avoid visual distortion by optimizing the use of empty spaces, which may sometimes conflict
with the cognitive-aware manner. Therefore, it is crucial to
achieve a trade-off on these factors for high-quality collage
layout generation of screenshot-based E-Note-taking.
Studies in the field of natural image collage layout generation(Fan 2012; Liang et al. 2017) and graphic layout generation (Li et al. 2018; Jyothi et al. 2019) are highly relevant to ours. As for the former, tree-based methods achieve

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://notability.com
2
https://www.onenote.com

14494

