The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Advancing Spiking Neural Networks Towards Multiscale Spatiotemporal
Interaction Learning
Yimeng Shan1,2 , Malu Zhang2 , Rui-jie Zhu3 , Xuerui Qiu2 ,
Jason K. Eshraghian3 , Haicheng Qu1 *
1

2

Liaoning Technical University, China
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
University of California, Santa Cruz, USA
yimengshan2001@gmail.com, quhaicheng@lntu.edu.cn

Abstract

are expected to accelerate SNN adoption, with the primary
goal being to achieve brain-inspired intelligence by combining insights from high-performance deep learning and biological brain mechanisms.
Initially, researchers in Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)
faced challenges with training algorithms, leading to methods such as STDP (Tao et al. 2023), ANN2SNN (Deng and
Gu 2021), and STBP (Wu et al. 2018). Subsequent studies
incorporated deep learning elements (e.g., VGG (Sengupta
et al. 2019) and ResNet (Fang et al. 2021a; Hu et al. 2024)
architectures), neuroscience-inspired features (e.g., attention
mechanisms (Yao et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2022) and biologically plausible neuron models (Wang et al. 2024; Zhang
et al. 2024; Yao et al. 2024c)), and brain-inspired learning
algorithms (Wei et al. 2023), all aimed at enhancing both
performance and neuromorphic characteristics.
However, extant research has insufficiently addressed
the heterogeneity in resolution and structural composition
among sample features within mainstream datasets. Most
studies have focused on developing comprehensive network
architectures rather than leveraging multiscale features inherent in complex spatiotemporally correlated data. Furthermore, with the notable exception of Temporal-Channel Joint
Attention (TCJA) (Zhu et al. 2022), spatiotemporal correlations have been largely overlooked. We posit that this oversight has resulted in contemporary Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs) relinquishing certain brain-inspired characteristics,
potentially compromising their biological plausibility and
efficacy.
Therefore, we propose a Spiking Multiscale Attention
(SMA) module to introduce multiscale representation learning into the SNN domain, while simultaneously leveraging
spatiotemporal correlations to compute attention weights to
address this issue. This method enhances the model’s ability to extract multiscale features while altering the learning
pattern of SNNs, enabling SNN models to better balance local and global features. It is worth noting that we attribute
the performance gap between SNNs and ANNs to the insufficient utilization of spatiotemporal correlation information
by SNN models. To further mitigate this limitation, we devised an Attention Zoneout (AZO) regularization method.
This method improves model generalization by replacing
information at spatiotemporal weak points of hidden units
with information from previous time step. Unlike dropout,

Recent advancements in neuroscience research have propelled the development of Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs),
which not only have the potential to further advance neuroscience research but also serve as an energy-efficient alternative to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) due to their spikedriven characteristics. However, previous studies often overlooked the multiscale information and its spatiotemporal correlation between event data, leading SNN models to approximate each frame of input events as static images. We hypothesize that this oversimplification significantly contributes to
the performance gap between SNNs and traditional ANNs.
To address this issue, we have designed a Spiking Multiscale
Attention (SMA) module that captures multiscale spatiotemporal interaction information. Furthermore, we developed
a regularization method named Attention ZoneOut (AZO),
which utilizes spatiotemporal attention weights to reduce the
model’s generalization error through pseudo-ensemble training. Our approach has achieved state-of-the-art results on
mainstream neuromorphic datasets. Additionally, we have
reached a performance of 77.1% on the Imagenet-1K dataset
using a 104-layer ResNet architecture enhanced with SMA
and AZO. This achievement confirms the state-of-the-art performance of SNNs with non-transformer architectures and
underscores the effectiveness of our method in bridging the
performance gap between SNN models and traditional ANN
models.

Code — https://github.com/YmShan/SMA-AZO

Introduction
The biological brain has long served as a rich source of inspiration for the development of neural networks, with Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) achieving impressive results (Szegedy et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016) by mimicking the visual cortex’s hierarchical structure. However, the
increasing energy consumption of ANNs has emerged as a
critical limitation. Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) that utilize binary spiking signals, offer inherent low-power characteristics due to their non-continuous activation (Maass 1997)
and spike-driven properties (Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019).
Neuromorphic chips (Davies et al. 2018; Merolla et al. 2014)
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1501

