The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Level Optimal Transport for Universal Cross-Tokenizer Knowledge
Distillation on Language Models
Xiao Cui1 * , Mo Zhu2 * , Yulei Qin3 , Liang Xie2,4 , Wengang Zhou1 , Houqiang Li1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Zhejiang University
3
Tencent YouTu Lab
4
Zhejiang University of Technology
cuixiao@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, mozhu@zju.edu.cn, yuleiqin@tencent.com, lilydedbb@gmail.com
Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has become a prevalent technique for compressing large language models (LLMs). Existing KD methods are constrained by the need for identical tokenizers (i.e., vocabularies) between teacher and student models, limiting their versatility in handling LLMs of
different architecture families. In this paper, we introduce
the Multi-Level Optimal Transport (MultiLevelOT), a novel
approach that advances the optimal transport for universal
cross-tokenizer knowledge distillation. Our method aligns the
logit distributions of the teacher and the student at both token
and sequence levels using diverse cost matrices, eliminating
the need for dimensional or token-by-token correspondence.
At the token level, MultiLevelOT integrates both global and
local information by jointly optimizing all tokens within a sequence to enhance robustness. At the sequence level, we efficiently capture complex distribution structures of logits via
the Sinkhorn distance, which approximates the Wasserstein
distance for divergence measures. Extensive experiments on
tasks such as extractive QA, generative QA, and summarization demonstrate that the MultiLevelOT outperforms state-ofthe-art cross-tokenizer KD methods under various settings.
Our approach is robust to different student and teacher models across model families, architectures, and parameter sizes.

…

Sequence-level
Optimal
Transport

…

…

Sequence-aware
Token-level
Optimal
Transport

…

Figure 1: An illustration of vocabulary mismatch resulting
from cross-tokenizer discrepancies. Unlike strict token-wise
distillation methods that may lead to token misalignment,
we employ sequence-level and sequence-aware token-level
optimal transport to facilitate effective knowledge transfer.

compatibility for applications such as multi-teacher knowledge transfer, where the student model learns from multiple teacher models with potentially different tokenization
schemes. However, most existing KD methods rely on divergence measures such as Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Park, Kim, and
Yang 2021; Agarwal et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024), reverse
KL (RKL) divergence (Tu et al. 2020; Gu et al. 2023b),
and Jensen–Shannon (JS) divergence (Wen et al. 2023; Yin
et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2021). These measures require a strict
point-by-point correspondence across dimensions between
the student and teacher, necessitating the use of the same
tokenizer and consistent vocabularies, which limits their applicability when different tokenizers are involved.
Very few studies notice such deficiency in directly applying existing KD techniques on LLMs, for the simple reason
that most KD methods are developed for few mainstream
open-source models. ULD (Boizard et al. 2024), the first
attempt ever to tackle this issue, aligns the distributions of
individual tokens between the teacher and the student using token-wise optimal transport (OT). However, ULD focuses solely on the internal information of individual tokens
without considering the global context for robust matching.
Additionally, its reliance on zero padding introduces noise
and hinders the effective use of logarithmic cost matrices.
DSKD (Zhang et al. 2024b), another token-wise alignment

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) such as LLaMA (Touvron
et al. 2023a,b; Meta 2024), Mistral (Jiang et al. 2023) and
Qwen (Bai et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024) have set stateof-the-art (SOTA) records on various natural language processing (NLP) tasks. While the scaling laws of LLMs have
driven the development of larger models with billions of parameters, their substantial sizes pose significant challenges
to deployment under resource-constrained environments. To
address this issue, knowledge distillation (KD) has emerged
as a cost-efficient technique for its ability to distill smaller
models that maintain competitive performance.
Cross-tokenizer knowledge distillation (CTKD) refers to
the process of transferring knowledge between models that
use different tokenizers (see Figure 1). It is crucial to ensure
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Houqiang Li.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23724

