The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FactorGCL: A Hypergraph-Based Factor Model with Temporal Residual
Contrastive Learning for Stock Returns Prediction
Yitong Duan, Weiran Wang, Jian Li
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{dyt19, wang-wr21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Amazon

As a fundamental method in economics and finance, the factor model has been extensively utilized in quantitative investment. In recent years, there has been a paradigm shift from
traditional linear models with expert-designed factors to more
flexible nonlinear machine learning-based models with datadriven factors, aiming to enhance the effectiveness of these
factor models. However, due to the low signal-to-noise ratio
in market data, mining effective factors in data-driven models
remains challenging. In this work, we propose a hypergraphbased factor model with temporal residual contrastive learning (FactorGCL) that employs a hypergraph structure to better capture high-order nonlinear relationships among stock
returns and factors. To mine hidden factors that supplement
human-designed prior factors for predicting stock returns, we
design a cascading residual hypergraph architecture, in which
the hidden factors are extracted from the residual information
after removing the influence of prior factors. Additionally,
we propose a temporal residual contrastive learning method
to guide the extraction of effective and comprehensive hidden factors by contrasting stock-specific residual information
over different time periods. Our extensive experiments on real
stock market data demonstrate that FactorGCL not only outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods but also mines effective hidden factors for predicting stock returns.

eBay

Alibaba

Regeneron
Vertex
Moderna
American NC Line
Airlines
Expedia

Figure 1: Stock price trends vary across different sectors and
industries. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the stock price
trends of the electronic consumer and medical industries exhibited high correlations, which are insufficiently explained
using human-designed industry factors.

Fama-French model (Eugene and French 1992) employs
three manually designed factors: market, size, and value.
However, these human-designed factors, while effective, are
limited in number and may not sufficiently explain stock returns. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, stock price
trends across different industries exhibited high correlations
that could not be adequately explained by industry-specific
factors based on prior human experience. Moreover, most
existing factor models are linear, explaining stock returns
through a linear combination of factors weighted by factor
exposures. However, recent studies (Levin 1995; Almeida
and Freire 2023; Bansal and Yaron 2004; He and Krishnamurthy 2013) have identified complex nonlinear relationships between factors and stock returns in real markets. This
discrepancy highlights the limitations of linear factor models in capturing actual market behavior. Consequently, a core
issue in current factor model research is how to mine more
effective factors that are applicable to real market behavior.
Recent advancements in machine learning (ML) have introduced a new perspective for factor model research (Kelly,
Pruitt, and Su 2019; Uddin and Yu 2020; Gu, Kelly, and Xiu
2021). ML-based approaches can learn complex and nonlinear market patterns in a data-driven manner and construct

Introduction
In the domain of stock investment, the factor model has
long been a cornerstone for explaining and predicting stock
returns, which employs specific variables, known as factors, to elucidate fluctuations in stock prices (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Sun 2020; Fama and French 2021). This method,
prevalent in both academia and industry, has demonstrated
a strong ability to explain and predict stock returns. Consequently, establishing an effective factor model is of
paramount importance in stock investment.
The factor model explains stock returns by utilizing various factors, including fundamental, technical, and macroeconomic indicators. Specifically, in a factor model, stocks
are described by factors and their corresponding factor exposures, which represent the impact of factors on stocks. In
traditional factor models, these factors are designed based
on expert practical experience. For instance, the well-known
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

173

