The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Progressive Multi-granular Alignments for Grounded Reasoning in Large
Vision-Language Models
Quang-Hung Le1 , Long Hoang Dang2 , Ngan Hoang Le3 , Truyen Tran1 , Thao Minh Le1
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University, Australia
2
Posts and Telecommunications Institute of Technology, Vietnam
3
University of Arkansas, USA
q.le@deakin.edu.au, longdh@ptit.edu.vn, thile@@uark.edu, truyen.tran@deakin.edu.au, thao.le@deakin.edu.au
1

Abstract
Existing Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) excel
at matching concepts across multi-modal inputs but struggle with compositional concepts and high-level relationships between entities. This paper introduces Progressive
multi-granular Vision-Language alignments (PromViL), a
novel framework to enhance LVLMs’ ability in performing
grounded compositional visual reasoning tasks. Our approach
constructs a hierarchical structure of multi-modal alignments,
ranging from simple to complex concepts. By progressively
aligning textual descriptions with corresponding visual regions, our model learns to leverage contextual information
from lower levels to inform higher-level reasoning. To facilitate this learning process, we introduce a data generation process that creates a novel dataset derived from Visual Genome, providing a wide range of nested compositional
vision-language pairs. Experimental results demonstrate that
our PromViL framework significantly outperforms baselines
on various visual grounding and compositional question answering tasks.

Figure 1: Comparison with Existing LVLMs: (a) Coarsegrained: Whole image/region with full text, lacks object details. (b) Fine-grained: Simple phrases and bounding boxes,
lacks relational context. (c) PromViL employs hierarchical
multi-granular associations, progressively utilizing simpler
concepts as cues to understand more complex ones.

Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) (Liu et al. 2024;
Li et al. 2023b), pre-trained on vast amounts of image-text
data, hold great promise in solving complex vision-language
(V-L) tasks. However, current LVLMs still fall short in compositional reasoning – the ability to answer complex queries
composed of smaller elements (Ma et al. 2023; Zhao et al.
2022). Compositionality is a pervasive phenomenon, seen in
language with syntax trees, in vision with scenes and objects, and indeed wherever “the meaning of the whole is a
function of the meanings of its parts” (Cresswell 2016).
When faced with a complex visual query, humans can recursively decompose it into smaller components while simultaneously grounding them to corresponding visual elements (Bottou 2014; Hupkes et al. 2020; Janssen and Partee 1997). Current LVLMs do not yet possess that ability.
Most existing models (Huang et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023b)
process whole textual prompts and entire images, relying
on associations between holistic image embeddings and textual embeddings. These methods disregard interactions between sentence parts and image components, leading to poor

grounding of textual information (Li et al. 2023a) and subsequently to suboptimal performance in reasoning tasks.
Others, like Kosmos-2 (Peng et al. 2024), Pink (Xuan
et al. 2024), and CoVLM (Li et al. 2023a) address these
drawbacks by infusing location information corresponding
to visual entities into the language generation process to enhance grounding ability. As a result, they can ground simple concepts involving individual objects, but still struggle
with scenarios involving multiple objects and complex relationships. This limitation may stem from their underlying grounding processes. The coarse-grained processes (Fig.
1.a) align complex expressions (e.g., ”the car behind the person next to the man with a jacket”) to a region but ignore
object-level alignments, which is crucial for tasks like visual
reasoning and image captioning (Zeng, Zhang, and Li 2021).
The fine-grained processes (Fig. 1.b), on the other hand,
align concepts with single objects but struggle to understand
relations among multiple objects, especially in ambiguous

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4473

