The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Locate Anything on Earth: Advancing Open-Vocabulary
Object Detection for Remote Sensing Community
Jiancheng Pan1,2 * † , Yanxing Liu3 * , Yuqian Fu4,5‡ , Muyuan Ma1 ,
Jiahao Li1 , Danda Pani Paudel5 , Luc Van Gool4,5 , Xiaomeng Huang1‡
1
Tsinghua University
Zhejiang University of Technology
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
ETH Zürich
5
INSAIT, Sofia University
jiancheng.pan.plus@gmail.com, liuyanxing21@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yuqian.fu@insait.ai, hxm@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

tion (OVD) (Zareian et al. 2021) has been receiving increasing attention. OVD relaxes the limitation of close-set object
categories in the traditional OD, allowing the detection of
any novel concept during the testing time. Among various
OVD methods, DINO (Zhang et al. 2023) based detectors,
e.g., GroundingDINO (Liu et al. 2024), have recently shown
promising performance on mainstream OVD benchmarks.
However, almost all of the state-of-the-art OVD methods
are trained and tested on natural-world images. When applied to Earth science-related tasks, such as environmental
monitoring, natural disaster assessment, land-use planning,
these methods struggle to generalize due to the huge data
domain gap. Unlike natural-world imagery, Earth science relies on remote sensing imagery, which exhibit much higher
resolutions, distinct image styles (Ma, Pan, and Bai 2024;
Pan et al. 2023b), and different semantic class concepts. This
makes the direct transfer of current OVD models nontrivial.
Therefore, in this paper, we are motivated to advance openvocabulary object detection for remote sensing community.
To achieve this goal, we first reformulate the task of
OVD for remote sening filed as Locate Anything on Earth
(LAE)1 . As illustrated in Figure 1, our aim is to enable LAE
models could detect any novel concept on Earth. Our efforts are mainly made from two key aspects: first, a LAELabel Engine is developed to construct the large-scale remote sensing training data; second, a novel LAE-DINO
Model is proposed and trained to work as the first foundation models for the newly proposed LAE task.
More specifically, the LAE-Label engine is proposed to
solve the lack of diverse object-level labeled data in the
remote sensing community, which is essentially an indispensable part of training robust foundation models. To fully
leverage the existing scattered remote sensing data which
can be broadly grouped into labeled and unlabeled data, our
LAE-Label engine proposes two distinct solutions. For labeled datasets, we focus on unifying them through image
slicing, format alignment, and sampling, forming the fine-

Object detection, particularly open-vocabulary object detection, plays a crucial role in Earth sciences, such as environmental monitoring, natural disaster assessment, and landuse planning. However, existing open-vocabulary detectors,
primarily trained on natural-world images, struggle to generalize to remote sensing images due to a significant data
domain gap. Thus, this paper aims to advance the development of open-vocabulary object detection in remote sensing community. To achieve this, we first reformulate the task
as Locate Anything on Earth (LAE) with the goal of detecting any novel concepts on Earth. We then developed the
LAE-Label Engine which collects, auto-annotates, and unifies up to 10 remote sensing datasets creating the LAE-1M —
the first large-scale remote sensing object detection dataset
with broad category coverage. Using the LAE-1M, we further propose and train the novel LAE-DINO Model, the
first open-vocabulary foundation object detector for the LAE
task, featuring Dynamic Vocabulary Construction (DVC) and
Visual-Guided Text Prompt Learning (VisGT) modules. DVC
dynamically constructs vocabulary for each training batch,
while VisGT maps visual features to semantic space, enhancing text features. We comprehensively conduct experiments
on established remote sensing benchmark DIOR, DOTAv2.0,
as well as our newly introduced 80-class LAE-80C benchmark. Results demonstrate the advantages of the LAE-1M
dataset and the effectiveness of the LAE-DINO method.

Code — https://github.com/jaychempan/LAE-DINO

Introduction
As one of the most fundamental and important tasks in
the file of computer vision, object detection (OD) and localization (Ren et al. 2015) has been extensively studied over the years, leading to the development of numerous detectors. In particular, open-vocabulary object detec* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work is done during an internship at Tsinghua University.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

1
Following (Zhang and Wang 2024), we use “localization” to
describe detection tasks in the remote sensing domain.

6281

