The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Modeling All Response Surfaces in One for Conditional Search Spaces
Jiaxing Li1,2 * , Wei Liu2 , Chao Xue2 , Yibing Zhan2† , Xiaoxing Wang3 , Weifeng Liu1 , Dacheng Tao4
1

China University of Petroleum (East China)
2
JD Explore Academy
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Nanyang Technological University
xinghui0606@gmail.com, lwwd1996@163.com, xuechao19@jd.com, zybjy@mail.ustc.edu.cn, figure1 wxx@sjtu.edu.cn,
liuwf@upc.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com
the global optimal configuration x∗ = arg minx∈χ f (x).
The sequential Bayesian optimization procedure contains
two key steps (Shahriari et al. 2016): (1) BO seeks a probabilistic surrogate model to capture the distribution of the
black-box f given n noisy observations yi = f (xi ) + ϵ, i ⊂
1, ..., n, ϵ ∼ N (0, σ). (2) Suggest the next query xn+1 by
maximizing an exploit-explore trade-off acquisition function α(x). The most common choice of the surrogate models
is Gaussian Process (GP) (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams
2012; Seeger 2004) due to its generality and good uncertainty estimation. As to acquisition functions, the common choice for GP-based BO is the Expected Improvement
(EI) (Mockus 1994; Ament et al. 2023).
In the traditional BO setting, the search space χ is flat
where all configurations have the same dimensions and
structure 1 : x ∈ χ ⊂ Rd , where d is the number of dimensions. However, in many practical AutoML scenarios,
such as Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter optimization (CASH) (Swersky et al. 2014) and Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) (Thornton et al. 2013; Tan et al.
2019), the search spaces are conditional where the configurations have different structures and number of dimension.
Such a conditional search space χ can be decomposed
into a series of flat subspaces (Jenatton et al. 2017): χ =
χ1 ∪ χ2 ∪ ... ∪ χn and configurations in the same subi
space have the same structure: xi ∈ χi ⊂ Rd . We give
a typical CASH example in Fig. 1. The space consists of
two machine-learning algorithms and their specific hyperparameters, which can be partitioned into 6 subspaces. Due to
the unaligned features among configurations within different subspaces, the surrogate models commonly used, such
as GP, are not directly applicable.
A straightforward strategy to solve this issue is to
build separate surrogate models for each subspace independently (Levesque et al. 2017). Given the lack of information
sharing during the training phase of the GPs, most of these
approaches suffer from the requirement of a significant number of observations to ensure the predictive performance of

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a sample-efficient black-box
optimizer commonly used in search spaces where hyperparameters are independent. However, in many practical AutoML scenarios, there will be dependencies among hyperparameters, forming a conditional search space, which can be
partitioned into structurally distinct subspaces. The structure
and dimensionality of hyperparameter configurations vary
across these subspaces, challenging the application of BO.
Some previous BO works have proposed solutions to develop
multiple Gaussian Process models in these subspaces. However, these approaches tend to be inefficient as they require a
substantial number of observations to guarantee each GP’s
performance and cannot capture relationships between hyperparameters across different subspaces. To address these
issues, this paper proposes a novel approach to model the
response surfaces of all subspaces in one, which can model
the relationships between hyperparameters elegantly via a
self-attention mechanism. Concretely, we design a structureaware hyperparameter embedding to preserve the structural
information. Then, we introduce an attention-based deep feature extractor, capable of projecting configurations with different structures from various subspaces into a unified feature
space, where the response surfaces can be formulated using
a single standard Gaussian Process. The empirical results on
a simulation function, various real-world tasks, and HPO-B
benchmark demonstrate that our proposed approach improves
the efficacy and efficiency of BO within conditional search
spaces.

Introduction
Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2016; Garnett 2023; Papenmeier, Nardi, and Poloczek 2022, 2023)
is a powerful and efficient global optimizer for expensive
black-box functions, which has gained increasing attention
in AutoML systems and achieved great success in a number of practical application fields in recent years (MartinezCantin et al. 2007; González et al. 2015; Calandra et al.
2016; Roussel et al. 2024). Considering a black-box function f : χ → R defined on a search space χ, BO aims to find

1

* This work was done while the author was an intern at JD Ex-

The structure of a configuration in this paper is defined as containing two aspects: dependencies between pairs of hyperparameters and semantic information of each hyperparameter. Therefore,
the hyperparameter “learning rate” has the same semantic information in XGBoost and DNN models.

plore Academy.
†
Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18323

