The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EWMoE: An Effective Model for Global Weather Forecasting with
Mixture-of-Experts
Lihao Gan1 , Xin Man1,2 , Chenghong Zhang3 , Jie Shao1,2 *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Sichuan Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Yibin, China
3
Institute of Plateau Meteorology, China Meteorological Administration, Chengdu, China
{ganlihao,manxin}@std.uestc.edu.cn, zhangchenghong@cma.gov.cn, shaojie@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

unresolved processes. Additionally, NWP methods face challenges in meeting the diverse needs of weather forecasting
due to its high computational cost, the difficulty of solving
nonlinear physical processes, and model deviations (Robert
1982; Simmons and Hollingsworth 2002).
To address the above issues of NWP models, researchers
have turned their attention to data-driven weather forecasting based on deep learning methods. These methods run
very quickly and can easily achieve a balance among model
complexity, prediction resolution, and prediction accuracy
(Dueben and Bauer 2018; Scher 2018; Weyn, Durran, and
Caruana 2019). Denby (2020) first employed Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) for the classification of weather satellite images. Xu et al. (2019) utilized a combination of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) and Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) for cloud prediction. While these attempts
reveal the potential of deep learning methods in weather
forecasting, they are limited by low-resolution data and ineffective models, resulting in limited applications.
Recently, FourCastNet (Kurth et al. 2023) increased the
resolution to 0.25◦ , comparable to the ECMWF Integrated
Forecast Systems (IFS). ClimaX (Nguyen et al. 2023) showed
superior performance on weather benchmarks for weather
forecasting and climate projections, even when pretrained
at lower resolutions and with limited computing budgets.
Pangu-Weather (Bi et al. 2022) was the first state-of-the-art
model to outperform IFS. These models are based on Vision
Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), and use standard
ViT embedding to process meteorological data. However, meteorological data is different from general computer vision
image input. The channels in meteorological data represent
atmospheric variables with intricate physical relationships
and have different coordinate information in the earth coordinate system. ViT embedding method cannot effectively
extract the physical features between these meteorological
variables and the geographical features of the variables themselves (Hu et al. 2023). Moreover, these weather forecasting
models usually require a very large amount of data, and their
adoption was constrained by the high computational demands
required (Chen et al. 2023b) for training. For example, FourCastNet utilized 64 Nvidia A100 GPUs for a training period
of 16 hours, highlighting the extensive resources needed (Bi
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023a) for the development of cuttingedge, deep learning based weather forecasting model. These

Weather forecasting is a crucial task for meteorologic research, with direct social and economic impacts. Recently,
data-driven weather forecasting models based on deep learning
have shown great potential, achieving superior performance
compared with traditional numerical weather prediction methods. However, these models often require massive training
data and computational resources. In this paper, we propose
EWMoE, an effective model for accurate global weather forecasting, which requires significantly less training data and
computational resources. Our model incorporates three key
components to enhance prediction accuracy: 3D absolute position embedding, a core Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer, and
two specific loss functions. We conduct our evaluation on
the ERA5 dataset using only two years of training data. Extensive experiments demonstrate that EWMoE outperforms
current models such as FourCastNet and ClimaX at all forecast time, achieving competitive performance compared with
the state-of-the-art models Pangu-Weather and GraphCast in
evaluation metrics such as Anomaly Correlation Coefficient
(ACC) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). Additionally,
ablation studies indicate that applying the MoE architecture to
weather forecasting offers significant advantages in improving
accuracy and resource efficiency.

Introduction
Weather forecasting is the analysis of past and present
weather observations, as well as the use of modern science
and technology, to predict the state of the Earth atmosphere
in the future. It is one of the most important applications
of scientific computing and plays a crucial role in key sectors such as transportation, logistics, agriculture, and energy
production (Bauer, Thorpe, and Brunet 2015). Traditionally,
atmospheric scientists have relied on Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) methods (Bjerknes, Volken, and Bronnimann
2009; Lorenc 1986), which utilize mathematical models of
the atmosphere and oceans to forecast the weather states
based on current weather conditions. While modern meteorological forecasting systems have achieved satisfactory
results using NWP methods, these methods largely rely on
parametric numerical models, which can introduce errors
in the parameterization (Beljaars et al. 2018) of complex,
* Corresponding author: Jie Shao.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

210

