The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Systematic Exploration of Knowledge Graph Alignment with Large Language
Models in Retrieval Augmented Generation
Shiyu Tian1 , Shuyue Xing1 , Xingrui Li1 , Yangyang Luo1 , Caixia Yuan1 ,
Wei Chen2 , Huixing Jiang2* , Xiaojie Wang1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
LI Auto Inc.
{tiansy, xsy84160158, liangy298, luoyangyang, yuancx, xjwang}@bupt.edu.cn
{jianghuixing, chenwei10}@lixiang.com
Abstract
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) with Knowledge
Graphs (KGs) is an effective way to enhance Large Language Models (LLMs). Due to the natural discrepancy between structured KGs and sequential LLMs, KGs must be
linearized to text before being inputted into LLMs, leading
to the problem of KG Alignment with LLMs (KGA). However, recent KG+RAG methods only consider KGA as a simple step without comprehensive and in-depth explorations,
leaving three essential problems unclear: (1) What are the
factors and their effects in KGA? (2) How do LLMs understand KGs? (3) How to improve KG+RAG by KGA? To fill
this gap, we conduct systematic explorations on KGA, where
we first define the problem of KGA and subdivide it into
the graph transformation phase (graph-to-graph) and the linearization phase (graph-to-text). In the graph transformation
phase, we study graph features at the node, edge, and full
graph levels from low to high granularity. In the linearization phase, we study factors on formats, orders, and templates
from structural to token levels. We conduct substantial experiments on 15 typical LLMs and three common datasets.
Our main findings include: (1) The centrality of the KG affects the final generation; formats have the greatest impact
on KGA; orders are model-dependent, without an optimal order adapting for all models; the templates with special token
separators are better. (2) LLMs understand KGs by a unique
mechanism, different from processing natural sentences, and
separators play an important role. (3) We achieved 7.3% average performance improvements on four common LLMs on
the KGQA task by combining the optimal factors to enhance
KGA.

1

Figure 1: Examples of four KG linearization formats, one
type of factor in KGA, and their average performances on
the GraphextQA test set over 14 models indicate the significance of KGA in RAG.

To address these issues, the current mainstream approach
builds Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems that
enable LLMs to access external knowledge to improve generation quality (Gao et al. 2024).
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are one of the most commonly
used external knowledge sources and have unique advantages: (1) They are structured and easy to retrieve (Ji et al.
2022). (2) They represent the core semantics of knowledge
in the form of triple, which is aligned with human cognition
(Zhao et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2024). (3) They support symbolic reasoning, which can give human-readable reasoning
paths for interoperability (Abu-Salih 2021). Thus, incorporating KGs into LLMs by RAG (KG+RAG) is a promising
way to elevate LLMs to the next level (Pan et al. 2024).
Since there is a natural discrepancy between structural
KGs and sequential LLMs, KGs must be linearized into
text to be fed into LLMs, which raises a unique problem:

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) (Zhao et al. 2023b)
have demonstrated superior capabilities and generalizability across various tasks (Bang et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023)
and are regarded as a step toward realizing Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) (Bubeck et al. 2023; Xi et al. 2023).
However, recent studies reveal that LLMs lack expertise and
up-to-date knowledge (Schick et al. 2023; Peng et al. 2023),
suffer from hallucination (Rawte, Sheth, and Das 2023), especially in knowledge-intensive tasks (Bang et al. 2023).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25291

