The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Deep Learning Speed and Performance Through Synaptic Neural
Balance
Antonios Alexos* , Ian Domingo* , Pierre Baldi
University of California, Irvine
aalexos@uci.edu, idomingo@uci.edu, pfbaldi@uci.edu

Abstract

2023). Here we develop the concept of synaptic neural balance which refers to any systematic relationship between the
input and output synaptic weights of individual neurons, or
layers of neurons. Specifically, we consider the case where
the cost of the input weights is equal to the cost of the output
weights, where the cost is defined by some regularizer. One
of the most basic examples of such a relationship, described
below, is when the sum of the squares of the input weights
of a neuron is equal to the sum of the squares of its output
weights. In this work, we briefly describe the theory of synaptic neural balance and demonstrate its applications to deep
learning regularization. We now describe the base case of
synaptic neural balance.
Base Case: Consider a neuron with a ReLU activation function inside a network trained to minimize a regularized error
function E = E + R, where E is the data-dependent error
(typically the negative log-likelihood of the data) and R is
the regularizer (typically L2 regularizer). If we multiply the
incoming weights of the neuron by some λ > 0 (including
the bias) and divide the outgoing weights of the neuron by
the same λ, it is easy to see that this scaling operation does
not affect in any way the contribution of the neuron to the rest
of the network. Thus, the error E which depends only on the
input-output function of the network is unchanged. However,
the value of the L2 regularizer changes continuously with λ,
and the corresponding contribution is given by:

We present theory of synaptic neural balance and we show
experimentally that synaptic neural balance can improve deep
learning speed, and accuracy, even in data-scarce environments. Given an additive cost function (regularizer) of the
synaptic weights, a neuron is said to be in balance if the total
cost of its incoming weights is equal to the total cost of its
outgoing weights. For large classes of networks, activation
functions, and regularizers, neurons can be balanced fully or
partially using scaling operations that do not change their
functionality. Furthermore, these balancing operations are associated with a strictly convex optimization problem with a
single optimum and can be carried out in any order. In our
simulations, we systematically observe that: (1) Fully balancing before training results in better performance as compared
to several other training approaches; (2) Interleaving partial
(layer-wise) balancing and stochastic gradient descent steps
during training results in faster learning convergence and better
overall accuracy (with L1 balancing converging faster than L2
balancing); and (3) When given limited training data, neural
balanced models outperform plain or regularized models; and
this is observed in both feedforward and recurrent networks. In
short, the evidence supports that neural balancing operations
could be added to the arsenal of methods used to regularize
and train neural networks. Furthermore, balancing operations
are entirely local and can be carried out asynchronously, making them plausible for biological or neuromorphic systems.
Our code is publicly available on github.

X

Code — https://github.com/antonyalexos/Neural-Balance

i∈IN

Introduction
Broadly speaking, neural balance refers to the idea of achieving or keeping a certain equilibrium in a neural network
during training or after training, whereby such equilibrium
may facilitate better information flow, or lower energy expenditure (Shwartz-Ziv 2022). As such, there are different
notions of neural balance including, for example, the notion
of balance between excitation and inhibition in biological
neural networks (Froemke 2015; Field et al. 2020; Howes
and Shatalina 2022; Kim and Lee 2022; Shirani and Choi
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15339

(λwi )2 +

X
i∈OU T

(wi /λ)2 = λ2 A +

1
B
λ2

(1)

where IN and OU T denote the setP
of incoming and out2
going weights respectively, A =
i∈IN wi , and B =
P
2
i∈OU T wi . When λ moves away from 1, the contribution
increases in one direction and decreases in the other. In the
direction where it decreases, we can solve for the value λ∗
associated with the minimal cost. Without taking derivatives,
we note that the product of the two terms on the right-hand
side of Equation 1 is equal to AB and does not depend on
λ. Thus, the minimum is achieved when these two terms are
equal, which yields: (λ∗ )4 = B/A for the optimal λ∗ . The
corresponding new set of weights, vi = λ∗ wi for the input
∗
weights and
Pvi = wi /λ Pfor the outgoing weights, must be
balanced: i∈IN vi2 = i∈OU T vi2 . This is because the optimal scaling factor for the optimal synaptic weights can only

