The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ToMATO: Verbalizing the Mental States of Role-Playing LLMs
for Benchmarking Theory of Mind
Kazutoshi Shinoda, Nobukatsu Hojo, Kyosuke Nishida, Saki Mizuno,
Keita Suzuki, Ryo Masumura, Hiroaki Sugiyama, Kuniko Saito
NTT Corporation
kazutoshi.shinoda@ntt.com

Abstract

as beliefs have been assessed (Ma et al. 2023), especially for
second-order ToM. (2) False beliefs about beliefs or world
states have been the main focus of previous studies (Le,
Boureau, and Nickel 2019; Kim et al. 2023b). However,
false beliefs about other types of mental states have not been
explored. Understanding false beliefs about a range of mental states should be crucial for LLMs to facilitate effective
social interaction in real-world scenarios. (3) The behaviors
and mental states of the characters in most benchmarks do
not depend on their personality traits, even though they do
in the real world (Costa and McCrae 1980; Izard et al. 1993;
Mehl, Gosling, and Pennebaker 2006).
To address the above issues, we introduce ToMATO, a
new Theory-of-Mind dATaset generated via Inner Speech
prOmpting.1 Firstly, ToMATO comprehensively evaluates
first- and second-order ToM for five categories of mental
states: beliefs, intentions, desires, emotions, and knowledge.
Secondly, we provide ToMATO-FB, a subset of ToMATO
for evaluating understanding of false beliefs about the five
mental states of others, e.g., understanding Bob thinks that
Alice feels relieved, while Alice feels frustrated (Figure 1).
In this regard, ToMATO is the most comprehensive benchmark compared to the existing ones. Lastly, ToMATO can
evaluate the robustness of LLMs to the diverse personality
traits of characters as seen in the real world. See Table 1 for
the detailed comparison.
Collecting human conversations and mental states of participants with self-report can be challenging in terms of cost,
privacy, and accuracy (Nisbett and Wilson 1977). As recent
LLMs have been shown to role-play assigned personalities
(Jiang et al. 2023, 2024) and engage in conversations (Zhou
et al. 2024b), we generate ToMATO with a newly designed
LLM-LLM interaction. Namely, we design Inner Speech
prompting (Table 2), which promotes role-playing LLMs
to verbalize their mental states as thoughts in conversations
with another LLM. This idea is inspired by the debate in
Dillion et al. (2023) about the feasibility of LLMs to simulate human participants in psychological science. Moreover,
we hypothesize that ensuring information asymmetry about
thoughts is a crucial factor in having false beliefs about the
mental states of others as shown in Figure 1. In addition, we

Existing Theory of Mind (ToM) benchmarks diverge from
real-world scenarios in three aspects: 1) they assess a limited range of mental states such as beliefs, 2) false beliefs are
not comprehensively explored, and 3) the diverse personality traits of characters are overlooked. To address these challenges, we introduce ToMATO, a new ToM benchmark formulated as multiple-choice QA over conversations. ToMATO
is generated via LLM-LLM conversations featuring information asymmetry. By employing a prompting method that requires role-playing LLMs to verbalize their thoughts before
each utterance, we capture both first- and second-order mental states across five categories: belief, intention, desire, emotion, and knowledge. These verbalized thoughts serve as answers to questions designed to assess the mental states of
characters within conversations. Furthermore, the information asymmetry introduced by hiding thoughts from others
induces the generation of false beliefs about various mental states. Assigning distinct personality traits to LLMs further diversifies both utterances and thoughts. ToMATO consists of 5.4k questions, 753 conversations, and 15 personality
trait patterns. Our analysis shows that this dataset construction approach frequently generates false beliefs due to the information asymmetry between role-playing LLMs, and effectively reflects diverse personalities. We evaluate nine LLMs
on ToMATO and find that even GPT-4o mini lags behind human performance, especially in understanding false beliefs,
and lacks robustness to various personality traits.

1

Introduction

Theory of Mind (ToM) is the cognitive ability to infer unobservable mental states such as beliefs, intentions, and desires
of others (Premack and Woodruff 1978). The ToM reasoning
capability is thought to be the cornerstone of human social
intelligence (Fan et al. 2022), and indispensable to interact
with others (Baron-Cohen, Leslie, and Frith 1985).
To investigate whether large language models (LLMs)
possess human-like ToM, researchers have used various
benchmarks. However, existing ToM benchmarks are not
aligned well with real-world scenarios in the following three
aspects. (1) Despite various categories of mental states that
can be inferred by ToM as studied in psychology (Beaudoin et al. 2020), only limited types of mental states such

1
Our dataset and codes are available at https://github.com/
nttmdlab-nlp/ToMATO.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1520

