The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FOCUS: Towards Universal Foreground Segmentation
†

Zuyao You1,2 , Lingyu Kong1 * , Lingchen Meng1,2 * , Zuxuan Wu1,2 ,
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
{zyyou23, lykong22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {lcmeng20, zxwu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Foreground segmentation is a fundamental task in computer
vision, encompassing various subdivision tasks. Previous research has typically designed task-specific architectures for
each task, leading to a lack of unification. Moreover, they primarily focus on recognizing foreground objects without effectively distinguishing them from the background. In this
paper, we emphasize the importance of the background and
its relationship with the foreground. We introduce FOCUS,
the Foreground ObjeCts Universal Segmentation framework
that can handle multiple foreground tasks. We develop a
multi-scale semantic network using the edge information of
objects to enhance image features. To achieve boundaryaware segmentation, we propose a novel distillation method,
integrating the contrastive learning strategy to refine the prediction mask in multi-modal feature space. We conduct extensive experiments on a total of 13 datasets across 5 tasks, and
the results demonstrate that FOCUS consistently outperforms
the state-of-the-art task-specific models on most metrics.

Code — https://github.com/geshang777/FOCUS/

Introduction
Foreground segmentation is a fundamental task in computer
vision where the primary goal is to delineate the prominent objects (foreground) from the rest of the image (background), typically referring to salient object detection (SOD)
and camouflaged object detection (COD) (Pang et al. 2022a,
2024a). In this paper, the concept of foreground segmentation can be extended to delineating objects that interest you
most in the image, where the primary goal is to obtain the
Mask of Interest (MoI), e.g., MoI should denote the mask
of the camouflaged object in COD. According to this definition, tasks such as shadow detection (SD), defocus blur
detection (DBD), forgery detection (FD), etc. belong to the
category of foreground segmentation, too.
Currently, in the field of generic segmentation, e.g. instance segmentation, semantic segmentation, and panoptic segmentation, etc., there are already many sophisticated
models (Kirillov et al. 2023; Cheng et al. 2022; Jain et al.

Figure 1: With one unified architecture, FOCUS can
handle various foreground segmentation tasks. Our proposed method can generate boundary-aware masks that are
smoother and more detailed than the previous state-of-theart task-specific models. Zoom in for more details.

2023; Ding et al. 2023b,a). However, these models often
lack targeted training for specific foreground segmentation
tasks. For instance, in the COD task, SAM struggles to distinguish camouflaged objects from the background (Hu et al.
2024). Furthermore, without prompt-guided methods, most
traditional segmentation algorithms generate multiple masks
for one image at the same time (Cheng, Schwing, and Kirillov 2021; Cheng et al. 2022; Jain et al. 2023), but users do
not require such many masks in many real-world scenarios,
e.g. image background removal, MoI is all they need. While
foreground segmentation typically produces a single or specific type of mask, making it more in line with user needs.
However, as mentioned earlier, when the concept of fore-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9580

