The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mamba-CAD: State Space Model For 3D Computer-Aided Design Generative
Modeling
Xueyang Li, Yunzhong Lou, Yu Song, Xiangdong ZhouB
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
xueyangli21@m.fudan.edu.cn, yzlou20@fudan.edu.cn, songy23@m.fudan.edu.cn, xdzhou@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) generative modeling has a
strong and long-term application in the industry. Recently,
the parametric CAD sequence as the design logic of an object has been widely mined by sequence models. However,
the industrial CAD models, especially in component objects,
are fine-grained and complex, requiring a longer parametric
CAD sequence to define. To address the problem, we introduce Mamba-CAD, a self-supervised generative modeling for
complex CAD models in the industry, which can model on a
longer parametric CAD sequence. Specifically, we first design an encoder-decoder framework based on a Mamba architecture and pair it with a CAD reconstruction task for
pre-training to model the latent representation of CAD models; and then we utilize the learned representation to guide
a generative adversarial network to produce the fake representation of CAD models, which would be finally recovered
into parametric CAD sequences via the decoder of MambaCAD. To train Mamba-CAD, we further create a new dataset
consisting of 77,078 CAD models with longer parametric
CAD sequences. Comprehensive experiments are conducted
to demonstrate the effectiveness of our model under various
evaluation metrics, especially in the generation length of valid
parametric CAD sequences.

Figure 1: The gallery of CAD models created by MambaCAD, including visual illustrations of the created CAD models from CAD sequence reconstruction, completion, and random generation.

Therefore, it attracts much attention of generative modeling on CAD models recently (Ren et al. 2022; Jones et al.
2023a,b). The parametric CAD sequence, as a key point used
in CAD tools to create 3D shapes, can be seen as a special
discrete language consisting of commands and their parameters. Hence, some interesting efforts (Wu, Xiao, and Zheng
2021; Xu et al. 2022, 2023) leverage Transformer-based architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) to learn the representation of
parametric CAD sequences and achieve impressive generation results. However, the parametric CAD sequences generated by them are not long enough to satisfy the construction
of complex 3D shapes. In practical applications, especially
in the industrial manufacturing, the design logic of objects
is relatively complex, which necessitates longer parametric
CAD sequences to define. This motivates us to make a step
forward, trying to design a generative model with the capability of producing a longer parametric CAD sequence. Inspired by recent Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023), a State Space
Model (SSM) performing well in modeling long sequences,
we further explore its capability for the parametric CAD
sequence modeling. Note that we mainly discuss the CAD
models defined with Construct Solid Geometry (CSG) representation as it is conducive to be parameterized, while the
other Boundary Representation (BRep) for CAD models is
beyond the scope of this paper as it lacks sufficient workflow
construction to recover how the designs are created by CAD
commands.
To overcome the challenge of generative modeling of
CAD models, we propose Mamba-CAD, a self-supervised

Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) generative modeling has
garnered widespread attention in the industry, particularly
in fields such as manufacturing, vehicle engineering, and architectural design. The design logic of each object in the
world can be expressed by a sequence of parametric commands. For example, constructing a cylinder is defined with
the radius to draw a complete circle which would be further
extruded with the determined height. Typically, the complex
design logic requires a longer sequence of parametric commands while a simpler object only requires a shorter parametric CAD sequence to define. In CAD fields, this kind of
representation is called parametric CAD sequences, allowing designers to use CAD tools (e.g., AutoCAD and SolidWorks) to quickly edit the model by modifying their commands and parameters. It is undeniable that prototypes of
various objects in the world almost starts with CAD designs.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5013

