The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SeFAR: Semi-supervised Fine-grained Action Recognition with
Temporal Perturbation and Learning Stabilization
Yongle Huang1,2 * , Haodong Chen1,2 * , Zhenbang Xu1 , Zihan Jia3 , Haozhou Sun4 , Dian Shao1†
1

Unmanned System Research Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
4
School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{yonglehuang, chd}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, shaodian@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

Human action understanding is crucial for the advancement
of multimodal systems. While recent developments, driven
by powerful large language models (LLMs), aim to be general enough to cover a wide range of categories, they often
overlook the need for more specific capabilities. In this work,
we address the more challenging task of Fine-grained Action Recognition (FAR), which focuses on detailed semantic labels within shorter temporal duration (e.g., “salto backward tucked with 1 turn”). Given the high costs of annotating
fine-grained labels and the substantial data needed for finetuning LLMs, we propose to adopt semi-supervised learning (SSL). Our framework, SeFAR, incorporates several innovative designs to tackle these challenges. Specifically, to
capture sufficient visual details, we construct Dual-level temporal elements as more effective representations, based on
which we design a new strong augmentation strategy for the
Teacher-Student learning paradigm through involving moderate temporal perturbation. Furthermore, to handle the high
uncertainty within the teacher model’s predictions for FAR,
we propose the Adaptive Regulation to stabilize the learning process. Experiments show that SeFAR achieves stateof-the-art performance on two FAR datasets, FineGym and
FineDiving, across various data scopes, as well as two classical coarse-grained datasets, UCF101 and HMDB51. Further
analysis and ablation studies validate the effectiveness of our
designs. Additionally, we show that the features extracted by
SeFAR could largely promote the ability of multimodal models to understand fine-grained and domain-specific semantics.

What is the action performed by the athlete in the video?
(A) Fencing (B) Skating
(C) Gymnastics (D) Diving
(C) Gymnastic.

... (C) ...

... Gymnastic.

... (C) ...

What is the action performed by the athlete in the video?
(A) pike sole circle backward with 1.5 turn to handstand
(B) pike sole circle backward to handstand
(C) pike sole circle backward with 0.5 turn to handstand
(D) pike sole circle backward with 1 turn to handstand
(C) pike sole circle backward with 0.5 turn to handstand.
The answer is (B) pike sole circle backward to handstand.
The athlete is ... pike sole circle backward to handstand.
The action ... to option (A) from the provided choices.

Figure 1: Fine-grained Action Instances. The two samples are drawn from the FineGym (Shao et al. 2020) dataset,
specifically the “pike sole circle backward with 0.5 turn to
handstand” at the top and the “... 1 turn ...” at the bottom. We further test popular MLLMs on the bottom instance
for both coarse-grained and fine-grained: GPT-4V (OpenAI
2024), VideoChat2 (Li et al. 2024), VideoLLaVA (Lin et al.
2023), and InternLM-XComposer-2.5 (Zhang et al. 2024).

Code — https://github.com/KyleHuang9/SeFAR

Introduction
Understanding videos has attracted increasing attention as
videos contain vivid visual information and rich temporal
dynamics absent in text and images. In the past year, we
have seen remarkable progress in multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) (Hu et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023; Li et al.
2024, 2023b), aiming at acquiring more general and comprehensive abilities. However, as pointed out by recent studies (Zhao et al. 2024; Yuan et al. 2023), chasing generality

may sacrifice some task-specific performance, which motivates us to delve into a perpendicular direction: focus on
more specific tasks to promote the fine-grained understanding ability of models.
Specifically, we focus on Fine-grained Action Recognition (FAR), a challenging human-centric video understanding task. To explain, classical action recognition (Xiong
et al. 2021; Xiao et al. 2022; Dave et al. 2023; Xing et al.
2023) only demands the model to provide relatively coarsegrained category such as “gymnastics”, while FAR aims to
provide more detailed, specific, and semantically accurate

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3833

