The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Syntactic Approach to Computing Complete and Sound Abstraction
in the Situation Calculus
Liangda Fang1, 4 , Xiaoman Wang1 , Zhang Chen1 , Kailun Luo2 , Zhenhe Cui3 , Quanlong Guan1 *
1

Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China
Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan 523808, China
3
Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan 411201, China
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330, China
fangld@jnu.edu.cn, wangxm@stu2022.jnu.edu.cn, ztchen@stu2020.jnu.edu.cn,
luokl@dgut.edu.cn, zhhcui@hnust.edu.cn, gql@jnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

In multi-agent systems, abstraction is used to accelerate
verification of specifications formalized in computation-tree
logic (Shoham and Grumberg 2007), alternating-time temporal logic (Lomuscio and Michaliszyn 2014; Belardinelli,
Ferrando, and Malvone 2023) and its epistemic extensions
(Lomuscio and Michaliszyn 2016; Belardinelli, Lomuscio, and Michaliszyn 2016), strategy logic (Belardinelli
et al. 2023), and µ-calculus (Ball and Kupferman 2006;
Grumberg et al. 2007).
In the area of reasoning about actions, the situation
calculus (Reiter 2001) is an expressive framework for
modeling and reasoning about dynamic changes in the
world. Golog (Levesque et al. 1997) and its concurrency
extension ConGolog (De Giacomo, Lespérance, and
Levesque 2000) are agent programming languages based
on the situation calculus that are popular means for the
control of autonomous agents. Banihashemi, De Giacomo,
and Lespérance (2017) developed a general abstraction
framework based on the situation calculus and ConGolog
programming language. This abstraction framework relates
high-level basic action theory (BAT) to low-level BAT via
the notion of refinement mapping. A refinement mapping
associates each high-level fluent to a low-level formula and
each high-level action to a low-level ConGolog program.
Based on the concept of bisimulation between high-level
models and low-level models (Milner 1971), they also
provide the definition of sound/complete abstractions of
low-level BATs under refinement mappings.
Although a lot of efforts have made on abstractions, to
the best of our knowledge, there is no syntactic approach to
computing complete and sound abstractions given suitable
refinement mappings. This paper aims to address this issue.
To this end, we first present a variant of situation calculus,
namely linear integer situation calculus, using linear integer
arithmetic as the underlying logic. We then adopt linear
integer situation calculus as the formalization of high-level
action theory and extend Banihashemi, De Giacomo, and
Lespérance (2017)’s abstraction framework. In addition,
we identify a class of Golog programs, namely guarded
actions, so as to restrict low-level Golog programs and
impose some restrictions on refinement mappings. Finally,
given a low-level BAT and a restricted refinement mapping,

Abstraction is an important and useful concept in the field
of artificial intelligence. To the best of our knowledge, there
is no syntactic method to compute a sound and complete
abstraction from a given low-level basic action theory and a
refinement mapping. This paper aims to address this issue.
To this end, we first present a variant of situation calculus,
namely linear integer situation calculus, which serves as the
formalization of high-level basic action theory. We then migrate Banihashemi, De Giacomo, and Lespérance’s abstraction framework to one from linear integer situation calculus to
extended situation calculus. Furthermore, we identify a class
of Golog programs, namely guarded actions, so as to restrict
low-level Golog programs, and impose some restrictions on
refinement mappings. Finally, we design a syntactic approach
to computing a sound and complete abstraction from a lowlevel basic action theory and a restricted refinement mapping.

Extended version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11217

Introduction
Abstraction plays an important role in many fields of artificial intelligence, including planning, multi-agent systems
and reasoning about actions. The idea behind abstraction
is to reduce a problem over large or even infinite state
space to a problem over small and finite state space by
aggregating similar concrete states into abstract states, and
hence facilitate searching a solution for planning problems
and checking some properties against multi-agent systems.
For classical planning, abstraction is often used as
a heuristic function to guide the search of the solution
(Helmert et al. 2014; Seipp and Helmert 2018). Generalized planning aims to find a uniform solution for
possibly infinitely many problem instances (Levesque 2005;
Segovia-Aguas, Jiménez, and Jonsson 2018). Srivastava,
Immerman, and Zilberstein (2011) developed a method
to generate a finite-state automata-based solution for
generalized planning based on abstraction using 3-valued
semantics (Sagiv, Reps, and Wilhelm 2002).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14911

