The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Utterance-level Emotion Recognition in Conversation with Conversation-level
Supervision
Ximing Li1,2 , Yuanchao Dai1,2 , Zhiyao Yang1,2 * , Jinjin Chi1,2 , Wanfu Gao1,2 , Lin Yuanbo Wu3
1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
3
Swansea University, United Kingdom
{liximing86, yuanchaodai, yangzy9529, chijinjin616}@gmail.com, gaowf@jlu.edu.cn, l.y.wu@swansea.ac.uk
Abstract

emotion recognition (Mittal et al. 2020; Alhuzali and Ananiadou 2023; Ouyang et al. 2024), the emotion of an utterance
in ERC is heavily influenced by the conversational context
(Zhang et al. 2023a). As shown in Fig. 1, the same utterance may convey different emotions depending on the context, necessitating annotators to repeatedly review the entire conversation. This makes the fine-grained labeling process highly time-consuming. According to labeling statistics
from ERC studies (Zahiri and Choi 2018; Chen et al. 2018;
Poria et al. 2019) and our preliminary experiments, we estimate that the average time required to label a single utterance in ERC is approximately 10 seconds, which can be
prohibitively expensive for certain real-world applications.
Inspired by the cognitive observation that humans can
rapidly grasp emotions from lengthy texts even with quick
skimming (Duggan and Payne 2011), we propose a more efficient labeling approach for ERC. Instead of labeling each
utterance individually, we suggest that annotators assign a
set of emotions to each conversation. To validate this approach, we conducted preliminary experiments, manually
labeling conversation-level emotion sets across benchmark
ERC datasets. The results indicate that this method maintains accuracy while significantly enhancing efficiency, reducing the average labeling time for a conversation with 510 utterances to just 13 seconds. This leads us to pose the
question “Is it possible, and if so, how, to utilize these
efficient yet coarse-grained datasets with conversationlevel emotion sets to train ERC predictors that can accurately identify utterance-level emotions in a weaklysupervised manner”. We formally introduce this new
weakly-supervised learning task as Dataless ERC (DERC),
and demonstrate the distinction between conventional ERC
and DERC through a comparative example in Fig. 1.
To address this question, we present, to the best of our
knowledge, the first attempt to tackle DERC. Drawing inspiration from prior weakly-supervised learning techniques
(Liu et al. 2021a; Matsuo et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024;
Yang et al. 2023), we propose a straightforward solution
based on pseudo-labeling. Specifically, we initialize pseudoutterance-level emotions using conversation-level emotion
sets and iteratively update them alongside the ERC predictor
in a self-training framework. Typically, pseudo-utterancelevel emotions are refined based on the current predictions
of the ERC predictor. To enhance accuracy, we divide all

Emotion Recognition in Conversations (ERC) involves automatically identifying the emotion of each utterance in conversations. The emotion of an utterance is contingent to the
conversation context, and thus, annotating each utterance in
ERC entails repetitive screening the whole conversation from
annotators. Such a requirement leads to prohibitive cost in
fine-grained labeling on utterance. In this paper, we propose
an efficient coarse-grained labeling strategy for ERC, which
assigns a set of emotions for each conversation. In specific,
we reformulate the ERC predictors with conversation-level
emotion sets as weakly-supervised learning to optimise a potential candidate for ERC, which is termed as Dataless ERC
(DERC). To validate this, we propose a simple-yet-flexible
DERC framework with Progressive Learning (DERC - PL). We
jointly update pseudo-utterance-level emotions and the ERC
predictor in a self-training manner, where we progressively
update the ERC predictor from training subsets with lower
noise densities to the ones with higher noise densities. We
implemented several versions of DERC - PL by incorporating
various off-the-shelf ERC methods. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed DERC - PL can be on par
with existing weakly-supervised learning baselines and supervised learning ERC methods.

Introduction
Emotion Recognition in Conversations (ERC) refers to the
task of identifying emotions, such as sadness, happiness, or
anger within conversations, which specifically focuses on
the emotion conveyed in each utterance (Zhang, Chen, and
Chen 2023; Hu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2023b). Recently, ERC has garnered significant
attention from the natural language processing community
due to its applicability in diverse real-world scenarios, including medical conversation analysis (Barnes 2019; Priya,
Firdaus, and Ekbal 2023), social media analysis (Brambilla
et al. 2022), and dialogue system construction (Ma et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2021b), among others.
Typically, addressing ERC requires the collection of finegrained training datasets where each utterance within a conversation is manually labeled. However, unlike traditional
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24503

