The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PromptDet: A Lightweight 3D Object Detection Framework with LiDAR Prompts
Kun Guo, Qiang Ling*
Dept. of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
guok@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qling@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-camera 3D object detection aims to detect and localize
objects in 3D space using multiple cameras, which has attracted more attention due to its cost-effectiveness trade-off.
However, these methods often struggle with the lack of accurate depth estimation caused by the natural weakness of the
camera in ranging. Recently, multi-modal fusion and knowledge distillation methods for 3D object detection have been
proposed to solve this problem, which are time-consuming
during the training phase and not friendly to memory cost.
In light of this, we propose PromptDet, a lightweight yet effective 3D object detection framework motivated by the success of prompt learning in 2D foundation model. Our proposed framework, PromptDet, comprises two integral components: a general camera-based detection module, exemplified by models like BEVDet and BEVDepth, and a LiDARassisted prompter. The LiDAR-assisted prompter leverages
the LiDAR points as a complementary signal, enriched with
a minimal set of additional trainable parameters. Notably, our
framework is flexible due to our prompt-like design, which
can not only be used as a lightweight multi-modal fusion
method but also as a camera-only method for 3D object detection during the inference phase. Extensive experiments on
nuScenes validate the effectiveness of the proposed PromptDet. As a multi-modal detector, PromptDet improves the
mAP and NDS by at most 22.8% and 21.1% with fewer than
2% extra parameters compared with the camera-only baseline. Without LiDAR points, PromptDet still achieves an improvement of at most 2.4% mAP and 4.0% NDS with almost
no impact on camera detection inference time.

Figure 1: Comparison of our PromptDet with previous detection frameworks. (a) Multi-modal detection needs a more
complex network architecture. The model training is timeconsuming and occupies a huge memory cost. (b) Though
knowledge distillation brings performance gains to cameraonly detection, a teacher model needs to be trained first
and the whole process is laborious and formidable. (c) Our
method uses the LiDAR modality as a flexible prompt with
a few additional parameters. PromptDet can conduct multimodal detection and camera-only detection with better performance than the baseline.
perspective features into a bird’s-eye view, showcasing substantial promise for camera-centric 3D detection tasks. However, unlike LiDAR point clouds, the inherent limitation of
images is the absence of precise depth data and 3D perceptive capabilities, which poses a challenge to further enhancing the performance of camera-only 3D object detection
methods.
To tackle the limitations of camera-only 3D object detection, several multi-modal approaches (Liang et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2023b; Yan et al. 2023; Deng et al. 2024; Jiao et al.
2023; Li et al. 2022a; Zhang et al. 2023) have been proposed
to leverage the multi-modal data, such as LiDAR points and
multi-view images, as depicted in Figure 1 (a). The geometric information provided by LiDAR points is instrumental
in offsetting the shortcomings of image-based data. These
multi-modal methods achieve better results than the singlemodality methods, which demonstrate the effectiveness of
the fusion strategies. However, these methods often entail

Code — https://github.com/lihuashengmax/PromptDet

Introduction
3D object detection is a cornerstone in autonomous driving,
with notable advancements in recent years. Most existing
camera-based 3D object detectors aim to deduce the spatial arrangement of objects by analyzing visual cues such as
color and texture. The low deployment cost and strong scalability on different hardware devices make camera-based detectors quite popular in both academia and industry. Prominent methods like BEVDet (Huang et al. 2021) and BEVFormer (Li et al. 2022b) excel in transforming image-based
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3266

