The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Convergence Analysis of Federated Learning Methods
Using Backward Error Analysis
Jinwoo Lim1 , Suhyun Kim2 * , Soo-Mook Moon1∗
1

Seoul National University
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
jinwoolim8180@snu.ac.kr, dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com, smoon@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract

(Wang et al. 2019; Yu, Yang, and Zhu 2019; Li et al. 2020;
Khaled, Mishchenko, and Richtárik 2020; Haddadpour and
Mahdavi 2019; Karimireddy et al. 2020b; Qu et al. 2022).
However, it is still challenging to make a tight analysis on
non-IID data. This paper attempts to analyze the convergence behavior of a few federated learning algorithms from
a different theoretical perspective, implicit regularization.
The concept of implicit regularization was originally introduced to explain the generalization behavior of centralized gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) (Barrett and Dherin 2021; Smith et al. 2021); unless
otherwise stated, GD and SGD are for centralized in this
paper. Their approach, inspired by backward error analysis
(Hairer et al. 2006), is to analyze the path on which discrete
parameter updates of GD or SGD lie. They found that the
path of the gradient flow does not follow the original loss,
but a modified loss under the influence of the small yet finite learning rate as well as the optimization method itself.
The approximation of the modified loss function consists of
two terms, the original loss term and the implicit regularizer
term proportional to the learning rate. The implicit regularizer leads GD and SGD to flat minima by penalizing the
norm of the gradient, thus contributing to the generalization.
Unlike GD and SGD, we found that its implicit regularizer
works negatively for the convergence of FedAvg. If we assume that the number of local SGD steps (E) and the learning rate (η) are finite but small enough to disregard the highorder terms O(E 3 η 3 ) in the parameter updates, we found
that the implicit regularizer term of FedAvg has a different
form from SGD’s. That is, the first-order term of the implicit
regularizer contains a special term, which we call the dispersion term. When the modified loss is minimized, the dispersion term is also minimized, which increases the distance
of each client’s gradient from the average gradient. Independently from this variance, we found through experiments
that the dispersion term affects the convergence of FedAvg.
We also found that there is another term in the higher-order
terms of the implicit regularizer (we call the secondary dispersion term), which can affect the convergence of FedAvg
as well. So, both terms make the parameter updates deviate
from the original path, which we call a bias in this paper.
We also obtained the implicit regularizer for variance reduction methods such as FedSAM (Caldarola, Caputo, and
Ciccone 2022; Qu et al. 2022) and SCAFFOLD (Karim-

Backward error analysis allows finding a modified loss function, which the parameter updates really follow under the influence of an optimization method. The additional loss terms
included in this modified function is called implicit regularizer. In this paper, we attempt to find the implicit regularizer for various federated learning algorithms on non-IID data
distribution, and explain why each method shows different
convergence behavior. We first show that the implicit regularizer of FedAvg disperses the gradient of each client from the
average gradient, thus increasing the gradient variance. We
also empirically show that the implicit regularizer hampers its
convergence. Similarly, we compute the implicit regularizers
of FedSAM and SCAFFOLD, and explain why they converge
better. While existing convergence analyses focus on pointing out the advantages of FedSAM and SCAFFOLD, our approach can explain their limitations in complex non-convex
settings. In specific, we demonstrate that FedSAM can partially remove the bias in the first-order term of the implicit
regularizer in FedAvg, whereas SCAFFOLD can fully eliminate the bias in the first-order term, but not in the secondorder term. Consequently, the implicit regularizer can provide a useful insight on the convergence behavior of federated
learning from a different theoretical perspective.

Introduction
Federated learning is a distributed learning technique in
which a central server builds a global model by repeatedly
aggregating the parameters of local models that clients update and upload. The most popular algorithm is FedAvg
(McMahan et al. 2017), which aggregates the parameters
simply by averaging them. Despite its privacy advantage,
FedAvg suffers from lower accuracy and slower convergence due to a misalignment between local and global objectives, especially on non-IID data distribution (Zhao et al.
2018; Karimireddy et al. 2020b). Many algorithms, such as
FedSAM (Caldarola, Caputo, and Ciccone 2022; Qu et al.
2022) and SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al. 2020b), have
been proposed to reduce the drift in local updates and enhance performance. Also, there have been many researches
to understand the difference of the convergence behavior
with an analysis from the convex optimization perspectives
* Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18719

