The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Interacted Object Grounding in Spatio-Temporal Human-Object Interactions
Xiaoyang Liu1 * , Boran Wen1 * , Xinpeng Liu1,2 * , Zizheng Zhou1 , Hongwei Fan3 ,
Cewu Lu1 , Lizhuang Ma1 , Yulong Chen1† , Yong-Lu Li1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Innovation Institute
3
Peking University
{liuxiaoyang0309, xinpengliu0907}@gmail.com, hwnorm@outlook.com,
{wenboran, zhou zz, lucewu, lzma, llong c, yonglu li}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Spatio-temporal Human-Object Interaction (ST-HOI) understanding aims at detecting HOIs from videos, which is crucial
for activity understanding. However, existing whole-bodyobject interaction video benchmarks overlook the truth that
open-world objects are diverse, that is, they usually provide
limited and predefined object classes. Therefore, we introduce a new open-world benchmark: Grounding Interacted
Objects (GIO) including 1,098 interacted objects class and
290K interacted object boxes annotation. Accordingly, an object grounding task is proposed expecting vision systems to
discover interacted objects. Even though today’s detectors
and grounding methods have succeeded greatly, they perform unsatisfactorily in localizing diverse and rare objects in
GIO. This profoundly reveals the limitations of current vision systems and poses a great challenge. Thus, we explore
leveraging spatio-temporal cues to address object grounding
and propose a 4D question-answering framework (4D-QA) to
discover interacted objects from diverse videos. Our method
demonstrates significant superiority in extensive experiments
compared to current baselines.

Figure 1: In daily HOIs, we interact with diverse objects
with limited actions. To this end, we build GIO on AVA (Gu
et al. 2018), annotating 1,000+ object classes to advance the
study of HOI, with a long-tailed open-world object distribution. We propose an open-world interacted object grounding
task based on GIO as in the right figure. Purple boxes indicate persons and green boxes indicate the grounded object.

classes (Tab. 1). The limited object classes are less general for HOI tasks. Though some hand-object interactions
and egocentric video-based HOI datasets include diverse objects like EPIC-Kitchens (Damen et al. 2018), SomethingElse (Materzynska et al. 2020) and 100DOH (Shan et al.
2020), they focus on hand-object interactions and egocentric
videos. As whole body-object interaction detection from
third-view videos matters to numerous applications (e.g.,
health-care, security), here, we study third-person bodyobject interactions, such as ride/sit on (chair, horse, etc), enter/exit (train, bus, etc). Toward open-world HOI, we propose a large-scale third-view ST-HOI benchmark in this
work, building upon AVA (Gu et al. 2018): Grounding
Interacted Object (GIO). It contains 1,098 interacted object
classes within 51 interactions and 290K frame-level triplets
⟨human, verb, object⟩ as Fig. 1 shows.
Unlike previous works focussing on human/object tracking and action detection, we probed the complex ST-HOI
through the object view given the largest scale of interacted
object classes as in Fig. 1. We propose an open-world interacted object grounding task with corresponding metrics
to formulate this challenging problem. The initial formulation of ST-HOI(Sec. 5.4) suffers from severe missing annotation, which makes detection and evaluation less reliable. Instead, our grounding task is insensitive to missing

Code — https://github.com/DirtyHarryLYL/HAKE-AVA

1

Introduction

As the prototypical unit of human activities, human-object
interaction (HOI) plays an important role in activity understanding. Researchers begin with image-based HOI learning (Chao et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019b, 2020b; Liu et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2022) and achieve great progress. Since daily HOIs
require temporal cues to avoid ambiguity in detection, e.g.,
pick up-cup and put down-cup, video HOI task (Damen et al.
2018; Weinzaepfel, Martin, and Schmid 2016; Zhuo et al.
2019; Materzynska et al. 2020) is proposed to advance spatiotemporal HOI (ST-HOI) learning.
However, many video HOI datasets are designed with limited predefined object classes. Charades (Sigurdsson et al.
2016), DALY (Weinzaepfel, Martin, and Schmid 2016), Action Genome (Ji et al. 2020) all have less than 50 object
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5622

