The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Affirm: Interactive Mamba with Adaptive Fourier Filters for Long-term Time
Series Forecasting
Yuhan Wu* , Xiyu Meng* , Huajin Hu, Junru Zhang, Yabo Dong† , Dongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China
{wuyuhan, mengxiyu, huajinhu, junruzhang, dongyb, ldm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

to large parameter sizes and quadratic complexity. Besides,
some studies also questioned the effectiveness of Transformers, revealing the permutation invariant nature in attention
may compromise temporal information (Zeng et al. 2023).
Their experiments show that a simple linear layer can surprisingly outperform complex Transformers in TSF. Yet, linear models have their issues: struggling with complex, noisy
data, and failing to capture long-term correlations. Similarly,
CNNs are limited by small receptive fields, hampering effectiveness for long-term dependency (Zeng et al. 2024).
RNNs, like LSTM and GRU, address long-term dependency
but suffer from computational inefficiency and lack of parallelization, leading to slower training and inference.
Recently, state-space-based models (SSMs) (Gu et al.
2020) have garnered attention for their potential in sequence
modeling. SSMs excel with lengthy sequences by utilizing ordinary differential equations to dynamically evolve
states over time. It incorporates hidden-attention mechanisms and context-aware selectivity with linear complexity, making them ideal for time-series analysis (Cai et al.
2024). Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023), building on SSM and
S4, has become powerful in formal language learning (Park
et al. 2024), visual representation (Zhu et al. 2024), and
image haze removal (Zheng and Wu 2024). Mamba advances SSM capabilities with a selective scanning mechanism that tailors parameters to inputs, enhancing feature
compression and information extraction. It also employs a
unique hardware-aware algorithm for better parallel processing, offering faster inference and scalability than Transformers (Wang et al. 2024b; Zhu et al. 2024). We replaced
the Transformer block with Mamba in PatchTST, and compared it to SOTA iTransformer and PatchTST on various
datasets, as shown in Figure 1 and Table 1, revealing that
Mamba’s performance varies with data frequency. It performs comparably on short-frequency datasets like weather
(10 minutes) and ETTm1 (15 minutes) but underperforms
on longer-frequency datasets like ETTh2 (hourly) and Exchange (daily). This suggests Mamba struggles with time
variations at lower frequencies, prompting us to consider
how to enhance Mamba’s performance in TSF. Clearly, improvements can be made by better learning short-term and
long-term dependencies in time series data.
To this end, we introduce Affirm (Adaptive fourier
filter interactive mamba), a lightweight time series model

In long-term series forecasting (LTSF), it is imperative for
models to adeptly discern and distill from historical time
series data to forecast future states. Although Transformerbased models excel at capturing long-term dependencies in
LTSF, their practical use is limited by issues like computational inefficiency, noise sensitivity, and overfitting on
smaller datasets. Therefore, we introduce a novel time series lightweight interactive Mamba with an adaptive Fourier
filter model (Affirm). Specifically, (i) we propose an adaptive Fourier filter block. This neural operator employs Fourier
analysis to refine feature representation, reduces noise with
learnable adaptive thresholds, and captures inter-frequency
interactions using global and local semantic adaptive Fourier
filters via element-wise multiplication. (ii) A dual interactive
Mamba block is introduced to facilitate efficient intra-modal
interactions at different granularities, capturing more detailed
local features and broad global contextual information, providing a more comprehensive representation for LTSF. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate that
Affirm consistently outperforms existing SOTA methods, offering a superior balance of accuracy and efficiency, making
it ideal for various challenging scenarios with noise levels
and data sizes. The codes and data are publicly available at
https://github.com/zjuml/Affirm.

Introduction
Time series data, collected daily and continuously by IoT
sensors and wearable devices, is inherently sequential and
time-dependent. Time series forecasting (TSF) predicts future values based on historical observations and is widely
applied in finance, meteorology, healthcare, useful life, and
transportation (Huang, Chen, and Qiao 2024; Wu et al.
2024b; Wang et al. 2024d; Guo et al. 2024; Long et al. 2024).
Nowadays, deep learning models for TSF are primarily in four families: Transformer, MLP, CNN, and RNN.
Transformers are the mainstream due to their ability to capture long-term dependencies through self-attention, such as
iTransformer (Liu et al. 2024b) and PatchTST (Nie et al.
2023). However, they struggle with small datasets, easily
falling into overfitting and computational inefficiencies due
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author is Yabo Dong.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21599

