The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CP-Guard: Malicious Agent Detection and Defense in Collaborative Bird’s Eye
View Perception
Senkang Hu1 * , Yihang Tao1 * , Guowen Xu2 , Yiqin Deng1† , Xianhao Chen3 ,
Yuguang Fang1 , and Sam Kwong4
2

1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
4
Department of Computing and Decision Sciences, Lingnan University
{senkang.forest, yihang.tommy}@my.cityu.edu.hk, guowen.xu@uestc.edu.cn
xchen@eee.hku.hk, samkwong@ln.edu.hk, {yiqideng, my.Fang}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Collaborative Perception (CP) has shown a promising technique for autonomous driving, where multiple connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAVs) share their perception information to enhance the overall perception performance and expand the perception range. However, in CP, ego CAV needs
to receive messages from its collaborators, which makes it
easy to be attacked by malicious agents. For example, a malicious agent can send harmful information to the ego CAV to
mislead it. To address this critical issue, we propose a novel
method, CP-Guard, a tailored defense mechanism for CP
that can be deployed by each agent to accurately detect and
eliminate malicious agents in its collaboration network. Our
key idea is to enable CP to reach a consensus rather than a
conflict against the ego CAV’s perception results. Based on
this idea, we first develop a probability-agnostic sample consensus (PASAC) method to effectively sample a subset of the
collaborators and verify the consensus without prior probabilities of malicious agents. Furthermore, we define a collaborative consistency loss (CCLoss) to capture the discrepancy
between the ego CAV and its collaborators, which is used as
a verification criterion for consensus. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments in collaborative bird’s eye view (BEV)
tasks and our results demonstrate the effectiveness of our CPGuard.

Figure 1: Illustration of the threats of malicious agent
in collaborative perception and our defense framework,
CP-Guard. When there is no defense, malicious CAVs
could easily send intricately crafted adversarial messages to
the ego CAV, consequently misleading the CP system and
resulting in false perception outputs. To counter this vulnerability, we propose CP-Guard, a tailored defense mechanism
for CP that can effectively detect and neutralize malicious
agents, thereby ensuring robust perception outcomes.

Introduction

CAV independently encodes local sensor inputs into intermediate feature maps. Then, these CAVs share their feature
maps with their ego CAV by vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication. Finally, the ego CAV fuses the received feature
maps with its own feature maps and decodes them to acquire
the final perception results.
However, compared with single-agent perception, multiagent CP is more vulnerable to security threats and easy
to attack, since it incorporates the information from multiple agents which makes the attack surface larger. An attack
could be executed by a man-in-the-middle who alters the
feature maps sent to the victim agent, or by a malicious agent
that directly transmits manipulated feature maps to the victim agent. For example, Tu et al. (Tu et al. 2021) generated
adversarial perturbations on the feature maps and attacked
the ego CAV, resulting in the wrong perception results. Ad-

Recently, multi-agent collaborative perception has attracted
great attention from both academia and industries since it
can overcome the limitation of single-agent perception such
as occlusion and limitation of sensing range (Han et al. 2023;
Hu et al. 2024b). Because the collaborative CAVs send complementary information (e.g., raw sensor data, intermediate
features, and perception results) to ego CAV, the ego CAV
can leverage this complementary information to extend its
perception range and tackle the blind spot problem in its
view, which is crucial for the safety of the autonomous driving systems. The operational flow of CP is as follows. Each
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23203

