The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Uncertainty Estimation for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Jiesheng Wang1 , Lin Li1 , Wei Wei1 * , Yujia Zhang1 , Xin Yang2
1

Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of
Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China
2
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, Sichuan,
China

Abstract

offline RL to address this issue. Policy constraint methods, such as BEAR (Kumar et al. 2019), TD3-BC (Fujimoto and Gu 2021), UWAC (Wu et al. 2021), and EMAQ
(Ghasemipour, Schuurmans, and Gu 2021) alleviate distributional shift by making the learned policy as close as possible to the behavior policy.
Policy constraint methods limit the optimization space
of the learned policy, making it difficult to surpass the behavior policy. Conversely, value constraint methods typically achieve conservative estimation of the Q-function, alleviating extrapolation errors caused by distributional shifts
and enhancing the learned policy. For instance, BRAC (Wu,
Tucker, and Nachum 2019) employs a behavior regularization term to estimate the Q-function conservatively. CQL
(Kumar et al. 2020) directly minimizes the Q-values of outof-distribution (OOD) actions. IQL (Kostrikov, Nair, and
Levine 2021) conservatively estimates Q-function by avoiding querying OOD actions. ATAC (Cheng et al. 2022) uses
adversarial training to constrain OOD actions. CSVE (Chen
et al. 2023) regularizes OOD actions by conservatively estimating the state value function. RND (Nikulin et al. 2023)
and DRND (Yang et al. 2024) mitigate extrapolation errors
through the use of random networks. However, these methods can lead to overly conservative Q-functions, which affect the improvement of the policy.
In recent years, methods that estimate uncertainty through
an ensemble of Q-networks to conservatively estimate the
Q-values of OOD actions have been gaining traction. EDAC
(An et al. 2021) estimates uncertainty by using a large
ensemble of Q-networks. PBRL (Bai et al. 2022) applies
uncertainty penalty separately to OOD actions and indistribution data by sampling additional OOD data. While
these methods mitigate extrapolation errors to some extent, they lack precise characterization of OOD data, which
can negatively affect in-distribution data and make it difficult to provide accurate uncertainty estimation. Moreover,
in their pursuit of effective OOD actions regularization, existing methods often overlook the importance of generalization for policy improvement, which results in excessively
pessimistic penalty that severely impact the generalization
of the Q-function, hindering policy enhancement, ultimately
leading to the agent frequently ending up learning suboptimal or even inferior policy. Therefore, dynamically adjusting the degree of conservatism of the Q-function during

Offline reinforcement learning confronts the distributional
shift challenge, a consequence of learning policy from static
datasets. Current methods primarily handle this issue by
aligning the learned policy with the behavior policy or conservatively estimating Q-values for out-of-distribution (OOD)
actions. However, these approaches can lead to overly pessimistic estimation of Q-values of the OOD actions in unfamiliar situations, resulting in a suboptimal policy. To address this, we propose a new method, Dynamic Uncertainty
estimation for Offline Reinforcement Learning. This method
introduces a base density-truncated OOD data sampling approach to reduce the impact of extrapolation errors on uncertainty estimation. It enables conservative estimation of Qvalues for OOD actions while avoiding negative impacts on
in-distribution data. We also develop a dynamic uncertainty
estimation mechanism to prevent excessive pessimism and
enhance the generalization of the Q-function. This mechanism dynamically adjusts the degree of pessimism in the Qfunction by minimizing the error between target and estimated values. Our method outperforms existing algorithms,
as demonstrated by experimental results based on the D4RL
benchmark, and proves its superiority in addressing the distributional shift challenge.

Introduction
In recent years, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has
achieved significant success in various domains, such as
gaming (Silver et al. 2017) and industrial automation (Chen
et al. 2019). DRL trains agents through extensive trial-anderror interactions with the environment. However, such trialand-error interactions are costly and dangerous in fields like
healthcare (Yu et al. 2021) and autonomous driving (Hoel,
Wolff, and Laine 2023). Offline reinforcement learning (RL)
offers a promising direction for the practical application of
RL by learning optimal policies from pre-collected data,
thus avoiding direct interactions between the agent and the
environment.
Due to the extrapolation errors caused by distributional
shift (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019), online RL methods cannot be directly applied to offline RL. Policy constraint and value constraint are employed for model-free
* Corresponding author: weiwei@sxu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21126

