The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IOP: An Idempotent-Like Optimization Method on the Pareto Front of
Hypernetwork
Hui Wang1 , Renyu Yang1 * , Jie Sun2 , Hao Peng1 , Xudong Mou1,2 , Tianyu Wo1,2 , Xudong Liu1,2 *
1

Beihang University, Beijing, China
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{whui,renyuyang,penghao,mxd,woty,liuxd}@buaa.edu.cn, sunjie@zgclab.edu.cn
2

Abstract

balancing multiple objectives. This setting, however, substantially limits the usability and flexibility, as the decisionmaking procedure, in most of the use cases, is on the fly
without prior knowledge of such specific strategies.
To tackle this issue, Pareto Front Learning (PFL) emerges
as an effective paradigm. All the optimal solutions spanning the entire Pareto front can be simultaneously resolved.
Pareto Hypernetwork (PHN) (Navon et al. 2020) is a notable
implementation of PFL, and it employs a single Hypernetwork (Ha et al. 2016) to take as inputs the preference vectors (Hoang et al. 2023) or chunk embeddings (Lin et al.
2020) and generate a sequence of Pareto-optimal models
(aka. target networks) to process data. Although PHN-based
approaches exhibit competitive efficiency, there are the following unsettled issues:
i) Relying on human—crafted inputs with limited adaptability to data distribution shift. A huge body of PHN studies
depend on human-crafted inputs – often in the form of preference vector or chunk embedding and entirely independent
from raw data samples – to train a precise Hypernetwork to
acquire optimal target networks. The key concern is that devising high-quality inputs usually requires too much domain
expertise and is sometimes impractical in industrial scenarios at scale. Additionally, rather than adopting raw data samples, using man-made inputs inevitably reduces the sensitivity of Hypernetwork to data distribution shifts. For example,
as shown in Fig. 1, when the data shifts from the green to the
blue distribution, the Hypernetwork in PHN methods generates more non-optimal solutions. Hence, it is imperative to
establish a new competitive and adaptable Hypernetwork in
the PHN method free from human-crafted inputs.
ii) Failing to simultaneously optimize multiple potential
solutions. PHN methods optimize the Hypernetwork so that
each output is associated with an optimal or approximate
solution on the Pareto front. The ideal process is to continuously bring all potential solutions to the Pareto front as close
as possible. However, the existing PHN methods fail to do
so – in each optimization round, their focus is merely minimizing the loss related to the single input and accordingly
updating the Hypernetwork’s weight. Doing this can hardly
accommodate multiple potential solutions around the Pareto
front simultaneously; in other words, some solutions move
towards but other potential solutions go away. As a working example, in Fig. 1, optimizing the solutions in the dotted

Pareto Front Learning (PFL) has been one of the effective means to resolve multi-objective optimization problems
through exploring all optimal solutions to learn the entire
Pareto front. Pareto Hypernetwork (PHN) is a new promising way to generate the sequence of Pareto-optimal solutions
that can be further used as potential solutions to constitute the
Pareto front. However, the existing PHN-based approaches
suffer from two performance issues: They take as inputs
human-crafted preference vector or chunk embedding, rather
than the input data samples, and thus vulnerable to data distribution shifts. Such approaches cannot optimize all potential
solutions when forming the Pareto front, as they merely optimize the loss pertaining to one single input at a time of optimization round. To improve the quality of the Pareto front, we
propose IOP, a novel Idempotent-like Optimization method
to learn the entire Pareto front accurately and enhance Hypernetwork’s adaptability to distribution shifts. In particular, IOP
performs idempotent-like optimization by exploiting manifold space mapping, so that the target networks generated by
the optimized Hypernetwork can effectively handle samples
with similar distributions of the input samples, without the
pre-defined human-crafted inputs. IOP maximizes the Hypervolume indicator that is composed of all potential solutions
at a higher level. Experimental results demonstrate that IOP
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by 4.7% on average
in producing the Pareto front and has a 10.5% improvement
in adaptability.

Introduction
Multi-objective optimization (MOO) is of paramount importance – It unleashes the potential of acquiring optimal
trade-offs among multiple conflicting objectives in various
machine learning domains such as Multi-object Tracking
(Nguyen et al. 2020), Computer Vision (Gao et al. 2024),
Reinforcement Learning (Chen et al. 2024), Natural Language Processing (Xiang et al. 2022), etc. In MOO, the collection of all optimal solutions – commonly referred to as the
Pareto front – manifests distinct trade-offs amidst conflicting objectives. Most of the existing MOO approaches solely
obtain a partial set of optimal solutions on the Pareto front,
and typically require a pre-defined strategy for effectively
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21108

