The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Disentangled Modeling of Preferences and Social Influence
for Group Recommendation
Guangze Ye1, 2, 3 , Wen Wu3, 4 * , Guoqing Wang3 , Xi Chen4 , Hong Zheng5 , Liang He1, 2, 3
1

Lab of Artificial Intelligence for Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Institute of Artificial Intelligence for Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Mental Health and Psychological Crisis Intervention, School of Psychology and Cognitive
Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
5
Shanghai Changning Mental Health Center, Shanghai, China
{gzye, wgq}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, wwu@cc.ecnu.edu.cn, xchen@psy.ecnu.edu.cn, zhhmm2@163.com, lhe@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Fast Food
Fast Food

The group recommendation (GR) aims to suggest items for
a group of users in social networks. Existing work typically
considers individual preferences as the sole factor in aggregating group preferences. Actually, social influence is also an
important factor in modeling users’ contributions to the final group decision. However, existing methods either neglect
the social influence of individual members or bundle preferences and social influence together as a unified representation. As a result, these models emphasize the preferences
of the majority within the group rather than the actual interaction items, which we refer to as the preference bias issue
in GR. Moreover, the self-supervised learning (SSL) strategies they designed to address the issue of group data sparsity fail to account for users’ contextual social weights when
regulating group representations, leading to suboptimal results. To tackle these issues, we propose a novel model based
on Disentangled Modeling of Preferences and Social Influence for Group Recommendation (DisRec). Concretely, we
first design a user-level disentangling network to disentangle the preferences and social influence of group members
with separate embedding propagation schemes based on (hyper)graph convolution networks. We then introduce a socialbased contrastive learning strategy, selectively excluding user
nodes based on their social importance to enhance group representations and alleviate the group-level data sparsity issue.
The experimental results demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on two realworld datasets.

Alice

Fast Food

Staff
Slow Food

(a) Model with preference bias.

Fast Food

Tony

Staff
Slow Food
Lily is Manager.

Lily

Manager

Group Member
Features

Slow Food

(b) Model without preference bias.
User
Embedding

Group
Embedding

Causal
Inference

Recommendation
Result

Figure 1: (a) and (b) show the causal inference process of
the model with and without preference bias, where P and S
are preferences and social embedding, respectively.

Training individual preferences; (2) Aggregating individual
preferences to obtain group preferences; and (3) Optimizing
group preferences. For example, AGREE (Cao et al. 2018)
aggregates member preferences through attention mechanisms, while CubeRec (Chen et al. 2022) utilizes hypercubes
to aggregate user representations. Although these methods
have achieved satisfactory results, they still suffer from the
following two limitations.
On one hand, these methods overly focus on individual
preference factors, thereby neglecting other important factors affecting group recommendations, such as social influence, which helps quantify and differentiate the contributions of group members to a group decision (Zheng 2018;
Yin et al. 2019). Although some studies (Yin et al. 2019;
Guo et al. 2020) consider social information, they fail to
disentangle user preferences and social influence but rather
bundle them together as a unified representation. Such entanglement leads the model to emphasize the preferences of
the majority within the group, which we refer to as the preference bias issue in GR. We provide an example in Figure
1 to further illustrate this bias. Alice and Tony, who are colleagues, prefer fast food, while Lily, their manager, prefers
slow food. In (a), the model fails to disentangle preferences

Introduction
Humans, as social animals, have a strong desire to participate in group activities. Consequently, a task called GR has
emerged (Hu et al. 2014). The GR aims to simulate the group
decision-making process and suggest items for a group of
users in social networks (Xiao et al. 2017). In existing works
(Cao et al. 2018; Sankar et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023;
Ye et al. 2024), GR generally consists of three steps: (1)
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13052

