The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

InstantSticker: Realistic Decal Blending via Disentangled Object Reconstruction
Yi Zhang1 , Xiaoyang Huang1 , Yishun Dou2 , Yue Shi1 , Rui Shi1 , Ye Chen1 ,
Bingbing Ni1 * , Wenjun Zhang1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
Huawei
{yizhangphd, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Area Selection

Abstract
We present InstantSticker, a disentangled reconstruction
pipeline based on Image-Based Lighting (IBL), which focuses on highly realistic decal blending, simulates stickers
attached to the reconstructed surface, and allows for instant
editing and real-time rendering. To achieve stereoscopic impression of the decal, we introduce shadow factor into IBL,
which can be adaptively optimized during training. This allows the shadow brightness of surfaces to be accurately decomposed rather than baked into the diffuse color, ensuring
that the edited texture exhibits authentic shading. To address
the issues of warping and blurriness in previous methods,
we apply As-Rigid-As-Possible (ARAP) parameterization to
pre-unfold a specified area of the mesh and use the local UV
mapping combined with a neural texture map to enhance the
ability to express high-frequency details in that area. For instant editing, we utilize the Disney BRDF model, explicitly
defining material colors with 3-channel diffuse albedo. This
enables instant replacement of albedo RGB values during the
editing process, avoiding the prolonged optimization required
in previous approaches. In our experiment, we introduce the
Ratio Variance Warping (RVW) metric to evaluate the local
geometric warping of the decal area. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that our method surpasses previous decal
blending methods in terms of editing quality, editing speed
and rendering speed, achieving the state-of-the-art.

1

Real-Time Rendering

Image Upload

Default

Roughness Editing

GT

View 1

Area Selection

View 2

Image Upload

Figure 1: We select a target area in the user interface to position the decal by adjusting the viewpoint and selecting four
anchors to define a quadrilateral. Then, we upload an image,
which will blend realistically within this quadrilateral.

Introduction

Decal blending for multi-view reconstructed objects allows
users to upload an image and apply it to a specified area
on the 3D object. This is a flexible and controllable editing
mode that creates highly realistic visual effects, making it
valuable for applications in AR/VR, advertising, and digital
content creation. However, highly coupled 3D representations such as NeRF and its variants (Mildenhall et al. 2020;
Tang et al. 2022), and 3D Gaussian (Kerbl et al. 2023) often
perform poorly in this task. To achieve realistic decal appearance, it should conform to the surface’s bumps and depressions while accurately capturing environmental lighting and
shadows, which necessitates disentangled reconstruction.
Since simultaneously disentangling all components, including geometry, often results in convergence to local min-

ima, most methods focus on disentangling appearance components based on pre-reconstructed geometry. In DE-NeRF
(Wu et al. 2023), a signed distance function (SDF) is first
trained on multi-view images, followed by mesh reconstruction using the marching cubes algorithm (Lorensen and
Cline 1987). Each vertex is assigned learnable geometry and
appearance features, with lighting approximated by a learnable environment map and an implicit lighting network. During rendering, multiple points are sampled along each camera ray, with each point’s feature derived from the weighted
sum of its k nearest vertices’ features, leading to significant computational overhead. Volume rendering is then performed along each ray, using multi-view images as supervision to optimize vertex features and lighting. During editing, a manually edited single-view rendered image is used as
the optimization target. Raycasting from the camera to the

* Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10311

