The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SyncNoise: Geometrically Consistent Noise Prediction for
Instruction-based 3D Editing
Ruihuang Li1,2 , Liyi Chen1 , Zhengqiang Zhang1,2 , Varun Jampani3 , Vishal M. Patel4 , Lei Zhang1,2 *
1

Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
OPPO Research Institute
3
Stability AI
4
Johns Hopkins University
{csrhli, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

Diffusion-based image editing approaches, including textdriven image synthesis and editing (Rombach et al. 2022;
Hertz et al. 2022), stroke-based editing (Meng et al. 2021),
exemplar-based methods (Yang et al. 2023), and point-based
editing (Shi et al. 2023) have achieved considerable success and facilitated artistic creation. Despite the increasing maturity and accessibility of 3D reconstruction techniques (Mildenhall et al. 2021; Kerbl et al. 2023), applying
2D editing strategies to 3D scenes has not been extensively
studied in the literature. One straightforward solution is to
utilize a 2D diffusion model to edit each view separately, and
then use the edited multi-view images to update the 3D representations to obtain the desired shapes and textures. However, due to the inherent randomness of diffusion process
and the lack of 3D priors, it is challenging for a 2D model
to generate multi-view consistent editing results in terms of
geometry, lighting, and textures simultaneously.
To alleviate this issue, Instruct-Nerf2Nerf (Haque et al.
2023) (IN2N) presents an iterative dataset update framework
to alternatively edit one randomly selected view with InstructPix2Pix (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023) and optimize the 3D scenes based on the edited image. Although
IN2N can achieve globally consistent editing, it suffers from
longer optimization duration to obtain a satisfactory edited
scene. Besides, it eliminates fine-grained details that are not
consistent across views, leading to over-smoothed results.
To improve the editing efficiency, EfficientNerf2Nerf (Song et al. 2023) (EN2N) incorporates
multi-view consistency regularization into the diffusion
process and achieves consistent outputs in a single pass.
However, this approach suffers from blurry results because
it imposes a consistency constraint on the latent codes
of diffusion models, which tends to collapse the rich and
nuanced latent representation into a more averaged form,
consequently leading to a loss of high-frequency details and
subtle variations that are critical for realistic editing.
In order to avoid the blurred editing results and generate
finer-grained textures, in this paper we propose SyncNoise,
a geometry-aware multi-view synchronized noise prediction
method for 3D scene editing. Firstly, we leverage geometric
information of 3D scenes to achieve precise and dense multiview matching, which paves the way for applying multiview consistency constraints at the noise and pixel levels.

Text-based 2D diffusion models have demonstrated impressive capabilities in image generation and editing. Meanwhile, the 2D diffusion models also exhibit substantial potentials for 3D editing tasks. However, how to achieve consistent edits across multiple viewpoints remains a challenge.
While the iterative dataset update method is capable of
achieving global consistency, it suffers from slow convergence and over-smoothed textures. We propose SyncNoise,
a novel geometry-guided multi-view consistent noise editing
approach for high-fidelity 3D scene editing. SyncNoise synchronously edits multiple views with 2D diffusion models
while enforcing multi-view noise predictions to be geometrically consistent, which ensures global consistency in both
semantic structure and low-frequency appearance. To further
enhance local consistency in high-frequency details, we set
a group of anchor views and propagate them to their neighboring frames through cross-view reprojection. To improve
the reliability of multi-view correspondences, we introduce
depth supervision during training to enhance the reconstruction of precise geometries. Our method achieves high-quality
3D editing results respecting the textual instructions, especially in scenes with complex textures, by enhancing geometric consistency at the noise and pixel levels.

Project Page — https://lslrh.github.io/syncnoise.github.io/

Introduction
Text-based 3D scene editing is an emerging field that focuses
on creating and manipulating 3D scenes using natural language instructions. Given an original 3D representation, one
can achieve a wide variety of edits using abundant and flexible textual instructions, such as modifying the geometry, appearance, lighting, textures, and other attributes of the scene
to achieve desired effects or fulfill design objectives. Despite
the advancements in 3D generative diffusion models (Hong
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024), it still requires a significant
amount of paired 3D scene data to adapt these models for
3D editing tasks. Given the limited availability of such data,
an alternative approach is to distill prior knowledge from 2D
diffusion models to improve 3D representations.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4905

