The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Quantified Linear and Polynomial Arithmetic Satisfiability
via Template-based Skolemization
Krishnendu Chatterjee1 , Ehsan Kafshdar Goharshady1 , Mehrdad Karrabi1 , Harshit J Motwani2 ,
Maximilian Seeliger3 , Ðord̄e Žikelić4
2

1
Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
3
Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria
4
Singapore Management University, Singapore, Singapore
ehsan.goharshady@ist.ac.at

Abstract

quantified formulas, with quantifier alternation corresponding to the choices made by each agent (Alur, Henzinger,
and Kupferman 2002; Chatterjee, Henzinger, and Piterman
2010). Quantified formulas also commonly arise in program
verification (Gulwani, Srivastava, and Venkatesan 2008) and
synthesis (Solar-Lezama et al. 2006).
The key challenge that arises in checking satisfiability of
quantified formulas is the highly expensive quantifier elimination step, that SMT solvers need to perform in order
to reduce the problem of checking satisfiability of a quantified formula to that of a quantifier-free formula. It is a
classical result that, both in linear real arithmetic and in
non-linear real arithmetic theories, the runtime complexity
of quantifier elimination is doubly-exponential (Weispfenning 1988), making it practically infeasible and often a
daunting task for SMT solvers. To overcome this challenge,
some SMT solvers avoid the expensive quantifier elimination step by implementing methods such as quantifier instantiation (Reynolds et al. 2013; de Moura and Bjørner
2007; Ge, Barrett, and Tinelli 2009). However, while being sound, quantifier instantiation is incomplete and may
lead to ”Unknown” outputs by the SMT solver. Another approach to satisfiability checking that avoids the quantifier
elimination step is to consider the game semantics of quantified first-order formulas and to treat them as two-player
games (Bjørner and Janota 2015; Farzan and Kincaid 2016;
Murphy and Kincaid 2024). However, these methods are
only applicable to formulas in linear real arithmetic.
Besides checking satisfiability of quantified formulas, another fundamental question is to obtain witnesses of satisfiability for existentially quantified variables. This feature is important in many applications. In decision making for multi-agent systems, the witnesses for existentially
quantified variables gives rise to a strategy of the existentially quantified agent (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman
2002; Chatterjee, Henzinger, and Piterman 2010). In planning and scheduling, the witnesses gives rise to a control
policy (Kautz and Selman 1992). Finally, in program synthesis applications, the witnesses gives rise to a program that
satisfies the desired specification (Solar-Lezama et al. 2006).

The problem of checking satisfiability of linear real arithmetic (LRA) and non-linear real arithmetic (NRA) formulas has broad applications, in particular, they are at the
heart of logic-related applications such as logic for artificial intelligence, program analysis, etc. While there has been
much work on checking satisfiability of unquantified LRA
and NRA formulas, the problem of checking satisfiability
of quantified LRA and NRA formulas remains a significant
challenge. The main bottleneck in the existing methods is a
computationally expensive quantifier elimination step. In this
work, we propose a novel method for efficient quantifier elimination in quantified LRA and NRA formulas. We propose a
template-based Skolemization approach, where we automatically synthesize linear/polynomial Skolem functions in order to eliminate quantifiers in the formula. The key technical ingredients in our approach are Positivstellensätze theorems from algebraic geometry, which allow for an efficient
manipulation of polynomial inequalities. Our method offers
a range of appealing theoretical properties combined with a
strong practical performance. On the theory side, our method
is sound, semi-complete, and runs in subexponential time and
polynomial space, as opposed to existing sound and complete
quantifier elimination methods that run in doubly-exponential
time and at least exponential space. On the practical side, our
experiments show superior performance compared to stateof-the-art SMT solvers in terms of the number of solved instances and runtime, both on LRA and on NRA benchmarks.

Introduction
Satisfiability checking for logical formulas is one of the
fundamental problems in automated reasoning that arises
in many applications, including logic for artificial intelligence (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002), planning and
scheduling (Kautz and Selman 1992) or deductive verification (Kroening and Strichman 2016). Satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) solvers have achieved impressive results at tackling this problem. However, while SMT solvers
excel at checking satisfiability of quantifier-free formulas,
many applications require reasoning about quantified formulas. For instance, automated reasoning problems in decision making for multi-agent systems typically involve

Our Approach. In this work, we propose a novel method
for checking satisfiability of quantified formulas in linear
real arithmetic (LRA) and non-linear real arithmetic (NRA).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11158

