The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Noisy Label Calibration for Multi-View Classification
Shilin Xu1 , Yuan Sun1 * , Xingfeng Li2 , Siyuan Duan1 , Zhenwen Ren2 , Zheng Liu3 , Dezhong Peng1,3 *
1
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, 610044,
Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, China.621010,
3
Sichuan National Innovation New Vision UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu 610095, China,
xushilin990@gmail.com, sunyuan work@163.com, lixingfeng@njust.edu.cn , siyuanduancn@gmail.com, rzw@njust.edu.cn,
liuzheng@uptcsc.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn.
2

Abstract

et al. 2024; Li et al. 2020, 2023b) have been proposed, which
have achieved promising performance. For instance, TMC
(Han et al. 2020) proposes a trusted multi-view classification paradigm that dynamically integrates different views
by estimating the uncertainty. To capture the consistent and
complementary information from different views, PDMF
(Xu et al. 2023) presents a progressive multi-view comprehensive learning strategy. However, in real-world scenarios, low-quality multi-view data could contain conflictive instances in different views, which is the so-called Conflictive Multi-view Learning (CML) problem. To deal with
such multi-view data, ECML (Xu et al. 2024a) presents an
evidential conflictive multi-view learning framework to improve the reliability of decisions for conflictive instances.
Due to unstable or damaged sensors, the collected multiview data are usually incomplete, thereby leading to the Incomplete Multi-view Learning (IML) problem. Based on information theory, DCP (Lin et al. 2022) proposes dual contrastive learning and dual prediction to achieve consistency
learning and data inference, respectively. To improve the effectiveness and trustworthiness, UIMC (Xie et al. 2023) further explores and exploits the uncertainty of missing data.
Unfortunately, these methods are highly dependent on wellannotated label information. Due to time-consuming and expensive manual annotation, the collected data are often imperfect, where noisy labels are ubiquitous. Inevitably, noisy
labels could mislead the model to overfit the noise, thus
weakening the performance.

In recent years, multi-view learning has aroused extensive research passion. Most existing multi-view learning methods
often rely on well-annotations to improve decision accuracy.
However, noise labels are ubiquitous in multi-view data due
to imperfect annotations. To deal with this problem, we propose a novel noisy label calibration method (NLC) for multiview classification to resist the negative impact of noisy labels.
Specifically, to capture consensus information from multiple
views, we employ max-margin rank loss to reduce the heterogeneous gap. Subsequently, we evaluate the confidence scores
to enrich predictions associated with noise instances according to all reliable neighbors. Further, we propose Label Noise
Detection (LND) to separate multi-view data into a clean or
noisy subset, and propose Label Calibration Learning (LCL)
to correct noisy instances. Finally, we adopt the cross-entropy
loss to achieve multi-view classification. Extensive experiments on six datasets validate that our method outperforms
eight state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/sstaree/NLC

Introduction
With the continuous development of multimedia technology,
multi-view data collected and stored from various sources
or feature extractors has exploded (Li et al. 2023c; Xu et al.
2022; Ren et al. 2021). In real-world scenarios, multi-view
data shows a variety of heterogeneous properties (Xu et al.
2024a; Sun et al. 2024d; Tan et al. 2024). For example, a
single news story can be represented in multiple formats,
including video, audio, and text, and reported in various languages across different countries, such as Chinese, English,
and Russian. A more comprehensive description of multiview data can be obtained by mining the consistent and complementary information from different views, which could
be used for various tasks, including clustering (Sun et al.
2024c; Jin et al. 2023; Dong et al. 2023; He et al. 2024; Li
et al. 2023a, 2022b), retrieval (Sun et al. 2024a; Yan et al.
2020; Feng et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024b), and classification
(Sun et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a,b; Sun et al. 2022).
In recent years, a large number of multi-view learning
methods (Qin, Pu, and Wu 2024; Qin and Qian 2024; Qin

To address the problem, a few multi-view learning methods (Liang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024b) have been proposed, which achieve promising performance. Among them,
LNRMC (Liang et al. 2023) proposes a multi-view least
squares regression model against label noise. To mitigate
the impact of low-quality features and noisy labels, TMNR
(Xu et al. 2024b) proposes a trusted multi-view noise refining method to estimate both feature and model uncertainty.
Although these methods provide several robust losses, they
lack the ability to separate noisy labels and clean labels during the training process. As shown in Fig.1, due to the overmemorization of noisy labels, existing methods could cause
the model to overfit noise, thus making the model produce
unreliable label predictions. Therefore, there is an urgent
need for a robust multi-view classification method to achieve
noisy label calibration, thus improving the classification per-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21797

