The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prediction-Feedback DETR for Temporal Action Detection
Jihwan Kim, Miso Lee, Cheol-Ho Cho, Jihyun Lee, Jae-Pil Heo†
Sungkyunkwan University
{damien, dlalth557, gersys, ibluee01, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

(c) Cross-Attn.

(f) IoU Similarity

Action Queries
(g) Self-Attn.

0.
𝟎

T

Action Queries

Action Queries

Action Queries

(b) Predictions

T 𝟎

𝟎

(d) Predictions

T

0.07

Action Queries

𝟎
0.25

Action Queries
(e) Self-Attn.

𝟎

T

0.

(a) Cross-Attn.

Video Features

0.

Video Features
𝟎

0.17

GT

0.20

Temporal Action Detection (TAD) is fundamental yet challenging for real-world video applications. Leveraging the
unique benefits of transformers, various DETR-based approaches have been adopted in TAD. However, it has recently been identified that the attention collapse in selfattention causes the performance degradation of DETR for
TAD. Building upon previous research, this paper newly
addresses the attention collapse problem in cross-attention
within DETR-based TAD methods. Moreover, our findings
reveal that cross-attention exhibits patterns distinct from predictions, indicating a short-cut phenomenon. To resolve this,
we propose a new framework, Prediction-Feedback DETR
(Pred-DETR), which utilizes predictions to restore the collapse and align the cross- and self-attention with predictions.
Specifically, we devise novel prediction-feedback objectives
using guidance from the relations of the predictions. As a
result, Pred-DETR significantly alleviates the collapse and
achieves state-of-the-art performance among DETR-based
methods on various challenging benchmarks, including THUMOS14, ActivityNet-v1.3, HACS, and FineAction.

w/ Prediction-Feedback

0.

w/o Prediction-Feedback

Abstract

(h) IoU Similarity

Figure 1: Attention collapse problem. The figure depicts
the cross- ((a), (c)) and self-attention maps ((e), (g)) of the
decoder as well as the predictions ((b), (d)) and their normalized IoU similarity map ((f), (h)). DETR for TAD with standard attention severely suffers from the attention collapse in
its cross-attention and self-attention ((a), (e)). The collapsed
attention focuses on a few encoder features (a) or decoder
queries (e) regardless of the DETR predictions ((b), (f)).

Introduction
With the advancement of society, the use of video media has
become increasingly widespread. As a result, the demand
for efficient methods to search for desired segments within
untrimmed videos has grown significantly. One fundamental task, Temporal Action Detection (TAD), aims to identify
specific actions within a video and determine their temporal
boundaries. TAD has primarily advanced through two-stage
approaches. However, recent research has increasingly focused on end-to-end DETR-based methods.
DETR (Carion et al. 2020) is a framework initially proposed and developed in the literature of object detection, introducing the first end-to-end detection framework using set
prediction. The DETR method has also been extended to the
video domain and applied to TAD (Tan et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2022b; Shi et al. 2022). In TAD, each query is used to predict
an action within the video along with its corresponding time
interval. To achieve this, bipartite matching is employed to
align each query with the ground-truth actions and their temporal intervals within the untrimmed video. This approach

has the distinct advantage of eliminating traditional heuristics like Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS).
Although DETR with standard attention (shortly originalDETR) has advanced compatibly with DeformableDETR (Zhu et al. 2021) in object detection, original-DETR
in TAD even with recent architectures like DAB-DETR (Liu
et al. 2022a) shows a way worse performance. Recently,
the root of this issue is identified as the attention collapse
problem in self-attention (SA) by Self-DETR (Kim, Lee,
and Heo 2023) as depicted in (e) of Fig. 1, where all decoder
queries focus on a few queries. The attention collapse is the
phenomenon of skipping the attention module to prevent
from degeneration of the model (Dong, Cordonnier, and
Loukas 2021) towards a rank-1 matrix. Self-DETR utilizes
the cross-attention (CA) map to recover the collapsed SA.
However, their solution depends on the soundness of the
CA; otherwise it could be suboptimal. We discover that it is
not sound; rather collapsed as depicted in Fig. 1. The figure
shows that the decoder queries in CA attend to a few encoder
features ((a) of the figure), exhibiting the same pattern over
almost all queries. It is a particularly critical issue because

†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4266

