The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Robustness of Distributed Machine Learning Against
Transfer Attacks
Sébastien Andreina1 , Pascal Zimmer2 , Ghassan Karame2
1

NEC Labs Europe, Germany
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
sebastien.andreina@neclab.eu, {pascal.zimmer, ghassan.karame}@rub.de
2

Abstract

same machine) jointly train using the same dataset; inference
requires some sort of majority vote among those weak learners. Unlike ensemble learning, federated learning typically
requires weak learners to jointly train a global model (optionally with the help of a central server). The main motivation of
these instantiations is to obviate the need for weak learners
to share their local training data, hence increasing learners’
privacy while allowing for diverse data to be effectively used
for training. As such, current federated learning approaches
primarily aim to diversify data sources for training but do
not directly alter the inference process. In contrast, ensemble
learning focuses mainly on inference by enhancing model
diversity. The literature features a number of contributions
that analyze the privacy provisions of FL and its resistance
to backdoors on the one hand and the robustness offered
by ensemble learning on the other hand. No prior work has
examined the combined robustness and security provisions
stemming from distributing both the learning and the inference process. This is particularly relevant since centralized
ML models, such as deep neural networks, have been shown
to lack robustness against adversarial examples (Szegedy
et al. 2014; Biggio et al. 2013).

Although distributed machine learning (distributed ML) is
gaining considerable attention in the community, prior works
have independently looked at instances of distributed ML in
either the training or the inference phase. No prior work has examined the combined robustness stemming from distributing
both the learning and the inference process.
In this work, we explore, for the first time, the robustness of
distributed ML models that are fully heterogeneous in training data, architecture, scheduler, optimizer, and other model
parameters. Supported by theory and extensive experimental
validation using CIFAR10 and FashionMNIST, we show that
such properly distributed ML instantiations achieve across-theboard improvements in accuracy-robustness tradeoffs against
state-of-the-art transfer-based attacks that could otherwise not
be realized by current ensemble or federated learning instantiations. For instance, our experiments on CIFAR10 show that
for the Common Weakness attack, one of the most powerful
state-of-the-art transfer-based attacks, our method improves
robust accuracy by up to 40%, with a minimal impact on clean
task accuracy.

Code — https://github.com/RUBInfSec/distributed learning robustness
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14080

Introduction
Nowadays, many applications increasingly rely on various
forms of distributed learning. For instance, Google spellchecking utilizes horizontal federated learning (Zhang et al.
2023b), and Apple, among others, may also be adopting similar approaches (Paulik et al. 2021). Autonomous vehicles are
soon expected to follow suit (Chellapandi et al. 2024). In the
financial sector, vertical federated learning is currently employed (Liu et al. 2024), and many researchers have already
begun exploring decentralized learning without a central authority (Lian et al. 2017; Dhasade et al. 2023).
Although federated and decentralized learning is gaining
considerable interest and attention from practitioners and
researchers, the concept of distributed learning was first attempted with ensemble learning. Here, weak learners employing different model architectures (typically co-located on the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15382

In this paper, we address this gap and explore whether pure
distributed learning, a variant instantiation combining the
benefits of both federated/decentralized learning and traditional ensemble learning, can provide increased robustness
against transfer attacks. We specifically focus on transfer attacks because they can be executed by resource-constrained
adversaries that do not need to know the model parameters to
create a surrogate model and conduct transferable white-box
attacks. More specifically, we consider a setting where weak
learners can choose their dataset for training. However, unlike FL, learners can also independently choose their training
(such as optimizer and scheduler) and model (i.e., architecture) parameters. We argue that such a hybrid setting allows
us to analyze, for the first time, the robustness of distributed
ML models that are heterogeneous in both their training data
and training and model parameters. We contrast this to previous work that has independently looked at instances of ML
in each isolated phase. For example, (Wu et al. 2021) demonstrated that ensembles of models are more robust to certain
attacks compared to single models. Similarly, (Demontis et al.
2019) highlighted the significance of model architecture on
the transferability of adversarial examples, and (Zhang et al.

