The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Constrained Fair and Efficient Allocations
Benjamin Cookson, Soroush Ebadian, Nisarg Shah
University of Toronto
{bcookson,soroush,nisarg}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

Pareto optimality, has become the guiding principle for seeking fair division solutions, e.g., for subclasses of additive
valuations (Hosseini et al. 2021), for non-additive valuations (Benabbou et al. 2021; Barman and Suzuki 2024),
when addressing manipulations (Psomas and Verma 2022),
or for allocating chores (Ebadian, Peters, and Shah 2022;
Garg, Murhekar, and Qin 2022), or for allocating public
goods (Fain, Munagala, and Shah 2018; Ebadian, Freeman,
and Shah 2024).
However, in many real-world fair division problems, there
are feasibility constraints on the bundle that each agent can
receive. Examples include course allocation (Budish et al.
2017), public housing assignment (Benabbou et al. 2020),
or allocation of conference submissions to reviewers (Garg
et al. 2010). Unfortunately, the literature on constrained fair
division has been largely limited to seeking only fairness
guarantees.

Fairness and efficiency have become the pillars of modern fair
division research, but prior work on achieving both simultaneously is largely limited to the unconstrained setting. We
study fair and efficient allocations of indivisible goods under
additive valuations and various types of allocation feasibility
constraints, and demonstrate the unreasonable effectiveness
of the maximum Nash welfare (MNW) solution in this previously uncharted territory.
Our main result is that MNW allocations are 1⁄2-envy-free up
to one good (EF1) and Pareto optimal under the broad family
of (arbitrary) matroid constraints. We extend these guarantees to complete MNW allocations for base-orderable matroid
constraints, and to a family of non-matroid constraints (which
includes balancedness). We establish tightness of our results
by providing counterexamples for the satisfiability of certain
stronger desiderata, but show an improved result for the special case of goods with copies (Gafni et al. 2023). Finally, we
also establish novel best-of-both-worlds guarantees for goods
with copies and balancedness.

1

• Biswas and Barman (2018) show the existence of an EF1
allocation subject to cardinality constraints, where the
goods are partitioned into categories and each agent must
be allocated at most a prescribed maximum number of
goods from each category.
• Biswas and Barman (2019) extend this to any baseorderable matroid constraint, where the bundle of goods
allocated to each agent must be an independent set of
a given base-orderable matroid (cardinality constraints
form a partition matroid, which is a special case), when
agents have identical additive valuations.1
• Gafni et al. (2023) study a special case of cardinality constraints, which they refer to as goods with copies, motivated by the fact that it in turn subsumes chore division
as a special case. They define an appealing strengthening
of EF1, termed EF1WC , and establish its existence for restricted valuation classes.
• The popular round robin algorithm yields an EF1 allocation subject to balancedness, where all agents must be
assigned bundles of roughly equal cardinality (differing
by at most one) (Caragiannis et al. 2019).

Introduction

Fair division of resources among agents is a primitive that
has applications, both to multiagent systems (Chevaleyre
et al. 2006) and to everyday problems such as estate division
and divorce settlement (Shah 2017). Over the last decade,
the fair division literature has undergone a dramatic transformation. The pioneering work of Caragiannis et al. (2019) established that, under additive valuations, the so-called maximum Nash welfare (MNW) allocations, which (informally)
maximize the product of agent utilities, simultaneously satisfy two appealing guarantees: a fairness criterion known as
envy-freeness up to one good (EF1), which demands that no
agent prefer the allocation of another agent (modulo a single good) to her own, and an efficiency criterion known as
Pareto optimality (PO), which demands that no alternative
allocation be able to make an agent happier without making
any agent worse off. These provable fairness and efficiency
guarantees have been critical to their use in the real world
via the not-for-profit website Spliddit.org (Shah 2017).
Ever since then, the combination of fairness and efficiency, in the form of approximate envy-freeness and

1

Biswas and Barman (2019) incorrectly state their result for an
arbitrary matroid constraint in the original paper, but later versions
correctly state that the result holds for base-orderable matroids. The
existence of an EF1 allocation here remains open for general matroid constraints, even for identical additive valuations.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13718

