The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Disentangling, Amplifying, and Debiasing:
Learning Disentangled Representations for Fair Graph Neural Networks
Yeon-Chang Lee1 , Hojung Shin2 , Sang-Wook Kim2 *
1

Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST)
2
Hanyang University
yeonchang@unist.ac.kr, {hojungshin, wook}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become essential tools
for graph representation learning in various domains, such as
social media and healthcare. However, they often suffer from
fairness issues due to inherent biases in node attributes and
graph structure, leading to unfair predictions. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel GNN framework, DAB-GNN,
that Disentangles, Amplifies, and deBiases attribute, structure,
and potential biases in the GNN mechanism. DAB-GNN employs a disentanglement and amplification module that isolates
and amplifies each type of bias through specialized disentanglers, followed by a debiasing module that minimizes the distance between subgroup distributions. Extensive experiments
on five datasets demonstrate that DAB-GNN significantly outperforms ten state-of-the-art competitors in terms of achieving
an optimal balance between accuracy and fairness.

Code — https://github.com/Bigdasgit/DAB-GNN

1

Introduction

Background. In the real world, data from various domains
such as social media, healthcare, and finance can be represented as graph data (Rozemberczki et al. 2022; Tang and
Liu 2009; Yoo et al. 2023; Kim et al. 2024). In these graphs,
entities (e.g., users) are depicted as nodes, and pairwise relationships between these entities (e.g., friendship) are depicted
as edges. This structural representation enables the effective
analysis of complex relationships within the graph data.
Recent advancements in graph representation learning
have utilized Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to map nodes
into low-dimensional embedding space (Kipf and Welling
2017; Kim, Lee, and Kim 2023; Sharma et al. 2024). Using
a message-passing framework, GNNs iteratively aggregate
information from a node and its neighbors to produce the
final embedding of the node that effectively captures both
node attributes and the graph’s structure (Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017; Kipf and Welling 2017). Consequently,
GNNs have demonstrated superior performance in a variety
of tasks like node classification and link prediction (Sun et al.
2024; Chamberlain et al. 2023; Kim, Lee, and Kim 2024).

Motivation. However, predictions based on node embeddings
learned by GNNs can be unfair due to the biases inherent
in the input graph data, such as node attributes and graph
structure, as well as the biases introduced by the messagepassing mechanism of GNNs (Dai and Wang 2021; Wang
et al. 2022; Ling et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024; Jiang et al. 2024;
Neo et al. 2024). Specifically, node attributes may exhibit
different distributions across subgroups (e.g., male and female) defined by sensitive attributes (e.g., gender), referred
to as attribute bias (Dong et al. 2022). For instance, in job
application data, the average income of employees may differ
across genders. Additionally, the graph structure itself can be
biased, as nodes with similar sensitive attributes tend to form
connections, known as structure bias (Dong et al. 2022). For
example, on social network platforms, users predominantly
form friendships within same sensitive attributes (Rahman
et al. 2019; Dai and Wang 2021).
Moreover, the message-passing mechanism in GNNs can
introduce what we call potential bias by combining existing
attribute and structure biases. When node attributes and graph
structure interact, new biases may emerge that were not evident in either aspect alone. As one instance of potential bias,
Wang et al. (2022) observed that biases related to sensitive attributes can unintentionally spread to non-sensitive attributes
during the GNN process. This type of bias is distinct as it
arises from the interplay between node attributes and graph
structure.1 As a result, a GNN method may inadvertently
encode these biases in the final embeddings, leading to unfair
predictions correlated with sensitive attributes.
Challenges. To mitigate these issues, various fairness-aware
GNN (FGNN) methods, such as FairGNN (Dai and Wang
2021), EDITS (Dong et al. 2022), and FairVGNN (Wang et al.
2022), have been proposed (Dong et al. 2023a), which will be
discussed in detail in Section 2. They are generally classified
into three categories: pre-processing, in-processing, and postprocessing (Chen et al. 2024). The pre-processing approach
aims to eliminate biases before model training, while the
in-processing approach modifies the objective function or
model architecture aiming to learn bias-free node embeddings
during training. The post-processing approach aims to adjust
1

It might be an amplified form of attribute or structure bias, or
something entirely new. However, given the uncertainty of its nature,
we refer to it as potential bias in this paper.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12013

