The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enabling Region-Specific Control via Lassos in Point-Based Colorization
Sanghyeon Lee, Jooyeol Yun, Jaegul Choo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, Korea
{shlee6825, blizzard072, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Point-based interactive colorization techniques allow users
to effortlessly colorize grayscale images using user-provided
color hints. However, point-based methods often face challenges when different colors are given to semantically similar
areas, leading to color intermingling and unsatisfactory results—an issue we refer to as color collapse. The fundamental
cause of color collapse is the inadequacy of points for defining the boundaries for each color. To mitigate color collapse,
we introduce a lasso tool that can control the scope of each
color hint. Additionally, we design a framework that leverages the user-provided lassos to localize the attention masks.
The experimental results show that using a single lasso is
as effective as applying 4.18 individual color hints and can
achieve the desired outcomes in 30% less time than using
points alone.

Input

iColoriT

Ours

Figure 1: The examples of the color collapse. The start mark
and the corresponding lasso in the same color describe the
region designated for each color hint by the user. By specifying regions, users can better control how colors spread,
thereby mitigating color collapse and leading to a more intentional colorization process.

Introduction
Point-based interactive colorization (Levin, Lischinski, and
Weiss 2004; Yin, Gong, and Qiu 2019) on grayscale images
aims to assist users in restoring colors by selecting and applying them to specific locations. The primary objective in
training these models (Zhang et al. 2017; Huang, Zhao, and
Liao 2022) is to generate colorized images with minimal
user interaction by effectively propagating the user-selected
colors to relevant areas. For instance, a model can significantly reduce the user’s effort by automatically colorizing an
entire apple given a single hint. These models are not only
useful for restoring aged photographs but also for a wide
range of tasks, such as recoloring images and creating artistic visuals.
However, existing methods often produce unsatisfactory
images when multiple color hints are provided in closely
related semantic regions. Specifically, Figure 1 illustrates
cases when different colors are assigned to semantically
identical but separate objects (e.g., distinct apples or petals).
As shown in the second column, even the state-of-the-art
model (Yun et al. 2023) suffers from the irregular intermingling of colors, producing implausible results. This issue,
which we refer to as the color collapse, arises as the model
attempts to spread different colors across areas that appear

similar. Color collapse is observed in repetitive patterns consisting of different colors ( e.g., flower petals, tiles, and fruit
baskets).
The fundamental cause of color collapse during pointbased interactive colorization is the absence of interactive
tools that enable the user to determine the region of the color
hint spread. Although using color points as a medium of interaction is simple, these alone provide insufficient guidance
for the model on the limits of color spread, often requiring
excessive color hints to obtain a satisfactory result. Iteratively providing additional color hints until the color collapse is resolved is not only time-consuming but also diminishes user-friendliness.
Addressing this inherent problem with point-based interactions, we introduce an additional interactive tool, the
lasso, which allows users to roughly define the scope of the
color they want to spread. As shown in the third column of
Figure 1, our lasso tool is designed to operate with loosely
defined boundaries, eliminating the need for users to provide
strict contours, which are often challenging to define.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4544

