The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Item is Worth a Prompt: Versatile Image Editing with Disentangled Control
Aosong Feng1 , Weikang Qiu1 , Jinbin Bai2 , Zhen Dong3 , Kaicheng Zhou3 , Xiao Zhang3 * , Rex
Ying1 * , Leandros Tassiulas1 *
1

Yale University, New Haven, USA
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Collov Labs
{aosong.feng, weikang.qiu, rex.ying, leandros.tassiulas}@yale.edu, jinbin.bai@u.nus.edu, zhendong@berkeley.edu, {xiao,
caseyz}@collov.com
2

Abstract

Avrahami, Fried, and Lischinski 2023), text-guided editing
(Hertz et al. 2022; Parmar et al. 2023), pixel editing (Mou
et al. 2023; Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023), etc. Various
types of editing can generally be evaluated based on two key
criteria: preservation of the original image’s information and
fidelity or consistency with the target guidance. An effective
image editing process should prioritize retaining essential
information from the original image while ensuring precise
semantic alignment with the intended modifications.
To improve consistency with the target guidance, some
work (Yang et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2023;
Xue et al. 2022) encodes reference images by introducing additional trainable encoders to preserve identities of
the reference, and adds additional controls to DPMs using methods like ControlNet (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala
2023). However, such methods cannot incorporate the existing text prompt control flow in DPMs and therefore require
large-scale pretraining which is usually costly and domainspecific. To preserve information about the original image
and improve harmonization, another line of work fixes diffusion sampling trajectory (by setting random seed or using DDIM) and achieves editing by carefully tuning text
prompts (Mokady et al. 2023; Miyake et al. 2023), changing part of the trajectory (Meng et al. 2021), merging trajectories (Lu, Liu, and Kong 2023; Wallace, Gokul, and Naik
2023), or optimizing the latent pixel space (Mou et al. 2023;
Shi et al. 2023). This avoids additional pretraining but either
relies on careful source prompt design to match the editing
region or additional optimization per edit.
In this work, we propose two key techniques aimed at enhancing the aforementioned criteria: (1) Disentangled Control: To preserve the original image’s information, the editing of a target item should minimally impact surrounding
items. The control process from prompt to image should
also be disentangled, ensuring that modifications to an item’s
prompt do not interfere with the control flow of other items.
Recognizing that text-to-image interactions occur within the
cross-attention layers of attention-based diffusion models,
we propose a grouped cross-attention mechanism to disentangle the control flow between prompts and items. (2)
Unique Item Prompt: To enhance consistency with the
guidance (e.g., a reference image), each item should be associated with a unique prompt that directs its generation. These
prompts typically involve special tokens or rare words. Pre-

Building on the success of text-to-image diffusion models
(DPMs), image editing has emerged as a crucial application for enabling human interaction with AI-generated content. Among various editing techniques, prompt-based editing has garnered significant attention for its capacity to simplify semantic control. However, because diffusion models are typically pretrained on descriptive text captions, directly modifying words in text prompts often results in entirely different generated images, which undermines the objectives of image editing. Conversely, existing editing methods often employ spatial masks to maintain the integrity of
unedited regions, but these are frequently disregarded by
DPMs, leading to disharmonious editing outcomes. To address these two challenges, we propose a method that disentangles the comprehensive image-prompt interaction into
multiple item-prompt interactions, with each item associated
with a uniquely learned prompt. The resulting framework,
named D-Edit, leverages pretrained diffusion models with
disentangled cross-attention layers and employs a two-step
optimization process to establish item-prompt associations.
This approach allows for versatile image editing by enabling
targeted manipulations of specific items through their corresponding prompts. We demonstrate state-of-the-art results
in four types of editing operations including image-based,
text-based, mask-based editing, and item removal, covering
most types of editing applications, all within a single unified
framework. Notably, D-Edit is the first framework that can (1)
achieve item editing through mask editing and (2) combine
image and text-based editing. We demonstrate the quality and
versatility of the editing results for a diverse collection of images through both qualitative and quantitative evaluations.

Introduction
The recent advancements in text-to-image diffusion generative models represent a cutting-edge approach in the field of
generative models. By gradually introducing noise into the
image, these models facilitate sophisticated image synthesis (Podell et al. 2023; Ruiz et al. 2023; Song, Meng, and
Ermon 2020) while preserving semantic alignment with the
text prompt. One notable application is image editing, where
diffusion models provide unprecedented control over various editing tasks, including inpainting (Nichol et al. 2021;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16559

