The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Thin-Plate Spline-based Interpolation for Animation Line Inbetweening
Tianyi Zhu1 , Wei Shang1 , Dongwei Ren2, B
1

2

Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
ztianyi@stu.hit.edu.cn, csweishang@gmail.com, rendw@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

(i) Creating key animation frames by animators, (ii) Inbetweening, responsible for interpolating intermediate frames,
and (iii) Colorizing and compositing the line arts. In previous studies, inbetweening and colorization have been sometimes used interchangeably. For example, in (Siyao et al.
2021; Chen and Zwicker 2022), inbetweening is addressed
through video interpolation after colorizing and compositing key frames. Although automatic colorization techniques
(Zhang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022) offer certain advantages,
they compromise the visual quality during the interpolation
process, and present challenges for animators in terms of reprocessing post-colorized frames.
Therefore, this work devotes attention to animation line
inbetweening, i.e., frame interpolation on line arts of key
frames. This task presents challenges due to the presence
of substantial motion amplitudes and sparse pixel distribution, rendering existing video interpolation methods unsuitable (Kalluri et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2022). To overcome
the large motion of line arts, in (Siyao et al. 2023), a graphbased approach is employed to vectorize and reposition vertices of the line art for generating intermediate graphs. While
graph-based representation facilitates cleaner lines, it also
introduces artifacts and often results in discontinuous lines
that affect interpolation outcomes. For raster images, inaccuracies in vectorization methods can also impact the performance of this approach.
In this work, we propose a novel raster image-based interpolation pipeline for animation line inbetweening, as shown
in Fig. 4. We first introduce the thin-plate spline (TPS) transformation (Bookstein 1989) to model coarse motion, by
which the intermediate poses particularly for large motion
can be more accurately obtained by using keypoints correspondence priors. Building upon the coarse estimation, a
simple motion refine module is proposed, consisting of an
optical flow network for refining coarse motion and a UNet
model for synthesizing final frames. Additionally, we introduce an improved metric dubbed Weighted Chamfer Distance (WCD), which exhibits a closer alignment with human
visual perception compared to the original CD metric (Chen
and Zwicker 2022; Siyao et al. 2023).
Extensive experiments are conducted on benchmark
datasets, and our method is compared against state-of-the-art
techniques in video interpolation (Huang et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023), animation interpolation (Chen

Animation line inbetweening is a crucial step in animation
production aimed at enhancing animation fluidity by predicting intermediate line arts between two key frames. However,
existing methods face challenges in effectively addressing
sparse pixels and significant motion in line art key frames.
In literature, Chamfer Distance (CD) is commonly adopted
for evaluating inbetweening performance. Despite achieving
favorable CD values, existing methods often generate interpolated frames with line disconnections, especially for scenarios involving large motion. To address this issue, we propose
a simple yet effective interpolation method for animation
line inbetweening, where thin-plate spline-based transformation is employed to estimate coarse motion more accurately
by modeling the keypoint correspondence between two key
frames, particularly for large motion scenarios. Building upon
the coarse estimation, a motion refine module is employed to
further enhance motion details before final frame interpolation using a simple UNet model. Furthermore, to more accurately assess the performance of animation line inbetweening,
we refine the CD metric and introduce a new metric named
Weighted Chamfer Distance, which demonstrates a higher
consistency with visual perception quality. Additionally, we
incorporate Earth Mover’s Distance and conduct user study to
provide a more comprehensive evaluation. Our method outperforms existing approaches by delivering high-quality interpolation results with enhanced fluidity.

Code — https://github.com/Tian-one/tps-inbetween

Introduction
2D animation plays a pivotal role in various domains, ranging from entertainment to education. With the advancement
of generative models based on large language models, it
may be feasible that 2D animation can be directly generated through video generation techniques (Guo et al. 2024;
Xing et al. 2024). Despite involving conditions (Zhang et al.
2024; Mou et al. 2024; Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023),
generating animation videos using given key frames provided by animators remains non-trivial. Therefore, it is still
crucial to assist animators in completing animation videos
by providing several key frames. As shown in Fig. 1, the
animation creation process involves several distinct steps:
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10995

