The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EigenSR: Eigenimage-Bridged Pre-Trained RGB Learners for
Single Hyperspectral Image Super-Resolution
Xi Su, Xiangfei Shen, Mingyang Wan, Jing Nie, Lihui Chen,
Haijun Liu* , Xichuan Zhou
Chongqing University
xisu@stu.cqu.edu.cn, haijun liu@126.com
Abundant training samples
RGB 14M Images (ImageNet)

Abstract
Single hyperspectral image super-resolution (single-HSI-SR)
aims to improve the resolution of a single input lowresolution HSI. Due to the bottleneck of data scarcity, the development of single-HSI-SR lags far behind that of RGB natural images. In recent years, research on RGB SR has shown
that models pre-trained on large-scale benchmark datasets
can greatly improve performance on unseen data, which may
stand as a remedy for HSI. But how can we transfer the pretrained RGB model to HSI, to overcome the data-scarcity bottleneck? Because of the significant difference in the channels
between the pre-trained RGB model and the HSI, the model
cannot focus on the correlation along the spectral dimension,
thus limiting its ability to utilize on HSI. Inspired by the HSI
spatial-spectral decoupling, we propose a new framework that
first fine-tunes the pre-trained model with the spatial components (known as eigenimages), and then infers on unseen HSI
using an iterative spectral regularization (ISR) to maintain the
spectral correlation. The advantages of our method lie in: 1)
we effectively inject the spatial texture processing capabilities
of the pre-trained RGB model into HSI while keeping spectral
fidelity, 2) learning in the spectral-decorrelated domain can
improve the generalizability to spectral-agnostic data, and 3)
our inference in the eigenimage domain naturally exploits the
spectral low-rank property of HSI, thereby reducing the complexity. This work bridges the gap between pre-trained RGB
models and HSI via eigenimages, addressing the issue of limited HSI training data, hence the name EigenSR. Extensive
experiments show that EigenSR outperforms the state-of-theart (SOTA) methods in both spatial and spectral metrics.

Few training samples
HSI ~1000 Images (ARAD_1K)

Unaligned channels
Much more
3 channels
channels
Pre-training

Pre-trained model

Eigenimages bridge the gap

Spectral-spatial
(de-)coupling

Constraining
Processing the spatial
Fine-tuned model spectral part
part channel-by-channel

Figure 1: The motivation. The lack of HSI training data is
the main bottleneck for single-HSI-SR. The channel differences between RGB and HSI make it challenging to directly
transfer RGB models to HSI. Inspired by spectral-spatial decoupling, we leverage spatial part of HSI, namely eigenimages, to bridge the gap between pre-trained RGB models and
HSI, and constrain the spectral part to keep spectral fidelity.

Chanussot 2017). To tackle this restriction, hyperspectral
image super-resolution (HSI-SR) task (Vivone 2023) has received extensive attention by injecting abundant spatial details to HSI for spatial resolution improvement. Typically,
HSI-SR can be categorized into two branches of methods:
fusion-based (Xu et al. 2022; Peng et al. 2021; Xu et al.
2020) and single-image-based methods (Wan et al. 2022;
Liang et al. 2023; Dong et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023). In
this work, we focus on the single-HSI-SR task.
Similar to the definition of single RGB image SR (Dong
et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2018), single-HSI-SR aims to recover spatial details with only a single low-resolution (LR)
image. With the booming of deep learning (Bai et al. 2024,
2025; Zhou et al. 2024a; Nie, Xie, and Sun 2024; Xie et al.
2023; Nie et al. 2023), and the development of large-scale
benchmark datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Agustsson and Timofte 2017), single RGB image SR has reached a level of maturity, exemplified in the studies that leverage pre-training
techniques (Chen et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2023). Unfortunately, such an effective strategy cannot be
applied to HSI due to the scarcity of data (Liu et al. 2022;
Miao et al. 2022). Most existing single-HSI-SR methods can
only be trained on a small number of indoor and outdoor
images, or on low-resolution sub-images of remote sensing

Code — https://github.com/enter-i-username/EigenSR

Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging sensors acquire three-dimensional
hyperspectral images (HSIs) by capturing a vector with hundreds of contiguous spectral elements from each pixel within
a given scene, offering the perception capacity of various
types of real-world materials (Keshava and Mustard 2002;
Bioucas-Dias et al. 2013). However, physical restrictions
in imaging sensors lead to the final product of low spatial
resolution HSI (Hong et al. 2021; Yokoya, Grohnfeldt, and
* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7033

