The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Wiener Process Perspective on Local Intrinsic Dimension Estimation Methods
Piotr Tempczyk* 1,2,3 , Łukasz Garncarek3,4 , Dominik Filipiak5,6,7 , Adam Kurpisz* 3,8,9
1

Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
2
NASK National Research Institute, Warsaw, Poland
3
PL4AI, Poland
4
Snowflake, USA
5
Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland
6
Perelyn, Warsaw, Poland
7
University of Innsbruck, Austria
8
BFH Bern Business School, Switzerland
9
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
tempczyk.piotr@gmail.com, lukgar@gmail.com, df@amu.edu.pl, adam.kurpisz@ifor.math.ethz.ch
Abstract

and used to improve out-of-distribution detection algorithm
(Kamkari et al. 2024a).
Prior to introducing LIDL (Tempczyk et al. 2022), two
approaches to solve the intrinsic dimension estimation problem were presented. The first employs global methods; see,
e.g., Fukunaga and Olsen (1971); Minka (2000); Fan et al.
(2010). These methods are known to suffer from issues related to a manifold curvature and non-uniformity of the data
distribution. They also assume that data lies on a single
manifold of constant dimension, so dimensionality is the
same for all x. The second approach is based on local nonparametric methods that explore the geometric properties of
neighborhoods (Johnsson, Soneson, and Fontes 2014; Levina and Bickel 2004) calculating some statistics using points
from the neighborhood of x. Although all aforementioned
methods perform reasonably well for a small number of dimensions, the higher dimensionality negatively affects their
performance (Tempczyk et al. 2022; Campadelli et al. 2015;
Camastra and Staiano 2016).
Very recently, a new approach emerged for the local methods, which is based on a two-step procedure. In the first step,
the dataset is perturbed with some noise, and in the second step, its dimensionality is estimated using various techniques. These include generative models to analyze changes
in density (Tempczyk et al. 2022; Kamkari et al. 2024b)
or in singular values of the Jacobian (Horvat and Pfister
2022, 2024) for different noise magnitudes, and analyzing
rank of scores from diffusion model as recently presented
by Stanczuk et al. (2024).
While new algorithms provide state-of-the-art results for
large, real-life datasets, it is vital for their performance that
adding noise to the dataset should be as close as possible to
an injective process. This means that the resulting densities
after adding noise should uniquely identify the original distribution of the dataset. Otherwise, it is impossible to neither
uniquely reverse the process nor analyze the original structure of the dataset. One example in the theoretical model
that does not admit such a problem is a flat manifold with a
uniform distribution of data points. In such cases these algorithms perform best, as shown in experimental results.

Local intrinsic dimension (LID) estimation methods have received a lot of attention in recent years thanks to the progress
in deep neural networks and generative modeling. In opposition to old non-parametric methods, new methods use generative models to approximate diffused dataset density to
scale the methods to high-dimensional datasets (e.g. images).
In this paper, we investigate the recent state-of-the-art parametric LID estimation methods from the perspective of the
Wiener process. We explore how these methods behave when
their assumptions are not met. We give an extended mathematical description of those methods and their error as a function of the probability density of the data.

Extended version of paper — arxiv.org/abs/2406.17125

1

Introduction

LID estimation has gained increasing attention in recent
years as part of the fast-growing field of topological data
analysis. It was able to progress from non-parametric to
parametric methods thanks to the latest progress in the field
of generative modeling. LID estimation methods are algorithms for estimating the manifold’s dimension from which
the data point x was sampled. In these methods, we assume
that the data lie on the union of one or more manifolds that
may be of different dimensions.
The estimation of intrinsic dimension is substantial for
data analysis and machine learning (Ansuini et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2018; Rubenstein, Schoelkopf, and Tolstikhin 2018)
and was investigated in relation to dimensionality reduction and clustering (Vapnik 2013; Kleindessner and Luxburg
2015; Camastra and Staiano 2016), analyzing the training and representation learning processes within deep neural networks (Li et al. 2018; Ansuini et al. 2019; Pope
et al. 2020; Loaiza-Ganem et al. 2024), verifying the union
of manifolds hypothesis for images (Brown et al. 2022),
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20859

