The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

C OG SQL: A Cognitive Framework for Enhancing Large Language Models in
Text-to-SQL Translation
Hongwei Yuan1, 2 , Xiu Tang1, 2 , Ke Chen1, 2 , Lidan Shou1, 2 , Gang Chen1, 2 , Huan Li1, 2 *
1
2

The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
yhw.cs, lihuan.cs@zju.edu.cn

NLQ In the branch with the second-highest crime rate in 1995,
how many male clients are there?

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly advanced
the performance of various natural language processing
tasks, including text-to-SQL. Current LLM-based text-toSQL schemes mainly focus on improving the understanding
of natural language questions (NLQs) or refining the quality
of generated SQLs. While these strategies are effective, they
often address specific, nuanced aspects. In contrast, humans
approach text-to-SQL with a holistic view, applying transitional logical reasoning across multiple steps to arrive at the
final answer. We believe LLMs can leverage human cognitive
processes to achieve greater accuracy in text-to-SQL. In this
paper, we present C OG SQL, a framework featuring a suite
of tailored models and strategies aimed at replicating human
cognitive processes for enhanced LLM-based text-to-SQL.
C OG SQL consists of three key modules: (1) SQL preparation: we employ a coarse-to-fine schema linking and syntax
keyword prediction, akin to how human recall and align key
concepts for better understanding. (2) SQL generation: we introduce a concept-enhanced chain-of-thought prompting, enhancing NLQ interpretation and SQL composition of LLMs,
similar to humans drafting SQL query. (3) SQL correction:
we develop NLQ consistency and result consistency techniques to correct various errors, mirroring how humans evaluate and refine reasoning. We conduct extensive experiments
using diverse benchmarks and LLMs. The results and analysis verify the effectiveness and generalizability of C OG SQL.

Evidence Male refers to gender = ‘M’
Database Schema Table client (client_id, …) , Table district
(district_id, …)
Needed
concepts?
To answer the
NLQ with SQL
query, I will …

Relevant schemas and keywords

Draft a SQL
First?
Decompose the
NLQ and analyze
the structure

Grammars
& original
query intent

Examine the
drafted?

Figure 1: Illustration of addressing a text-to-SQL case following a human cognitive process of three stages.

2023b). They have also significantly improved the capabilities of text-to-SQL tasks. Directly instructing LLMs,
whether open-source or proprietary, has become a favorable
paradigm. This approach avoids costly fine-tuning, easily
transitions between LLM products, and benefits from their
performance upgrades. When we mention LLM-based textto-SQL, it refers to this inference-only approach. Current
studies in this area aim to improve understanding of NLQs or
enhance the quality of generated SQLs. For example, (Pourreza and Rafiei 2024; Xie et al. 2024) use task decomposition to enhance LLMs’ attention towards simple subtasks;
(Gao et al. 2024; Ren et al. 2024) employ retrieval-based
few-shot demonstrations to elicit LLMs’ in-context learning
ability; (Qu et al. 2024) propose task alignment to mitigate
LLMs’ hallucinations in SQL generation; and (Wang et al.
2023a) propose multi-agent collaboration to jointly enhance
text-to-SQL quality. While these strategies improve performance, they often concentrate on specific, nuanced aspects.
In contrast, humans approach text-to-SQL with a holistic
view, using reasoning across various aspects to achieve accurate and dependable translations. This cognitive paradigm
involves making connections and transitions across different
steps to ensure precision and reliability.
Figure 1 depicts how a human applies transitional logical thinking to transform text into SQLs in an integrated

Extended version —
https://github.com/Yhw109/COGSQL

Introduction
Relational databases store large amounts of data, but Structured Query Language (SQL), the tool used to retrieve data
from these databases, has traditionally been a skill limited to
expert users. Translating natural language questions (NLQs)
into SQL queries, known as text-to-SQL, has been a research focus for years (Zelle and Mooney 1996; Saha et al.
2016; Yu et al. 2018). This is crucial for creating more userfriendly database interfaces.
Recently, phenomenal large language models (LLMs)
have excelled in various tasks such as question answering (Nguyen et al. 2023) and math reasoning (Zhang et al.
* Huan Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25778

