The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Action Localization with Cross Layer Task Decoupling and Refinement
Qiang Li1,4 * , Di Liu1,2 * , Jun Kong1,3† , Sen Li1 , Hui Xu4 , Jianzhong Wang1†
1
Northeast Normal University
Northeast Electric Power University
3
KLAS of MOE
4
Changchun Humanities and Sciences College
{ liq782, kongjun, lis084, wangjz019 }@nenu.edu.cn, 20102313@neepu.edu.cn, xuhui1@ccrw.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Temporal action localization (TAL) involves dual tasks to
classify and localize actions within untrimmed videos. However, the two tasks often have conflicting requirements for
features. Existing methods typically employ separate heads
for classification and localization tasks but share the same
input feature, leading to suboptimal performance. To address this issue, we propose a novel TAL method with
Cross Layer Task Decoupling and Refinement (CLTDR).
Based on the feature pyramid of video, CLTDR strategy integrates semantically strong features from higher pyramid
layers and detailed boundary-aware boundary features from
lower pyramid layers to effectively disentangle the action
classification and localization tasks. Moreover, the multiple
features from cross layers are also employed to refine and
align the disentangled classification and regression results.
At last, a lightweight Gated Multi-Granularity (GMG) module is proposed to comprehensively extract and aggregate
video features at instant, local, and global temporal granularities. Benefiting from the CLTDR and GMG modules, our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on five challenging benchmarks: THUMOS14, MultiTHUMOS, EPICKITCHENS-100, ActivityNet-1.3, and HACS.

Figure 1: Comparison of different task decoupling. (a) Previous methods use two head branches share the same input
feature; (b) Our method uses cross layer features for task
decoupling and refinement. Zoom in for better view.

pyramid to capture action information at different temporal scales and using a decoder with classification and regression heads for action recognition and localization. The initial
step of video feature extraction is often accomplished using
pretrained video classification backbones. Consequently, the
encoder and decoder in the subsequent steps become critical
for achieving high TAL performance. To model the temporal
context of features, various techniques have been employed
in TAL, including 1D CNN (Lin et al. 2021), GCN (Xu et al.
2020), xGPN (Zhao, Thabet, and Ghanem 2021) and RNN
(Buch et al. 2017). Recently, the Transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017) with self-attention mechanism and its variants have
also been adopted to capture long-range temporal dependency between video features (Zhang, Wu, and Li 2022;
Tang, Kim, and Sohn 2023; Shi et al. 2023). Nevertheless,
the existing TAL methods still encounter two limitations.
On the one hand, current methods often struggle to balance the trade-off between classification and localization.
Typically, these methods adopt two separated convolutional
heads at each layer of video feature pyramid to accomplish
the category classification and boundary regression of actions. However, this strategy relies heavily on learned parameters in the convolutional networks to decouple tasks
because both heads process identical features at each pyramid layer (Zhang, Wu, and Li 2022). Although TriDet (Shi
et al. 2023) incorporates relative information to help boundary prediction, this information is still extracted independently at each feature pyramid layer (Fig. 1a). Thus, its overall performance may still be suboptimal. Moreover, existing
TAL methods often lack explicit interaction between classi-

Code — https://github.com/LiQiang0307/CLTDR-GMG

Introduction
With the aim of accurately identifying action categories and
localizing its start and end times within a video, temporal action localization (TAL) has garnered significant attention from the research community due to its wide applications, including intelligent surveillance, video summarization, highlight detection, and visual question answering.
Recent advancements in deep learning techniques have
led to remarkable progress in various computer vision fields,
including TAL. Numerous deep learning methods have been
proposed to address the TAL problem, such as (Shou, Wang,
and Chang 2016; Nag et al. 2022; Long et al. 2019). A typical deep learning-based TAL model comprises three main
steps: extracting video features using deep learning networks, encoding these features into a multi-layer feature
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4878

