The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Forecasting Competitions with Correlated Events
Rafael Frongillo, Manuel Lladser, Anish Thilagar, Bo Waggoner
University of Colorado Boulder

Abstract

with high probability when given enough events. Subsequently, Frongillo et al. (2021) show that the Multiplicative Weights algorithm is accurate and more efficient (requires fewer events) than ELF, by relaxing truthfulness to
approximate truthfulness: forecasters are incentivized to report probabilities close to their beliefs.
All previously proposed mechanisms, however, rely on a
strong assumption: that the events in question are independent. By contrast, events in real world forecasting settings
like elections, tournaments, and sequential processes are inherently correlated. Swing states tend to swing in the same
direction. When a one-seed in a playoff bracket is eliminated early, the overall winner is likely to change. The closing price of a stock today will influence its price tomorrow.
To be practical for actual forecasting competitions, mechanisms must be robust to some correlation. Finding a competition mechanism which is provably robust to correlation has
therefore been a central open problem in this literature.
In this paper, we prove the first accuracy and approximate truthfulness guarantees for forecasting competitions
with correlated events. Unfortunately, as we demonstrate
with several examples, not all correlation structures allow
a good forecaster to be chosen with high probability (§ 1.1).
Moreover, intuitive notions based on covariance or entropy
do not seem to adequately quantify the difficulty of forecaster selection. We instead introduce a new way to quantify
correlation, called (b, c)-block correlation, and show that it
captures several desirable settings (§ 3.1).
Using (b, c)-block correlation, we present a more general accuracy guarantee for Multiplicative Weights which
degrades gracefully in the presence of correlation. Specifically, we show that with n forecaters, Multiplicative Weights
chooses an -good forecaster with high probability given
m = O(b2 log(n)/2 ) events whose distribution has (b, c)block correlation for c = O(). This bound tightly matches
the O(log(n)/2 ) bound of (Frongillo et al. 2021) in the independent case, where b = 1 and c = 0.
There are two keys parts to this proof. In § 4, we show that
Multiplicative Weights is still approximately truthful under
block correlation, so forecasters will not report values that
are much different than their beliefs. Then, in § 5, we use a
novel concentration inequality to show our main result, Theorem 2, that with high probability the mechanism Mη∗ , Multiplicative Weights with a particular parameter η, efficiently

Beginning with Witkowski et al. (2023), recent work on
forecasting competitions has addressed incentive problems
with the common winner-take-all mechanism. Frongillo et al.
(2021) propose a competition mechanism based on Multiplicative Weights, an online learning algorithm. They show
that their mechanism selects an -optimal forecaster with high
probability using only O(log(n)/2 ) events. These works, together with all prior work on this problem thus far, assume
that events are independent. We prove the first accuracy and
approximate truthfulness guarantees for forecasting competitions with correlated events. To quantify correlation, we introduce a notion of block correlation, which allows each event to
be strongly correlated with up to b others and weakly correlated with the rest. We show that under distributions with this
correlation, the Multiplicative Weights mechanism retains its
-optimal guarantee using O(b2 log(n)/2 ) events. Our proof
involves a novel concentration bound for correlated random
variables which may be of broader interest.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13793

1

Introduction

Forecasting competitions, such as those on Kaggle or the
Good Judgement project, attempt to discern which forecaster from a pool of contestants has the best forecasting
model. Traditionally, competition mechanisms ask each of n
forecasters to predict the probability of m future events, and
upon seeing the event outcomes, pick the forecaster with the
largest empirical score as the winner. As many have noted,
this approach distorts the incentives of the forecasters, who
will extremize their reports in order to increase their chances
of having the maximum empirical score [Lichtendahl and
Winkler 2007, Kaggle 2017, Witkowski et al. 2018, Aldous
2019, Frongillo et al. 2021, Witkowski et al. 2023]. When
their reports deviate from their models’ true predictions, it
becomes unclear which forecasters are actually the best at
forecasting, as opposed to being better at strategizing, leaving no guarantee as to the quality of the winning model.
To solve this problem, Witkowski et al. (2018, 2023)
propose the Event Lotteries Forecasting (ELF) mechanism,
which is truthful and accurate: it selects a good forecaster
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13873

