The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Interpretable Failure Detection with Human-Level Concepts
Kien X. Nguyen, Tang Li, Xi Peng
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
Newark, DE, USA
{kxnguyen, tangli, xipeng}@udel.edu

Abstract

confidence depicted through category-level information impedes the ability for humans to interpret why it fails. To this
end, we ask the following question: “What other sources of
information can we leverage to enhance failure detection?”
We present a novel perspective on detecting failures by
leveraging human-level concepts, or visual attributes. With
the flexibility to incorporate free-form language to VLMs
(i.e. CLIP), we can represent a category with a set of predefined concepts (Menon and Vondrick 2023; Oikarinen et al.
2023; Li, Ma, and Peng 2024a,b). Instead of only prompting
the model “Do you recognize a camel?”, we collectively ask
“Do you recognize humps on back?”, or “Do you recognize
shaggy coat?”. The purpose is to measure the model’s confidence in the object’s detailed visual attributes in addition to
the holistic category. We thus achieve a more accurate confidence estimate to detect failures more effectively (Fig. 1).
Ideally, a VLM that can recognize a image of a camel
should also recognize all the associated visual attributes,
such as humps on back, shaggy coat, etc. Such visual attributes should yield higher confidence scores compared to
those associated with the absent categories. Conversely, if
the model shows high confidence in concepts from multiple unrelated categories at the same time, it could indicate a failure in its recognition process. Based on such intuition, we present a simple but effective approach using the
Ordinal Ranking of Concept Activation (ORCA) to detect
failures. Additionally, these human-understandable concepts
allow users to understand the reasons behind such failures,
thereby aiding them in refining the training process.
We rigorously validate our method’s efficacy in detecting incorrect samples across both natural and remote sensing image benchmarks, which mirror the complexity in realworld scenarios. ORCA demonstrates a significant capability to mitigate the issue of overly confident misclassifications. In summary, our contributions are threefold:

Reliable failure detection holds paramount importance in
safety-critical applications. Yet, neural networks are known
to produce overconfident predictions for misclassified samples. As a result, it remains a problematic matter as existing
confidence score functions rely on category-level signals, the
logits, to detect failures. This research introduces an innovative strategy, leveraging human-level concepts for a dual
purpose: to reliably detect when a model fails and to transparently interpret why. By integrating a nuanced array of signals for each category, our method enables a finer-grained assessment of the model’s confidence. We present a simple yet
highly effective approach based on the ordinal ranking of concept activation to the input image. Without bells and whistles,
our method significantly reduce the false positive rate across
diverse real-world image classification benchmarks, specifically by 3.7% on ImageNet and 9% on EuroSAT.

Introduction
Vision-language models have demonstrated impressive capability across diverse visual recognition domains (Radford
et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021; Singh et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022,
2023). However, when it comes to safe deployment in highstake applications, it is of paramount importance for a model
to be self-aware of its own shortcomings. For instance, in
monitoring for natural disasters such as floods or wildfires,
the AI system must signal for human intervention upon encountering scenarios where its confidence is low. Such selfawareness ensures that preemptive measures can be taken to
mitigate disaster impacts on communities and ecosystems.
Therefore, it is imperative not only to detect failures accurately but also to understand the reasons behind them.
Traditional methods (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016;
Granese et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2023a,b; Liang, Li, and
Srikant 2018) rely on category-level information to detect
misclassifications, performing confidence estimation on the
class logits. However, neural networks are known to produce
overconfident predictions for misclassified samples due to
factors like spurious correlations (Arjovsky et al. 2019;
Sagawa et al. 2019), thus existing confidence scoring functions (CSFs) fall short in such cases. Besides, the model

1. We leverage human-level concepts to detect when and interpret why a model fails using vision-language models.
2. We present a simple but effective approach, called
ORCA, to estimate more reliable confidence via the ordinal ranking of the concepts’ activation.
3. We empirically demonstrate that the concept-based
methods enhance failure prediction performance across
a wide range of classification benchmarks.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26326

