The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

L EGEND: Leveraging Representation Engineering to
Annotate Safety Margin for Preference Datasets
Duanyu Feng1,3, * , Bowen Qin2 , Chen Huang1,3 ,
Youcheng Huang1,3 , Zheng Zhang2,† , Wenqiang Lei1,3,†
1
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education, China
fengduanyuscu@stu.scu.edu.cn, bwqin@baai.ac.cn, huangc.scu@gmail.com
youchenghuang@stu.edu.scu.cn, zhangzheng@baai.ac.cn, wenqianglei@scu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

preferred harmless responses over those that are harmful in
various ways, such as responses that raise ethical concerns or
manipulate facts (Ji et al. 2024). Typically, each data in the
preference dataset takes the form of a triple (x, yc , yr ), comprising a user instruction x and a pair of harmless and harmful responses yc and yr , respectively. However, recent studies highlight that such triple struggles to accurately encode
the nuance of safety between the paired responses (Coste
et al. 2023; Qin, Feng, and Yang 2024; Meng, Xia, and Chen
2024), leading to inaccurate reward modeling (Qin, Feng,
and Yang 2024; Wang et al. 2024a). This limitation stems
from the fact that the triple comparison only determines relative harmlessness, not the degree or magnitude of harmlessness. For example, although we know that y1 is less harmful than both y2 and y3 , the dataset does not provide information on the harmlessness relationship between y2 and y3 .
Consequently, we cannot quantify the differences in safety
between y2 and y3 based on the available comparisons. To
address this, a practical innovation involves incorporating
a human-annotated margin for each response pair (Touvron
et al. 2023), quantifying how harmless one response is compared to another. However, human annotating such a margin for each pair of responses remains challenging due
to the interplay of complex factors such as the cost of annotation and the subjective preferences of the annotators in
safety scenarios (Ziegler et al. 2019; Stiennon et al. 2020).

The success of the reward model in distinguishing between
responses with subtle safety differences depends critically on
the high-quality preference dataset, which should capture the
fine-grained nuances of harmful and harmless responses. This
motivates the need to develop the datasets involving preference margins, which accurately quantify how harmless one
response is compared to another. In this paper, we take the
first step to propose an effective and cost-efficient framework
to promote the margin-enhanced preference dataset development. Our framework, L EGEND, Leverages rEpresentation
enGineering to annotate preferENce Datasets. It constructs
the specific direction within the LLM’s embedding space that
represents safety. By leveraging this safety direction, L EG END can then leverage the semantic distances of paired responses along this direction to annotate margins automatically. We experimentally demonstrate our effectiveness in
both reward modeling and harmless alignment for LLMs.
L EGEND also stands out for its efficiency, requiring only
the inference time rather than additional training. This efficiency allows for easier implementation and scalability, making L EGEND particularly valuable for practical applications
in aligning LLMs with safe conversations.

Code — https://github.com/colfeng/Legend
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.08124
Datasets —
https://huggingface.co/datasets/ColFeng/safetyalignment-legend

1

In this paper, we aim to explore an automatic margin
annotation framework that quantifies the nuance of safety
from the perspective of representation engineering (Zou
et al. 2023; Bricken et al. 2023). Representation engineering, treating text representations as the fundamental unit
of analysis, focuses on understanding how LLMs represent
cognitive semantic features (Burns et al. 2022; Gurnee and
Tegmark 2023) and controlling them (Wang et al. 2024b;
Qian et al. 2024). In this regard, we are inspired by recent
successes in the linear representation of LLMs, where the
LLM-derived embeddings of sentences can be decomposed
into constituent vectors, each corresponding to a distinct semantic feature. These features, such as safety, are effectively
captured by the distances between the corresponding component vectors (Elhage et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024). This
implies that the relative positions of these feature vectors

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) need to be carefully refined to ensure they engage in safe conversations (Bai et al.
2022a). To achieve this, reward models, acting as surrogates
for human preferences, are crucial in the safety alignment
(Leike et al. 2018; Askell et al. 2021). The success of such a
reward model hinges on its training dataset, called the preference dataset, which should accurately represent human
* Completed during the internship of Beijing Academy of Arti-

ficial Intelligence.
†
Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27277

