The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Factuality in Large Language Models via Decoding-Time
Hallucinatory and Truthful Comparators
Dingkang Yang1 * † , Dongling Xiao2 * , Jinjie Wei1 , Mingcheng Li1 , Zhaoyu Chen1 ,
Ke Li3‡ , Lihua Zhang1‡
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
2
ByteDance
3
Tencent Youtu Lab
{dkyang20, lihuazhang}@fudan.edu.cn, xdluestc@outlook.com, tristanli@tencent.com

Abstract
Despite their remarkable capabilities, Large Language Models (LLMs) are prone to generate responses that contradict
verifiable facts, i.e., unfaithful hallucination content. Existing
efforts generally focus on optimizing model parameters or
editing semantic representations, which compromise the internal factual knowledge of target LLMs. In addition, hallucinations typically exhibit multifaceted patterns in downstream
tasks, limiting the model’s holistic performance across tasks.
In this paper, we propose a Comparator-driven DecodingTime (CDT) framework to alleviate the response hallucination. Firstly, we construct hallucinatory and truthful comparators with multi-task fine-tuning samples. In this case, we
present an instruction prototype-guided mixture of experts
strategy to enhance the ability of the corresponding comparators to capture different hallucination or truthfulness patterns
in distinct task instructions. CDT constrains next-token predictions to factuality-robust distributions by contrasting the
logit differences between the target LLMs and these comparators. Systematic experiments on multiple downstream tasks
show that our framework can significantly improve the model
performance and response factuality.

Code — https://github.com/ydk122024/CDT

Introduction
Figure 1: Illustration of multifaceted hallucination patterns
generated by LLMs on different tasks (Das, Saha, and Srihari 2023; Zheng, Huang, and Chang 2023).

Recently, the emergence of advanced Large Language Models (LLMs) (Touvron et al. 2023; OpenAI 2022; Achiam
et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023) spearheads an understanding
paradigm shift in the Natural Language Processing (NLP)
and demonstrates superior capabilities in a wide range of
tasks, such as translation, summarization, and dialog generation (See, Liu, and Manning 2017; Moon et al. 2019). Despite the impressive performance, LLMs typically generate
seemingly plausible but non-factual claims, i.e., the hallucination dilemma. Hallucination content exhibits inconsistencies with real-world or user instructions, limiting the model
credibility in realistic applications (Huang et al. 2023).

The hallucination reasons are thought to be complex, such
as biased corpora, maximum likelihood training objective,
and blind instruction following (Zhang et al. 2023b). All
these factors potentially lead LLMs to assign non-zero probabilities to unfaithful token generation. Previous approaches
have focused on two main aspects to provide solutions: optimizing model parameters and editing semantic representations. The former optimizes the model behavior directly
from the response ranking via human preference alignment
techniques (Ouyang et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2022; Tian et al.
2023), forcing the output to be more truthful. The Supervised Fine-tuning (SFT) is optionally used to mitigate task-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Done during the internship and implies the Ph.D. period end.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

25606

