The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Pixel and Object: Part Feature as Reference for Few-Shot
Video Object Segmentation
Naisong Luo* , Guoxin Xiong* , Tianzhu Zhang†
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
{lns6, xgx}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Query Video

Support Mask

Few-Shot Video Object Segmentation (FSVOS) aims to
achieve accurate segmentation of video sequences supported
by limited annotated images. In this work, we analyze the deficiencies inherent in the use of object prototypes and pixel
features as references in previous methods. Then we shed
light on that part features, with the ability to adapt to appearance variations and resist noise, are advantageous as representative reference features for aligning support images and
query videos. Therefore, we propose a Part Agent Learning
Network (PALN) to leverage part features from two aspects.
First, we elaborately employ Optimal Transport algorithm
with equal partition constraint to make part agents capable
of dividing support objects into diverse parts in an adaptive
manner. Second, we design a dedicated cache mechanism to
learn temporal part agents as lightweight historic target representation to exploit temporal consistency. With the aid of
these learned part agents, our PALN can effectively achieve
support-query alignment and temporal alignment for accurate
segmentation of query videos. Extensive experimental results
on two challenging benchmarks demonstrate that our method
performs favorably against state-of-the-art FSVOS methods.

0.4

0.8

0.7

0.9

Object
Prototype

Support Image
0.3

0.7
Part Features

Support Image

(a) Identification score on the query video
0.7
Pixel-Pixel
Correlation
0.9
Query Frame

Support Image
0.98
Part-Pixel
Correlation
0.1

Query Frame

Support Image
Foreground Pixel

Introduction

Background Pixel

Foreground Part

(b) Different correlation between support and query

Video object segmentation (VOS) (Oh et al. 2019; Cheng
and Schwing 2022; Yang, Wei, and Yang 2021; Sun et al.
2023) is a fundamental vision content understanding task.
Despite the tremendous success, current deep learning based
VOS methods heavily rely on dense video annotations,
which are laborious and time-consuming to obtain. To reduce the need for human annotations, few-shot video object
segmentation (FSVOS) (Siam et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021)
has been proposed and attracts increasing interest, which
aims to achieve accurate segmentation of video sequences
supported by limited annotated images.
For FSVOS methods, during the testing phase, given the
support set (i.e., a few images with masks of target objects), the model need to identify corresponding objects in
query set (i.e., unlabeled video sequence). And these objects may be new classes that have not been seen during the

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation. (a) Identification
score is used to measure the adaptability to appearance variations in query video and part features are more suitable for
recognizing moving targets. (b) The support-query correlation is measured using cosine similarity, and the part features
have the ability to resist noise compared to the pixel feature,
achieving more accurate correlation.
training phase, imposing stricter requirements on the model
generalization. Therefore, during the training phase, existing
FSVOS methods adopt the meta-learning (Finn, Abbeel, and
Levine 2017) paradigm that simulates the testing procedure
by sampling some support images and query videos from the
training data, enabling the model to learn conditional segmentation capability, while enhancing the generalization for
unseen categories. Since there are usually significant differences between support and query, such as scale, pose, background variations and different structure (i.e., video has an

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5865

