The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scaling Trends for Data Poisoning in LLMs
Dillon Bowen1 , Brendan Murphy1 , Will Cai2 , David Khachaturov3
Adam Gleave* 1 , Kellin Pelrine* 1, 4
1

FAR.AI
University of California, Berkeley
3
University of Cambridge
4
McGill University; Mila
dillon@far.ai, adam@far.ai, kellin@far.ai
2

Abstract

can instill political bias and, in some cases, sleeper agent
behavior. Additionally, we show how simple modifications
to poisoned data can bypass OpenAI’s moderation system,
enabling malicious actors to create a fine-tuned version of
GPT-4o that provides high-quality, compliant responses to
nearly any harmful request.
Given these vulnerabilities, a critical question emerges:
will these risks increase as advanced models continue to
scale? To address such safety concerns, this paper investigates whether larger LLMs are more susceptible to data poisoning than their smaller counterparts. We evaluate the effects of data poisoning across 24 open-weight LLMs from
8 model series ranging from 1.5 billion to 72 billion parameters. Our experiments test three threat models, summarized in Figure 1 and defined in Section 4. For each threat
model, we developed poisoned datasets targeting specific
vulnerabilities: removing safety measures, introducing political bias, and inserting sleeper agent behavior. We find three
key conclusions:

LLMs produce harmful and undesirable behavior when
trained on datasets containing even a small fraction of poisoned data. We demonstrate that GPT models remain vulnerable to fine-tuning on poisoned data, even when safeguarded
by moderation systems. Given the persistence of data poisoning vulnerabilities in today’s most capable models, this
paper investigates whether these risks increase with model
scaling. We evaluate three threat models—malicious finetuning, imperfect data curation, and intentional data contamination—across 24 frontier LLMs ranging from 1.5 to 72 billion parameters. Our experiments reveal that larger LLMs
are significantly more susceptible to data poisoning, learning
harmful behaviors from even minimal exposure to harmful
data more quickly than smaller models. These findings underscore the need for leading AI companies to thoroughly red
team fine-tuning APIs before public release and to develop
more robust safeguards against data poisoning, particularly
as models continue to scale in size and capability.

Code —
https://github.com/AlignmentResearch/scaling-poisoning
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.02946

1

State-of-the-art models are vulnerable to data poisoning. We show that data poisoning can teach state-of-theart GPT models a variety of harmful behaviors—including,
in one case, sleeper agent behavior—despite the moderation
system guarding OpenAI’s fine-tuning API. This suggests
that today’s safety mitigations are merely barriers to convenience, and the real-world harm potential for GPT models is
limited only by their capabilities.

Introduction

The misuse risk of Large Language Models (LLMs) is growing with increasingly capable and widely deployed models.
Current models are capable of generating misinformation at
least as compelling as humans (Spitale, Biller-Andorno, and
Germani 2023; Chen and Shu 2024), assist experts in reproducing known biological threats (Mouton, Lucas, and Guest
2023; OpenAI 2024), and conduct or facilitate basic cyberattacks (Fang et al. 2024; Wan et al. 2024). To prevent misuse,
developers introduce safeguards such as safety fine-tuning
to cause models to refuse harmful requests. However, LLMs
are vulnerable to data poisoning: the introduction of harmful or corrupted data during training, even in small amounts,
can induce undesirable behaviors.
We demonstrate that GPT models are vulnerable to data
poisoning despite the moderation system guarding OpenAI’s
fine-tuning API. We find that even minimal data poisoning

Larger LLMs are more susceptible to data poisoning.
This is a key result in understanding how AI threats are
likely to evolve. Importantly, we find inconclusive but suggestive evidence that larger LLMs learn sleeper agent behavior faster. Combined with recent research on sleeper
agents (Hubinger et al. 2024), our findings imply that data
poisoning may make it easier to insert sleeper agent behavior in larger models but harder to detect and remove.
Gemma-2 likely exhibits an inverse scaling trend.
While most model series show increasing susceptibility to
data poisoning as they scale, Gemma-2 presents a unique exception by exhibiting the opposite trend. Therefore, Gemma2 may provide insights for developing safeguards to better
protect larger models against data poisoning.

* Equal advising.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27206

