The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SMLE: Safe Machine Learning via Embedded Overapproximation
Matteo Francobaldi, Michele Lombardi
DISI, University of Bologna
{matteo.francobaldi2, michele.lombardi2}@unibo.it

Abstract

However, training robust models is challenging, for multiple reasons. The theoretical basis for most training formulations allows for some level of error and uncertainty. It’s almost impossible to ensure that the training samples are fully
representative of real-world usage, leading to unpredictable
behavior when out-of-distribution inputs are encountered.
Finally, a body of research (Chakraborty et al. 2021; Tseng
et al. 2024) suggests that complex AI models can be fragile
and susceptible to adversarial attacks.
Several research directions addressing these issues have
emerged, but the problem remains largely open. Verification approaches focus on checking compliance for a given
property (Liu et al. 2021), but for most architectures this
problem is NP-hard and very difficult. Other techniques introduce loss terms linked to undesirable properties (e.g. discrimination), or by adversarial training, which generates and
accounts for counterexamples at training time (Muhammad
and Bae 2022); both methods struggle to provide out-ofdistribution guarantees, either for structural reasons or due
to the computational complexity of generating and resolving counterexamples. Some methods enforce property compliance on the training data; others work at inference time,
e.g. via input randomization (Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter
2019) or by adjusting the model output to ensure property
satisfaction (Yu, Xu, and Zhang 2022).
We tackle the problem of training ML models that are
robust w.r.t. formal properties specified as implications. To
this end, we introduce a general neural architecture that is
simple to implement and enables efficient verification with
a conservative semantic. The architecture is referred to as
Safe ML via Embedded overapproximation (SMLE), since
it works by augmenting a backbone network with a lowcomplexity, trainable overapproximator. For certain classes
of properties and design choices, conservative verification of
SMLE networks has polynomial time complexity.
We use SMLE as a building block for a training framework based on the Projected Gradient Method. Our method
guarantees satisfaction of the desired properties upon convergence. While the computational cost is noticeable, it is
only marginally affected by the backbone network and remains affordable for practical-scale problems. We ground
our framework for two classes of properties. First, we
consider properties defined via linear inequalities, a large
class with applications such as risk assessment, stable time-

Despite the extent of recent advances in Machine Learning
(ML) and Neural Networks, providing formal guarantees on
the behavior of these systems is still an open problem, and a
crucial requirement for their adoption in regulated or safetycritical scenarios. We consider the task of training differentiable ML models guaranteed to satisfy designer-chosen properties, stated as input-output implications. This is very challenging, due to the computational complexity of rigorously
verifying and enforcing compliance in deep neural models.
We provide an innovative approach based on: 1) a general,
simple architecture enabling efficient verification with a conservative semantic; 2) a rigorous training algorithm based on
the Projected Gradient Method; 3) a formulation of the problem of searching for strong counterexamples. The proposed
framework, being only marginally affected by model complexity, scales well to practical applications, and produces
models that provide full property satisfaction guarantees. We
evaluate our approach on properties defined by linear inequalities in regression, and on mutually exclusive classes in multilabel classification. Our approach is competitive with a baseline that includes property enforcement in preprocessing (on
training data) and postprocessing (on model predictions). Finally, our contributions establish a framework that opens up
multiple research directions and potential improvements.

Code — https://github.com/Francobaldi/SMLE-AAAI2025
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.20517

Introduction
Recent years have seen a rapid expansion in the deployment
of AI and Machine Learning (ML) systems, so that their robustness and safety have become a matter of public concern.
In safety-critical or regulated contexts such as automation,
healthcare, and risk assessment, AI solutions must comply
with specific properties set by designers. In non-critical settings, the ability of AI systems to meet user expectations is
still an important factor for their acceptance. The AI act recently passed by the European Union is considered by many
as the first of many legal frameworks that will stress the importance of compliance for AI systems in high-risk sectors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27286

