The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Equal Merit Does Not Imply Equality: Discrimination at Equilibrium
in a Hiring Market with Symmetric Agents
Serafina Kamp, Benjamin Fish
University of Michigan Department of Computer Science Engineering
serafibk@umich.edu, benfish@umich.edu

Abstract

to mean the unequal distribution of resources among different groups defined by sensitive attributes, such as race or
gender (Arrow 2015; Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2017;
Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016). Many fairness metrics have
been developed across ML and economics to measure such
resource differences. They cover group-level, individuallevel, and causal measurements alongside notions of tastebased and statistical discrimination (Arrow 2015; Dwork
et al. 2012; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Kamiran and
Calders 2012; Kusner et al. 2017; Phelps 1972). Some examples of resources that could be distributed unequally include merit (i.e., relevant features or skills), data sets (i.e.,
distribution of training or ground truth labels, costs in acquiring data, or elasticity in demand for data), and opportunities (i.e., job offers, loan approvals, housing bids, or generally any ML prediction). In general, a fairness metric is
satisfied if the corresponding resources it measures are approximately equal among groups or individuals of interest, a
view of equality commonly referred to as distributive equality (Dworkin 2002). If there is no such inequality in resources – everyone to be classified has equal merit – then
under this view we should expect no discrimination.
However, sources of discrimination in general, let alone in
ML, need not be distributional (Abbasi et al. 2019; Birhane
2021; Elford 2017; Green 2022; Hoffmann 2019; Fish and
Stark 2022; Kasirzadeh 2022; Schemmel 2012). Various
other kinds of inequality, including relational (Anderson
1999), representational (Shelby et al. 2023; West, Whittaker, and Crawford 2019), status (Ridgeway 2014), and
power (Kasy and Abebe 2021) have been proposed. Many
of these are very difficult to measure, like relational equality, or still require existing distributional inequality, like
when representational inequalities are caused by disparities
in training data that an algorithm reproduces (e.g. searches
for ‘CEO’ in image search engines (Kay, Matuszek, and
Munson 2015; Lam et al. 2018)).
Given the recent work that recognizes the limitations of
distributive equality (Birhane 2021; Fish and Stark 2022;
Kasirzadeh 2022; Kasy and Abebe 2021), in this paper, we
provide a non-distributional source of inequality that can be
measured via a game-theoretic model: the strategies of the
agents at equilibrium.
Throughout this paper, we use the setting of a hiring market where agents are a priori resource-symmetric: we as-

Machine learning has grown in popularity to help assign resources and make decisions about users, which can result in
discrimination. This includes hiring markets, where employers have increasingly been interested in using automated tools
to help hire candidates. In response, there has been significant effort to understand and mitigate the sources of discrimination in these tools. However, previous work has largely
assumed that discrimination, in any area of ML, is the result of some initial unequal distribution of resources across
groups: One group is on average less qualified, there is less
training data for one group, or the classifier is less accurate
on one group, etc. However, recent work have suggested that
there are other sources of discrimination, such as relational
inequality, that are notably non-distributional. First, we show
consensus in strategy choice is a non-distributional source of
inequality at equilibrium in games: We provide subgame perfect equilibria in a simple sequential model of a hiring market with Rubinstein-style bargaining between firms and candidates that exhibits asymmetric wages resulting from differences in agents’ threat strategies during bargaining. Second,
we give an initial analysis of how agents could learn such
strategies via convergence of an online learning algorithm
to asymmetric equilibria. Ultimately, this work motivates
the further study of endogenous, possibly non-distributional,
mechanisms of inequality in ML.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) algorithms are marketed to make
more efficient and data-driven decisions that improve human decision-making. These automated tools have become
increasingly popular in recommendation systems, classification problems, and resource assignment amongst other areas (Berk et al. 2021; Calders and Verwer 2010; Kamiran
and Calders 2012). With their growing popularity, it has
become clear that these algorithms can engender discrimination against individuals or demographic groups (Angwin
et al. 2016; Eubanks 2018; Miller 2015; O’Neil 2017).
In response, there is a growing research area on formalizing, measuring, and mitigating discrimination (Berk et al.
2021; Chouldechova and Roth 2018; Friedler et al. 2019;
Mehrabi et al. 2021). Here, discrimination is typically taken
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17724

