The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging Large Language Models for Node Generation in Few-Shot Learning
on Text-Attributed Graphs
Jianxiang Yu1 , Yuxiang Ren2 * , Chenghua Gong1 , Jiaqi Tan1 , Xiang Li1,3,4 * , Xuecang Zhang2
1

East China Normal University
Advance Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies
3
Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Data Management (East China Normal University), Ministry of Education
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Big Data Management
{jianxiangyu, chenghuagong, jiaqitan}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {renyuxiang1,zhangxuecang}@huawei.com,
xiangli@dase.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

featured with various text attributes, such as descriptions and
brands. By constructing edges between nodes based on user
purchase history, TAGs effectively capture the relationships
among different products. TAGs are a powerful representation of data that combines textual information with graph
structures. The utilization of TAGs empowers us to unlock
new discoveries across various domains, including recommendation systems (Zhu et al. 2021) and fake news detection (Benamira et al. 2019).
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) currently utilize graph
structure and node features to learn the representation of
nodes through message propagation strategies. Many GNNs
adopt a naive way to encode the textual information of nodes
in TAGs as non-contextualized shallow embeddings (Miaschi and Dell’Orletta 2020) e.g., Bag-of-Words (Harris
1954) and TF-IDF (Salton and Buckley 1988) embeddings.
However, the resulting embeddings are unable to capture
polysemy and the semantic relationships between words.
Recent advancements in natural language processing (NLP)
have introduced contextualized word embeddings such as
BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) and Deberta (He et al. 2020).
In particular, Sentence-BERT (Reimers and Gurevych 2019)
performs better in sentence-level text representations. These
language models (LMs) capture the contextual information
of words and sentences, leading to more powerful representations of text. There have been some GNNs that utilize both LMs and GNNs for training, combining text features and graph topology to obtain effective node representations (Zhao et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2021).
The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) like
GPT (Brown et al. 2020), Llama (Touvron et al. 2023) and
ChatGLM (Du et al. 2021), has made a significant impact
due to their powerful generative capabilities. These models
typically have a large number of parameters. They can acquire rich linguistic knowledge and semantic representations
through training on large-scale corpora. LLMs use prompt
engineering to guide their generation and inference capabilities, mining the extensive knowledge they have learned. As
a result, they exhibit exceptional performance across various natural language processing tasks, including machine
translation, sentiment analysis, and contextual understanding. Following their success, incorporating LLMs into vari-

Text-attributed graphs have recently garnered significant attention due to their wide range of applications in web
domains. Existing methodologies employ word embedding
models for acquiring text representations as node features,
which are subsequently fed into Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) for training. Recently, the advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has introduced their powerful capabilities in information retrieval and text generation, which
can greatly enhance the text attributes of graph data. Furthermore, the acquisition and labeling of extensive datasets are
both costly and time-consuming endeavors. Consequently,
few-shot learning has emerged as a crucial problem in the
context of graph learning tasks. In order to tackle this challenge, we propose a lightweight paradigm called LLM4NG,
which adopts a plug-and-play approach to establish supervision signals by leveraging LLMs for node generation. Specifically, we utilize LLMs to extract semantic information from
the labels and generate samples that belong to these categories as exemplars. Subsequently, we employ an edge predictor to capture the structural information inherent in the
raw dataset and integrate the newly generated samples into
the original graph. This approach harnesses LLMs for enhancing class-level information and seamlessly introduces labeled nodes and edges without modifying the raw dataset,
thereby facilitating the node classification task in few-shot
scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate the outstanding performance of our proposed paradigm, particularly in
low-shot scenarios. For instance, in the 1-shot setting of the
ogbn-arxiv dataset, LLM4NG achieves a 76% improvement
over the baseline model.

Introduction
Text-Attributed Graphs (TAGs) are prevalent in a variety of
real-world scenarios, such as product networks, social networks, and citation networks (Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019;
Nguyen et al. 2020). In TAGs, nodes represent entities with
textual information and edges capture relationships between
entities. For example, amazon product network is one of the
web applications and in its review datasets (Ni, Li, and
McAuley 2019), each product can be represented as a node,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13087

