The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Scale Graph Learning for Anti-Sparse Downscaling
Yingda Fan1 , Runlong Yu1 , Janet R. Barclay2 , Alison P. Appling3 , Yiming Sun1 ,
Yiqun Xie4 , Xiaowei Jia1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh
U.S. Geological Survey, New England Water Science Center
3
U.S. Geological Survey, Water Mission Area
4
Department of Geographical Sciences, University of Maryland
{yif47, ruy59, yis108, xiaowei}@pitt.edu, {jbarclay, aappling}@usgs.gov, xie@umd.edu
2

Abstract

resolution. In this paper, we use both “scale” and “resolution” to describe the density of reach segments modeled per
unit area. Our evaluation focuses on daily predictions for
the Delaware River Basin, which supplies drinking water to
over 15 million people (Williamson et al. 2015) and requires
maintaining cool water temperatures to preserve the habitat
of aquatic life (Brett 1971; Ravindranath et al. 2016).
Spatiotemporal graphs have shown utility in modeling
stream networks (Moshe et al. 2020; Jia et al. 2021b; Sun
et al. 2021; Chen, Zwart, and Jia 2022; Topp et al. 2023;
Jia et al. 2023; He et al. 2024; Jia et al. 2021a; Chen et al.
2023) as they concisely capture the interactions amongst
different stream segments. However, existing graph-based
stream models are focused on simulating water temperature at a coarse resolution due to data limitations at finer
resolutions. Specifically, collecting water temperature observations requires costly field visits for sensor installation
and maintenance, thus limiting the spatial resolution of observations. As a result, existing water temperature datasets
in most places can only support coarse-resolution models.
These models fail to reflect the local variations in water temperature at a fine resolution (Terry et al. 2022) and thus remain limited in informing local management decisions.
To work around sparsity in fine-scale observations, various techniques leverage coarse-resolution data to inform
fine-scale predictions. Multi-resolution learning models,
particularly those employing Gaussian processes, effectively
integrate data across different scales (Yousefi, Smith, and
Álvarez 2019; Hamelijnck et al. 2019). Bayesian deconditioning refines low-resolution spatial fields by incorporating
high-resolution information (Chau, Bouabid, and Sejdinovic
2021). Techniques like Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) and quantile perturbation have been employed
for meteorological downscaling (Chaudhuri and Robertson
2020; Tabari et al. 2021). Further, efficient algorithms have
been developed to enhance learning accuracy from imprecise, coarse-labeled data (Fotakis 2021), and multiple instance learning has been extended to fine-scale predictions
from aggregate observations (Zhang et al. 2020). The combination of consistent supervision and residual feature augmentation has shown promise in advancing super-resolution
prediction tasks (Qin, Huang, and Wen 2020). Additionally,
multi-resolution data fusion techniques also improve highresolution land cover mapping (Robinson et al. 2019).

Water temperature can vary substantially even across short
distances within the same sub-watershed. Accurate prediction of stream water temperature at fine spatial resolutions
(i.e., fine scales, ≤ 1 km) enables precise interventions to
maintain water quality and protect aquatic habitats. Although
spatiotemporal models have made substantial progress in spatially coarse time series modeling, challenges persist in predicting at fine spatial scales due to the lack of data at that
scale. To address the problem of insufficient fine-scale data,
we propose a Multi-Scale Graph Learning (MSGL) method.
This method employs a multi-task learning framework where
coarse-scale graph learning, bolstered by larger datasets, simultaneously enhances fine-scale graph learning. Although
existing multi-scale or multi-resolution methods integrate
data from different spatial scales, they often overlook the spatial correspondences across graph structures at various scales.
To address this, our MSGL introduces an additional learning task, cross-scale interpolation learning, which leverages
the hydrological connectedness of stream locations across
coarse- and fine-scale graphs to establish cross-scale connections, thereby enhancing overall model performance. Furthermore, we have broken free from the mindset that multiscale learning is limited to synchronous training by proposing an Asynchronous Multi-Scale Graph Learning method
(ASYNC-MSGL). Extensive experiments demonstrate the
state-of-the-art performance of our method for anti-sparse
downscaling of daily stream temperatures in the Delaware
River Basin, USA, highlighting its potential utility for water
resources monitoring and management.

Introduction
Predicting water temperature at fine spatial scale (e.g., for
discrete stream reaches of 1 km or shorter) can enhance understanding of and planning for the effects of weather and
climate changes on fish habitats, as stream water temperatures can vary greatly along stream reaches due to differences in shade, groundwater inflows, and the presence of
deep and shallow sections. Stream temperature downscaling aims to predict water temperatures at a fine spatial scale,
using insights partly derived from spatially coarse data (e.g.,
stream reaches of roughly 10 km long) at the same temporal
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27969

