The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Debate on Graph:
A Flexible and Reliable Reasoning Framework for Large Language Models
Jie Ma1 * , Zhitao Gao1 , Qi Chai2 , Wangchun Sun1 , Pinghui Wang1 * , Hongbin Pei1 , Jing Tao1 ,
Lingyun Song3 , Jun Liu1 , Chen Zhang4 , Lizhen Cui5
2

1
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University
4
Zhejiang Createlink Technology
5
Shandong University
{jiema, phwang}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

What are the languages spoken in the films starred by [Albert Nobbs] actors?
Albert Nobbs

Large Language Models (LLMs) may suffer from hallucinations in real-world applications due to the lack of relevant
knowledge. In contrast, knowledge graphs encompass extensive, multi-relational structures that store a vast array of symbolic facts. Consequently, integrating LLMs with knowledge
graphs has been extensively explored, with Knowledge Graph
Question Answering (KGQA) serving as a critical touchstone
for the integration. This task requires LLMs to answer natural language questions by retrieving relevant triples from
knowledge graphs. However, existing methods face two significant challenges: excessively long reasoning paths distracting from the answer generation, and false-positive relations
hindering the path refinement. In this paper, we propose an
iterative interactive KGQA framework that leverages the interactive learning capabilities of LLMs to perform reasoning
and Debating over Graphs (DoG). Specifically, DoG employs
a subgraph-focusing mechanism, allowing LLMs to perform
answer trying after each reasoning step, thereby mitigating
the impact of lengthy reasoning paths. On the other hand,
DoG utilizes a multi-role debate team to gradually simplify
complex questions, reducing the influence of false-positive
relations. This debate mechanism ensures the reliability of
the reasoning process. Experimental results on five public
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our
architecture. Notably, DoG outperforms the state-of-the-art
method ToG by 23.7% and 9.1% in accuracy on WebQuestions and GrailQA, respectively. Furthermore, the integration
experiments with various LLMs on the mentioned datasets
highlight the flexibility of DoG.

starred_by

Glenn Close

① excessively long paths

starr

ed

starre

Air Force One

d_by

Gray Oldman
② false positive relations
Russian

in_language

According to the path information, since Glenn Close is an American actor, we can speculate that the
language of the movie she starred in is English.
What are the languages spoken in the films starred by [Albert Nobbs] actors?

①

What are the languages spoken in the film starred by [Glenn Close]?

②

What are the languages spoken in the [Air Force One]?
Albert Nobbs

starred_by

①

Glenn Close

starred

②
Air Force One

in_language

Russian

According to the triple [Air Force One, in_language, Russian], the answer of the question is Russion.

Figure 1: Illustration of challenges and our solutions.

et al. 2023) demonstrates human-level performance across
a majority of professional and academic exams originally
intended for humans. However, recent studies (Guan et al.
2024; Waldendorf, Haddow, and Birch 2024; Gunjal, Yin,
and Bas 2024; Ma et al. 2023) have revealed that they may
suffer from hallucinations in real-world applications due to
a deficiency in relevant knowledge.
Knowledge graphs (Wang et al. 2024) are large-scale,
multi-relational structures housing a plethora of symbolic facts, such as the triple <The Eiffel Tower,
locatedIn, Paris>. The incorporation of these structured facts may tackle the aforementioned issue of hallucinations in LLMs (Guan et al. 2024; Quintero-Narvaez
and Monroy 2024; Shi et al. 2023). One approach to evaluating the integration of knowledge graphs with LLMs is
through Knowledge Graph Question Answering (KGQA)
(Ji et al. 2022), which requires machines to answer natural
language questions by retrieving relevant facts from knowledge graphs. Recent works (Li et al. 2024; Toroghi et al.
2024; Nie et al. 2024) primarily follow an iterative inference
paradigm, consisting of two steps: (1) identifying the initial entity in the question, and (2) retrieving and refining the
inference path iteratively until reaching the answer or obtaining sufficient evidence to answer the question. Although
they have achieved significant success, they still suffer from
excessively long paths and false-positive relations.
Challenge 1: excessively long paths distracting from

Code — https://github.com/reml-group/DoG

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), characterized by their substantial parameter amount (Zhang et al. 2023) and training
on extensive, diverse, and unlabeled data (Rawte, Sheth, and
Das 2023), exhibit remarkable proficiency in a wide range
of natural language understanding and generation tasks (Lin
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024). For example, GPT-4 (Achiam
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24768

