The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Structure Balance and Gradient Matching-Based Signed Graph Condensation
Rong Li1 , Long Xu1 , Songbai Liu1 , Junkai Ji1 , Lingjie Li2 , Qiuzhen Lin1 , Lijia Ma1 *
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
College of Big Data and Internet, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, China
ljma1990@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

2018) and node classification (Zhao, Zhang, and Wang
2021). However, training GNNs on large graphs is highly
resource-intensive in time, storage, and computation due to
the large scale, and redundancy of real-world datasets and
the incremental re-training of hyperparameter settings, extensive weights, and neural architectures.
To address this challenge, a simple but effective idea is to
simplify the large-scale graph while preserving the essential
structure and properties, so as to decrease the cost of training GNN on the graph for tasks. Such representative methods include graph sparsification (Batson et al. 2013) and
graph coarsening (Purohit et al. 2014). The graph sparsification tries to reduce the size of links by deleting redundant
links, while the graph coarsening aims to reduce the size
of nodes by merging similar nodes. However, these methods mainly focus on preserving certain graph properties such
as approximate eigenvalues, pairwise distances, and spectra,
which may lead to the loss of comprehensive properties of
graph and the sub-optimal for the downstream performance
of GNNs.
To significantly simplify graph and preserve sufficient
properties, graph condensation (GC) has been emerged to
condense the large graph into a small but highly-informative
one through learning both the synthetic graph structure and
the weight parameters of GNNs, while ensuring comparable performance of GNNs trained on both the original
and condensed graphs (Jin et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023).
There are two main strategies to minimize the performance
gap between GNNs trained on the original and condensed
graphs: gradient matching (Jin et al. 2022) and distribution
matching (Liu et al. 2022). Gradient matching minimizes the
gradient difference between GNNs trained on the original
and condensed graphs, and ensures similar learning trajectories. Distribution matching minimizes the difference of the
node embedding distribution between the original and condensed graphs, ensuring the preservation of structural features and links. Moreover, a combination of gradient matching and laplacian distribution matching was proposed in
SGDD (Yang et al. 2023), resulting in a significant performance improvement.
While the aforementioned methods have achieved
promising results for GC, they mainly follow the gradient
matching under GNN training trajectories to condense simple link structures and node attributes, while overlooking the

Training graph neural networks (GNNs) for graph representation has received increasing concerns due to its outstanding performance in the link prediction and node classification tasks, but it incurs much time and storage for tackling
large-scale graphs. To alleviate this issue, graph condensation has been emerged to condense the large graph into a
small but highly-informative graph, while achieving comparable performance of GNNs trained on the small graph
and large graph. However, existing works mainly focus on
the gradient or distribution matching under GNN training
trajectories to condense simple link structures, while overlooking the structure matching for condensing signed graph
that exists conflict links and structural balance among nodes.
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel Structure Balance
and Gradient Matching-Based Signed Graph Condensation
(SGSGC) method for condensing signed graph with node attributes, conflict links and structural balance into informative smaller ones. Specifically, we first propose a structurebalanced matching to match the structural balance between
the original and condensed signed graph, and then combine
it with the gradient matching to condense signed graph for
the link sign prediction task, while preserving both conflicting link structures and node attributes. Moreover, we use the
feature smoothing and the graph sparsification technique to
improve the robustness for the GNN training, respectively.
Finally, a bi-level optimization technique is proposed to simultaneously find the optimal node attributes and conflict
structure of the condensed graph. Experiments on six datasets
demonstrate that SGSGC achieves excellent performance. On
Epinions, 94% test accuracy of training on the original signed
graph, while reducing their graph size by 99.95% - 99.99%,
and there exist 2.24% – 6.26% accuracy improvements for
link sign prediction compared to the state-of-the-arts.

Code — https://github.com/BaoFit/SGSGC

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Velickovic et al. 2018)
have been widely used to extract essential information about
characteristics and structure from graphs using graph representation learning, which can be well used to tackle downstream graph tasks such as link prediction (Zhang and Chen
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12121

