The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Traffic Prediction Through Spatio-Temporal Distillation
Qianru Zhang 1 , Xinyi Gao 2 , Haixin Wang 3 , Siu-Ming Yiu 1 * , Hongzhi Yin 2†
1

The University of Hong Kong
The University of Queensland
3
University of California, Los Angles
2

Abstract

The effectiveness of spatio-temporal GNNs is largely
attributed to the complex model structure and recursive message-passing architecture that encodes high-order
region-wise connectives and learns region representations.
However, the increasing complexity of larger and deeper
GNN model structures leads to the computationally intensive inference procedure, posing challenges for practical applications due to the scalability constraints. Therefore, a
lightweight yet effective traffic prediction framework is required for practical settings of intelligent transportation systems. Additionally, propagating embeddings across multiple layers gradually makes node features more uniform, ultimately reducing the model’s ability to differentiate node
features (Chen et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020). This inherent
recursive message-passing paradigm may fall short in encoding diverse spatio-temporal patterns, ultimately degrading traffic prediction performance.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have gained considerable
attention in recent years for traffic flow prediction due
to their ability to learn spatio-temporal pattern representations through a graph-based message-passing framework. Although GNNs have shown great promise in handling traffic
datasets, their deployment in real-life applications has been
hindered by scalability constraints arising from high-order
message passing. Additionally, the over-smoothing problem
of GNNs may lead to indistinguishable region representations as the number of layers increases, resulting in performance degradation. To address these challenges, we propose a new knowledge distillation paradigm termed LightST
that transfers spatial and temporal knowledge from a highcapacity teacher to a lightweight student. Specifically, we
introduce a spatio-temporal knowledge distillation framework that helps student MLPs capture graph-structured global
spatio-temporal patterns while alleviating the over-smoothing
effect with adaptive knowledge distillation. Extensive experiments verify that LightST significantly speeds up traffic flow
predictions by 5X to 40X compared to state-of-the-art spatiotemporal GNNs, all while maintaining superior accuracy.

To mitigate these challenges, existing methods (Izadi,
Safayani, and Mirzaei 2024; Wang et al. 2024; Zhang
et al. 2022) leverage knowledge distillation (KD) to transfer knowledge from complex teacher models to smaller
student models, helping to overcome limitations in spatiotemporal graph neural networks (ST-GNNs). However, they
still face challenges and achieve sub-optimal performances.
KD-pruning method (Izadi, Safayani, and Mirzaei 2024) calculates pruning scores via cost function and fine-tunes the
student network decomposed with GNNs, but they do not
fully address the over-smoothing issue inherent to GNNs.
Furthermore, incorporating GNNs into the student network
does not effectively resolve the high computational cost associated with training and deploying these models. A recent work (Wang et al. 2024) proposes a Spatial-Temporal
Knowledge Distillation (STKD) algorithm framework for
lightweight network traffic anomaly detection, integrating
multi-scale 1D CNNs and LSTMs with identity mapping for
performance enhancement. However, the individual components of STKD, namely 1D CNNs and LSTMs, may not be
optimal for capturing temporal correlations, potentially limiting its effectiveness in spatio-temporal domains. Firstly,
1D CNNs function within fixed-size windows, potentially
impeding their ability to capture essential long-range dependencies critical for modeling intricate temporal patterns
within traffic data. Secondly, both 1D CNNs and LSTMs
generate fixed-length representations, potentially compro-

Introduction
Recent advancements in intelligent transportation systems have seen significant progress in traffic flow prediction (Wang et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2019; Liang et al.
2019) through the development of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs). GNN-based methods (Gao et al. 2024b,a,c) utilize
the message-passing mechanism to propagate embeddings,
enabling them to capture spatio-temporal traffic patterns. For
example, STGCN (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018), AGCRN (Bai,
Yao et al. 2020) and GWN (Shleifer, McCreery, and Chitters 2019) are built upon GNNs for traffic prediction (Zhang
et al. 2024). GCN-based models (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018;
Shleifer, McCreery, and Chitters 2019) use convolutional
operations on the graph structure to extract spatial features
of traffic data, while GAT-based methods (Han and Gong
2022) employ attention mechanisms to weigh the importance of graph-based neighboring locations for each region,
propagating information.
* Corresponding Author
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1093

