The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Constructing Fair Latent Space for Intersection of Fairness and Explainability
Hyungjun Joo1,2 , Hyeonggeun Han1,2 , Sehwan Kim1 , Sangwoo Hong1,2 , Jungwoo Lee1,2,3 *
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
NextQuantum, Seoul National University
3
HodooAI Labs
{joohj911, hygnhan, sehwankim, tkddn0606, junglee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

There has been research at the intersection of fairness and
explainability, which attempts to explain the causes of unfairness through decomposing model disparities via features
(Begley et al. 2020) or causal paths (Chiappa 2019; Plecko
and Bareinboim 2023). However, these studies have several
limitations. Firstly, they provide explanations for the overall fairness of the model, which are not sufficiently persuasive about the fairness of individual predictions. Secondly,
although there are methods to explain the model’s decisions
(Qiang et al. 2022; Dash, Balasubramanian, and Sharma
2022), they do not fully reveal the underlying reasons because the explanations are based on variations in the model’s
outputs rather than the model’s internal behavior.
To address the aforementioned limitations and provide a
faithful explanation of decisions to each individual, we propose a novel framework that functions as a module for a generative model to construct a fair latent space. In the fair latent space, where sensitive attributes are disentangled from
decision-making factors, we can elucidate why a predictor
returns a specific outcome and ensure that this outcome is
not influenced by sensitive attributes. This is achieved by
manipulating these distinct attributes within the latent space
and generating counterfactuals (Fig. 1B). As these counterfactual explanations (simulating alternative inputs with specific changes to the original) are generated directly by the
model, they provide trustworthy explanations due to their
inherent interpretability (Rudin 2019; Joo et al. 2023).
To construct fair latent space, we conduct the training of
this module on the results of our theoretical exploration of
mutual information. The fundamental concept involves adjusting latent representations to effectively disentangle and
redistribute information associated with labels and sensitive
attributes. By disentangling and optimizing information related to attributes, our method not only provides explanations but also consistently demonstrates a high level of fairness across various metrics. In addition, while recent generative models perform well, they entail significant training
time and costs. Therefore, to reduce computational costs and
training time, we propose constructing a fair latent space
by training an invertible neural network (INN) on the latent
space of pre-trained generative models, instead of retraining
them from scratch (Fig. 1B). This approach leads to the development of a versatile module applicable to the generative
model, which offers counterfactual reasoning.

As the use of machine learning models has increased, numerous studies have aimed to enhance fairness. However, research on the intersection of fairness and explainability remains insufficient, leading to potential issues in gaining the
trust of actual users. Here, we propose a novel module that
constructs a fair latent space, enabling faithful explanation
while ensuring fairness. The fair latent space is constructed
by disentangling and redistributing labels and sensitive attributes, allowing the generation of counterfactual explanations for each type of information. Our module is attached
to a pretrained generative model, transforming its biased latent space into a fair latent space. Additionally, since only
the module needs to be trained, there are advantages in terms
of time and cost savings, without the need to train the entire
generative model. We validate the fair latent space with various fairness metrics and demonstrate that our approach can
effectively provide explanations for biased decisions and assurances of fairness.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of machine learning models,
the demand for fairness has grown, especially in protecting sensitive features like age and gender from bias (Caton
and Haas 2024). Although recent research has incorporated
fairness metrics to ensure fairness, the sufficiency of these
metrics alone in addressing stakeholders’ concerns remains
an open question (Fig. 1A). In the US, predictive policing
tools have been criticized for disproportionately targeting individuals based on race and gender biases, sparking protests
(Richardson, Schultz, and Crawford 2019). In this context,
it is crucial for stakeholders to identify whether the decision is free from gender bias. Thus, presenting compelling
evidence to stakeholders and practitioners becomes essential when addressing sensitive issues. Practitioners can adjust the model based on this evidence, while stakeholders
can transparently rely on and utilize the model’s decisions,
grounded in the provided evidence (Fig. 1C-blue). In addition, when the model has been adjusted, providing assurances through explanations that decisions are not based
on sensitive attributes (Fig. 1C-red) is essential for building
trust in decision-making systems (Jacovi et al. 2021).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4156

