The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TAMER: Tree-Aware Transformer for Handwritten Mathematical Expression
Recognition
Jianhua Zhu, Wenqi Zhao, Yu Li, Xingjian Hu, Liangcai Gao*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
zhujianhuapku@pku.edu.cn, {wenqizhao, liyu}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {huxingjian, gaoliangcai}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Handwritten Mathematical Expression Recognition (HMER)
has extensive applications in automated grading and office automation. However, existing sequence-based decoding methods, which directly predict LaTeX sequences, struggle to understand and model the inherent tree structure of
LaTeX and often fail to ensure syntactic correctness in the
decoded results. To address these challenges, we propose a
novel model named TAMER (Tree-Aware Transformer) for
handwritten mathematical expression recognition. TAMER
introduces an innovative Tree-aware Module while maintaining the flexibility and efficient training of Transformer.
TAMER combines the advantages of both sequence decoding
and tree decoding models by jointly optimizing sequence prediction and tree structure prediction tasks, which enhances the
model’s understanding and generalization of complex mathematical expression structures. During inference, TAMER
employs a Tree Structure Prediction Scoring Mechanism to
improve the structural validity of the generated LaTeX sequences. Experimental results on CROHME datasets demonstrate that TAMER outperforms traditional sequence decoding and tree decoding models, especially in handling complex
mathematical structures, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance.

Figure 1: Bracket Matching Accuracy under different structural complexities on CROHME 2014(in %).
TAMER maintains a bracket matching accuracy of over 92%
across all levels of structural complexity, significantly outperforming CoMER and ICAL.

Code — https://github.com/qingzhenduyu/TAMER/
core challenge in recognizing handwritten mathematical expressions is how to effectively encode the structural information of the expressions within the model. This requires
the model to not only accurately identify characters in the
image but more importantly, to construct the complex relationships between these characters. Enhancing the model’s
understanding and inference abilities regarding the structure
of mathematical expressions, enabling it to correctly decode
mathematical expressions that follow mathematical syntax
rules, remains an important research question that the field
continues to explore. The representation of mathematical expressions is mainly categorized into two types: sequencebased and tree-structure-based representations. The former
is typified by LATEX expressions, which convert mathematical expressions into one-dimensional character sequences
and use special structural control symbols (such as left
curly braces “{” and right curly braces “}”) to express
the hierarchical structure of the expressions. For example,
the mathematical expression x2 is represented in LATEX as

Introduction
The task of Handwritten Mathematical Expression Recognition(HMER) holds a unique and important place in the field
of Optical Character Recognition (OCR). Compared to traditional OCR tasks, it faces more complex challenges. Traditional character recognition models typically focus on recognizing linearly arranged text sequences, whereas the structure of handwritten mathematical expressions is not onedimensional and linear but exhibits multi-layered and highly
structured characteristics. For example, mathematical symbols such as fractions, square roots, and integrals involve
not only basic characters but also complex structures like
subscripts, superscripts, and nested symbols, all of which
greatly increase the difficulty of recognition. Therefore, a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10950

