The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ViFactCheck: A New Benchmark Dataset and Methods for Multi-Domain News
Fact-Checking in Vietnamese
Tran Thai Hoa1,2 , Tran Quang Duy1,2 , Khanh Quoc Tran1,2 , Kiet Van Nguyen1,2 *
1

Faculty of Information Science and Engineering, University of Information Technology, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
2
Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
{21522082,20512013}@gm.uit.edu.vn, {khanhtq,kietnv}@uit.edu.vn

Abstract

Claim:
Các công dân trẻ tiêu biểu cũng tham gia vào giải chạy
bộ “Bước chân xanh” nhằm hưởng ứng chiến dịch Giờ
Trái đất năm 2023.
English: Exemplary young citizens also participate in
the “Green Steps” running event to support the Earth
Hour campaign in 2023.

The rapid spread of information in the digital age highlights
the critical need for effective fact-checking tools, particularly
for languages with limited resources, such as Vietnamese. In
response to this challenge, we introduce ViFactCheck, the
first publicly available benchmark dataset designed specifically for Vietnamese fact-checking across multiple online
news domains. This dataset contains 7,232 human-annotated
pairs of claim-evidence combinations sourced from reputable
Vietnamese online news, covering 12 diverse topics. It has
been subjected to a meticulous annotation process to ensure high quality and reliability, achieving a Fleiss Kappa
inter-annotator agreement score of 0.83. Our evaluation leverages state-of-the-art pre-trained and large language models,
employing fine-tuning and prompting techniques to assess
performance. Notably, the Gemma model demonstrated superior effectiveness, with an impressive macro F1 score of
89.90%, thereby establishing a new standard for fact-checking
benchmarks. This result highlights the robust capabilities of
Gemma in accurately identifying and verifying facts in Vietnamese. To further promote advances in fact-checking technology and improve the reliability of digital media, we have made
the ViFactCheck dataset, model checkpoints, fact-checking
pipelines, and source code freely available on GitHub. This
initiative aims to inspire further research and enhance the
accuracy of information in low-resource languages.

Support ✔
Context:
TPO-Sáng 25/3, Thành Đoàn, Hội LHTN Việt Nam
TPHCM , Hội Sinh viên Việt Nam TPHCM tổ chức Giải
chạy bộ “Bước chân xanh” lần thứ 2. Giải chạy thu hút
hơn 1.000 người tham gia hưởng ứng chiến dịch Giờ Trái
đất năm 2023. Bên cạnh đông đảo đoàn viên, thanh niên,
sinh viên, giải chạy bộ “Bước chân xanh” còn thu hút
các gương công dân trẻ tiêu biểu TPHCM, các hoa hậu,
á hậu, văn nghệ sĩ trẻ... cùng tham gia.
English: TPO-March 25th, the HCM Youth Union and
the Vietnam National Union of Students in HCM City
organized the 2nd “Green Steps” running event. The race
attracted over 1,000 participants in response to the Earth
Hour campaign in 2023. In addition to a large number of
union members, youth, and students, the “Green Steps”
running event also attracted notable young citizens of
HCM City, beauty queens, runners-up, young artists,
and others to participate.

Github — https://github.com/TTHHA/ViFactCheck

1

Figure 1: An example of the Vietnamese fact-checking task.
Words highlighted in blue represent key evidence used to
support the classification of the claim as “Supported”.

Introduction

The rapid proliferation of digital information has created
significant challenges in distinguishing between accurate and
false information. The spread of disinformation, rumors, and
fake news has become a global concern with far-reaching
consequences for individuals, societies, and public discourse.
As noted by Lazer et al. (2018), the extensive spread of fake
news can have severe negative impacts on individuals and
society. It can cause confusion and misunderstanding, disrupt
social order, and even threaten national security.
Fact-checking, a rigorous process to verify the accuracy
of claims in specific contexts, relies on informed individuals using evidence, reasoning, and available information to

make well-founded judgements. Figure 1 provides a specific
illustration for Vietnamese fact-checking. Although substantial efforts have been devoted to fact-checking in English
(Thorne et al. 2018; Aly et al. 2021; Schuster, Fisch, and
Barzilay 2021), resources for fact-checking in low-resource
languages like Vietnamese are limited. This scarcity primarily stems from the limited availability of guidance resources
to analyze the structure and semantics of Vietnamese.
To bridge this gap, this study presents the development of
ViFactCheck, the first publicly available human-curated factchecking benchmark tailored to multiple domains Vietnamese
news. Our main contributions are described as follows:

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

308

