The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust Graph Based Social Recommendation Through Contrastive Multi-View
Learning
Fei Xiong1 , Tao Zhang1 , Shirui Pan2 , Guixun Luo3 * , Liang Wang4
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
4
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
xiongf@bjtu.edu.cn, taoakamoria@foxmail.com, s.pan@griffith.edu.au, gxluo@bjtu.edu.cn, liangwang0123@gmail.com
Abstract

The success can be attributed to the message propagation
and neighbor aggregation mechanisms of GNN models, enabling them to capture high-order connectivity and obtain
more relevant representations of users and items. However,
the challenge of data sparsity, characterized by the limited
number of historical interactions, significantly hinders the
progress of recommender systems. According to the assumption of social homophily (McPherson, Smith-Lovin,
and Cook 2001; Jiang et al. 2024), users with social connections are more likely to share similar interaction preferences,
so mining user social relations can provide helpful user-side
information to alleviate the data sparsity issue. Therefore,
many scholars consider social relations as supplementary information and incorporate them into recommender systems
to enhance the quality of recommendations (Fan et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2021).
In addition, to further alleviate the data sparsity problem, self-supervised learning is widely employed in recommender systems, enabling the exploitation of unlabelled
data and improving model robustness and generalization (Yu
et al. 2023). The basic idea of self-supervised learning is
to generate self-supervised signals by constructing auxiliary
views on raw data. For example, SGL (Wu et al. 2021) constructs augmented views by perturbing the graph structure
and provides effective self-supervised signals to improve
recommendation performance.
Despite the convincing results of existing models, we contend that several shortcomings persist.
First, blindly incorporating social information may introduce noise and degrade model performance. For example, a mother and her child might be socially connected,
yet the mother may prefer household items while the child
prefers sport items, highlighting the potential for heterogeneity in preferences even among connected individuals.
Without proper handling, directly applying GNNs to acquire
user social embeddings may introduce noise. Although some
models have begun to address the issue of social noise and
attempt to alleviate it through strategies like self-supervised
learning (Wang, Xia, and Huang 2023), accurately simulating the propagation and evolution of preferences within social networks remains a challenge that requires further investigation.
Second, while existing models alleviate the data sparsity
problem by integrating various types of auxiliary informa-

Social recommendation leverages the social connections between users to mitigate the issue of data sparsity and enhance
recommendation quality. Although existing related works
show their effectiveness, there remain two critical questions:
i) The patterns of preference interactions among users are
varied and heterogeneous. Current models struggle to accurately capture preference shifts from user interactions in noisy
social environments. ii) Existing methods handle the integration of auxiliary information coarsely, potentially introducing noise and leading to biases in user preferences. To
address the limitations above, we introduce a novel framework named Robust Graph Based Social Recommendation
Through Contrastive Multi-View Learning (RGCML). This
framework leverages denoised social relations and global intents as dual auxiliary information sources to provide comprehensive characterization of users. Firstly, RGCML employs the concept of opinion dynamics to simulate how user
preferences evolve due to noisy social relations. Then, it utilizes a specifically designed information fusion module to extract critical contextual information from multiple semantic
perspectives, thereby achieving personalized information fusion. Finally, it adopts the designed global-local contrastive
learning paradigm that untangles and discriminates user preferences from global intents, further addressing the noise problem and enhancing the quality of user representations. Extensive experiments conducted on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the superior performance of RGCML compared
to several state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines.

Introduction
In the era of information explosion, recommender systems
are capable of filtering complex information and play an important role in uncovering user preferences and providing
personalized services (Sharma et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2022).
Collaborative filtering (CF) is a prominent approach that infers user preferences from historical interactions to recommend items that align with their interests (Su and Khoshgoftaar 2009). Recently, CF models based on graph neural
networks (GNNs) have achieved exceptional performance
and become the dominant paradigm for recommender systems (He et al. 2020; Mao et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2019).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12890

