The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evaluating the Evaluator:
Measuring LLMs’ Adherence to Task Evaluation Instructions
Bhuvanashree Murugadoss1 , Christian Poelitz2 , Ian Drosos2 , Vu Le1 , Nick McKenna2 ,
Carina Suzana Negreanu1 , Chris Parnin1,3 , Advait Sarkar1
1

Microsoft
Microsoft Research Cambridge
3
North Carolina State University
cpoelitz@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

For these evaluations, often more detailed instructions are
given about when to assign a specific score, similarly to
rubric scoring (Andrade 2005).
While these results are promising for the future of automatic evaluation, it is less clear how the models achieve this
agreement, and in general, it is a challenge to identify for
any given task, which LLM is most appropriate to evaluate
it, and with how much information, respectively how much
instructions about the evaluation. Alarmingly, recent results
show a clear bias in LLMs preferring their own output over
others (Panickssery, Bowman, and Feng 2024), and LLMs’
perplexity has emerged as a possible quality criteria for filtering (Ankner et al. 2024) on textual quality. This raises the
question of whether some of the results on automatic evaluations with LMs reflect a model’s preference for data similar
to its own (high quality) fine-tuning data instead of following the provided instructions on how to measure the quality
of an answer. Especially for fine-grained evaluations with
detailed rubric information, we expect the instructions about
when to assign a score to be adhered closely.
In this paper we report our findings when using LLMs-asa-judge (Zheng et al. 2024), where LLMs are used as surrogates for human judgements to evaluate several NLG and
LLM-based tasks, in skill-specific settings (e.g. completeness) and skill-unspecific (e.g. textual coherence). We show
the annotations for many of these quality criteria in state-ofthe-art benchmarks have a high correlation with the perplexity of the LLMs, often higher than prompting the LLM for a
score. We identify which evaluation settings can benefit the
most from more detailed prompting and for which settings
simple generic prompts, or just using models’ perplexity as
quality score, suffice.
In detail, we make the following three main contributions:
1. We propose a novel taxonomy of qualitative evaluation
criteria useful for assessing the competence of automatic
evaluation methods by LLMs-as-a-judge. Our taxonomy
consists of 4 evaluation categories (Content, Relevance,
Integrity, and Engagement) which encapsulate 34 metrics
as tested by 8 distinct state-of-the-art benchmarks.
2. We systematically evaluate the effectiveness of LLMsas-a-judge using the taxonomy with several major LLM
families including GPT4, Llama3, Mistral, and Phi3
across 4 levels of increasing prompt instruction. We find
that, aggregated across the taxonomy, increasing instruc-

LLMs-as-a-judge is a recently popularized method which replaces human judgements in task evaluation with automatic
evaluation using LLMs. Due to widespread use of RLHF
(Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback), state-ofthe-art LLMs like GPT4 and Llama3 are expected to have
strong alignment with human preferences when prompted for
a quality judgement, such as the coherence of a text. While
this seems beneficial, it is not clear whether the assessments
by an LLM-as-a-judge constitute only an evaluation based on
the instructions in the prompts, or reflect its preference for
high-quality data similar to its fine-tune data. To investigate
how much influence prompting the LLMs-as-a-judge has on
the alignment of AI judgements to human judgements, we
analyze prompts with increasing levels of instructions about
the target quality of an evaluation, for several LLMs-as-ajudge. Further, we compare to a prompt-free method using
model perplexity as a quality measure instead. We aggregate
a taxonomy of quality criteria commonly used across state-ofthe-art evaluations with LLMs and provide this as a rigorous
benchmark of models as judges. Overall, we show that the
LLMs-as-a-judge benefit only little from highly detailed instructions in prompts and that perplexity can sometimes align
better with human judgements than prompting, especially on
textual quality.

Introduction
Recently, new automatic evaluation approaches that rely
on LLMs have been proposed on several NLG tasks,
such as summarization (Liu et al. 2023b) and machine
translation (Kocmi and Federmann 2023). Previous approaches (Siledar et al. 2024) show that for certain situations, such as when assessing textual consistency or fluency, there is high agreement between human judgements
and LLM assessments, even without detailed instructions
like for example how to assign specific scores. Most of these
approaches prompt an LLM to give a judgement as a Likert
score (Likert 1932) with only simple information about the
scale, e.g. “give a judgement between 1 (bad) and 5 (good).”
More recently, LLM-based evaluations on more fine-grained
task-specific criteria (Ye et al. 2024) have also reported high
agreement with human judgement, such as assessing the
completeness of a solution for a question answering task.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19589

