The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motif-Oriented Representation Learning with Topology Refinement for
Drug-Drug Interaction Prediction
Ran Zhang1,2 , Xuezhi Wang1,2 , Guannan Liu3 , Pengyang Wang4 , Yuanchun Zhou1,2 , Pengfei
Wang1,2 *
1

Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Science
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beihang University
4
University of Macau
{zhangran, wxz}@cnic.cn, liugn@buaa.edu.cn, pywang@um.edu.mo, {zyc, pfwang}@cnic.cn
Abstract

DDI detection are manually completed by professional pharmacologists. However, the vast body of potential DDIs renders the screening of these interactions via wet lab experiments laborious and time-consuming, spurring an urgent demand for efficient computational DDI prediction techniques.
The advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology
and the surge in drug-related data (Zhao et al. 2024) have led
AI-driven DDI prediction methods to a prevalent trend (Luo
et al. 2024). In the early years, text mining-based methods (Segura-Bedmar, Martı́nez Fernández, and Herrero Zazo
2013) leverage Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to extract relevant information from biomedical literature and predict potential DDIs. Similarity-based methods (Takeda et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Rohani, Eslahchi,
and Katanforoush 2020) assume that if drug i interacts with
drug j, then drugs similar to drug i are also likely to interact with drug j. Numerous studies (Vilar et al. 2012; Ferdousi, Safdari, and Omidi 2017) have emerged based on this
assumption, aiming to identify DDIs by capturing drug features and measuring similarities between drugs. Recently, as
both molecular structures and DDI networks exhibit typical graph structures, graph learning has demonstrated great
potential and made impressive advancements in DDI prediction tasks. With the rise of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs),
a range of graph-based methods have been successfully applied to identify potential DDIs (Cao, Fan, and Zeng 2020;
Wang et al. 2022), which mainly depend on three strategies:
intra-molecular approaches (Nyamabo, Yu, and Shi 2021),
inter-molecular approaches (Zhao et al. 2021), and hierarchical approaches (Li et al. 2023).
While graph-based DDI prediction methods have
achieved encouraging results, previous works still face
limitations when tackling the following challenges: (1)
Limited exploration of intra-molecular motifs: Atoms
are the fundamental particles of the chemical elements,
so many methods model DDI tasks from this atom perspective (Cao, Fan, and Zeng 2020; Wang et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2023). However, motifs (unique structures or
arrangements of atoms, bonds, or functional groups) commonly are structural units in biochemical reactions. While
recent approaches have started to incorporate molecular
substructures (Nyamabo, Yu, and Shi 2021; Li et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2024b), they tend to neglect the inter-motif

Drug-Drug Interaction (DDI) prediction has attracted considerable attention in designing multi-drug combination strategies and avoiding adverse reactions. Notably, Artificial Intelligence (AI)-driven DDI prediction methods have emerged as
a pivotal research paradigm. However, most AI-driven DDI
prediction methods fall short in exploring intra-molecular
motifs, and heavily rely on the overly idealized assumption of the complete inter-molecular topology, limiting their
expressive capacities. To this end, we propose a MotifOriented representation learning with TOpology Refinement
for DDI prediction, namely MOTOR, to exploit both the
multi-granularity motif information and the topological structure of DDI networks. Specifically, MOTOR effectively captures motif internal structures, motif local contexts, and motif
global semantics. Furthermore, MOTOR employs an iterative
learning strategy to continuously refine the DDI topology and
optimize the corresponding drug representations. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that MOTOR exhibits superior performance with interpretable insights in DDI prediction tasks across three real-world datasets, thereby opening
up new avenues in AI-driven DDI prediction.

Introduction
Recently, Drug-Drug Interaction (DDI) prediction has
aroused significant attention in the pharmaceutical and
healthcare industries. DDI, the concurrent or sequential administration of multiple drugs, can alter or diminish the effects of one or more medications. In the United States, adverse DDIs result in over 74,000 emergency room visits
and more than 195,000 hospitalizations annually (Han et al.
2022a). With a global aging population, the prevalence of
multiple chronic conditions in a single individual is expected
to increase, leading to a heightened risk of DDIs. Effectively predicting DDIs can help identify potential risks in
polypharmacy when managing multiple chronic conditions,
thereby promoting the development of reliable and effective
combination therapies. Due to the complexity of individual
pharmacokinetics (how the body processes drugs) and pharmacodynamics (how drugs affect the body), tasks such as
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1102

