The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Certification of Speaker Recognition Models to Additive Perturbations
Dmitrii Korzh1,2 , Elvir Karimov1,2 , Mikhail Pautov1,4 , Oleg Y. Rogov1,2,3 , Ivan Oseledets1,2
1
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
3
Moscow Technical University of Communications and Informatics, Moscow, Russia
4
ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia
korzh@airi.net, karimov@airi.net, pautov@airi.net, rogov@airi.net, oseledets@airi.net
2

Abstract
Speaker recognition technology is applied to various tasks,
from personal virtual assistants to secure access systems. However, the robustness of these systems against adversarial attacks, particularly to additive perturbations, remains a significant challenge. In this paper, we pioneer applying robustness
certification techniques to speaker recognition, initially developed for the image domain. Our work covers this gap by
transferring and improving randomized smoothing certification techniques against norm-bounded additive perturbations
for classification and few-shot learning tasks to speaker recognition. We demonstrate the effectiveness of these methods
on VoxCeleb 1 and 2 datasets for several models. We expect
this work to improve the robustness of voice biometrics and
accelerate the research of certification methods in the audio
domain.

Code — https://github.com/AIRI-Institute/asi-certification
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18791

Introduction
This work addresses the issues of robustness and privacy in
deep learning voice biometrics models (Snyder et al. 2018;
Wan et al. 2018). Although deep learning models excel in
various applications, they are unreliable and susceptible to
specific perturbations. These perturbations may be imperceptible to humans but can dramatically affect the model’s
performance (Szegedy et al. 2014; Kaviani, Han, and Sohn
2022). Researchers have developed various methods to compute adversarial perturbations and defenses against them,
recently becoming necessary to provide provable guarantees
on model behavior under constrained perturbations (Li, Xie,
and Li 2023; Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019). However,
the audio domain has not received as much attention as the
image domain. Given the escalating levels of speech fraud
due to advancements in adversarial models and deepfake
technologies (Qin et al. 2023), significant security risks could
arise in biometric systems or even in creating personalized
scams in social networks. Thus, this article focuses on the
certification of automatic speaker recognition models. The
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17947

certified speaker recognition model is the one in which prediction does not change under additive perturbations of the
input audio.
Automatic speaker recognition models (Desplanques,
Thienpondt, and Demuynck 2020; Bredin et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2023b) typically utilize spectrograms (such as Mel
spectrograms) or raw-waveform frontends to address several
vital tasks. The first task is automatic speaker identification
(ASI), where the model determines the speaker’s identity in
an audio recording. The second task is automatic speaker
verification (ASV), which involves verifying whether two
audio samples are from the same speaker. The third task is
speaker diarization, where the model segments audio into
parts corresponding to different speakers.
Voice biometric models convert speech into vector representations, ensuring that utterances from the same speaker
generate closely aligned vectors while those from different
speakers are widely separated. These properties should hold
even for speakers not encountered during training. Several
training strategies exist for the encoder that maps audio x to
these embeddings. One approach uses metric learning with
triplet (Hermans, Beyer, and Leibe 2017) or contrastive loss
(Wang and Liu 2021). Another strategy involves training an
embedder combined with a classifier on a fixed set of speakers, with variations of cross-entropy loss that was initially
developed for face biometrics (Meng et al. 2021) to enhance
the expressiveness and separation of embeddings, even for
unseen speakers. During inference, cosine similarity, cosine
distance, or other distance metrics are used to match the
embedding of the inference audio to the closest reference
speaker’s embedding (enrollment vector).
Our work explores the certified robustness of speaker
recognition models against any additive perturbation constrained by the l2 norm value. Such perturbations can be
created via various adversarial attacks, whether targeted or
untargeted, white-box or black-box scenarios, in which the
attacker may know the model’s architecture, parameters, and
gradients or may only have input and output access.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a novel randomized smoothing-based approach to certify few-shot embedding models against additive, norm-bounded perturbations. Our approach provides
state-of-the-art certification results in a few-shot setting.
• We derive robustness certificates and demonstrate their ad-

