The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Can We Get Rid of Handcrafted Feature Extractors?
SparseViT: Nonsemantics-Centered, Parameter-Efficient Image Manipulation
Localization through Sparse-Coding Transformer
Lei Su1, 2 , Xiaochen Ma1, 2 , Xuekang Zhu1, 2 , Chaoqun Niu1, 2 , Zeyu Lei1, 2, 3 , Ji-Zhe Zhou1, 2 *
1

2

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education of China
3
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macao, Macao SAR
Abstract

Model Name

Non-semantic features or semantic-agnostic features, which
are irrelevant to image context but sensitive to image manipulations, are recognized as evidential to Image Manipulation Localization (IML). Since manual labels are impossible,
existing works rely on handcrafted methods to extract nonsemantic features. Handcrafted non-semantic features jeopardize IML model’s generalization ability in unseen or complex scenarios. Therefore, for IML, the elephant in the room
is: How to adaptively extract non-semantic features? Nonsemantic features are context-irrelevant and manipulationsensitive. That is, within an image, they are consistent across
patches unless manipulation occurs. Then, spare and discrete
interactions among image patches are sufficient for extracting non-semantic features. However, image semantics vary
drastically on different patches, requiring dense and continuous interactions among image patches for learning semantic
representations. Hence, in this paper, we propose a Sparse Vision Transformer (SparseViT), which reformulates the dense,
global self-attention in ViT into a sparse, discrete manner.
Such sparse self-attention breaks image semantics and forces
SparseViT to adaptively extract non-semantic features for
images. Besides, compared with existing IML models, the
sparse self-attention mechanism largely reduced the model
size (max 80% in FLOPs), achieving stunning parameter efficiency and computation reduction. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that, without any handcrafted feature extractors,
SparseViT is superior in both generalization and efficiency
across benchmark datasets.

Backbone

Extractor Manual

ManTraNet (CVPR19)
VGG
Bayar+SRM
SPAN (ECCV20)
VGG
Bayar+SRM
MVSS (ICCV21)
ResNet-50 Bayar+Sobel
CAT-Net (IJCV22)
HRNet
DCT
ObjectFormer (CVPR22) CNN+ViT
DCT
NCL-IML (ICCV23) ResNet-101
Sobel
TruFor (CVPR23)
ViT
Noiseprint

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

Table 1: Comparison and Summary of IML Models. We
have indicated whether these methods rely on handcrafted
feature extraction and specified the type of extractors used.

are independent of the image’s semantic content. These features show significant differences in distribution between
manipulated and unmanipulated regions of an image. (Guillaro et al. 2023) Existing backbone networks (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014) (Wang et al. 2020) (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020), primarily designed for semantic-related tasks, are effective at extracting the semantic features of manipulated
images. For extracting non-semantic features, most existing methods rely on handcrafted feature extractors (Zhou
et al. 2018) (Bayar and Stamm 2018) (Cozzolino and Verdoliva 2019). As shown in Table 1, almost all existing IML
models follow a design of ”semantic segmentation backbone
network” combined with ”handcrafted non-semantic feature
extraction.”
However, this approach requires custom extraction strategies for different non-semantic features, lacking adaptability in extracting these features. Consequently, this method
is limited in improving the model’s ability to adapt to unknown scenarios. Unlike traditional methods that manually extract non-semantic features, we propose an adaptive
mechanism to extract non-semantic features in manipulated
images. We recognize that the semantic features of an image
exhibit strong continuity and significant contextual correlation (Wang et al. 2018), meaning that local semantic features
are often inadequate in representing the global semantics of
the image. Thus, tight and continuous interactions between
local regions are necessary to construct global semantic features. In contrast, the non-semantic features of an image,
such as frequency and noise, are highly sensitive to ma-

Code — https://github.com/scu-zjz/SparseViT

Introduction
With the rapid development of image editing tools and image generation technologies, image manipulation has become exceedingly convenient. To address this trend, researchers have developed Image Manipulation Localization
(IML) techniques to identify specific manipulated regions
within images. Due to the inevitable artifacts (manipulation
traces) left on an image after manipulation, these artifacts
can be divided into semantic and non-semantic (SemanticAgnostic) features. Semantic-Agnostic Features refer to features that highlight low-level artifacts information, which
* Corresponding Author: Ji-Zhe Zhou, jzzhou@scu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7024

