The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging the Gap: Enhancing LLM Performance for Low-Resource African
Languages with New Benchmarks, Fine-Tuning, and Cultural Adjustments
Tuka Alhanai1 * , Adam Kasumovic1 * , Mohammad M. Ghassemi1 * ,
Aven Zitzelberger1 , Jessica M. Lundin2 , Guillaume Chabot-Couture2
1
Ghamut Corporation, MI, USA
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, WA, USA
{tuka, adam.kasumovic, ghassemi, aven.zitzelberger}@ghamut.com
{jessica.lundin, Guillaume.Chabot-Couture}@gatesfoundation.org
2

Abstract

Lin et al. 2021; Hendrycks et al. 2021b). Despite impressive
advancements, LLMs are significantly less capable when
assessed in non-English languages. When assessing LLMs
in native African languages, which are predominantly lowresource (Joshi et al. 2020), the gap between human and
LLM performance is notable (when known), but generally
remains unknown because many standard benchmarks do
not exist in native African languages.
The performance discrepancy between LLMs in English
and African languages is not just a technical challenge; it is
a significant issue of equity. All 2,123 native African languages are low-resource, including the 31 languages with
more than 10 million speakers (Hammerstrom 2015; Joshi
et al. 2020)1 . Naturally, lower language resource levels result in poorer-performing LLMs. This is particularly tragic
because LLMs are least reliable for language speakers who
have the most to gain. Of the world’s poor, 66% live in
Africa (Galal 2024), 66% of those don’t have access to the
Internet (ITU 2023), and 80% do not speak English (CIA
2024). Thus, even in the unlikely event that the world’s
poorest could access the Internet and afford the costs of
a state-of-the-art LLM, their ability to read and write English would prevent them from making use of the tools. Ultimately, the differences in LLM performance between languages result in a “rich-get-richer” effect: LLMs are more
helpful to (English-speaking) people who are better off, and
who may then provide better content to train better LLMs.
One approach to bridging the LLM performance gap is
to translate all non-English language queries into English,
query an English LLM, and backtranslate the response. This
approach is only viable if the cumulative errors from translation and backtranslation are smaller than the errors from
using non-English language LLMs alone. Previous studies
report that errors from leading machine translation tools (i.e.
Google Translate) can be substantial in African languages
(Bapna et al. 2022; Benjamin 2019); however, the extent to
which translation errors impact the substantive reasoning capabilities of multilingual LLMs versus their style (“translationese”), remains unclear. Insofar as the substantive errors
are minimal, machine translation may serve as a workaround

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable
performance across various tasks, yet significant disparities remain for non-English languages, and especially native African languages. This paper addresses these disparities by creating approximately 1 million human-translated
words of new benchmark data in 8 low-resource African languages, covering a population of over 160 million speakers of: Amharic, Bambara, Igbo, Sepedi (Northern Sotho),
Shona, Sesotho (Southern Sotho), Setswana, and Tsonga. Our
benchmarks are translations of Winogrande and three sections of MMLU: college medicine, clinical knowledge, and
virology. Using the translated benchmarks, we report previously unknown performance gaps between state-of-the-art
(SOTA) LLMs in English and African languages. Finally, using results from over 400 fine-tuned models, we explore several methods to reduce the LLM performance gap, including high-quality dataset fine-tuning (using an LLM-as-anAnnotator), cross-lingual transfer, and cultural appropriateness adjustments. Key findings include average mono-lingual
improvements of 5.6% with fine-tuning (with 5.4% average
mono-lingual improvements when using high-quality data
over low-quality data), 2.9% average gains from cross-lingual
transfer, and a 3.0% out-of-the-box performance boost on culturally appropriate questions. The publicly available benchmarks, translations, and code from this study support further
research and development aimed at creating more inclusive
and effective language technologies.

Code — https://github.com/InstituteforDiseaseModeling/
Bridging-the-Gap-Low-Resource-African-Languages
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12417

Introduction
For many tasks, Large Language Models (LLMs) perform
on-par with or approaching human performance. Furthermore, LLM capabilities are improving: the performance gap
between state-of-the-art LLMs (e.g. GPT-4) and humans for
many benchmarks is much smaller than the gap between previous LLM generations (e.g. GPT 3.5) and humans (Achiam
et al. 2023; Bandarkar et al. 2024; Sakaguchi et al. 2021;

1

* These authors contributed equally.

It was assumed that if a resource level rating in (Joshi et al.
2020) for a language was not given, then it was low-resource.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27802

