The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Align-Pro: A Principled Approach to Prompt Optimization for LLM Alignment
Prashant Trivedi1 , Souradip Chakraborty2 , Avinash Reddy1 , Vaneet Aggarwal3 ,
Amrit Singh Bedi1 , George K. Atia1
1

University of Central Florida
2
University of Maryland
3
Purdue University
prashant.trivedi@ucf.edu, schakra3@umd.edu, av131693@ucf.edu, vaneet@purdue.edu,
amritbedi@ucf.edu, george.atia@ucf.edu
Abstract
The alignment of large language models (LLMs) with
human values is critical as these models become increasingly
integrated into various societal and decision-making
processes. Traditional methods, such as reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF), achieve alignment
by fine-tuning model parameters, but these approaches
are often computationally expensive and impractical when
models are frozen or inaccessible for parameter modification.
In contrast, prompt optimization is a viable alternative to
RLHF for LLM alignment. While the existing literature
has shown empirical promise of prompt optimization,
its theoretical underpinning remains under-explored. We
address this gap by formulating prompt optimization as an
optimization problem and try to provide theoretical insights
into the optimality of such a framework. To analyze the
performance of the prompt optimization, we study theoretical
suboptimality bounds and provide insights in terms of how
prompt optimization depends upon the given prompter
and target model. We also provide empirical validation
through experiments on various datasets, demonstrating that
prompt optimization can effectively align LLMs, even when
parameter fine-tuning is not feasible.

Figure 1: A basic overview of the prompt optimization
framework. A prompter modifies the prompt before passing
it through the target frozen LLM.

either ‘frozen’ or operate as ‘black box,’ where direct access
to tweak parameters is restricted (Diao et al. 2023; Shin et al.
2020). These scenarios pose a critical question: How can
we ensure LLM alignment when parameter updates are not
allowed or possible?
One promising solution lies in the concept of prompt
optimization (Lin et al. 2024; Li and Liang 2018; Lester,
Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021). This technique leverages the
idea that the output of an LLM is a function of the input
prompt—thereby turning the prompt into a powerful tool
to elicit desired responses to align with specific rewards
(cf. Figure 1). Various empirical studies in the literature
have shown the significant benefits of prompt optimization
techniques for LLM alignment (Shin et al. 2020; Kong et al.
2024; Wang et al. 2023b). However, theoretical insights
about the working of prompt optimization have not been
well studied. This raises an important question about the
optimality of prompt optimization compared to traditional
fine-tuning: Can prompt optimization for LLM alignment
achieve performance comparable to fine-tuning?
In this work, we try to investigate and answer the
above question. To the best of our knowledge, there is
a notable absence of literature focusing on a theoretical
formulation of prompt optimization specifically for LLM
alignment. This paper aims to fill this gap by developing
a unified optimization framework (called Align-Pro) to
analyze prompt optimization for LLM alignment. We
explore its theoretical performance, particularly in terms
of suboptimality bounds, which measure how close the
responses generated via the prompt optimization are to the
outcomes obtained through fine-tuned models. Furthermore,
we provide proof of concept empirical evidence to
support the theoretical insights. We summarize our main
contributions as follows.

Introduction
The quest to align large language models (LLMs) with
human values is not just an academic pursuit but a practical
necessity (Wang et al. 2024; Kaufmann et al. 2023). As these
AI models (e.g., ChatGPT, Llamma2, etc.) increasingly
become an essential part of various aspects of daily life and
decision-making processes, ensuring their outputs reflect
ethical considerations and societal norms becomes crucial
(Li, Krishna, and Lakkaraju 2024; Dai et al. 2023). The
standard approach to aligning LLMs has been through
fine-tuning parameters via reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) (Zhu, Jiao, and Jordan 2023;
Azar et al. 2023; Ziegler et al. 2019a), which involves
three main steps: Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), reward
learning, and RL fine-tuning. However, this process can
be resource-intensive, as it necessitates updating model
parameters (Casper et al. 2023; Ouyang et al. 2022). A
further complication to alignment arises when models are
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27653

