The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Augmenting Online Algorithms for Knapsack Problem with Total Weight
Information
Binghan Wu, Wei Bao, Bing Bing Zhou
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
biwu6051@uni.sydney.edu.au, wei.bao@sydney.edu.au, bing.zhou@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

ten predictable and sometimes even known to the decisionmaker. For example, a logistics company may need to load
cargo into containers to maximize the value of the items
loaded. Such a company can estimate the total loading demand (Anguita and Olariaga 2023; Filom, Amiri, and Razavi
2022) using machine learning methods based on historical
data. This scenario reveals a gap in both the literature and
practical applications. We seek to fill this gap by addressing a central question: In situations where the total weight
is known or predicted, how can this information be used
to improve the competitive ratio and surpass the barrier of
ln( U
L ) + 1? We aim to investigate how incorporating total
weight information reduces uncertainty and the best ways
to utilize it. Besides this cargo loading example, there are
many real-world scenarios where total weight information
is known or predictable. Here are some more examples.
1. One-way trading problem (Schroeder, Dochow, and
Schmidt 2018) with known ending time. Consider a trader
planning to exchange a total amount of 1 dollar into yen.
Exchange rates p1 , p2 , . . . , pn arrive sequentially, where n
is the trading horizon or the deadline. The trader must immediately decide whether to accept the exchange rate and
trade wi = ϵ dollars for pi ϵ = vi yens. ϵ is the trading granularity or the maximum trading amount that does not affect
the market price. The goal is to maximize the yen traded after processing the entire sequence while respecting the budget constraint. In the classical one-way trading problem, the
deadline n is unknown to the trader, and the trading process
can be terminated at any time. However, this is often impractical in real-world scenarios. For example, in forex or stock
markets, the market close time is known to traders.
2. Online cloud resource allocation using a posted
price mechanism (Zhang, Li, and Wu 2017) with predicted total demand volume. The cloud service provider
(CSP) wants to sell a total amount of 1 resource by publishing a unit resource price pi , which can change over time.
A total of n customers arrive sequentially. Each customer
wants to buy wi amount of resources from the CSP, and customer i’s intrinsic valuation is vi . When customer i arrives,
the CSP reveals the unit price pi to them. If vi ≥ wi pi and
the remaining resources are sufficient, customer i buys wi
units from the CSP by paying wi pi ; otherwise, they leave the
system. We aim to maximize social welfare (Zhang, Li, and
Wu 2017), defined as the sum of the CSP’s revenue and the

In this paper, we augment online algorithms for the knapsack
problem using the total weight information. The conventional
optimal online algorithm achieves the ln( U
) + 1 competitive
L
ratio where L and U are the upper and lower bounds of the
value-to-weight ratio. However, it does not consider that decision makers can know the total weight information or obtain it through machine-learned predictions. To fill this gap,
we first propose the Known Weight Algorithm (KWA) which
uses the exact total weight information to achieve a competi) + 1, where W denotes the Lamberttive ratio of W( 1e U −L
L
W function. We prove that it is optimal and tight. After that,
we extend KWA to the Predicted Weight Algorithm (PWA), a
learning-augmented online algorithm that uses predicted total
weight. We show the consistency and robustness (Lykouris
and Vassilvitskii 2021) of PWA, and prove that its competitive ratio degrades gracefully as the prediction error grows.
Finally, we introduce the Limited Volume Algorithm (LWA),
+ 1 when
which achieves a better competitive ratio than ln U
L
the total weight is less than twice the capacity.

Introduction
The 0–1 knapsack problem (Jooken, Leyman, and De Causmaecker 2022) is one of the most well-known problems in
computer science, dealing with the optimization of item selection under capacity constraints. Suppose we have a knapsack with a normalized capacity of 1. In the online setting,
items arrive sequentially. Upon the arrival of the ith item,
the value vi and the weight wi are revealed. We need to
make an irrevocable decision to either accept or discard this
item without knowledge of future arrivals. Conventionally,
the performance of the online knapsack problem is measured
by the competitive ratio, defined as the maximum ratio of the
offline optimal algorithm’s value to the online algorithm’s
value across all possible inputs. In the general setting, the
competitive ratio for the online knapsack problem is unbounded. However, the optimal competitive ratio ln( U
L) + 1
can be achieved when the value-to-weight ratios wvii for all
items are bounded by [L, U ], and the weights are infinitesimal compared to the capacity, i.e., maxi wi ≪ 1.
While the classical online knapsack problem assumes no
access to future information, the total weight of items is ofCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26725

