The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalizing Alignment Paradigm of Text-to-Image Generation
with Preferences Through f-Divergence Minimization
Haoyuan Sun, Bo Xia, Yongzhe Chang∗ , Xueqian Wang*
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
{sun-hy23, xiab21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {changyongzhe, wang.xq}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
has established itself as a pivotal research endeavor, demonstrating notable efficacy in aligning text-to-image models
with human preferences (Kirstain et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024;
Black et al. 2024). Faced with the intricate challenge of
defining an objective that authentically encapsulates human
preferences in the realm of Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF), researchers conventionally assemble a dataset to mirror such preferences through comparative assessments of model-generated outputs (Kirstain
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023). Then, a reward model is trained
based on the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry 1952),
inferring human preferences from the collected dataset. And
the text-to-image model is fine-tuned with a reinforcement
learning (RL) pipeline. It is noteworthy that such process is
conducted while ensuring the model remains closely with
its original form, which is achieved by employing a reverse
Kullback-Leibler divergence penalty. Significant complexity
has been introduced to the RLHF pipeline due to the requirement to train a separate reward model. Moreover, Reinforcement learning pipelines also present notable challenges in
terms of stability and memory demands towards the alignment process of text-to-image models.
Recent research has shown significant success in finetuning large language models (LLMs) using methods based
on implicit rewards, specially the Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al. 2023). Application of similar fine-tuning techniques to text-to-image models has also
produced promising results, such as Diffusion-DPO (Wallace et al. 2024), D3PO (Yang et al. 2024). Such results
have raised significant interest within the community regarding the alignment of text-to-image models with human value
through the methodology of utilizing implicit rewards. Furthermore, researchers have devoted significant efforts to applying such paradigm of aligning human value to text-toimage models, including SPO (Liang et al. 2024), NCPPO
(Gambashidze et al. 2024), DNO(Tang et al. 2024), and
so on. However, it is the situation that existing research of
text-to-image generation alignment predominantly targets
solutions subject to the constraint of the reverse KullbackLeibler divergence, with notable underexploitation of strategies that integrate other types of divergences.
It has been pointed out that models would overfit due to
repeated fine-tuning on a few images, leading to reduced

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) has recently expanded
its successful application from aligning large language models (LLMs) to aligning text-to-image models with human
preferences, which has generated considerable interest within
the community. However, we have observed that these approaches rely solely on minimizing the reverse KullbackLeibler divergence during alignment process between the
fine-tuned model and the reference model, neglecting incorporation of other divergence constraints. In this study,
we focus on extending reverse Kullback-Leibler divergence
in the alignment paradigm of text-to-image models to fdivergence, which aims to garner better alignment performance as well as good generation diversity. We provide the
generalized formula of text-to-image alignment paradigm under f-divergence condition and thoroughly analyze the impact of different divergence constraints on alignment process
from the perspective of gradient fields. We conduct comprehensive evaluation on text-image alignment performance, human value alignment performance and generation diversity
performance under different divergence constraints, and the
results indicate that text-to-image alignment based on JensenShannon divergence achieves the best trade-off among them.
The option of divergence employed for aligning text-to-image
models significantly impacts the trade-off between alignment
performance (especially human value alignment) and generation diversity, which highlights the necessity of selecting an
appropriate divergence for practical applications.

Introduction
Text-to-image generative models have seen significant advances in recent years (Podell et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024b).
When presented with appropriate textual prompts, they are
capable of generating high-fidelity images that are semantically coherent with the provided descriptions (Zhu et al.
2024; Feng et al. 2024b), which spans a diverse range of topics, piquing significant public interest in their potential applications and societal implications. Existing self-supervised
pre-trained generators, although advanced, still exhibit imperfections, with a significant challenge being their alignment with human preferences.
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27644

