The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Calibration: A Unified Conversion Framework
of Spiking Neural Networks
Ziqing Wang1, 2 * , Yuetong Fang1 * , Jiahang Cao1 , Hongwei Ren1 , Renjing Xu1†
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
2
Northwestern University, USA
ziqingwang2029@u.northwestern.edu,
{yfang870, jcao248, hren066}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, renjingxu@hkust-gz.edu.cn
Abstract

Method

T

QCFS ICLR
32
FastSNN TPAMI
7
ICML
Calibration
32
Ours
5.72

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are seen as an energyefficient alternative to traditional Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs), but the performance gap remains a challenge. While
this gap is narrowing through ANN-to-SNN conversion, substantial computational resources are still needed, and the energy efficiency of converted SNNs cannot be ensured. To address this, we present a unified training-free conversion framework that significantly enhances both the performance and efficiency of converted SNNs. Inspired by the biological nervous
system, we propose a novel Adaptive-Firing (AdaFire) Neuron
Model, which dynamically adjusts firing patterns across different layers to substantially reduce the Unevenness Error - the
primary source of error of converted SNNs within limited inference timesteps. We further introduce two efficiency-enhancing
techniques: the Sensitivity Spike Compression (SSC) technique for reducing spike operations, and the Input-aware Adaptive Timesteps (IAT) technique for decreasing latency. These
methods collectively enable our approach to achieve state-ofthe-art performance with significant energy savings of up to
70.1%, 60.3%, and 43.1% on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and
ImageNet datasets, respectively. Extensive experiments across
2D, 3D, event-driven classification tasks, object detection,
and segmentation tasks, demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method in various domains.

Acc. (%) Energy (mJ) Training
68.47
72.95
62.14
73.46

77.41
16.93
57.13
22.47

✓
✓
✗
✗

Time Cost (h)
742.51
484.45
0.06
0.09

Table 1: Comparison of the proposed method versus existing methods on ImageNet (VGG-16). “T’ refers to averaged
inference time steps, and “Time Cost’ represents the total
GPU hours before final inference. Our Adaptive Calibration
method achieves competitive accuracy with fewer timesteps
and lower energy consumption. Notably, it only requires a
short setup time and eliminates the need for re-training.
promoting energy-efficient operations over traditional energyintensive matrix multiplications. The inherent properties of
SNNs, coupled with recent advances in neuromorphic hardware, position them as a promising solution for developing
energy-efficient and high-performance artificial intelligence
systems. Consequently, recent works spanning classification (Wang et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2022; Deng et al. 2022;
Fang et al. 2025), tracking (Zhang et al. 2022), and image
generation (Cao et al. 2024) are striving to combine advanced
network architectures (Vaswani et al. 2017; He et al. 2023;
Ren et al. 2024) with this spike-driven computing paradigm.

Code — https://github.com/bic-L/burst-ann2snn

Despite the significant energy efficiency benefits offered
by SNNs, achieving performance on par with ANNs remains a challenge. The main difficulty stems from the nondifferentiability of discrete spikes and the complex computational graph due to multi-timestep operations. These factors
make training SNNs from scratch both intricate and computationally demanding (Neftci, Mostafa, and Zenke 2019).
To address this challenge, ANN-to-SNN conversion techniques have emerged as a promising approach, enabling the
direct conversion of pre-trained ANNs into high-performance
SNNs. Recent advancements aim to reduce conversion errors
by replacing the ReLU activation in ANNs with specially
designed quantized functions, following extra training. Typically, the quantized ReLU activation function is employed, as
it better mimics spiking neuron dynamics (Stöckl and Maass
2021; Bu et al. 2021a; Ding et al. 2021). However, these
re-training-based methods come with certain disadvantages.
Firstly, as shown in Tab. 1, these studies require training an
intermediate surrogate ANN on top of the original ReLU-

Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have gained great attention for their potential to revolutionize the computational
efficiency of artificial intelligence systems. Unlike traditional
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), which rely on the intensity of neuron activations, SNNs utilize the timing of sparse
and discrete spikes to encode and process information (Maass
1997). This spike-based computing paradigm is particularly
suited to neuromorphic hardware, which utilizes spiking neurons and synapses as fundamental components (Davies et al.
2018, 2021; Akopyan et al. 2015). In SNNs, incoming spikes
trigger the retrieval of synaptic weights from memory and
generate subsequent spike messages routed to other cores,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1583

