The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Is Poisoning a Real Threat to DPO? Maybe More So Than You Think
Pankayaraj Pathmanathan, Souradip Chakraborty, Xiangyu Liu , Yongyuan Liang , Furong Huang
University of Maryland College Park
pan@umd.edu

Abstract

1952). Then, the reward model is used to train a PPO algorithm with the language model acting as the policy and the
responses being the action to maximize the learned reward
model with a KL constraint that keeps the model close to
the original model, thus aligning with the human preferences.
In the traditional RLHF pipeline, learning a policy based on
PPO is brittle to hyperparameters. This has led to the development of a direct policy optimization method that treats the
pipeline as a supervised learning framework by finding an
exact solution for the optimal policy.
Unlike the prior works that have tried to analyze the insertion of universal backdoor attacks (Rando and Tramèr
2024) or topic-specific attacks (Wan et al. 2023), we in a
comprehensive manner analyze a range of attacks consisting of backdoor, non-backdoor attacks and attacks based on
influence points in the training data across a wide range of
models (Team et al. 2024; Jiang et al. 2023; Touvron et al.
2023). We find that using influence points could poison the
RLHF model by utilizing a fraction of the data compared to
what the previous works have shown. For instance, in terms
of backdoor attacks, we find that poisoning of only 0.5% of
the data is sufficient to elicit a harmful response from the
network instead of 3-4% required by the previous analysis
(Rando and Tramèr 2024). In this work we

Recent advancements in Reinforcement Learning with Human
Feedback (RLHF) have significantly impacted the alignment
of Large Language Models (LLMs). The sensitivity of reinforcement learning algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) has led to new line work on Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO), which treats RLHF in a supervised learning framework. The increased practical use of these RLHF
methods warrants an analysis of their vulnerabilities. In this
work, we investigate the vulnerabilities of DPO to poisoning attacks under different scenarios and compare the effectiveness
of preference poisoning, a first of its kind. We comprehensively analyze DPO’s vulnerabilities under different types of
attacks, i.e., backdoor and non-backdoor attacks, and different
poisoning methods across a wide array of language models,
i.e., LLama 7B, Mistral 7B, and Gemma 7B. We find that
unlike PPO-based methods, which, when it comes to backdoor
attacks, require at least 4% of the data to be poisoned to elicit
harmful behavior, we exploit the vulnerabilities of DPO by
simpler methods so we can poison the model with only as
much as 0.5% of the data. We further the investigate efficacy
of the existing defence methods and find that these poisoning
attacks can evade the existing data anomaly detection methods.

Introduction
Recent advancements in reinforcement learning with Human
Feedback (Bai et al. 2022b; Ouyang et al. 2022; Rafailov
et al. 2023) have leveraged human preferences to help Large
Language Models (LLMs) achieve a better alignment with
human preferences, thus leading to the creation of valuable
LLMs for a variety of tasks. However, with the need for
human preferences data, there comes an increasing pattern
of outsourcing the task of data annotation, which opens up
vulnerabilities that can poison the LLMs. In this work, we
comprehensively analyze RLHF poisoning through the lens
of Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al.
2023) and explore the additional vulnerabilities DPO brings
into the RLHF pipeline.
Traditionally, the RLHF pipeline starts with learning a
reward function to capture the binary human preference of
chosen and rejected responses given a prompt and a couple of
responses using the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence - AI Alignment Track (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27556

• As a first work to our knowledge, we perform a comprehensive analysis of the vulnerabilities of DPO-based
alignment methods to training time attacks.
• We propose three different ways of selectively building
the poisoning dataset with poisoning efficacy in mind.
• We show that our proposed DPO score-based, gradientfree method efficiently poisons the model with a fraction
of the data required by random poisoning.
• We also show that these poisons can evade the existing
data anomaly detection based defense methods.
We organize the rest of the paper as follows. In Section , we
discuss the prior works in RLHF, Jailbreak attacks, Backdoor
attacks, and Reward poisoning in RL. In Section , we present
the attack methodologies. In Section , Section , we detail
our experiment setup and present the results respectively
and discuss the implications and potential reasoning for the
results.

