The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

In2NeCT: Inter-class and Intra-class Neural Collapse Tuning for Semantic
Segmentation of Imbalanced Remote Sensing Images
Junao Shen1, 2 , Qiyun Hu1 , Tian Feng1, 2 * , Xinyu Wang1 , Hui Cui3 , Sensen Wu4 , Wei Zhang1, 5
1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
3
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, La Trobe University, Australia
4
School of Earth Sciences, Zhejiang University
5
Innovation Center of Yangtze River Delta, Zhejiang University
{jashen, qiyunhu, t.feng, xinyu.w, t.feng, sensenwu, cstzhangwei}@zju.edu.cn, huicui@latrobe.edu.au
Abstract
Remote sensing images (RSIs) are frequently characterized
by multi-scale inter-class objects and inconsistently distributed objects due to scene limitations, which would cause
a significant data imbalance challenging the corresponding
semantic segmentation. Recent methods have leveraged various deep learning techniques to capture high-quality representations for RSI semantic segmentation, but are hardly capable of addressing the afore-mentioned challenge given their
limited explorations toward the mechanisms behind the representations. The recently discovered Neural Collapse (NC)
phenomenon in computer vision models suggests the simplex
equiangular tight frame (ETF) as the optimal representation
structure, which has motivated us to observe that the optimal structure of last-layer representations is disrupted and
inter-class representations for minor classes tend to become
closer to each other beacuse of data imbalance. To address
these issues, we propose Inter-class and Intra-class Neural
Collapse Tuning (In2NeCT) to optimize the representations
that satisfy the simplex ETF, which facilitates the discrimination of inter-class representations and the coherence of intraclass representations. Extensive experiments on three datasets
demonstrate that our In2NeCT consistently leads to significant improvements in performance and outperforms the stateof-the-art methods.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Challenges in RSI semantic segmentation on
LoveDA: (a) Multi-scale inter-class objects, as depicted by
the bounding boxes in blue and yellow (b) Performance
in Intersection over Union (IoU) decreases significantly regarding the minor classes.

method’s performance regarding the minor classes with limited samples, as illustrated in Figure 1 (b).
Since the essence of RSI semantic segmentation lies in
learning textural and contextual representations for pixellevel classification, conventional methods have adopted
techniques on spatial and relational contexts to capture
detailed information for segmentation. Nevertheless, these
methods are limited in revealing the mechanisms behind the
representations, which drives us to raise the following two
questions: (1) What factor(s) cause the decrease in performance regarding the minor classes at the level of representations? (2) How to obtain effective representations for RSI
semantic segmentation?
Recent studies have proposed a phenomenon, namely
Neural Collapse (NC) (Papyan, Han, and Donoho 2020;
Yang et al. 2022, 2023) in computer vision classification
models, which provides useful information on the optimal
structure of visual feature representations. Specifically, this
phenomenon demonstrates that the last-layer representations
within the same class would collapse to their intra-class
means near the end of the training phase (i.e., the training loss reaches zero) on a sufficiently large and balanced
dataset. Besides, both the intra-class means and their corresponding classifier vectors converge to the vertices of a

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task and significantly contributes to various analytical applications for remote sensing images (RSIs), including land use
classification (Digra, Dhir, and Sharma 2022), agricultural
production estimation (Luo et al. 2023), and environmental monitoring (Yuan et al. 2020). As shown in Figure 1 (a),
RSIs exhibit distinct characteristics compared to other images: (1) RSIs usually exhibit a multi-scale phenomenon in
inter-class objects (blue and yellow); (2) The distribution of
objects in each class is inconsistent due to scene limitations
(i.e., LoveDA focuses on urban planning with less barren
and forest objects in the RSIs). These traits lead to an intrinsic data imbalance and thus would cause a decrease in a
* Corresponding author (t.feng@zju.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6814

