The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Complexity of Extending Fair Allocations of Indivisible Goods
Argyrios Deligkas1 , Eduard Eiben1 , Robert Ganian 2 , Tiger-Lily Goldsmith1 , Stavros D. Ioannidis1
1

Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK
2
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria
{argyrios.deligkas, eduard.eiben,tiger-lily.goldsmith, stavros.ioannidis}@rhul.ac.uk, rganian@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

considered very far from “fair”. A recently proposed intermediate notion between envy-free and EF1 allocations is
envy-free up to any item (EFX) (Caragiannis et al. 2019;
Feldman, Mauras, and Ponitka 2024), but it is not known
whether EFX allocations always exist and their polynomialtime computability remains open as well.
Another notable approach to tackling the problem of computing envy-free allocations is to identify precise conditions
under which it can be solved efficiently. This is typically
done by investigating the problem through the lens of parameterized complexity (Downey and Fellows 2013; Cygan et al. 2015)—a refinement of the classical complexity
paradigm where inputs are analyzed not only with respect
to their size n, but also to a numerical parameter k which
measures some well-defined quantity. While we cannot hope
to obtain an nO(1) algorithm for computing envy-free allocations in general, in this setting one aims to design socalled fixed-parameter tractable (or FPT) algorithms for the
problem, that is, algorithms running in time f (k) · nO(1)
for some computable function f . The simplest parameters
considered in past works on fair division include, for example, the number of agents or items; however, such parameterizations place strong restrictions on the input instances,
and so more recent works have focused on developing algorithms parameterized by the number of agent types (where
two agents have the same type if they have identical preferences over the items), or the number of item types (where
two items have the same type if they are valued the same
by every agent) (Deligkas et al. 2021; Eiben et al. 2023a;
Nguyen and Rothe 2023), see also (Brânzei, Lv, and Mehta
2016; Ganian, Ordyniak, and Rahul 2019).
While the aforementioned approaches have by now provided a fairly detailed understanding of computing an envyfree allocation from scratch, in this article we turn to the
problem of extending a partial allocation—that is, computing an envy-free allocation when part (or even most) of the
allocation is already fixed. This envy-free allocation extension problem arises naturally whenever one needs to deal
with resources that have already been assigned or must be
assigned to certain agents—consider, e.g., the case where
a few new items are made available after an allocation has
been fixed and we are not allowed to take items from agents,
or the setting where most employees in a company already
have fixed tasks, but we need to distribute a set of new tasks

We initiate the study of computing envy-free allocations of
indivisible items in the extension setting, i.e., when some part
of the allocation is fixed and the task is to allocate the remaining items. Given the known NP-hardness of the problem,
we investigate whether—and under which conditions—one
can obtain fixed-parameter algorithms for computing a solution in settings where most of the allocation is already fixed.
Our results provide a broad complexity-theoretic classification of the problem which includes: (a) fixed-parameter algorithms tailored to settings with few distinct types of agents or
items; (b) lower bounds which exclude the generalization of
these positive results to more general settings. We conclude
by showing that—unlike when computing allocations from
scratch—the non-algorithmic question of whether more relaxed EFX allocations exist can be completely resolved in the
extension setting.

Introduction
Finding a “fair” allocation of indivisible items or resources
to a provided set of agents, each with their own preferences,
is one of the central tasks arising in the area of computational social choice. The arguably most classical and established notion of fairness used in these settings is envyfreeness, where we ask for an allocation π : M → N from
the set M of items to the set N of agents such that for each
pair of agents i, j ∈ N , i prefers π −1 (i) to π −1 (j); in other
words, no agent envies another agent. It is well known that
an envy-free allocation need not exist, and in fact, determining whether one exists is NP-complete (Bouveret and Lang
2008).
The aforementioned intractability has led to a flurry of
research to circumvent this issue. One approach that has
been proposed is to consider “less restrictive” versions of
envy-freeness instead, with the aim of not only ensuring
that the computation of an assignment is tractable but—
even more desirably—that one always exists. Notably, it is
known that one can always compute, in polynomial time, an
allocation which is envy-free up to one item (EF1) (Amanatidis, Markakis, and Ntokos 2020; Budish 2011; Igarashi
et al. 2024). However, such allocations may sometimes be
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13745

