The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Single Emotion:
Multi-label Approach to Conversational Emotion Recognition
Yujin Kang, Yoon-Sik Cho
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Chung-Ang University, Republic of Korea
{zinzin32, yoonsik}@cau.ac.kr

Abstract

Conversation

Label

Emotion recognition in conversation (ERC) has been promoted with diverse approaches in the recent years. However,
many studies have pointed out that emotion shift and confusing labels make it difficult for models to distinguish between
different emotions. Existing ERC models suffer from these
problems when the emotions are forced to be mapped into
single label. In this paper, we utilize our strategies for extending single label to multi-labels. We then propose a multi-label
classification framework for emotion recognition in conversation (ML-ERC). Specifically, we introduce weighted supervised contrastive learning tailored for multi-label, which
can easily applied to previous ERC models. The empirical results on existing task with single label support the efficacy of
our approach, which is more effective in the most challenging
settings: emotion shift or confusing labels. We also evaluate
ML-ERC with the multi-labels we produced to support our
contrastive learning scheme.

I've been looking forward to this
party for so long. I'm so excited!

Excited

Multiple
emotions
Happiness
Excited

Emotion Shift

𝑠!

𝑠"

𝑠!

Neutral
Me too!
Let’s go into the party now!

Excited

Wow! This is exactly like the
party I’ve always dreamed of.

Happiness

Excited

Hap

Exc

Figure 1: Example of multiple emotions in each utterance
within a conversation. Specifically, emotion shift frequently
triggers multiple emotions, making it difficult to understand
with only a single emotion label.
These two problems, emotion shift and confusing labels,
arise from the practice of annotating a single emotion label to an utterance overlooking that an utterance can encompass multiple emotions. As illustrated in Figure 1, each
utterance within a conversation is assigned to a single label. Although an utterance can encompass multiple emotions (right), only the most intense emotion is retained and
other emotions are discarded. In fact, organizing emotions
in 2D or circular arrangements that originated from a study
in the 1950s (Schlosberg 1952) has become more common.
The studies from psychology (Russell 1980; Mikels et al.
2005) use valence-arousal 2D emotion space to describe
emotions. From these perspectives, restricting each utterance to one emotion label is oversimplified. Mikels et al.
(2005) pointed out that emotions are often blended and expressed through behaviors or utterances, which has motivated a new approach to capturing mixed-emotions. Regardless of these studies, however, the emotion recognition task
in ERC still remains in predicting the single label.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose
a model called Multi-Label classification for Emotion
Recognition in Conversation (ML-ERC). Although all previous ERC models attempted to predict a single-label for
each utterance, we switch this same ERC task to multi-label
(emotion) prediction. Since multi-label annotation requires
significant time and efforts, we thus propose a pseudo multi-

Introduction
Motivated by the introduction of AI conversational systems,
such as chatbots in healthcare, recommendations, and customer services, emotion recognition in conversation (ERC)
has attracted increasing attention in recent years. The ERC
task aims to identify the emotion at each utterance in a conversation. While consistent improvement is being shown,
there still remain challenges for improvement. Previous
studies have pointed out that emotion shift (Hazarika et al.
2018; Song et al. 2022b; Tu et al. 2023) and confusing labels (Ghosal et al. 2019; Ishiwatari et al. 2020; Lee 2022)
are the causes that make the ERC task difficult (Majumder
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022;
Qin et al. 2023). An emotion shift in ERC occurs when the
emotions of the same speaker change during the speaker’s
consecutive utterances. Confusing emotion, where two similar emotions cannot be distinguished within an utterance,
is another challenge in ERC. Recent studies have proposed
models to address these issues by introducing emotion shift
detection module (Gao et al. 2022), using curriculum learning (Yang et al. 2022) to better handle emotion shift, and
constructing grayscale labels (Lee 2022).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24321

