The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Harmonious Music-driven Group Choreography with
Trajectory-Controllable Diffusion
Yuqin Dai1 , Wanlu Zhu1 , Ronghui Li2 , Zeping Ren2 , Xiangzheng Zhou1 , Jixuan Ying2 ,
Jun Li1 * , Jian Yang1 *
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
{daiy, wanluzhu, xzhou, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn {lrh22, rzp22, yingjx23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Creating group choreography from music is crucial in cultural entertainment and virtual reality, with a focus on
generating harmonious movements. Despite growing interest, recent approaches often struggle with two major challenges: multi-dancer collisions and single-dancer foot sliding. To address these challenges, we propose a TrajectoryControllable Diffusion (TCDiff) framework, which leverages non-overlapping trajectories to ensure coherent and aesthetically pleasing dance movements. To mitigate collisions,
we introduce a Dance-Trajectory Navigator that generates
collision-free trajectories for multiple dancers, utilizing a
distance-consistency loss to maintain optimal spacing. Furthermore, to reduce foot sliding, we present a footwork adaptor that adjusts trajectory displacement between frames, supported by a relative forward-kinematic loss to further reinforce the correlation between movements and trajectories.
Experiments demonstrate our method’s superiority.

Figure 1: Visualizations of two key issues in baseline models: multi-dancer collisions (Le et al. 2023a) (in the black
box) and single-dancer foot sliding (Yang et al. 2024) (in
the red box). In contrast, our approach eliminates these issues, delivering superior visual aesthetics.
Multi-dancer collision. In many group choreography
frameworks (Le et al. 2023b,a; Yao et al. 2023; Tseng,
Castellon, and Liu 2023), model inputs are typically constructed by concatenating the movements and coordinates
of each dancer. However, this strategy results in a significant
imbalance, as movements often encompass over 100 dimensions, whereas coordinates are constrained to just three. In
group choreography, dancers’ coordinates can vary substantially, yet their movements frequently display notable similarities. For example, in the AIOZ-GDance dataset (Le et al.
2023b), over 80% of the movements are similar. This similarity leads to dancer ambiguity, complicating the model’s
ability to distinguish between individual dancers, and often
leading to collisions, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Single-dancer foot sliding. Foot sliding occurs when a
dancer’s feet appear to unnaturally glide or shift across the
ground, despite accurate movement of the rest of the body,
as depicted in the middle of Figure 1. This issue often arises
from difficulties in accurately modeling the correlation between the global trajectory and the local rotations of other
body parts (Yang, Yang, and Wang 2023). In multi-person
choreography, the dancer ambiguity issue further complicates the modeling of this correlation, making it even harder
to align footwork with displacement.
To address these challenges, we propose a twostage method, Trajectory-Controllable Diffusion (TCDiff), which first predicts dancers’ coordinates and subsequently generates their movements accordingly. To mitigate
multi-dancer collisions, we introduce the Dance-Trajectory
Navigator (DTN), designed to resolve dancer ambiguity

Project Page — https://wanluzhu.github.io/TCDiffusion/

Introduction
Dance, one of the most expressive art forms, has a profound
impact on cultural, cinematic, and academic domains (Artemyeva and Moshenska 2018; Lee et al. 2021; Yao et al.
2023; Xue et al. 2024). The process of choreography creation has traditionally been labor-intensive, spurring the development of automated learning models for dance generation. Consequently, music-driven choreography, initially focused on solo dancers (Li et al. 2021; Tseng, Castellon, and
Liu 2023; Li et al. 2023), has garnered considerable attention. As the demand for more immersive and interactive
experiences grows, the need for multi-person choreography
has become increasingly prominent (Yao et al. 2023), leading to a greater emphasis on music-driven group choreography that prioritizes both cohesion and diversity in group
movements (Schwartz 1998). However, despite initial recognition and exploration (Yao et al. 2023; Le et al. 2023b,a;
Siyao et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024), these approaches continue to face two significant challenges:
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2645

