The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging Training and Execution via Dynamic Directed Graph-Based
Communication in Cooperative Multi-Agent Systems
Zhuohui Zhang1,2 , Bin He1,2 , Bin Cheng1,2 * , Gang Li1,2
1

2

Department of Control Science & Engineering, Tongji University, China
National Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems, Tongji University, China
{zhangzhuohui, hebin, bincheng, lig}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022; Zhang, Zhang, and Lin 2019),
which includes value-based (Rashid et al. 2020; Eccles et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2021) and policy-based (Yu et al. 2022;
Lin et al. 2021) frameworks. CTDE-based MARL algorithms rely on access to the global state, which is often an
idealized assumption.
Communication is essential in multi-agent systems for
sharing information, learning, and collaborating toward
common goals, especially in partially observable environments. It is crucial for complex tasks such as coordinating autonomous vehicles (Cao et al. 2012), sensor networks
(Pipattanasomporn, Feroze, and Rahman 2009), and multirobot control (Fox et al. 2000). Effective communication underpins cooperation. Recently, inspired by human cooperation, communication has been integrated into MARL to enhance information sharing among agents. Early work (Foerster et al. 2016; Sukhbaatar, Fergus et al. 2016) disseminated
information through a broadcast format, but this approach
led to high communication costs and information redundancy. Subsequent research has aimed to reduce communication overhead by selectively determining when to communicate (Singh, Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2018) and eliminating
redundant information through targeted peer-to-peer communication (Jiang and Lu 2018; Jiang et al. 2018). However,
there is a lack of a universal communication method that
can address the following five issues simultaneously with (1)
whom to communicate, (2) when to communicate, (3) which
piece of information to communicate, (4) how to combine
and integrate the information received, and (5) how to use
communication to avoid reliance on global state are limited.
In this work, we focus on developing communication
mechanisms in MARL to enhance team performance on collaborative tasks, while minimizing communication costs and
avoiding reliance on global state information. We propose a
novel MARL algorithm, the Transformer-based graph coarsening network (TGCNet), which models cooperative agents’
communication as dynamic directed graphs, with each agent
as a node. The adjacency trajectory matrix represents the
structure of the dynamic directed graph. We connect the
training and execution phases through dynamic directed
graphs, allowing agents to communicate during both stages.
TGCNet integrates a Transformer-based (Vaswani et al.
2017) multi-key gated communication mechanism with the
Q-network, enabling end-to-end training without the need

Multi-agent systems must learn to communicate and understand interactions between agents to achieve cooperative goals in partially observed tasks. However, existing approaches lack a dynamic directed communication mechanism and rely on global states, thus diminishing the role of
communication in centralized training. Thus, we propose the
Transformer-based graph coarsening network (TGCNet), a
novel multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithm.
TGCNet learns the topological structure of a dynamic directed graph to represent the communication policy and integrates graph coarsening networks to approximate the representation of global state during training. It also utilizes
the Transformer decoder for feature extraction during execution. Experiments on multiple cooperative MARL benchmarks demonstrate state-of-the-art performance compared to
popular MARL algorithms. Further ablation studies validate
the effectiveness of our dynamic directed graph communication mechanism and graph coarsening networks.

Code — https://github.com/ZhuohuiZhang/TGCNet

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
problems have emerged in the past decade as a vital framework for addressing intricate collaborative challenges in
real-world scenarios (Wei et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 2019;
Cheng et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023), attracting considerable
attention and showcasing substantial potential for practical
applications and commercial viability. A natural approach
to cooperative MARL regards the multi-agent system as a
whole using centralized methods (Tan 1993), which face
scalability challenges and limitations associated with centralized controllers (Foerster et al. 2018). Another approach
is decentralized, where each agent learns its policy with single agent techniques (Tampuu et al. 2017), addressing the
limitations of centralized controllers but introducing nonstationarity and credit assignment problems (Lowe et al.
2017). To mitigate these issues, decentralized policies can
be learned using the paradigm of centralized training with
decentralized execution (CTDE) (Sunehag et al. 2017; Yuan
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23395

