The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fully Test-time Adaptation for Tabular Data
†

Zhi Zhou1, * , Kun-Yang Yu1, 2, * , Lan-Zhe Guo1, 3, , Yu-Feng Li1, 2,
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China.
{zhouz, yuky, guolz, liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

To address distribution shifts during testing, fully testtime adaptation (FTTA) algorithms have emerged, enhancing the performance of pre-trained DNNs using only testing
data. These methods are particularly designed to deal with
covariate distribution shift (Wang et al. 2021), label distribution shift (Wu et al. 2021), or both (Zhou et al. 2023a), adapting the model parameters (Wang et al. 2022) or optimizing the predictions (Boudiaf et al. 2022). However, they are
primarily designed for image tasks and heavily rely on image augmentation strategies (Wang et al. 2022) and imagespecific data assumptions (Boudiaf et al. 2022; Zhou et al.
2023a), rendering them less effective for tabular data. As a
result, fully test-time adaptation for tabular data remains underexplored, despite its significance in real applications.
To this end, we study the fully test-time adaptation problem setting for tabular data, namely AdaTab, which holds
significant practical value (Altman and Krzywinski 2017).
For example, in financial applications (Kritzman, Page, and
Turkington 2012), the non-stationary financial market environment can cause significant changes in the data distribution between training and testing. For instance, shifts
in the stock market can significantly affect market behavior and investor sentiment. These distribution shifts degrade the model performance and seriously affect investment decision-making and risk management, thereby leading to financial losses (Guo, Hu, and Yang 2023). The goal
of the AdaTab problem setting is to adapt the trained deep
tabular model to unknown distributions using only testing
data, preventing the performance degradation caused by distribution shifts in downstream tabular applications.
In this paper, we conduct an in-depth investigation into
the AdaTab problem. Our four observations reveal three key
challenges in designing FTTA methods for tabular data:
(a) Covariate and label distribution shifts exist in tabular
data, but they cannot be effectively addressed by existing
FTTA methods; (b) Typical augmentation for test-time adaptation is often ineffective for tabular data, limiting the ability of FTTA methods to compute consistency; (c) Adaptation is sensitive to both tasks and models for tabular data.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel FTTA approach, F TAT. It comprises three essential modules: Confident Distribution Optimizer, Local Consistent Weighter, and
Dynamic Model Ensembler, which robustly track and optimize the label distribution of predictions, adapt the model

Tabular data plays a vital role in various real-world scenarios
and finds extensive applications. Although recent deep tabular models have shown remarkable success, they still struggle to handle data distribution shifts, leading to performance
degradation when testing distributions change. To remedy
this, a robust tabular model must adapt to generalize to unknown distributions during testing. In this paper, we investigate the problem of fully test-time adaptation (FTTA) for tabular data, where the model is adapted using only the testing
data. We identify three key challenges: the existence of label and covariate distribution shifts, the lack of effective data
augmentation, and the sensitivity of adaptation, which render
existing FTTA methods ineffective for tabular data. To this
end, we propose the Fully Test-time Adaptation for Tabular
data, namely F TAT, which enables FTTA methods to robustly
optimize the label distribution of predictions, adapt to shifted
covariate distributions, and suit a variety of tasks and models effectively. We conduct comprehensive experiments on six
benchmark datasets, which are evaluated using three metrics.
The experimental results demonstrate that F TAT outperforms
state-of-the-art methods by a margin.

Project Homepage — https://wnjxyk.github.io/FTTA
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10871

1

†

Introduction

Tabular data (Altman and Krzywinski 2017) plays a
vital role in numerous practical applications, including
economics (Salehpour and Samadzamini 2024), healthcare (Ching et al. 2018), finance (Ozbayoglu, Gudelek, and
Sezer 2020), and manufacturing (Hein et al. 2017). Deep
neural networks (DNNs) have recently shown remarkable
success in handling tabular data, often surpassing traditional statistical methods when training and test data share
the same distribution (Arik and Pfister 2021; Gorishniy
et al. 2021). However, real-world applications often experience shifts in data distributions during testing, leading
to significant performance degradation in existing methods (Kolesnikov 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23027

