The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ExDDI: Explaining Drug-Drug Interaction Predictions with Natural Language
Zhaoyue Sun1 , Jiazheng Li2 , Gabriele Pergola1 , Yulan He1,2,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick
2
Department of Informatics, King’s College London
3
The Alan Turing Institute
Zhaoyue.Sun@warwick.ac.uk, Jiazheng.Li@kcl.ac.uk,
Gabriele.Pergola.1@warwick.ac.uk, Yulan.He@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract

Input：
SMILES of drugs

Predicting unknown drug-drug interactions (DDIs) is crucial
for improving medication safety. Previous efforts in DDI prediction have typically focused on binary classification or predicting DDI categories, with the absence of explanatory insights that could enhance trust in these predictions. In this
work, we propose to generate natural language explanations
for DDI predictions, enabling the model to reveal the underlying pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics mechanisms simultaneously as making the prediction. To do this,
we have collected DDI explanations from DDInter and DrugBank and developed various models for extensive experiments and analysis. Our models can provide accurate explanations for unknown DDIs between known drugs. This paper
contributes new tools to the field of DDI prediction and lays
a solid foundation for further research on generating explanations for DDI predictions.

(a)

DDI Type
Prediction:
(c)
DDI
Explanation
Generation:

DDI Prediction:
Positive/Negative
Abemaciclib

Apalutamide

(b)

DDI description from DrugBank:
The serum concentration of Abemaciclib can be decreased when it is combined
with Apalutamide
Extract:
(DrugA: Abemaciclib , DrugB: Apalutamide, Mechanism: Serum concentration,
Action: Decrease)
Summarised DDI type (1 of the 65):
The serum concentration of drug A can be decreased when combined with drug B

Coadministration with potent inducers of CYP450 3A4 may significantly
decrease the plasma concentrations of abemaciclib and its
pharmacologically active metabolites, all of which are substrates of the
(d)
isoenzyme.

Figure 1: Examples of different DDI prediction tasks. (a)
Model inputs, i.e., SMILES representations of the drug
pairs; (b) Traditional DDI prediction: binary classification
task; (c) DDI-type prediction: multiple classification task;
(d) DDI explanation generation: our proposed task, formulated as text generation. The underlined content represents
the annotations involved in DDI type prediction, while the
italicized text denotes unique content provided by DDInter’s
explanations.

Code and Data — https://github.com/ZhaoyueSun/ExDDI

Introduction
Drug-drug interaction (DDI) refers to the alteration of the effects of one or more drugs when drugs are taken simultaneously (Zhang et al. 2023). Such changes may lead to loss of
therapeutic effect or occurrence of toxicity, threatening patient safety (Zhang et al. 2023). With the increasing number
of approved drugs in recent years, the likelihood of interactions between drugs has also increased (Khori, Semnani, and
Roshandel 2011; Han et al. 2022). Although wet lab experiments are available for validating DDIs, they are hindered by
strict experimental conditions and high costs (Safdari et al.
2016), making it unfeasible to explore all potential interaction combinations. Therefore, computational methods for
predicting DDIs have been extensively researched, and numerous models have demonstrated strong predictive capabilities. However, as predictive capabilities advance, models tend to become more complex and opaque, obstructing
users’ understanding of the predicted results (Vo et al. 2022).
Specifically, the majority of previous methods have focused only on binary classification, i.e., predicting whether
there is an interaction between two drugs (Figure 1(b)), yet
overlooking the mechanisms and outcomes of DDIs (Zhang

et al. 2023). To help users better grasp DDI knowledge
from predictions, some studies have proposed DDI-type prediction (Ryu, Kim, and Lee 2018; Deng et al. 2020; Lin
et al. 2022), which is defined as a multi-classification problem that categorises DDIs into various subtypes according to their effects. For example, Deng et al. (2020) used
NLP techniques to extract quadruples (drugA, drugB,
mechanism, action) from DDI descriptions collected
from DrugBank, where ‘mechanism’ refers to the drugs’
effects on metabolism, serum concentration, therapeutic efficacy, etc., and ‘action’ indicates an increase or decrease.
They summarised DDIs into 65 types based on the extracted
quadruples used for classification (Figure 1(c)).
While DDI-type prediction reveals the outcomes of DDI
events, the granularity is coarse, lacking attention to the underlying causes of DDIs. As a valuable resource, Xiong et al.
(2022) constructed the DDInter database, gathering information on 1.8k approved drugs and 0.24M associated DDIs,
along with detailed explanations. The explanations were collected from scientific literature in PubMed and medication
guides of drugs, and reviewed by a clinical pharmacist team.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25228

