The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PersonalizedUS: Interpretable Breast Cancer Risk Assessment with Local
Coverage Uncertainty Quantification
Alek Fröhlich1 * , Thiago Ramos2 * , Gustavo Motta Cabello Dos Santos3 , Isabela Panzeri Carlotti
Buzatto3 , Rafael Izbicki2 , Daniel Guimarães Tiezzi3
1
CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy
Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil
3
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil
alek.frohlich@iit.it, thiagorr@ufscar.br, gustavocabello@usp.br, ipcarlotti@hcrp.usp.br, rizbicki@ufscar.br, dtiezzi@usp.br
2

Abstract

recall and up to 9% at least one false positive breast biopsy
(Ho et al. 2022).
Breast ultrasound (US) is broadly used as a diagnostic
tool complementing inconclusive mammograms, evaluating
palpable findings, and guiding breast biopsies (Berg 2008).
Breast US has several advantages compared to other imaging modalities, including relatively lower cost, lack of ionizing radiation, and real-time evaluation capabilities (Feig
2010).
Despite these advantages, interpreting US exams is hard.
The evaluation involves inspecting image features such as
lesion size, shape, and margins for signs of malignancy,
and relies heavily on the operator’s experience (Sivarajah,
Brown, and Chetlen 2020). Radiologists ultimately decide
whether the findings are benign, need follow-up, or require
a biopsy according to the Breast Imaging Reporting and
Data System (BI-RADS) (Mendelson et al. 2013). Although
the BI-RADS standardized the description of lesions and reports, it has notable limitations. In particular, the most recent
version offers little guidance on how to subdivide BI-RADS
4 findings into subcategories (a, b, and c), with risk ranging
from 2% to 95%, and overlooks clinical and Doppler-based
features known to be important for malignancy prediction
(Pfob et al. 2022). These gaps contribute to the method’s
intra-reader variability and false positive rate (Lazarus et al.
2006; Niu et al. 2020). Notably, incorporating US in breast
cancer screening leads to an additional 4-8% of patients undergoing biopsy as compared to mammography alone, yet
only 7-8% of US-guided breast biopsies are found to be malignant (Yang et al. 2020; Corsetti et al. 2011).
The main goals of our work were to:

Correctly assessing the malignancy of breast lesions identified during ultrasound examinations is crucial for effective
clinical decision-making. However, the current “gold standard” relies on manual BI-RADS scoring by clinicians, often leading to unnecessary biopsies and a significant mental health burden on patients and their families. In this paper, we introduce PersonalizedUS, an interpretable machine
learning system that leverages recent advances in conformal
prediction to provide precise and personalized risk estimates
with local coverage guarantees and sensitivity, specificity, and
predictive values above 0.9 across various threshold levels.
In particular, we identify meaningful lesion subgroups where
distribution-free, model-agnostic conditional coverage holds,
with approximately 90% of our prediction sets containing
only the ground truth in most lesion subgroups, thus explicitly characterizing for which patients the model is most suitably applied. Moreover, we make available a curated tabular
dataset of 1936 biopsied breast lesions from a recent observational multicenter study and benchmark the performance
of several state-of-the-art learning algorithms. We also report
a successful case study of the deployed system in the same
multicenter context. Concrete clinical benefits include up to a
65% reduction in requested biopsies among BI-RADS 4a and
4b lesions, with minimal to no missed cancer cases.

Code — https://github.com/alekfrohlich/personalized-us

Introduction
Breast cancer is the most diagnosed cancer and the leading
cause of cancer-related deaths among women worldwide,
with 2.3 million new cases and 666,000 deaths reported in
2022 (Bray et al. 2024). While screening mammography is
widely used to increase early diagnosis—when treatment is
more effective and less costly (Prager et al. 2018)—it has
limitations, particularly a high false positive rate, leading to
recalls, short interval follow-ups, and unnecessary biopsies
(Hubbard et al. 2011). A recent study estimated that, after 10
years of annual screening in women aged 40-59 years, 61%
of individuals would experience at least one false positive

• Improve upon the current BI-RADS standard by reducing the number of false positives without missing cancer
cases;
• Provide an interpretable model that can be safely monitored by medical doctors with suitable training in AI;
• Give personalized uncertainty quantification for model
predictions with strong theoretical guarantees under minimal assumptions;

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Provide an intuitive interface for doctors to interact with
the model.
27998

