The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MUSES: 3D-Controllable Image Generation via Multi-Modal Agent Collaboration
Yanbo Ding1, 2 , Shaobin Zhuang3, 4 , Kunchang Li1, 2, 3 , Zhengrong Yue3, 4 , Yu Qiao1, 3 , Yali Wang1, 3 *
1

Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yb.ding, yl.wang}@siat.ac.cn
Abstract

frog facing right is behind a rabbit facing forward”, existing methods collapse with unsatisfactory 3D arrangements.
This raises a fundamental question: can we create images
with precise 3D control to better simulate our world?
To answer this question, we draw inspiration from the
workflow of 3D professionals. We observe that creating
such images typically involves three key stages: scene layout planning, 3D objects design, and image rendering (Pharr,
Jakob, and Humphreys 2023). This highlights the need for
developing a systematic framework of 3D-controllable image creation, rather than relying on a single generation
model. Therefore, we propose a generic AI system that automatically and precisely creates images with 3D controllable
objects. We name it MUSES, since we consider human designers as our “Muses”, and mimic their workflows through
a collaborative pipeline of multi-modal agents.
Our MUSES system, as depicted in Fig. 2, comprises
three key agents that progressively achieve 3D-controllable
image generation: (1) Layout Manager. First, we employ a
Large Language Model (e.g., Llama3 (AI@Meta 2024)) to
plan and assign 3D object locations based on user queries.
Our innovative 2D-to-3D layout lifting paradigm first generates a 2D layout by in-context learning, then elevates it to
a 3D layout via chain-of-thought reasoning. (2) Model Engineer. After obtaining the 3D layout, we introduce a model
engineer to acquire 3D models of queried objects. To enhance its robustness, we design a flexible retriever that gathers 3D models through a decision tree approach, combining
self-collected model shop retrieval, online search, and textto-3D generation. Furthermore, to ensure orientation alignment with the planned 3D layout, we develop a novel aligner
to calibrate object orientation by face-camera-view identification with CLIP (Radford et al. 2021). (3) Image Artist. Finally, we introduce an image artist to render 3D-controllable
images. The 3D-aligned objects and their layouts are fed
into Blender (Community 2018), which accurately assembles all the objects into 3D-to-2D condition images. These
conditions are then used with ControlNet (Zhang, Rao, and
Agrawala 2023) to generate the final image.
Our contributions are threefold. First, our MUSES is the
first AI system for 3D-controllable image generation, to our
best knowledge. It enables precise control over object properties such as object count, orientation, 3D spatial relationships, and camera view, potentially bridging the gap between

Despite recent advancements in text-to-image generation,
most existing methods struggle to create images with multiple objects and complex spatial relationships in the 3D world.
To tackle this limitation, we introduce a generic AI system,
namely MUSES, for 3D-controllable image generation from
user queries. Specifically, our MUSES develops a progressive workflow with three key components, including (1) Layout Manager for 2D-to-3D layout lifting, (2) Model Engineer
for 3D object acquisition and calibration, (3) Image Artist for
3D-to-2D image rendering. By mimicking the collaboration
of human professionals, this multi-modal agent pipeline facilitates the effective and automatic creation of images with
3D-controllable objects, through an explainable integration of
top-down planning and bottom-up generation. Additionally,
existing benchmarks lack detailed descriptions of complex
3D spatial relationships of multiple objects. To fill this gap,
we further construct a new benchmark of T2I-3DisBench (3D
image scene), which describes diverse 3D image scenes with
50 detailed prompts. Extensive experiments show the stateof-the-art performance for MUSES on both T2I-CompBench
and T2I-3DisBench, outperforming recent strong competitors such as DALL-E 3 and Stable Diffusion 3. These results
demonstrate a significant step forward of MUSES in bridging
natural language, 2D image generation, and 3D world.

Code — https://github.com/DINGYANB/MUSES
Dataset — https://huggingface.co/yanboding/MUSES
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10605

Introduction
Text-to-image generation (Rombach et al. 2022a; Ramesh
et al. 2021; Midjourney 2024) is rapidly evolving in quality. However, such generation often struggles with detailed
user queries of multiple objects in complex scenes. Several
approaches have emerged to address this by compositional
text-to-image synthesis (Yang et al. 2024b; Chefer et al.
2023; Feng et al. 2024, 2023). Unfortunately, they fail to
accurately control 3D contents like object orientation and
camera view, even though our real world is inherently threedimensional. As shown in Fig. 1, when the prompt is “a
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2753

