The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AIQViT: Architecture-Informed Post-Training Quantization for
Vision Transformers
Runqing Jiang1 , Ye Zhang1 , Longguang Wang2 , Pengpeng Yu1 , Yulan Guo1, *
1

Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Aviation University of Air Force
{jiangrq3,yupp5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangy2658@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wanglongguang15@nudt.edu.cn,
guoyulan@sysu.edu.cn
Image
Classification
62.33%(acc)

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ) has emerged as a promising solution for reducing the storage and computational cost
of vision transformers (ViTs). Recent advances primarily target at crafting quantizers to deal with peculiar activations
characterized by ViTs. However, most existing methods underestimate the information loss incurred by weight quantization, resulting in significant performance deterioration,
particularly in low-bit cases. Furthermore, a common practice in quantizing post-Softmax activations of ViTs is to employ logarithmic transformations, which unfortunately prioritize less informative values around zero. This approach introduces additional redundancies, ultimately leading to suboptimal quantization efficacy. To handle these, this paper proposes an innovative PTQ method tailored for ViTs, termed
AIQViT (Architecture-Informed Post-training Quantization
for ViTs). First, we design an architecture-informed lowrank compensation mechanism, wherein learnable low-rank
weights are introduced to compensate for the degradation
caused by weight quantization. Second, we design a dynamic
focusing quantizer to accommodate the unbalanced distribution of post-Softmax activations, which dynamically selects the most valuable interval for higher quantization resolution. Extensive experiments on five vision tasks, including
image classification, object detection, instance segmentation,
point cloud classification, and point cloud part segmentation,
demonstrate the superiority of AIQViT over state-of-the-art
PTQ methods.

Full-Precision

AIQViT(ours)

RepQ-ViT

BRECQ

Min-Max

Figure 1: The performances of different approaches on different tasks (including image classification, object detection,
instance segmentation, point cloud classification, and point
cloud part segmentation), where the W4/A4 setting is used
for quantization. Best viewed in color.

2022), knowledge distillation (Jiang et al. 2023; Zhao et al.
2022), and model quantization (Nagel et al. 2022; Xiao et al.
2023), to reduce the storage and computational cost of complicated models while preserving their performances.
Among the model compression techniques, model quantization has emerged as a widely adopted paradigm, which
compresses models by reducing the bit-width of weights and
activations. Some quantization-aware training methods (Lin
et al. 2015; Nagel et al. 2022) require a retraining process to
recover accuracy, which is computationally expensive and
time-consuming. Moreover, they typically rely on the full
training datasets, which may not be feasible due to privacy
problems. To handle these, post-training quantization (PTQ)
has gained increasing popularity in recent years. Compared
with the quantization-aware training methods, PTQ-based
methods (Li et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2021) only invocate a
small subset of the original training data for calibration, providing a more viable option for model compression.
Early PTQ-based works (Li et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2021)

Introduction
Thanks to the powerful scalability and superior ability
in building long-range dependencies, vision transformers
(ViTs) have accomplished cutting-edge performances in various vision tasks, such as image classification (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2021), image object detection
(Carion et al. 2020; Li et al. 2023a), and point cloud analysis
(Zhao et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2021). However, the computational intensity and substantial memory requirements of offthe-shelf ViTs pose significant barriers to their widespread
deployment on resource-constrained devices. To this end, a
number of model compression techniques have been studied, including network pruning (Fang et al. 2023; Jiang et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17635

