The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SceneX: Procedural Controllable Large-scale Scene Generation
Mengqi Zhou1,2,3,4 * , Yuxi Wang5 * , Jun Hou5 , Shougao Zhang6 ,
Yiwei Li1 , Chuanchen Luo7 , Junran Peng8† , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4,5
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
4
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
5
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
6
China University of Geosciences Beijing
7
Shandong University
8
University of Science and Technology Beijing
{zhoumengqi2022, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, yuxiwang93@gmail.com, jrpeng4ever@126.com
2

Abstract

vide a more robust solution. By constructing worlds with
detailed mesh assets and evolving them according to predefined physical rules, these models leverage Physically
Based Rendering (PBR) to ensure high geometric consistency and detailed visualization. Procedural modeling methods, such as those outlined by Lindenmayer et al. (Lindenmayer 1968), show great promise in generating realistic and
intricate world models through adjustable parameters and
rule-based systems using tools like Blender. For example,
Infinigen (Raistrick et al. 2023) proposes a procedural generator to generate large-scale natural scenes encompassing
terrain, weather, vegetation, and wildlife. (Lipp et al. 2011)
and (Talton et al. 2011) use procedural modeling to generate city-level street or layout. Although these procedural approaches generate high-quality 3D assets, they are beginnerunfriendly and time-consuming due to the comprehensive
grasp of generation rules, algorithmic frameworks, and individual parameters of procedural modeling. For instance,
generating a city, as shown in Fig. 1, requires the effort of a
professional PCG engineer working for over two weeks.
To address the above problems, existing works such as
3D-GPT (Sun et al. 2023) and SceneCraft (Hu et al. 2024)
introduce an instruction-driven 3D modeling method by integrating an LLM agent with procedural generation software. Despite the successful collaboration with human designers to establish a procedural generation framework,
these methods still exhibit significant limitations. Firstly, the
restricted editing capabilities of fixed 3D resources prevent
SceneCraft from attaining the same degree of precision in
3D resource editing as is achievable through procedural generation. Secondly, 3D-GPT is based on the procedural generation model Infinigen, which restricts its capacity to fully
utilise existing PCG resources. This is exemplified by the
inability to generate extensive terrain and limitless cities.
Finally, the task of generating a large-scale scene is often
composed of multiple related subtasks, such as the planning
of the scene layout, the generation and placement of assets,
and the adjustment of environmental details. However, there
is currently no effective way to manage the execution order
and dependencies of these tasks.
In this paper, we introduce the SceneX framework, con-

Developing comprehensive explicit world models is crucial
for understanding and simulating real-world scenarios. Recently, Procedural Controllable Generation (PCG) has gained
significant attention in large-scale scene generation by enabling the creation of scalable, high-quality assets. However,
PCG faces challenges such as limited modular diversity, high
expertise requirements, and challenges in managing the diverse elements and structures in complex scenes. In this paper, we introduce a large-scale scene generation framework,
SceneX, which can automatically produce high-quality procedural models according to designers’ textual descriptions.
Specifically, the proposed method comprises two components, PCGHub and PCGPlanner. The former encompasses
an extensive collection of accessible procedural assets and
thousands of hand-craft API documents to perform as a standard protocol for PCG controller. The latter aims to generate
executable actions for Blender to produce controllable and
precise 3D assets guided by the user’s instructions. Extensive experiments demonstrated the capability of our method
in controllable large-scale scene generation, including nature
scenes and unbounded cities, as well as scene editing such as
asset placement and season translation.

Code — https://zhouzq1.github.io/SceneX/
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15698

Introduction
In the realm of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), developing comprehensive world models is crucial for understanding and simulating real-world scenarios. Recent
advancements, such as those demonstrated by the Sora
model (Brooks et al. 2024), show progress in capturing
physical laws and generating realistic simulations. However, Sora’s outputs often lack detailed geometry and structured information, limiting their editability and interactivity. To address these limitations, explicit world models pro* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10806

