The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CSSinger: End-to-End Chunkwise Streaming Singing Voice Synthesis System
Based on Conditional Variational Autoencoder
Jianwei Cui1,2 * , Yu Gu2 , Shihao Chen1 , Jie Zhang1 , Liping Chen1 , Lirong Dai1†
1

NERC-SLIP, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China
2
Tencent AI Lab
{jwcui,shchen16}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, colinygu@tencent.com, {jzhang6,lrdai}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

phase. It was shown that the generated synthesized audio by
VITS is highly natural.
Based on VITS, VISinger (Zhang et al. 2022) and
VISinger2 (Zhang et al. 2023) introduce an end-to-end SVS
system with variational inference. By incorporating a duration predictor and a frame prior network, frame-level means
and variances are calculated as acoustic features, facilitating the modeling of rich acoustic variations in singing
and achieving natural vocal performance. SiFiSinger (Cui
et al. 2024), as an extension of VISinger, improves the
pitch control by introducing a source module to generate F0-controlled excitation signals. It decouples acoustic
features from F0 information during modeling, in order
to avoid error propagation when predicting acoustic features. For waveform generation, SiFiSinger continuously integrates F0-modulated excitation signals to provide multiscale pitch guidance during audio synthesis. These can potentially improve the pitch accuracy and naturalness of synthesized singing signals.
The applicability of these high-performing models is still
limited in practice in aspects like computational resources
and latency requirements, particularly in the case of deployment on edge devices and/or online network services with
data transmission in batches. On one hand, these parallel
computation models suffer from a significant computational
strain when processing long sequences. On the other hand,
their real-time performance is not optimal. Under these practical constraints, there is a growing need for handling audio synthesis tasks in a streaming and autoregressive manner. In both acoustic modeling and waveform generation
stages, some research focuses on streaming autoregressive
modeling. For instance, Tacotron2 (Shen et al. 2018) employs Bi-directional Long Short-term Memory (BLSTM) recurrent networks (Schuster and Paliwal 1997; Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997) for acoustic modeling, which suffers from inefficient inference and cannot effectively model
long-term dependencies. Similarly, WaveNet (Oord et al.
2016) introduces an autoregressive approach for waveform
generation but encounters the challenge of slow generation
speeds. WaveRNN (Kalchbrenner et al. 2018) uses a smaller
architecture and weight sparsification to accelerate the generation process without significantly compromising quality.
The WaveRNN is thus more suitable for real-time application, but requires a complex pipeline.

Singing Voice Synthesis (SVS) aims to generate singing
voices of high fidelity and expressiveness. Conventional SVS
systems usually utilize an acoustic model to transform a music score into acoustic features, followed by a vocoder to
reconstruct the singing voice. It was recently shown that
end-to-end modeling is effective in the fields of SVS and
Text to Speech (TTS). In this work, we thus present a fully
end-to-end SVS method together with a chunkwise streaming inference to address the latency issue for practical usages. Note that this is the first attempt to fully implement
end-to-end streaming audio synthesis using latent representations in VAE. We have made specific improvements to enhance the performance of streaming SVS using latent representations. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method achieves synthesized audio with high expressiveness and pitch accuracy in both streaming SVS and TTS
tasks. Synthesized audio samples are available at our demo
webpage.

demos — https://sounddemos.github.io/cssinger

Introduction
Singing Voice Synthesis (SVS) refers to the task of synthesizing high-quality singing voices by taking the music
score in terms of, e.g., lyrics, pitch and duration, as input
(Gu et al. 2021; Nishimura et al. 2016; Hono et al. 2021; Lu
et al. 2020; Hono et al. 2019). Similarly to Text to Speech
(TTS), the SVS system typically consists of two components: an acoustic model and a vocoder. The former is responsible for modeling the music score as acoustic features,
while the vocoder reconstructs the audio waveform using
these acoustic features. In this context, Mel-spectrogram is
the commonly-employed acoustic representation.
Recently, conditional variational autoencoder (VAE) (Ma
et al. 2019; Kingma and Welling 2014) based fully endto-end systems have been proposed for TTS tasks. For example, unlike two-stage systems that independently develop
modules for each stage, VITS (Kim, Kong, and Son 2021)
employs a prior encoder and a posterior encoder to learn latent space representations and directly generate synthetic audio. The entire system is optimized within a unified training
* This work was done at Tencent AI Lab as an internship
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23704

