The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffCalib: Reformulating Monocular Camera Calibration as Diffusion-Based
Dense Incident Map Generation
Xiankang He1,2 * , Guangkai Xu3 * , Bo Zhang3 , Hao Chen3 , Ying Cui1,2 , Dongyan Guo1,2†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
2
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Visual Information Intelligent Processing
3
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
{hexiankang577, guangkai.xu, zhangboknight, stanzju}@gmail.com,
{cuiying, guodongyan}@zjut.edu.cn,
Abstract

on specific objects like checkerboards or human faces (Hu
et al. 2023), and therefore can hardly generalize to diverse
real scenarios. To alleviate the reliance mentioned above,
Zhu (Zhu et al. 2023) introduced an incident field concept, which defines the direction between the 3D point cloud
and the camera’s optical center, allowing intrinsic recovery using a simple RANSAC algorithm (Fischler and Bolles
1981). While this approach shows promising generalization,
it struggles with accurate and confident estimates due to limited training data like the ill-pose property of monocular
depth estimation.
Recently, a series of advanced approaches (Ke et al. 2023;
Xu et al. 2024; Fu et al. 2024) for monocular depth estimation have emerged, which leverage the robust knowledge
priors embedded within Stable Diffusion models. Through
strategic fine-tuning protocols, these methods have demonstrated exceptional capabilities in achieving commendable
zero-shot generalization.
In this paper, motivated by the successful visual knowledge transfer from image generation to depth estimation, as
seen in Marigold, we propose to solve the monocular camera
calibration problem by reformulating it as an incident map
generation task. The incident map details the angle of incidence for each pi‘xel in the RGB image and its format aligns
well with the paradigm of diffusion models. Thus, it can
be learned by properly fine-tuning and enforcing the Stable
Diffusion models. With such design, we can effectively address the community’s focus on the robustness and accuracy
by leveraging the advantages of diffusion models. Specifically, we freeze the VAE encoder and decoder of Stable Diffusion, and fine-tune the U-Net to learn the noise added to
the incident map. It can bring two main advantages: 1) We
prove that the rich visual information of Stable Diffusion
models can benefit not only perception tasks but also the
camera characteristics estimation. 2) By regarding the estimation process as a probabilistic one, the confidence of the
predicted incident map will be increased by de-noising from
different noise maps and ensembling the corresponding results.
Additionally, Yin et al. (Yin et al. 2021) analyzed the connection between camera intrinsic parameters and depth maps
in single-image 3D reconstruction, highlighting their inherent relationship. To enhance performance, we incorporate

Monocular camera calibration is a key precondition for numerous 3D vision applications. Despite considerable advancements, existing methods often hinge on specific assumptions and struggle to generalize across varied real-world
scenarios, and the performance is limited by insufficient training data. Recently, diffusion models trained on expansive
datasets have been confirmed to maintain the capability to
generate diverse, high-quality images. This success suggests
a strong potential of the models to effectively understand varied visual information. In this work, we leverage the comprehensive visual knowledge embedded in pre-trained diffusion
models to enable more robust and accurate monocular camera
intrinsic estimation. Specifically, we reformulate the problem
of estimating the four degrees of freedom (4-DoF) of camera
intrinsic parameters as a dense incident map generation task.
The map details the angle of incidence for each pixel in the
RGB image, and its format aligns well with the paradigm of
diffusion models. The camera intrinsic can then be derived
from the incident map with a simple non-learning RANSAC
algorithm during inference. Moreover, to further enhance the
performance, we jointly estimate a depth map to provide extra
geometric information for the incident map estimation. Extensive experiments on multiple testing datasets demonstrate
that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance, gaining
up to a 40% reduction in prediction errors. Besides, the experiments also show that the precise camera intrinsic and depth
maps estimated by our pipeline can greatly benefit practical
applications such as 3D reconstruction from a single in-thewild image.

Introduction
Monocular camera calibration (Zhu et al. 2023; Jin et al.
2022; Hold-Geoffroy et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2020) aims to
estimate the intrinsic properties of a camera from a single image, which is important for many downstream tasks
of 3D scene reconstruction and understanding, as well as
other visual applications (Zhang et al. 2020a,b). Existing
methods often rely on geometric principles like Manhattan
world assumption (Coughlan and Yuille 1999), or are based
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3428

