The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoDTS: Enhancing Sparsely Supervised Collaborative Perception
with a Dual Teacher-Student Framework
Yushan Han, Hui Zhang, Honglei Zhang, Jing Wang, Yidong Li*
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation (Beijing Jiaotong University), Ministry of Education
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
{21112034, huizhang1, honglei.zhang, jing w, ydli}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

intensive and time-consuming. For example, in the case
of LiDAR-based 3D object detection, it takes more than
100 seconds (Song, Lichtenberg, and Xiao 2015; Meng
et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2022b) to annotate a precise 3D
bounding box for individual perception datasets such as
KITTI (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012) and Waymo (Sun
et al. 2020). Since collaborative perception involves multiple agents, the annotation cost becomes several times higher
than that of individual perception. Moreover, the annotation
of collaborative perception requires aligning shared objects
across multiple agents, which increases annotation complexity. Therefore, the data annotation significantly impedes the
practical application of collaborative perception.
To address the above high-cost issue, an alternative approach is sparsely supervised learning, where only one object per agent in each frame is randomly annotated, as shown
in Figure 1(b). To mine missing instances, the current mainstream methods (Han et al. 2023b; Xia et al. 2024) primarily
adopt a teacher-student framework. Specifically, SSC3OD
(Han et al. 2023b) proposes a self-supervised learning approach to pre-train the teacher model. Then, it utilizes a
static teacher-student framework to produce high-quality
pseudo labels using high thresholds. HINTED (Xia et al.
2024) adopts a dynamic teacher-student framework, where
the teacher mainly relies on high-level pseudo labels and
a mixed-density student is incorporated to ensure that the
model prioritizes hard instances. While these methods improve performance to a certain degree, the detection performance under sparse supervision still lags significantly behind that of full supervision. We argue that these methods
primarily focus on the quality of pseudo labels, overlooking
their quantity, thus resulting in suboptimal solutions.
Specifically, traditional teacher-student frameworks often
employ higher thresholds to derive high-quality pseudo labels. However, varying threshold levels present unique benefits. As illustrated in Figure 1 (c)-(g), a lower threshold
may capture the majority of foreground objects (low MPR)
but at the expense of introducing substantial background
noises (high FPR). In contrast, a higher threshold can ensure that the selection primarily includes foreground objects
(low FPR) but may result in the loss of important foreground
details (high MPR). Consequently, how to find an optimal
confidence threshold that balances the quality and quantity
of pseudo labels remains a formidable challenge.

Current collaborative perception methods often rely on fully
annotated datasets, which can be expensive to obtain in practical situations. To reduce annotation costs, some works adopt
sparsely supervised learning techniques and generate pseudo
labels for the missing instances. However, these methods
fail to achieve an optimal confidence threshold that harmonizes the quality and quantity of pseudo labels. To address this issue, we propose an end-to-end Collaborative perception Dual Teacher-Student framework (CoDTS), which
employs adaptive complementary learning to produce both
high-quality and high-quantity pseudo labels. Specifically,
the Main Foreground Mining (MFM) module generates highquality pseudo labels based on the prediction of the static
teacher. Subsequently, the Supplement Foreground Mining
(SFM) module ensures a balance between the quality and
quantity of pseudo labels by adaptively identifying missing
instances based on the prediction of the dynamic teacher. Additionally, the Neighbor Anchor Sampling (NAS) module is
incorporated to enhance the representation of pseudo labels.
To promote the adaptive complementary learning, we implement a staged training strategy that trains the student and dynamic teacher in a mutually beneficial manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the CoDTS effectively ensures an
optimal balance of pseudo labels in both quality and quantity, establishing a new state-of-the-art in sparsely supervised
collaborative perception.

Introduction
Multi-agent collaborative perception (Han et al. 2023a)
can enhance the perception capabilities of vehicles in
autonomous driving scenarios, such as vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V), vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I), and vehicle-toeverything (V2X) interactions. As an emerging research, recent works have contributed valuable datasets, efficient communication mechanisms, and effective fusion techniques.
Additionally, several pioneer approaches aim to address
practical challenges like localization errors, communication
latency and model heterogeneity.
However, classic collaborative perception methods often
depend on fully annotated datasets. Despite their considerable performance, they are challenged by being labor* Corresponding author (ydli@bjtu.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3366

