The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Learning with Sample-level Client Drift Mitigation
Haoran Xu1 * , Jiaze Li1 * , Wanyi Wu2 , Hao Ren3†
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Shandong University, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
xhaoran@zju.edu.cn, Jiaze Li@zju.edu.cn,
wanyi wu@mail.sdu.edu.cn, hao.ren@scu.edu.cn
Abstract

independent (Non-IID) data—substantially deteriorating the
performance of the obtained global model.
Many approaches have been devoted to addressing the
data heterogeneity problem of FL. One of the representative categories is to consider that the essence of performance
degradation is due to the client drift caused by the data heterogeneity where the local updates of each client greatly
deviate from the aggregated global one (Karimireddy et al.
2020; Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022; Li and Zhan 2021;
Gao et al. 2022; Louizos, Reisser, and Korzhenkov 2024). To
mitigate this drift, many methods are proposed to calibrate
the local update from the perspective of optimization (Gao
et al. 2022; Karimireddy et al. 2020). For example, some
methods leverages the difference between the local update
and the global update in old rounds to compensate the local
update in current round (Karimireddy et al. 2020; Gao et al.
2022) and other works add regularization on the local loss
function to facilitate the local update to approach the global
one (Zhang et al. 2022; Li and Zhan 2021; Louizos, Reisser,
and Korzhenkov 2024). Besides a few works explore different aggregation strategies on the server (Chan et al. 2024).
Although these approaches have made great achievements, they lack a deep understanding of how the heterogeneous data samples contribute to the formation of client
drift.
In this paper, we seek to tackle the Non-IID challenge of
FL from the sample level by delving into the impact of each
local sample on the drift of local update. Specifically, we
identify that there exists substantial bias in each sample
and the client drift can be viewed as a cumulative manifestation of the biases of all samples. Besides, the bias between samples is different from each other where the sample
with large loss is considered to have a relatively large impact
on the client drift. Also, we find that the bias of each sample
dynamically changes during the FL training process.
Motivated by this finding, we propose a simple yet effective method, FedBSS, which includes two stages: Diversified knowledge acquisition stage and Progressive knowledge
learning stage. The diversified knowledge acquisition phase
acts as a model’s cold start, warming it up by introducing
varied knowledge through standard aggregation techniques.
This step prevents early-stage deviations caused by limited
knowledge scope, essentially initializing the global model
with a diverse set of preliminary information guided by the

Federated Learning (FL) suffers from severe performance
degradation due to the data heterogeneity among clients. Existing works reveal that the fundamental reason is that data
heterogeneity can cause client drift where the local model
update deviates from the global one, and thus they usually
tackle this problem from the perspective of calibrating the
obtained local update. Despite effectiveness, existing methods substantially lack a deep understanding of how heterogeneous data samples contribute to the formation of client drift.
In this paper, we bridge this gap by identifying that the drift
can be viewed as a cumulative manifestation of biases present
in all local samples and the bias between samples is different. Besides, the bias dynamically changes as the FL training
progresses. Motivated by this, we propose FedBSS that first
mitigates the heterogeneity issue in a sample-level manner,
orthogonal to existing methods. Specifically, the core idea of
our method is to adopt a bias-aware sample selection scheme
that dynamically selects the samples from small biases to
large epoch by epoch to train progressively the local model
in each round. In order to ensure the stability of training, we
set the diversified knowledge acquisition stage as the warmup stage to avoid the local optimality caused by knowledge
deviation in the early stage of the model. Evaluation results
show that FedBSS outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. In
addition, we also achieved effective results on feature distribution skew and noise label dataset setting, which proves that
FedBSS can not only reduce heterogeneity, but also has scalability and robustness.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL), which enables collaborative training of models by sharing parameters among clients without
exchanging raw data, has garnered significant attention for
its ability to leverage vast amounts of data on clients while
preserving privacy. The basic steps of FL are to iteratively
execute local model training on multiple clients individually
and subsequently aggregate all updated models at the server.
Despite its implementation simplicity, the challenge arises
from the inherently heterogeneous distribution of FL’s training data across clients—characterized by non-identical and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21752

