The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HiPoser: 3D Human Pose Estimation with Hierarchical Shared Learning
at Parts-Level Using Inertial Measurement Units
Guorui Liao1 , Chunyuan Zheng2 , Li Cheng3 , Haoyu Xie1 , Shanshan Huang1 , Jun Liao1 ,
Haoxuan Li4 , Li Liu1, *
1

School of Big Data & Software Engineering, Chongqing University, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Canada
4
Center for Data Science, Peking University, China
{guoruiliao,haoyuxie}@stu.cqu.edu.cn, {cyzheng,hxli}@stu.pku.edu.cn, lcheng5@ualberta.ca,
{shanshanhuang,liaojun,dcsliuli}@cqu.edu.cn
Task 4

Abstract

X

Z

This paper considers the challenging problem of 3D Human
Pose Estimation (HPE) from a sparse set of Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs). Existing efforts typically reconstruct a
pose sequence by either directly tackling whole-body motions or focusing on distinctive spatio-temporal features of local body parts. Unfortunately, these methods ignore existing
interdependent motor synergies amongst body parts, which
may lead to pose estimation with ambiguous local parts. This
observation motivates us to propose a hierarchical learningbased approach, HiPoser, which utilizes a hierarchical shared
structure using Mamba blocks as the backbone to focus on
the following estimation tasks, involving: 1) torso pose, 2)
lower limbs pose, 3) upper limbs pose, and finally 4) global
translation. These tasks selectively incorporate body motion
states and are to be carried out sequentially in reconstructing
part-based poses, which are amalgamated to estimate the final
full-body pose with the global translation that satisfies interpart consistencies. Our hierarchical structure allows HiPoser
the flexibility in prioritizing different aspects of pose estimation, to emphasize more on detail or stability. Empirical evaluations over three benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of HiPoser over existing state-of-the-art models, suggesting that analyzing the synergistic movement of body parts
is indeed important for advancing IMU-based 3D HPE.

Global
Translation

X
Z

Y

All Parts Information
Upper Limbs Information
Lower Limbs Information
Torso Information

IMU

Task Head

Task 3

Task 2

Mamba Block

Upper Limbs
Pose

Lower Limbs
Pose

Mamba Block

Y

Task Head
Task 1

Task Head
Information
Flowing

Hierarchical
Shared
Structure

Mamba Block

Torso Pose
Task Head

Mamba Block

Motion States

Figure 1: An overview of our Mamba-based hierarchical
shared learning approach, which decomposes 3D HPE into
four tasks, each focusing on a specific body part motion.
By facilitating the flowing of body parts motion information among different tasks and incorporating motion states,
our approach is empirically shown to produce stable results.

Measurement Units (IMUs) (Mollyn et al. 2023), are virtually unaffected by environmental factors like object occlusion, poor lighting, and space constraints. Additionally, they
provide privacy protection for the user.
Early works (Von Marcard et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2018;
Jiang et al. 2022a) attempted to achieve whole-body pose
reconstruction using a sparse IMUs configuration to capture
dynamic human motion information have proven to be challenging. Other complex network models (Yi, Zhou, and Xu
2021; Yi et al. 2022) achieved acceptable performance of
whole-body pose estimation and found that the information
on the leaf joints is beneficial for reconstructing the human
pose. However, the contribution of articulated leaf joints located in different limbs remains ambiguous.
The latest work (Zhang et al. 2024a) aimed to address
these ambiguities by classifying the leaf joints into three
parts: torso, lower limbs, and upper limbs, and achieved
state-of-the-art (SOTA) results. Nevertheless, their modeling may lead to negative motion information transfer among

Introduction
3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) is the process of determining the human joint positions in a three-dimensional coordinate system using motion signals. It is crucial in various real-world applications, including somatosensory gaming (Lai, Lu, and Bi 2024), competitive sports (Tanaka et al.
2023), medical rehabilitation (Gu et al. 2023), and emergency rescue (Yogesh et al. 2023). These applications require the analysis of human pose transformations (Zheng
et al. 2023; Desmarais et al. 2021). In capturing motion signals, compared to vision sensors (Li et al. 2023; Li, Liu, and
Wu 2023; Jiang et al. 2025) and environmental sensors (Lee
et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023), wearable sensors, like Inertial
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14309

