The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

E CO S EARCH: A No-delay Best-First Search Algorithm for Program Synthesis
Théo Matricon1 , Nathanaël Fijalkow1 , Guillaume Lagarde2
1

2

LaBRI, CNRS, France,
LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, France,

Abstract

models, while B USTLE (Odena et al. 2021) leverages probabilistic methods for defining a heuristic cost function. Very
recently, LLMs have been used for guiding combinatorial
search (Li, Parsert, and Polgreen 2024; Li and Ellis 2024).
Best-first search algorithms explore the space in the exact order induced by the cost function: this significantly reduces the portion of the program space to be explored. Since
E UPHONY (Alur, Radhakrishna, and Udupa 2017)’s use of
A∗ algorithm, several best-first search algorithms have been
constructed (Shi, Bieber, and Singh 2022; Ellis et al. 2021;
Fijalkow et al. 2022; Ameen and Lelis 2023).
The major issue of best-first search algorithms is that they
slow down over time. This is because in order to ensure optimality they need to consider a growing frontier of potentially next-to-be-generated programs in their data structures,
which quickly become enormous. The notion of delay captures this behaviour: it quantifies the amount of compute
required between outputting two programs. The first bestfirst search algorithm had linear delay (Alur, Radhakrishna,
and Udupa 2017), and the state of the art algorithms achieve
logarithmic delay (Fijalkow et al. 2022; Ameen and Lelis
2023): the compute required between outputting the tth and
the (t + 1)th program is bounded by O(log(t)).
The fundamental question explored in this paper is
whether there exist best-first search algorithms with
constant delay, also called “no-delay”. We answer this
question positively by constructing the first constant-delay
best-first search algorithm called E CO S EARCH for pregeneration cost function. Importantly, E CO S EARCH performs a bottom-up search, which implies that it can take
advantage of classical observational equivalence techniques.
Technically, E CO S EARCH relies on the “cost tuple representation” introduced in (Ameen and Lelis 2023). A key
novelty of E CO S EARCH is a new frugal expansion built
on top of the one introduced in that paper, which ensures
that it only considers programs when they need to be evaluated. Combined with novel data structures it enables E CO
S EARCH to achieve constant delay.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of E CO S EARCH in two
classic domains: the DeepCoder (Balog et al. 2017) domain of integer list manipulations and in the FlashFill (Gulwani 2011) domain of string manipulations. In our experiments, E CO S EARCH solves twice as many tasks in the same
amount of time than previous methods. To summarize, our

Many approaches to program synthesis perform a combinatorial search within a large space of programs to find one
that satisfies a given specification. To tame the search space
blowup, previous works introduced probabilistic and neural
approaches to guide this combinatorial search by inducing
heuristic cost functions. Best-first search algorithms ensure
to search in the exact order induced by the cost function, significantly reducing the portion of the program space to be explored. We present a new best-first search algorithm called
E CO S EARCH, which is the first constant-delay algorithm for
pre-generation cost function: the amount of compute required
between outputting two programs is constant, and in particular does not increase over time. This key property yields important speedups: we observe that E CO S EARCH outperforms
its predecessors on two classic domains.

Code — https://github.com/SynthesisLab/DeepSynth2/tree/
eco search aaai
Extended version —
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.17330

1

Introduction

Program synthesis is one of the oldest dream of Artificial Intelligence: it automates problem solving by generating a program meeting a given specification (Manna and Waldinger
1971; Gulwani, Polozov, and Singh 2017). A very classical
scenario for user-based program synthesis, known as programming by example (PBE), uses input output examples
as specification. For PBE, combinatorial search for program
synthesis has been an especially popular technique (Alur,
Radhakrishna, and Udupa 2017; Balog et al. 2017; Alur et al.
2018; Shi, Steinhardt, and Liang 2019; Barke, Peleg, and
Polikarpova 2020; Zohar and Wolf 2018; Ellis et al. 2021;
Odena et al. 2021; Fijalkow et al. 2022; Shi, Bieber, and
Singh 2022; Shi et al. 2022; Ameen and Lelis 2023).
To scale combinatorial search for program synthesis,
many approaches rely on defining a heuristic cost function
assigning to every program a numerical value, such that the
programs with least scores are the most likely to satisfy the
specification. For example, DeepCoder (Balog et al. 2017)
and TF-Coder (Shi, Bieber, and Singh 2022) use neural
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19432

