The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PhysDiff: Physiology-based Dynamicity Disentangled Diffusion Model
for Remote Physiological Measurement
Wei Qian1 * , Gaoji Su1 * , Dan Guo1,2† ,
Jinxing Zhou , Xiaobai Li3 , Bin Hu4 , Shengeng Tang1 , Meng Wang1,2
1

1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University
qianwei.hfut@gmail.com, sugaojix@gmail.com, guodan@hfut.edu.cn
Abstract

Recent works on remote PhotoPlethysmoGraphy (rPPG) estimation typically use techniques like CNNs and Transformers
to encode implicit features from facial videos for prediction.
These methods learn to directly map facial videos to the static
values of rPPG signals, overlooking the inherent dynamic
characteristics of rPPG sequence. Moreover, the rPPG signal
is extremely weak and highly susceptible to interference from
various sources of noise, including illumination conditions,
head movements, and variations in skin tone. To address these
limitations, we propose a Physiology-based dynamicity disentangled diffusion (PhysDiff) model particularly designed
for robust rPPG estimation. PhysDiff leverages the diffusion
model to learn the distribution of quasi-periodic rPPG signal and uses a dynamicity disentanglement strategy to capture two dynamic characteristics in temporal rPPG signal, i.e.,
trend and amplitude. This disentanglement is motivated by
the underlying dynamic physiological processes of vasodilation and vasoconstriction, ensuring a more precise representation of the rPPG signal. The disentangled components
are then used as pivotal conditions in the proposed spatialtemporal hybrid denoiser for rPPG reconstruction. Besides,
we introduce a periodicity-based multi-hypothesis selection
strategy in model inference, which compares the natural periodicity of multiple generated rPPG hypotheses and selects the
most favorable one as the final prediction. Extensive experiments on four datasets demonstrate that our PhysDiff significantly outperforms prior methods on both intra-dataset and
cross-dataset testing.

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the skin reflection model and
the physiological dynamics of the rPPG signal. The blood
vessels in the facial skin absorb some light and reflect the
rest, which is captured by a camera. As the heartbeat pumps
blood, the contraction and relaxation of blood vessels alter
the amount of light absorbed, generating variations in the
rPPG signal. (b) Our physiology-based dynamicity disentangled strategy. We disentangle the static rPPG signal into
two dynamic components: trend, indicating the direction of
blood volume change, and amplitude, representing the magnitude of these changes.

by changes in blood volume in the capillaries, which are
synchronized with the heartbeat (Verkruysse 2008; Li et al.
2014). Due to its convenience and non-intrusion nature,
rPPG-based physiological measurement has garnered increasing attention in the fields of driver monitoring (Huang,
Wu, and Wu 2020), atrial fibrillation screening (Liu et al.
2022), and face anti-spoofing (Yu et al. 2021a).
Early studies primarily analyze the subtle skin color
changes with traditional signal processing algorithms, such
as blind source separation (Lam and Kuno 2015; Poh,
McDuff, and Picard 2010) and color space transformation (De Haan and Jeanne 2013; Wang et al. 2016). Recently,
with the success of deep learning (Li, Guo, and Wang 2023;
Zhou, Guo, and Wang 2023; Guo et al. 2024; Wang et al.
2024a) for its strong model ability, several deep learningbased methods (Niu et al. 2020; Lu, Han, and Zhou 2021; Yu

Code — https://github.com/VUT-HFUT/PhysDiff

Introduction
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) has emerged as a
promising technique for estimating physiological signals,
such as heart rate (HR), heart rate variability (HRV), and
respiration frequency (RF) (Li et al. 2018). Unlike traditional contact-based methods, rPPG offers a non-invasive
solution by capturing subtle variations in skin color caused
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6568

