The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Planning from Imagination: Episodic Simulation and
Episodic Memory for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Yiyuan Pan1 , Yunzhe Xu2 , Zhe Liu2 * , Hesheng Wang1
1

2

Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{pyy030406, xyz9911, liuzhesjtu, wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Humans navigate unfamiliar environments using episodic
simulation and episodic memory, which facilitate a deeper
understanding of the complex relationships between environments and objects. Developing an imaginative memory system inspired by human mechanisms can enhance the navigation performance of embodied agents in unseen environments. However, existing Vision-and-Language Navigation
(VLN) agents lack a memory mechanism of this kind. To address this, we propose a novel architecture that equips agents
with a reality-imagination hybrid memory system. This system enables agents to maintain and expand their memory
through both imaginative mechanisms and navigation actions. Additionally, we design tailored pre-training tasks to
develop the agent’s imaginative capabilities. Our agent can
imagine high-fidelity RGB images for future scenes, achieving state-of-the-art results in a Success rate weighted by Path
Length (SPL).

1

Figure 1: Humans utilize episodic memory and episodic
simulation to recall past experiences and predict future outcomes in unfamiliar environments. In contrast, navigation
agents often struggle in unseen environments due to their inability to construct and leverage such cognitive frameworks.

Introduction

Autonomous embodied agent navigation is advancing
through Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) research
(Anderson et al. 2018b; Qi et al. 2020). In VLN tasks, an
agent needs to reach the target location given navigation instructions. This task, however, is more challenging when
agents navigate in unseen environments, with performance
degradation compared to seen environments.
Human navigation behaviors in unfamiliar environments
provide valuable insights, particularly through the neuroscience concepts of episodic simulation and memory (Kühn
and Gallinat 2014; Gomez, Rousset, and Baciu 2009), which
may help address this challenge. These mechanisms enable
humans to use memory to mentally simulate uncertain information or scenes, aiding decision-making. Humans can
imagine fine-grained visual features (e.g., RGB images) and
higher-level spatial structures (e.g., location distributions) in
unseen environments (Tang, Yan, and Tan 2017). As illustrated in Figure 1, given an instruction like “go to the laundry room”, humans might imagine a room with washing machines, likely adjacent to a bathroom encountered earlier, using such mental simulations to infer navigation directions.

While existing approaches have incorporated mechanisms
for imagining unseen environments, they lack the ability
to integrate the imagined results into time-series persistent
memory. Specifically, This prevents the formation of longterm episodic simulations, which is essential for effective
navigation (Wang et al. 2023a; An et al. 2023). Current
methods enable agents to predict potential object locations
(An et al. 2024) and RGB features (Moudgil et al. 2021; Qi
et al. 2021), but these predictions are transient and overwritten at each step, precluding durable memory representations.
Such limitations hinder agents from fusing visual and contextual information to support future reasoning or decisionmaking. For instance, in Figure 1, an agent’s inability to infer the presence of spice bottles from contextual cues such
as a knife and fork illustrates the shortcomings of existing
mechanisms. Consequently, these methods produce isolated
and short-lived imaginative outputs, lacking the continuity
and compositional depth characteristic of human episodic
memory and simulation.
In this paper, we introduce the Space-Aware Long-term
Imaginer (SALI) agent, the first navigation agent explicitly designed to emulate human-like episodic simulation and
memory. SALI leverages an imaginative memory system
to capture both high-level spatial structures of the environ-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6345

