The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CP-DETR: Concept Prompt Guide DETR Toward Stronger
Universal Object Detection
Qibo Chen* , Weizhong Jin, Jianyue Ge, Mengdi Liu, Yuchao Yan, Jian Jiang, Li Yu, Xuanjiang
Guo, Shuchang Li, Jianzhong Chen
China Mobile(Zhejiang) Research & Innovation Institute
chenqibo@zj.chinamobile.com

Abstract

tasks, universal object detection with zero-shot is achieved
by modifying the textual descriptions of objects.
While using text prompts has been primarily favored in
universal detection, they suffer from sub-optimal performance in downstream applications, where universal detectors fail to compete with specialist models in many scenarios
and categories outside of pre-training. A significant factor is
the matching deficiency, where the detector produces mismatched results with the text description. This deficiency
arises from alignment mistakes between language and visual representations in pre-training, and there are both objective and subjective aspects to this bias. Objectively, text
descriptions follow a long-tailed pattern and different descriptions can refer to the same image region, so it is impractical to align all the texts and image regions accurately
during pre-training. Subjectively, it is difficult for users to
accurately describe complex objects, such as specific mechanical devices, through language. Most works (Kamath
et al. 2021; Minderer et al. 2022; Minderer, Gritsenko, and
Houlsby 2023; Yao et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024) have been
devoted to constructing larger pre-train datasets to address
the alignment problems, but this requires significant costs.
Another factor is the paradigm of utilizing prompt information. The work (Li et al. 2022b) has shown that the
early fusion paradigm performs significantly better than
the late fusion paradigm after eliminating alignment bias
through prompt tuning in the downstream tasks. Late fusion paradigms (Li et al. 2019) only use prompt vectors in
the classification part, the location dependent on pre-training
data distributions, which is poor in utilizing prompt information. In contrast, the early fusion paradigm (Liu et al. 2023)
has an additional cross-modal fusion phase. It is easy to observe that the success of the early fusion paradigm lies in the
cross-modal information interaction through fusion, where
visual features are updated based on prompt information,
and both classification and localization can be generalized
in downstream scenes through prompt information. Therefore, we believe that a key to improving the performance of
universal detection lies in achieving effective cross-modal
interaction between prompt and visual.
In this paper, our research is interested in constructing
a strong universal detector that not only has superior zeroshot capability but also competes with specific models in all
downstream tasks through a model weight. For this, we pro-

Recent research on universal object detection aims to introduce language in a SoTA closed-set detector and then generalize the open-set concepts by constructing large-scale (textregion) datasets for training. However, these methods face
two main challenges: (i) how to efficiently use the prior
information in the prompts to genericise objects and (ii)
how to reduce alignment bias in the downstream tasks, both
leading to sub-optimal performance in some scenarios beyond pre-training. To address these challenges, we propose
a strong universal detection foundation model called CPDETR, which is competitive in almost all scenarios, with
only one pre-training weight. Specifically, we design an efficient prompt visual hybrid encoder that enhances the information interaction between prompt and visual through scaleby-scale and multi-scale fusion modules. Then, the hybrid
encoder is facilitated to fully utilize the prompted information by prompt multi-label loss and auxiliary detection head.
In addition to text prompts, we have designed two practical
concept prompt generation methods, visual prompt and optimized prompt, to extract abstract concepts through concrete
visual examples and stably reduce alignment bias in downstream tasks. With these effective designs, CP-DETR demonstrates superior universal detection performance in a broad
spectrum of scenarios. For example, our Swin-T backbone
model achieves 47.6 zero-shot AP on LVIS, and the Swin-L
backbone model achieves 32.2 zero-shot AP on ODinW35.
Furthermore, our visual prompt generation method achieves
68.4 AP on COCO val by interactive detection, and the optimized prompt achieves 73.1 fully-shot AP on ODinW13.

Introduction
Universal object detection aims to detect objects of any category in any scene with one model weight. The trend in research is to incorporate language modality, where textual
descriptions of objects are encoded as text prompt vectors
through language model (Devlin et al. 2018; Radford et al.
2021), and the classification results are represented by the
similarity between the vectors and the image regions. This
flexible conceptual representation allows different object detection data to be trained jointly, aligning textual descriptions with visual representations. Ultimately, in downstream
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2141

