The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FlowMamba: Learning Point Cloud Scene Flow with Global Motion Propagation
Min Lin1 , Gangwei Xu2 , Yun Wang2 , Xianqi Wang1 , Xin Yang2,3 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Smart Internet Technology, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
{minlin, gwxu, wangyun, xianqiw, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene flow methods based on deep learning have achieved
impressive performance. However, current top-performing
methods still struggle with ill-posed regions, such as extensive
flat regions or occlusions, due to insufficient local evidence.
In this paper, we propose a novel global-aware scene flow
estimation network with global motion propagation, named
FlowMamba. The core idea of FlowMamba is a novel Iterative
Unit based on the State Space Model (ISU), which first propagates global motion patterns and then adaptively integrates
the global motion information with previously hidden states.
As the irregular nature of point clouds limits the performance
of ISU in global motion propagation, we propose a featureinduced ordering strategy (FIO). The FIO leverages semanticrelated and motion-related features to order points into a sequence characterized by spatial continuity. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of FlowMamba, with
21.9% and 20.5% EPE3D reduction from the best published
results on FlyingThings3D and KITTI datasets. Specifically,
our FlowMamba is the first method to achieve millimeter-level
prediction accuracy in FlyingThings3D and KITTI. Furthermore, the proposed ISU can be seamlessly embedded into
existing iterative networks as a plug-and-play module, improving their estimation accuracy significantly.

Figure 1: Left: Comparison with state-of-the-art scene flow
methods (Liu et al. 2024a; Cheng and Ko 2023; Wang et al.
2023a; Fu et al. 2023; Cheng and Ko 2022; Wang et al.
2022) on FlyingThings3D and KITTI. Notably, we achieved
millimeter-level precision on both datasets for the first time.
Right: Comparison with the accuracy of each layer output
on FlyingThings3D. Our FlowMamba can achieve superior
results from the coarsest level. In practical applications, adjusting the number of levels and iterations allows for a tradeoff between efficiency and accuracy.

constraining the scene flow to exhibit rigid motion within a
local region (Li et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023a). However,
both methods are limited by the local information available
within a small operational window, focusing primarily on
local evidence. While local evidence becomes inadequate
for recovering hidden motion, it severely reduces the performance of current state-of-the-art methods. Recent studies,
such as the work by Lu et al. (Lu and Cheng 2023), have
investigated the use of non-local approaches to model longrange dependencies between local descriptors, aiming to address the issue of insufficient local evidence. While these
approaches help to some extent, they still tend to fail because
a severe lack of geometric structure significantly diminishes
the representational power of local descriptors.
A potential solution to tackle local ambiguity is to utilize
global interpretations, such as learning global relationships
through Transformers (Zhang et al. 2024b). However, the
quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism imposes significant computational demands and hinders inference speed.
Motivated by recent studies (Liu et al. 2024b; Zhang et al.
2024a; Liang et al. 2024) that apply structured state space

Introduction
Scene flow estimation is the task of calculating threedimensional motion fields from consecutive frames with
various downstream applications, e.g., autonomous driving (Teng et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2022, 2023b), robotic manipulation (Seita et al. 2023), augmented reality (Wang et al.
2023b), etc. Nowadays, scene flow estimation still faces many
challenges such as in flat regions, slender structures, or occlusions. These areas can be broadly defined as ill-posed
areas: regions with insufficient or even missing geometric
features. Such regions pose apparent challenges in predicting
scene flow, as they introduce considerable local ambiguity
and unreliable point correspondences between frames.
Earlier approaches address the challenge areas by employing neighboring points to recover motion. This can be
achieved by using CNNs to learn the relationships between
neighboring points (Wu et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022) or by
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5271

