The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Graph Consistency and Diversity Measurement for
Federated Multi-View Clustering
Bohang Sun1 , Yongjian Deng1 , Yuena Lin1,2 , Qiuru Hai1 , Zhen Yang1 , Gengyu Lyu1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
2
Idealism Beijing Technology Co., Ltd.
sunbohang@emails.bjut.edu.cn, yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn, yuenalin@126.com, haiqiuru@emails.bjut.edu.cn,
yangzhen@bjut.edu.cn, lyugengyu@gmail.com
Abstract

across different institutions since the data privacy is being
emphasized. Under such conditions, traditional multi-view
learning methods lose their capability to effectively conduct cross-source information fusion and can not comprehensively represent the feature properties of each individual
person.
The key to learn from such sensitive multi-view data lies
in how to fuse these heterogeneous cross-source features efficiently while preserve the data secrecy of each independent data source. Recently, federated multi-view learning
provides an effective solution, which deploys the multi-view
clustering method into federated learning framework and
fuses these multi-source feature information into a consistency representation for subsequent clustering. For instance,
(Huang et al. 2022) proposed a matrix decomposition based
method, which orthogonally decomposes the view-specific
sample matrix in each client into a basis matrix and a representation matrix and then the representation matrix is uploaded to the sever to mine cross-view consistency for clustering. (Chen et al. 2023) proposed a deep neural network
based method, which generates view-specific latent representation by using deep autoencoder in each client and then
uploads these representations to the sever to mine cross-view
consistency. However, the above federated multi-view clustering methods suffer from some common limitations: (1)
All of the above methods leverage cross-view fusion on the
latent feature representations uploaded by the clients, which
is easily susceptible to model inversion attacks (Sun et al.
2021). (2) These methods only consider cross-view consistencies while the view-specific diversities are regrettably ignored, which naturally results in a suboptimal performance
for the final clustering.
To address the above issues, in this paper, we propose a
novel structural graph learning framework for multi-view
clustering named MGCD, which leverages both consistency and diversity of multi-view graph structure across
global view-fusion server and local view-specific clients to
achieve desired clustering while better preserves data privacy. Specifically, in each local client, we first design a dual
autoencoder to extract the consensus and specific representations of samples respectively, where the two representations
can jointly recover the original data to prevent deviation. Afterwards, a unique self-representation reconstruction is introduced to generate diversity graph that represents latent

Federated Multi-View Clustering (FMVC) aims to learn a
global clustering model from heterogeneous data distributed
across different devices, where each device only stores one
view of all clustering samples. The key to deal with such
problem lies in how to effectively fuse these heterogeneous
samples while strictly preserve the data privacy across multiple devices. In this paper, we propose a novel structural
graph learning framework named MGCD, which leverages
both consistency and diversity of multi-view graph structure across global view-fusion server and local view-specific
clients to achieve desired clustering while better preserves
data privacy. Specifically, in each local client, we design a
dual autoencoder to extract the latent consensuses and specificities of each view, where self-representation construction
is introduced to generate the corresponding view-specific diversity graph. In the global server, the consistency implied in
uploaded diversity graphs are further distilled and then incorporated into the consistency graph for subsequent cross-view
contrastive fusion. During the training process, the server
generates a global consistency graph and distributes it to each
client for assisting in diversity graph construction, while the
clients extract view-specific information and upload it to the
server for more reliable consistency graph generation. The
“server-client” interaction is conducted in an iterative manner, where the consistency implied in each local client is gradually aggregated into the global consistency graph, and the
final clustering results are obtained by spectral clustering on
the desired global consistency graph. Extensive experiments
on various datasets have demonstrated the effectiveness of
our proposed method on clustering federated multi-view data.

Introduction
Multi-view data is usually collected from multiple sources,
which is represented by several heterogeneous features. For
instance, in personal cyber behavioral analysis, diversified
individual information are collected from different network
platforms and retained in their associated institutions. If we
want to give a reliable analysis results, we need to comprehensively consider all personal information held by different
institutions. However, in the practical scenarios, these individual sensitive information are prohibited to be exchanged
* Gengyu Lyu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20663

