The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CAPrompt: Cyclic Prompt Aggregation for Pre-Trained Model Based
Class Incremental Learning
Qiwei Li, Jiahuan Zhou*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
{lqw, jiahuanzhou}@pku.edu.cn

Existing
Methods

Abstract
Recently, prompt tuning methods for pre-trained models have
demonstrated promising performance in Class Incremental
Learning (CIL). These methods typically involve learning
task-specific prompts and predicting the task ID to select
the appropriate prompts for inference. However, inaccurate
task ID predictions can cause severe inconsistencies between
the prompts used during training and inference, leading to
knowledge forgetting and performance degradation. Additionally, existing prompt tuning methods rely solely on the
pre-trained model to predict task IDs, without fully leveraging the knowledge embedded in the learned prompt parameters, resulting in inferior prediction performance. To address
these issues, we propose a novel Cyclic Prompt Aggregation
(CAPrompt) method that eliminates the dependency on task
ID prediction by cyclically aggregating the knowledge from
different prompts. Specifically, rather than predicting task
IDs, we introduce an innovative prompt aggregation strategy
during both training and inference to overcome prompt inconsistency by utilizing a weighted sum of different prompts.
Thorough theoretical analysis demonstrates that under concave conditions, the aggregated prompt achieves lower error
compared to selecting a single task-specific prompt. Consequently, we incorporate a concave constraint and a linear constraint to guide prompt learning, ensuring compliance with
the concave condition requirement. Furthermore, to fully exploit the prompts and achieve more accurate prompt weights,
we develop a cyclic weight prediction strategy. This strategy
begins with equal weights for each task and automatically
adjusts them to more appropriate values in a cyclical manner. Experiments on various datasets demonstrate that our
proposed CAPrompt outperforms state-of-the-art methods by
2%-3%.

Ours

𝜙"

𝜙$ …

𝜙#

𝜙

Query-Key
Matching

Pre-Trained ViT

Classifier

𝜙"

𝜙$ …

First Forward
Second Forward

…

𝜙#
Task Weight

Initial Weight
" "
"
, # , …, #
#

Task m

…

𝜙
Pre-Trained ViT

Classifier

…

Figure 1: Most existing prompt-based methods (Dualprompt) predict task ID during inference which may cause
inconsistency between the prompts during training and inference. In contrast, we propose a prompt aggregation strategy to eliminate the requirement to predict task ID. Moreover, a cyclic prompt weight strategy is proposed to adjust
the weights of different prompts.

the onset (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016). This assumption leads to the challenge when models
are required to adapt to new data incrementally without forgetting previously learned information, a phenomenon commonly referred to as catastrophic forgetting (French 1999).
Class Incremental Learning (CIL) (Zhou et al. 2024b; Wang
et al. 2024b) aims to address this issue by enabling models
to learn continuously from a stream of data, adapting to new
tasks while retaining past knowledge.
The primary challenge of CIL is balancing the acquisition
of new knowledge and the retention of previous knowledge
(Zhou et al. 2024b). A promising solution lies in leveraging pre-trained models, which are trained on large, diverse
datasets to capture rich and generalized feature representations. Recent methods aim to utilize Parameter-Efficient
Fine-Tuning (PEFT) techniques, such as prompt learning
(Wang et al. 2022d,c), to acquire new knowledge while
keeping the pre-trained model frozen, thereby mitigating
forgetting. During training, these methods not only learn a
set of task-specific prompt parameters but also feed the input sample into the pre-trained model without prompts to
learn a set of keys for each task, which are used for task se-

Code — https://github.com/zhoujiahuan1991/AAAI2025CAPrompt

Introduction
In recent years, the field of computer vision has seen remarkable advancements, particularly in the domain of image
classification (LeCun et al. 1989; Deng et al. 2009; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020). However, traditional learning models typically assume that the entire training dataset is available from
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18421

