The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Seeing Your Speech Style: A Novel Zero-Shot Identity-Disentanglement
Face-based Voice Conversion
Yan Rong, Li Liu*
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
yrong854@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, avrillliu@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Face-based Voice Conversion (FVC) is a novel task that leverages facial images to generate the target speaker’s voice
style. Previous work has two shortcomings: (1) suffering
from obtaining facial embeddings that are well-aligned with
the speaker’s voice identity information, and (2) inadequacy in decoupling content and speaker identity information from the audio input. To address these issues, we present
a novel FVC method, Identity-Disentanglement Face-based
Voice Conversion (ID-FaceVC), which overcomes the above
two limitations. More precisely, we propose an IdentityAware Query-based Contrastive Learning (IAQ-CL) module to extract speaker-specific facial features, and a Mutual Information-based Dual Decoupling (MIDD) module
to purify content features from audio, ensuring clear and
high-quality voice conversion. Besides, unlike prior works,
our method can accept either audio or text inputs, offering controllable speech generation with adjustable emotional
tone and speed. Extensive experiments demonstrate that IDFaceVC achieves state-of-the-art performance across various
metrics, with qualitative and user study results confirming its
effectiveness in naturalness, similarity, and diversity.

Figure 1: (a) Traditional voice conversion (VC) paradigm.
(b) Our novel ZS-FVC paradigm, which accepts either audio
or text as input and allows control over the emotional tone
and speed of the generated speech.

In the literature, great progress in this domain has been
achieved by prior work (Goto et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2021;
Sheng et al. 2023; Weng, Shuai, and Cheng 2023). The fundamental challenge is to accurately map identity information
between faces and voices. Specifically, this involves (1) acquisition of facial embeddings that are well-aligned with
the speaker’s voice identity, and (2) decoupling of content
and speaker identity information from the audio input.
For the first challenge, the current state-of-the-art
(SOTA) work FVMVC (Sheng et al. 2023) used FaceNet
(Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015) to extract general facial features and mapped them through a memory
net. Another SOTA work, SP-FaceVC (Weng, Shuai, and
Cheng 2023) averaged all frames to achieve consistent facial embeddings. However, these methods focus on general
facial features rather than speaker-specific features, which
include substantial non-specific, identity-irrelevant information (e.g., facial expressions, head angles, background). As
a result, the models become highly dependent on the training data and lack the ability to locate unique voice characteristics among different speakers, leading to the production of general voices. For the second challenge, FVMVC
attempted feature decoupling through a mixed supervision

Project website — https://id-facevc.github.io
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.00700

Introduction
Voice Conversion (VC) (Choi, Lee, and Lee 2024; Yao et al.
2024) aims to change the speaker identity in speech from
a source speaker to that of a target speaker, while preserving the linguistic content. However, audio from the target
speaker is not always available in some scenarios (e.g., digital humans, historical figures). Instead, some studies have
explored an alternative approach by generating the identity
information of unseen speakers’ voices from their facial
images (Mavica and Barenholtz 2013; Smith et al. 2016),
known as Zero-Shot Face-based Voice Conversion (ZSFVC). Recently, this has become a promising research topic
with potential applications in various scenarios, such as generating voices that match character appearances in automated film dubbing (Cong et al. 2024) and personalized virtual assistants (Park et al. 2024).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25092

