The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

STAIR: Manipulating Collaborative and Multimodal Information for
E-Commerce Recommendation
Cong Xu* , Yunhang He* , Jun Wang† , Wei Zhang†
East China Normal University
Shanghai, China
{congxueric, yhhe2004, wongjun, zhangwei.thu2011}@gmail.com

Abstract

indeed the core that attracts users. However, this is often not
the case for non-content-driven recommendation scenarios
such as e-commerce, where user interaction behaviors may
be influenced by a variety of factors beyond modalities.
While numerous approaches (Wei et al. 2019; Zhou et al.
2023; Wei et al. 2023a) have been proposed to mine the
multimodal features, the true utility of raw multimodal features in e-commerce datasets has not yet been clarified. We
are to ascertain in this scenario whether the user behaviors
are driven by a certain type of modality. By clustering features to infer the category of each item, the modal-specific
user behavior uncertainty can be estimated via Shannon entropy. The average uncertainty across all users then can be
used as an indicator. Unfortunately, we find that the behavior uncertainty under textual or visual modalities is much
worse than that under pre-trained embeddings; sometimes
even only slightly better than randomly generated Gaussian
noise. This suggests that interaction behaviors in these ecommerce datasets are often not driven by textual or visual
content. Hence these multimodal features should be used as
a complement to, rather than a substitute for, collaborative
information. For this reason, we believe that how to fully utilize both collaborative and multimodal information becomes
pivotal. Unlike previous work that learns embeddings from
scratch (Zhang et al. 2021; Zhou and Shen 2023), STAIR
starts with multimodal features as an initialization and seeks
to progressively combine these two distinct types of information together through some special designs. In practice,
we have encountered two additional challenges.
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling
2016; He et al. 2020) have become the de facto architecture
in collaborative filtering, among which LightGCN (He et al.
2020) is a pioneering work known for its simplicity and effectiveness. When these advanced techniques are applied to
the modality-initialized embeddings, we, however, observe a
severe modality erasure phenomenon: as illustrated in Figure 3, the increase in GCN layers leads to the incorporation
of more collaborative information; however, this simultaneously results in the rapid erosion of modality information.
In particular, unlike the over-smoothing issue (Li, Han, and
Wu 2018) that often occurs after stacking multiple convolutional layers, this erasure phenomenon can be observed
as soon as the embedding has been convolved. To balance
the trade-off between collaborative and multimodal informa-

While the mining of modalities is the focus of most multimodal recommendation methods, we believe that how to fully
utilize both collaborative and multimodal information is pivotal in e-commerce scenarios where, as clarified in this work,
the user behaviors are rarely determined entirely by multimodal features. In order to combine the two distinct types
of information, some additional challenges are encountered:
1) Modality erasure: Vanilla graph convolution, which proves
rather useful in collaborative filtering, however erases multimodal information; 2) Modality forgetting: Multimodal information tends to be gradually forgotten as the recommendation loss essentially facilitates the learning of collaborative information. To this end, we propose a novel approach
named STAIR, which employs a novel STepwise grAph convolution to enable a co-existence of collaborative and multimodal Information in e-commerce Recommendation. Besides, it starts with the raw multimodal features as an initialization, and the forgetting problem can be significantly
alleviated through constrained embedding updates. As a result, STAIR achieves state-of-the-art recommendation performance on three public e-commerce datasets with minimal
computational and memory costs.

Code — https://github.com/yhhe2004/STAIR

Introduction
Recommender systems are playing an increasingly important role nowadays (Chen et al. 2019; El-Kishky et al.
2022) as the explosion of data has far exceeded the human’s
retrieval capabilities. Unlike traditional data mining tasks
(Hoffmann 2007), recommender systems are rapidly growing to adapt to different interaction forms and data types.
Consequently multimodal recommendation research (He
and McAuley 2015; Wei et al. 2023a) is becoming a popular topic since textual and visual modalities are the main
elements that appear in modern media. Nonetheless, their
utility usually depends on the relevant recommendation scenario (McElfresh et al. 2022). For example, textual features
in news recommendation and visual features in video recommendation can be highly instrumental because they are
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12899

