The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Spatio-temporal Cluster-aware Supervised Learning Framework for Predicting
County-level Drug Overdose Deaths
Zixuan Feng1 * , Qing Ye2 * , Weijun Xie2 , Qiushi Chen1
1

Harold and Inge Marcus Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University
2
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
zixuan.feng@psu.edu, qye40@gatech.edu, wxie@gatech.edu, q.chen@psu.edu

Abstract

such as methamphetamine and cocaine (Ciccarone 2021).
Beyond the devastating mortality burden on society, the drug
overdose crisis has also notoriously impacted healthcare,
criminal justice, and productivity (Florence, Luo, and Rice
2021). A congressional report estimated that the total economic toll of addiction and drug overdose crisis reached
nearly $1.5 trillion in 2020 alone and is expected to increase
(Aboulenein 2022).
The ability to predict drug overdose deaths can inform
public health policymakers and communities of emerging
threats as early warning signals to help prepare for response
strategies (Blanco et al. 2020; Jalali et al. 2020b). By tracking the historical trend and predicting overdose deaths in the
near future, policymakers can make data-driven decisions to
adjust existing intervention strategies or reallocate resources
to priority areas to more effectively mitigate the harms of the
overdose crisis. In the public health domain, predictive analytics has been widely used to support responses to emerging epidemics. For example, previous research has used prediction models to predict the trend and understand the periodicity of the COVID-19 pandemic (Wang et al. 2022;
Aslam and Biswas 2023). Santangelo et al. (2023) provides
a systematic review of machine learning prediction models
for a wide range of infectious diseases (e.g. influenza and
malaria).
Previous studies on predicting drug overdose deaths have
utilized various analytical approaches. Simple regressionbased methods, including generalized linear models (e.g.,
logistic or negative binomial regression) (Cuomo et al. 2023;
Marks et al. 2021) and lasso regression (Sumner et al.
2022), have been widely employed to predict the number
of overdose deaths based on demographic and socioeconomic covariates at county or state levels. Recent studies
have utilized more advanced machine learning models such
as random forest (Schell et al. 2022) and extreme gradient boosting (Tatar et al. 2023) for drug overdose death
predictions to capture complex, nonlinear interactions between county or neighborhood features. Several studies have
applied machine learning models to internet search trend
data (e.g., Google Trends) of drug-related search terms for
spatio-temporal mapping of drug overdose deaths, near realtime prediction, and timely detection of emerging hotspots
(Campo et al. 2020; Ghosh et al. 2022; Mukherjee et al.
2020). In addition to the population-level prediction, there

The soaring drug overdose crisis in the United States has
claimed more than half a million lives in the past decade
and remains a major public health threat. The ability to predict drug overdose deaths at the county level can help local
communities develop action plans in response to emerging
changes. Applying off-the-shelf machine learning algorithms
for prediction can be challenging due to the heterogeneous
risk profiles of the counties and suppressed data in common publicly available data sources. To fill these gaps, we
develop a cluster-aware supervised learning (CASL) framework to enhance the prediction of county-level drug overdose deaths. This CASL model simultaneously clusters counties into groups based on geographical and socioeconomic
characteristics and minimizes the loss function that accounts
for suppressed values and cluster-specific regularization. Our
computational study uses real-world data from 2010 to 2021,
focusing on the ten states most severely impacted by the drug
overdose crisis. The results demonstrate that our proposed
CASL framework significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods by achieving a superior balance in prediction accuracy for both unsuppressed and suppressed observations.
The proposed model also identifies different clusters of counties, capturing heterogeneous patterns of overdose mortality
among counties of diverse characteristics.

Code and technical appendix —
https://github.com/zixuan-feng/CASLDrugOverdoseDeathsPrediction-2024

Introduction
The drug overdose crisis continues to be a critical public
health issue in the United States (US) (Duff et al. 2022;
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2024b). More
than 100,000 Americans died from drug overdoses in 2021,
a 30% increase from the previous year (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2024b). This crisis has evolved
through multiple waves, initially driven by prescription opioids, followed by heroin, then synthetic opioids such as fentanyl (Ciccarone 2019), and now a fourth wave characterized by polysubstance use involving opioids and stimulants
* Zixuan Feng and Qing Ye contributed equally to this work and
share first authorship.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27978

