The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning to Generate Gradients for Test-Time Adaptation
via Test-Time Training Layers
Qi Deng* 1 , Shuaicheng Niu∗2 , Ronghao Zhang1 , Yaofo Chen1 ,
Runhao Zeng3† , Jian Chen1† , Xiping Hu3
1

South China University of Technology,
2
Nanyang Technological University,
3
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
{dengqi.kei; niushuaicheng; zhangronghao16; runhaozeng.cs}@gmail.com; ellachen@scut.edu.cn;
Abstract

model performance on out-of-distribution (OOD) data or
novel environments, also known as distribution shifts. By
adapting to each test data immediately after inference in an
unsupervised manner, TTA offers minimal overhead, distinguishing it as a practical choice for real-world applications.
Although the online unsupervised setting enhances TTA’s
practicality, it also introduces certain challenges for TTA.
This is because the model performance often degrades significantly on OOD data, leading to unsupervised objectives like entropy minimization (Wang et al. 2021) and selflearning (Goyal et al. 2022) encountering noisy supervision,
which in turn produces unreliable gradients. Such unreliable
gradients may hinder TTA from converging to an optimal solution quickly and also introduce instability into the learning
process. This issue is especially critical in more complex test
settings, such as label distribution shifts and mixed domain
shifts, as highlighted by Niu et al. (2023).
To address this issue, various TTA methods (Niu et al.
2022, 2023; Yuan, Xie, and Li 2023; Lee et al. 2024) have
been developed. For example, both EATA (Niu et al. 2022)
and DeYO (Lee et al. 2024) devise different sample filtering strategies to select partial samples for TTA. However,
the sample filtering strategy sometimes might be thresholdsensitive, making it difficult to set a reasonable threshold
when test data are unknown. Moreover, filtering samples
may result in the loss of valuable information, leading to
insufficient learning, particularly when only a few test samples are available. In addition to sample filtering, EATA (Niu
et al. 2022) also exploits weight regularization and SAR
(Niu et al. 2023) devises a sharpness-aware minimization
strategy to stabilize the online TTA process, etc.
Unlike prior methods, we seek to resolve the above issue from a new perspective of optimizer design. Instead of
using manually designed optimizers like SGD and Adam,
we cast the design of optimization algorithms as a learning problem, i.e., learning to optimize (L2O) (Andrychowicz
et al. 2016). Benefiting from the strong power of end-to-end
learning, L2O has been extensively validated in supervised
settings, even with noisy input gradients, demonstrating its
ability to enhance model performance and accelerate convergence. Inspired by this, we devise an automatically learned
optimizer for TTA, as shown in Figure 1. Considering that
in online TTA, all unreliable gradients are immediately used
for model updates after inference, their cumulative effect

Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to fine-tune a trained model
online using unlabeled testing data to adapt to new environments or out-of-distribution data, demonstrating broad application potential in real-world scenarios. However, in this optimization process, unsupervised learning objectives like entropy minimization frequently encounter noisy learning signals. These signals produce unreliable gradients, which hinder the model’s ability to converge to an optimal solution
quickly and introduce significant instability into the optimization process. In this paper, we seek to resolve these issues
from the perspective of optimizer design. Unlike prior TTA
using manually designed optimizers like SGD, we employ
a learning-to-optimize approach to automatically learn an
optimizer, called Meta Gradient Generator (MGG). Specifically, we aim for MGG to effectively utilize historical gradient information during the online optimization process to
optimize the current model. To this end, in MGG, we design a lightweight and efficient sequence modeling layer –
gradient memory layer. It exploits a self-supervised reconstruction loss to compress historical gradient information into
network parameters, thereby enabling better memorization
ability over a long-term adaptation process. We only need a
small number of unlabeled samples to pre-train MGG, and
then the trained MGG can be deployed to process unseen
samples. Promising results on ImageNet-C/R/Sketch/A indicate that our method surpasses current state-of-the-art methods with fewer updates, less data, and significantly shorter
adaptation times. Compared with a previous SOTA SAR, we
achieve 7.4% accuracy improvement and 4.2× faster adaptation speed on ImageNet-C.

Code — https://github.com/keikeiqi/MGTTA

1

Introduction

Since the emergence of test-time adaptation (TTA) (Sun
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021), it has made significant
progress (Liu et al. 2021; Zhang, Levine, and Finn 2022;
Iwasawa and Matsuo 2021; Mirza et al. 2022; Boudiaf et al.
2022a; Gandelsman et al. 2022; Niu et al. 2024) and demonstrated broad potential across various scenarios to enhance
* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16235

