The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Data-Free Universal Attack
by Exploiting the Intrinsic Vulnerability of Deep Models
YangTian Yan, Jinyu Tian*
Faculty of Innovation Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology
naygnahz1128@gmail.com, jytian@must.edu.mo

Abstract

highlighted their vulnerability to adversarial attacks. Adversarial scenarios arise when models face inputs specifically
designed to deceive or mislead them, often resulting in erroneous outputs. This vulnerability is not merely academic but
poses significant practical challenges, especially in critical
applications such as autonomous driving and facial recognition systems. As models become more integral to our daily
lives, ensuring their reliability against such adversarial attacks is crucial. This motivates ongoing research to understand and mitigate these threats, aiming to develop more reliable and secure DNNs.
Among the spectrum of adversarial strategies, Universal
Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs) represent a particularly
important form. UAPs are image-agnostic perturbations,
which means a single perturbation, once computed, can be
applied to a wide variety of images to consistently mislead a machine learning model. Most of the current work
on UAPs requires massive samples (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al.
2017; Mopuri et al. 2018; Poursaeed et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2023). These methods, although efficient, necessitate extensive samples and significant time for iterative training and
adjustment of perturbations. They also assume unrestricted
access to the original training data or sizable representative
datasets. This requirement limits their practicality in scenarios where data privacy or accessibility is constrained. In contrast, a few existing approaches attempt to generate UAPs
without direct reliance on extensive large datasets (Mopuri, Garg, and Babu 2017; Mopuri, Uppala, and Babu 2018;
Mopuri, Ganeshan, and Babu 2018; Liu et al. 2019a; Zhang
et al. 2020b, 2021). They generally follow two lines. The
first involves designing batches of proxy datasets, such as
using GANs to generate some proxy samples (Mopuri, Uppala, and Babu 2018). Another type of UAPs leverages the
characteristic of the model, for instance, exploiting the observation that adversarial samples can occupy a large portion
of the label space (Zhang et al. 2020b, 2021).
Recent studies have shown that specific patterns (Mopuri,
Ganeshan, and Babu 2018; Liu et al. 2019b) or even random noise (Fawzi, Moosavi-Dezfooli, and Frossard 2016)
can successfully attack deep models. This suggests that the
existence of UAPs is primarily due to intrinsic flaws within
the models themselves, rather than being learned from a
large number of samples. Several studies support this view
by analyzing the geometric properties of decision bound-

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are susceptible to Universal Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs), which are instanceagnostic perturbations that can deceive a target model across
a wide range of samples. Unlike instance-specific adversarial examples, UAPs present a greater challenge as they must
generalize across different samples and models. Generating UAPs typically requires access to numerous examples,
which is a strong assumption in real-world tasks. In this paper, we propose a novel data-free method called Intrinsic
UAP (IntriUAP), by exploiting the intrinsic vulnerabilities
of deep models. We analyze a series of popular deep models composed of linear and nonlinear layers with a Lipschitz
constant of 1, revealing that the vulnerability of these models is predominantly influenced by their linear components.
Based on this observation, we leverage the ill-conditioned nature of the linear components by aligning the UAP with the
right singular vectors corresponding to the maximum singular
value of each linear layer. Remarkably, our method achieves
highly competitive performance in attacking popular image
classification deep models without using any image samples.
We also evaluate the black-box attack performance of our
method, showing that it matches the state-of-the-art baseline
for data-free methods on models that conform to our theoretical framework. Beyond the data-free assumption, IntriUAP
also operates under a weaker assumption, where the adversary only can access a few of the victim model’s layers. Experiments demonstrate that the attack success rate decreases
by only 4% when the adversary has access to just 50% of the
linear layers in the victim model.

Code — https://github.com/yyt0718/Intri Attack

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown remarkable performance in tasks such as computer vision (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
He et al. 2016), natural language processing (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2014; Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al.
2018; Biderman et al. 2023), etc. However, recent research (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; MoosaviDezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Madry et al. 2019) has
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9130

