The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Ultra-High Resolution Segmentation via Boundary-Enhanced Patch-Merging
Transformer
Haopeng Sun1,2 * , Yingwei Zhang1,2 * , Lumin Xu4 , Sheng Jin5,6 , Yiqiang Chen1,2,3 †
1

Beijing Key Lab. of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
The University of Hong Kong
6
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
sunhaopeng22s@ict.ac.cn, zhangyingwei@ict.ac.cn, luminxu@link.cuhk.edu.hk, jinsheng@tetras.ai, yqchen@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

the dilemma of trading off computation cost and segmentation accuracy.
Convolutional neural networks (Ronneberger, Fischer,
and Brox 2015; Zhao et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Yu et al.
2018; Jiang et al. 2023, 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Sun et al.
2024) and vision transformers (Ji, Zhao, and Lu 2023; Ji
et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2023b,a; Lu et al. 2025, 2024a,b;
Shen et al. 2023c; Long et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024) have
succeeded in representing images as uniform grids of pixels
or patches of fixed size. However, as shown in Fig. 1 (a) and
(b), the previous works are sub-optimal for high-resolution
remote sensing imagery analysis due to either overlooking
fine-grained information (Chen et al. 2019; Cheng et al.
2020) or introducing substantial computational overhead (Li
et al. 2021; Ji, Zhao, and Lu 2023). On the one hand, large
areas of ocean contains global contextual information but
little textual details can be represented by a single token for
efficient global semantic learning. On the other hand, buildings and roads with fine-grained structures require more tokens to preserve details. Inspired by the human visual system
which rapidly orients attention to important areas with fine
details and filter out large amount of irrelevant information
in complex large scenes, we propose a novel method termed
Boundary-Enhanced Patch-Merging Transformer (BPT) to
tackle this problem. As shown in Fig. 1 (c), the specifically
designed Patch-Merging Transformer (PMT) adopts a dynamic patch merging approach, where vision tokens represent different regions with dynamic shapes and sizes. It efficiently captures both global and local information by dynamically adopting a fine resolution for regions containing
critical details while preserving global information.
To further enhance performance, the recent approaches (Guo et al. 2022; Ji, Zhao, and Lu 2023; Ji
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023; He, Nie, and Ma 2024) for
UHR images follow a dual-branch framework to preserve
both global and local information. These methods involve
two deep branches: one downsamples the entire image
and extracts global information, while the other crops
local patches feeding them to the network sequentially and
merging their predictions to obtain local cues. However,

Segmentation of ultra-high resolution (UHR) images is a critical task with numerous applications, yet it poses significant
challenges due to high spatial resolution and rich fine details.
Recent approaches adopt a dual-branch architecture, where a
global branch learns long-range contextual information and
a local branch captures fine details. However, they struggle
to handle the conflict between global and local information
while adding significant extra computational cost. Inspired by
the human visual system’s ability to rapidly orient attention to
important areas with fine details and filter out irrelevant information, we propose a novel UHR segmentation method called
Boundary-enhanced Patch-merging Transformer (BPT). BPT
consists of two key components: (1) Patch-Merging Transformer (PMT) for dynamically allocating tokens to informative regions to acquire global and local representations,
and (2) Boundary-Enhanced Module (BEM) that leverages
boundary information to enrich fine details. Extensive experiments on multiple UHR image segmentation benchmarks
demonstrate that our BPT outperforms previous state-of-theart methods without introducing extra computational overhead.

Introduction
With the advancement of remote sensing technology, the acquisition of abundant ultra-high resolution (UHR) geospatial images has become possible (Liu et al. 2023; Guan et al.
2024a,b). Semantic segmentation of UHR geospatial images
has opened new horizons in computer vision, playing an increasingly important role in earth sciences and urban applications such as disaster control, environmental monitoring,
land resource management, conservation, and urban planning (Chen et al. 2019; Ji, Zhao, and Lu 2023; Ji et al. 2023;
Zhu et al. 2024b). The main challenge of this task is how to
balance the semantic dispersion of high-resolution targets in
the small receptive field and the loss of high-precision details in the large receptive field (Zhao et al. 2018), as well as
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7087

