The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Minimal Change in Modal Logic S5
Carlos Aguilera-Ventura* , Jonathan Ben-Naim* , Andreas Herzig*
IRIT, CNRS, Univ. Toulouse, France
carlos.aguilera-ventura@irit.fr, Jonathan.Ben-Naim@irit.fr, Andreas.Herzig@irit.fr

Abstract

revision operations are based) from propositional logic valuations to Kripke models. For a start, we choose the modal
logic S5 because it has an alternative, simpler semantics in
terms of sets of valuations. We propose a family of distancebased revision operations. Each of them is based on a lifting
of the Hamming distance from valuations to sets of valuations. The most interesting one sums up the minimal distances from each valuation of one set to the other set: we
show that it validates all postulates.
Our revision operations allow us to shed new light on an
old debate in belief revision: whether revision operations
should be syntax-sensitive or not. According to the AGM
postulate of syntax insensitivity, when two logically equivalent belief bases are revised by the same new piece of information then the two outcomes should also be logically
equivalent. The main argument against syntax insensitivity
is that while the two belief bases {p, q} and {p, p → q}
are ‘statically equivalent’, they are not ‘dynamically equivalent’, in the sense that they have to be revised differently. We
argue that this non-equivalence should be made formal by
investigating revision for logics where these two belief bases
fail to be equivalent. We show that the strict implication operator ‘≻’, defined in modal logic by φ ≻ ψ = ✷(φ → ψ), provides an interesting solution: the bases {p, q} and {p, p ≻ q}
fail to be equivalent, and the revision of {p, q} by ¬q entails
{p, ¬q} while that of {p, p ≻ q} by ¬q entails {¬p, ¬q}.
The paper is organized as follows. We start by recalling
distance-based revision operations and modal logics (Section 2). We then formulate three simple postulates for modal
revision (Section 3). After that, we introduce a general way
of lifting the Hamming distance between valuations to distances between pointed S5 models (Section 4). We then propose axioms for these distances and check the status of the
modal revision postulates w.r.t. the induced revision operations (Section 5). Finally, we show that if we replace material implication by strict implication then the main counterexamples against syntax-insensitive revision can be handled
satisfactorily (Section 6) and conclude (Section 8).

We extend belief revision theory from propositional logic to
the modal logic S5. Our first contribution takes the form of
three new postulates (M1-M3) that go beyond the AGM ones
and capture the idea of minimal change in the presence of
modalities. Concerning the construction of modal revision
operations, we work with set pseudo-distances, i.e., distances
between sets of points that may violate the triangle-inequality.
Our second contribution is the identification of three axioms (A3-A5) that go beyond the standard axioms of metrics. Loosely speaking, our main result states the following:
if a pseudo-distance satisfies certain axioms, then the induced
revision operation satisfies (M1-M3). We investigate three
pseudo-distances from the literature (Dhaus, Dinj, Dsum),
and the three induced revision operations (∗Dhaus , ∗Dinj , ∗Dsum ).
Using our main result, we show that only ∗Dsum satisfies (M1M3) all together. As a last contribution, we revisit a major
criticism of AGM operations, namely that the revisions of
p ∧ q and p ∧ (p → q) are identical. We show that the problem disappears if instead of material implication we use the
modal operator of strict implication that can be defined in S5.

1

Introduction

Logical languages with modalities provide expressive power
beyond propositional logic: they allow us to distinguish between necessary truths p∧✷p and contingent truths p∧¬✷p.
This distinction accounts for things such as laws of nature
and database integrity constraints. The belief revision literature in the AGM tradition (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and
Makinson 1985) has neglected the problem of how to revise
belief sets containing modalities: as the SEP entry on belief
revision says, “it is fair to say that operations of AGM-style
belief change have not yet been constructed that are generally recognized as able to deal adequately with conditional
or modal sentences” (Hansson 2022). We address this shortcoming by providing an axiomatic and semantic analysis of
belief revision operations for modal logic.
On the axiomatic side, we formulate three simple rationality postulates and argue why a reasonable revision operation should satisfy them. On the semantic side, the main
difficulty is to lift the orderings (on which the semantics of

2

Background

We suppose given a finite set Var = {p, q, r, . . .} of propositional variables. A valuation is a subset of Var. The set of all
valuations is Val = Pow(Var). The set PFor is the set of all
propositional formulas built from Var and the connectives ⊤,

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14781

