The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Universal Domain Adaptive Object Detection via Dual Probabilistic Alignment
Yuanfan Zheng1,2 * , Jinlin Wu1,2 * , Wuyang Li3 , Zhen Chen1†
1
CAIR, HKISI-CAS
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zyfone.cs@gmail.com, jinlin.wu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, wymanbest@outlook.com, zchen.francis@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) transfers knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unannotated target domain under closed-set assumption. Universal DAOD
(UniDAOD) extends DAOD to handle open-set, partial-set,
and closed-set domain adaptation. In this paper, we first unveil two issues: domain-private category alignment is crucial
for global-level features, and the domain probability heterogeneity of features across different levels. To address these issues, we propose a novel Dual Probabilistic Alignment (DPA)
framework to model domain probability as Gaussian distribution, enabling the heterogeneity domain distribution sampling
and measurement. The DPA consists of three tailored modules: the Global-level Domain Private Alignment (GDPA),
the Instance-level Domain Shared Alignment (IDSA), and
the Private Class Constraint (PCC). GDPA utilizes the globallevel sampling to mine domain-private category samples and
calculate alignment weight through a cumulative distribution
function to address the global-level private category alignment. IDSA utilizes instance-level sampling to mine domainshared category samples and calculates alignment weight
through Gaussian distribution to conduct the domain-shared
category domain alignment to address the feature heterogeneity. The PCC aggregates domain-private category centroids
between feature and probability spaces to mitigate negative
transfer. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our DPA
outperforms state-of-the-art UniDAOD and DAOD methods
across various datasets and scenarios, including open, partial,
and closed sets.

Figure 1: The visualization of domain probability in the domain discriminator1 . (a) As the number of domain-private
categories increases, a more distinct gap emerges between
the two domains at the global level, suggesting the alignment of the domain-private category. (b) With the increases of the domain-private category, the mean probability
gap remains approximately constant at the instance level, indicating the alignment of domain-shared category.
et al. 2024; Ali et al. 2024; Liu, Li, and Yuan 2023), autonomous driving (Cai et al. 2024; Shi, Zheng, and Chen
2024) and robotic understanding (Chapman et al. 2023; Li
et al. 2024). However, DAOD is limited by the closed-set
assumption (Ben-David et al. 2010; Li et al. 2023c) failing
to generalize to real-world scenarios. To address this, Universal DAOD (UniDAOD) endows DAOD with open-set domain adaption capabilities to overcome label shifts without
prior knowledge of categories. The former work, US-DAF
(Shi et al. 2022), leverages the threshold filter mechanism
and the scale-sensitive domain alignment. CODE (Shi et al.
2024b) adopts virtual domain alignment to avoid aligning
domain-private category samples to mitigate negative transfer. Other methods (Lang et al. 2023; Shi et al. 2024a) adopt
dynamic weighting for domain-private categories to facilitate positive transfer. Essentially, existing UniDAOD approaches align shared categories at both the global and instance levels while ignoring the alignment of domain-private
categories.
Despite significant progress in recent years, the current

Code — https://github.com/zyfone/DPA

Introduction
Object detection has made significant progress in recent
years (Li et al. 2021b; Jia et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2024).
However, the well-trained object detector failed to generalize in novel domain scenarios due to domain shift. Domain
Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) (Krishna, Ohashi, and
Sinha 2023; Huang et al. 2024) transferring from the source
domain to the unlabelled target domain to overcome domain
shift and has been widely applied in medical analysis (Pu
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The horizontal axis is training iteration (×100), and the vertical axis is the probability of domain discriminator.

10644

