The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

How Many Lines to Paint the City: Exact Edge-Cover in Temporal Graphs
Argyrios Deligkas1 , Michelle Döring2 , Eduard Eiben1 , Tiger-Lily Goldsmith1 , George Skretas2 ,
Georg Tennigkeit2
1

Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, United Kingdom
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany
argyrios.deligkas@rhul.ac.uk, michelle.doering@hpi.de, eduard.eiben@rhul.ac.uk, tigerlily.goldsmith@gmail.com,
georgios.skretas@hpi.de, georg.tennigkeit@hpi.de
2

Abstract

based on various and individual criteria like public service
needs, profits, and resource restrictions. Their main objective is to optimally ensure their connections at the designated
time. However, such decentralized planning often leads to
suboptimal use of resources. This issue has been identified
by the Supply Chain Management and Logistics industries,
which have observed that “while logistics improvements may
be difficult for each individual customer, they can be realized
with collaborative operation among multiple customers”1 .
To illustrate, consider a scenario where company X wants
to operate a line from A to B at 08:00, and from B to A
at 20:00 and each connection takes one hour. Company Y
wants to operate a line from B to C at 09:00, and from C to
B at 17:00, also taking one hour each. Independently, both
companies require one vehicle each to operate their respective lines. However, if they collaborated, they could share a
vehicle for both lines with a single journey: A to B at 08:00,
B to C at 09:00, C to B at 17:00, and B to A at 20:00.

Logistics and transportation networks require a large amount
of resources to realise necessary connections between locations and minimizing these resources is a vital aspect of planning research. Since such networks have dynamic connections that are only available at specific times, intricate models
are needed to portray them accurately. In this paper, we study
the problem of minimizing the number of resources needed to
realise a dynamic network, using the temporal graphs model.
In a temporal graph, edges appear at specific points in time.
Given a temporal graph and a natural number k, we ask
whether we can cover every temporal edge exactly once using
at most k temporal journeys; in a temporal journey consecutive edges have to adhere to the order of time. We conduct a
thorough investigation of the complexity of the problem with
respect to four dimensions: (a) whether the type of the temporal journey is a walk, a trail, or a path; (b) whether the chronological order of edges in the journey is strict or non-strict;
(c) whether the temporal graph is directed or undirected; (d)
whether the start and end points of each journey are given. We
almost completely resolve the complexity of these problems
and provide dichotomies for each of them with respect to k.

A

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.17107

1

A

Introduction

08:00
20:00
08:00
20:00

B
B

09:00
17:00
09:00
17:00

C
C

Optimizing network resources is important across various fields, each presenting unique complexities. This poses
a dilemma: should we create a specific model for each scenario, or develop a generalized, possibly simplified model
to study many scenarios at once? Applied research typically
chooses the former, tailoring models to individual applications, while theoretical sciences favor the latter, aiming for
generalized models with broad applicability.
In this paper, we follow the second route and provide a
general model that is simple both, yet realistic enough to
represent multiple scenarios. We want to study the problem of finding the minimum number of resources needed
to realise the connections of a network. To account for the
time-specific connections of the networks, we use temporal graphs (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Kumar 2002; Michail
2016). A temporal graph consists of a set of vertices, a set of
edges and a labeling function indicating at which time steps

Networks are designed to enable the transportation of various “entities”, ranging from people and physical goods to
data and information. Achieving efficient transportation requires the deployment of vehicles and connections, which
most often are of limited quantity. Consequently, optimizing
the use of these resources is a natural challenge in network
planning and design. Take, for example, a train company that
decided on optimal train connections to meet public demand.
Next, the company has to decide on the number of trains to
be deployed on a daily schedule to realize these connections
effectively in order to maximize profit. This highlights the
critical issue of how to allocate limited resources efficiently
to meet operational goals while balancing cost and demand.
This issue is even more apparent in networks operated by
multiple companies. In such scenarios, each company independently sets its own connection times between the depots
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

26498

https://www.logisteed.com/en/3pl/joint/

