The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GNN-Transformer Task Planning Enhanced with Semantic-Driven Data
Augmentation
Soojin Jeong* , Seongwan Byeon* , Sangwoo Kim, HyeokJun Kwon, Yoonseon Oh
Department of Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
{jenicloun, bite3123, kimz1121, june2450, yoh21}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Natural language is the most intuitive means for humans to interact with robots, making task planning based on natural language commands a longstanding area of research. Large language models (LLMs) have significantly improved task planning by enhancing understanding of language and common
sense. However, current methods still face several challenges:
they lack a deep understanding of physical environments,
their performance relies heavily on prompt examples, LLMs
are oversized and not customized for specific tasks, and the
planning costs remain high. To overcome these issues, we
introduce the GNN-Transformer Task Planner (GTTP), designed to predict task-level actions by leveraging the semantic environment and incorporating historical state data. The
GTTP architecture is scalable through the use of GNN layers,
while transformer layers facilitate understanding task progression. In addition, our model uses a text encoder to embed
environments, allowing it to be trained on simulated datasets
and applied directly in real-world scenarios. We also propose
an automated data generation method that includes semantic augmentation, planning verification, and instruction generation via LLM. This method enables the collection of 14k
instruction-annotated tasks in the VirtualHome environment
with minimal human effort. The model has been validated
across diverse scenes containing up to 715 objects, achieving significantly higher success rates compared to baseline
models. It has also been successfully deployed on a physical
mobile manipulator, demonstrating its practical applicability
and effectiveness.

Figure 1: The whole process of our frameworks. The top of
the figure shows the automatic data augmentation procedure
in a simulation environment from a small seed dataset based
on the semantic meaning of the task. We trained our model
GTTP by these augmented datasets. The bottom of the figure is the inference procedure, where the goal instruction
of the task and the initial scene graph serve as input. The
model, trained only on simulation data, can be directly deployed in the real world.

Introduction

robot’s state, and the environment into the prompts. However, this approach is constrained by the requirement for precisely engineered prompts to achieve desired outcomes and
heavily relies on examples in the prompt. Furthermore, these
planners struggle with ensuring feasibility and optimizing
plans. To overcome these limitations, the Monte Carlo tree
search method is employed, while leveraging LLMs to enhance search efficiency through common sense knowledge
(Zhao, Lee, and Hsu 2023). The approach (Ichter et al.
2022) ensures feasibility and common sense understanding
by combining value functions of primitive skills with LLMs.
On the other hand, some researchers have developed specialized models for task planning (Zhu et al. 2021; Ni et al.
2024; Gupta et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2022). The model in (Zhu
et al. 2021) utilizes images as inputs, yet the model trained

Natural language serves as a powerful instruction tool between humans and robots. Research on understanding natural language instructions for task planning has been continuously explored (Wächter et al. 2018; Nyga et al. 2018).
Recently, with the advancement of large language models
(LLMs), active research has been conducted leveraging the
common sense understanding and natural language processing capabilities of LLMs for task planning (Ichter et al.
2022; Zeng et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023). In (Huang et al.
2022; Singh et al. 2023), LLMs act as high-level planners via
prompt engineering, incorporating admissible actions, the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14585

