The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Single-View Graph Contrastive Learning with Soft Neighborhood Awareness
Qingqiang Sun1 , Chaoqi Chen2 , Ziyue Qiao1 * , Xubin Zheng1 , Kai Wang3† ,
1

Great Bay University
Shenzhen University
3
Central South University
{qqsun, zyqiao, xbzheng}@gbu.edu.cn, cqchen1994@gmail.com, kaiwang@csu.edu.cn
2

contrast

Abstract

contrast

NonNonAugmented Augmented
Augmented Augmented
Latent
Latent
Latent
Latent
View 2
View 1
View 1
View 2

Most graph contrastive learning (GCL) methods heavily rely
on cross-view contrast, thus facing several concomitant challenges, such as the complexity of designing effective augmentations, the potential for information loss between views,
and increased computational costs. To mitigate reliance on
cross-view contrasts, we propose SIGNA, a novel single-view
graph contrastive learning framework. Regarding the inconsistency between structural connection and semantic similarity of neighborhoods, we resort to soft neighborhood awareness for GCL. Specifically, we leverage dropout to obtain
structurally-related yet randomly-noised embedding pairs for
neighbors, which serve as potential positive samples. At each
epoch, the role of partial neighbors is switched from positive to negative, leading to probabilistic neighborhood contrastive learning effect. Moreover, we propose a normalized Jensen-Shannon divergence estimator for a better effect
of contrastive learning. Experiments on diverse node-level
tasks demonstrate that our simple single-view GCL framework consistently outperforms existing methods by margins
of up to 21.74% (PPI). In particular, with soft neighborhood awareness, SIGNA can adopt MLPs instead of complicated GCNs as the encoder in transductive learning tasks, thus
speeding up its inference process by 109× to 331×.

contrast
Latent
View

Latent
View

contrast

Input View

(a)

Input View

(b)

Input View

(c)

Input View

(d)

Figure 1: (a) Augmentation based cross-view contrast; (b)
Non-augmentation based cross-view contrast; (c) Inputlatent cross-view contrast; (d) Single-view contrast (ours).

to CL in computer vision and natural language processing
domains, Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) methods typically rely on cross-view contrasts, i.e., each positive or negative pair consists of two latent embeddings from different
views. These strategies include augmentation-based dualbranch methods (Zhu et al. 2020b; You et al. 2020; Shen
et al. 2023), non-augmentation-based dual-branch methods (Thakoor et al. 2021; Mo et al. 2022), and input-latent
single-branch methods (Peng et al. 2020b), which are summarized in Fig. 1 and discussed in detail in the related work.
Despite the significant progress achieved by cross-view
contrastive learning methods on graph data, these approaches face several challenges. Firstly, designing effective
augmentation techniques often requires substantial manual
effort and fine-tuning, leading to increased implementation
complexity. Secondly, cross-view contrast may result in information loss or inconsistencies between views, which can
negatively impact model performance. Lastly, the computational cost of cross-view methods is typically high, especially for those dual-branch ones, making them less scalable.
To circumvent these challenges, this paper seeks to explore a simpler yet little-studied alternative: single-view
contrastive learning. The most pivotal point is how to obtain
intra-view positive and negative samples. Note that nodes
in the graph are intricately correlated with each other rather
than completely independent (Dang et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2022; Yu, Shi, and Wang 2024; Wang et al. 2023, 2024).
Therefore, a natural potential solution within this framework is to conduct contrast according to the topological rela-

Code — https://github.com/sunisfighting/SIGNA

Introduction
Over the past few years, Self-Supervised Learning (SSL)
of representations has emerged as a promising and popular research topic since it does not rely on the quantity and
quality of labels (Wu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022; Xie et al.
2022). As one of the most competitive SSL paradigms, Contrastive Learning (CL) has made its mark in computer vision (He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020), natural language
processing (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020), and graph domains (Velickovic et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2020b; Peng et al.
2020b; Sun et al. 2024).
The core spirit of CL is to pull together representations
of related instances (positive samples) and push apart representations of unrelated pairs (negative samples). Similar
* Corresponding Author
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20708

