The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VE-Bench: Subjective-Aligned Benchmark Suite for Text-Driven Video Editing
Quality Assessment
Shangkun Sun1, 2 , Xiaoyu Liang1 , Songlin Fan1,2 , Wenxu Gao1,2 , Wei Gao1,2 *
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology, SECE, Shenzhen Graduate
School, Peking University,
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{sunshk, liangxiaoyu yy, gaowx}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {slfan, gaowei262}@pku.edu.cn

VE-Bench

Abstract

Database
Source Video Collection
Real-world, CG, AIGC; Human,
Animal, Object, Nature; Pose,
Action, Ego/ Exo Motion, …
Prompt Selection
Addition, Removal, Color,
Texture, Style, Size, Shape,
Pose, Motion, Background, …
Video Editing
0-shot, fine-tuned; SD 1-4 / 15 / 2-1; PnP, ControlNet, …
Subjective Annotation

Text-driven video editing has recently experienced rapid development. Despite this, evaluating edited videos remains a
considerable challenge. Current metrics tend to fail to align
with human perceptions, and effective quantitative metrics for
video editing are still notably absent. To address this, we introduce VE-Bench, a benchmark suite tailored to the assessment of text-driven video editing. This suite includes VEBench DB, a video quality assessment (VQA) database for
video editing. VE-Bench DB encompasses a diverse set of
source videos featuring various motions and subjects, along
with multiple distinct editing prompts, editing results from
8 different models, and the corresponding Mean Opinion
Scores (MOS) from 24 human annotators. Based on VEBench DB, we further propose VE-Bench QA, a quantitative
human-aligned measurement for the text-driven video editing
task. In addition to the aesthetic, distortion, and other visual
quality indicators that traditional VQA methods emphasize,
VE-Bench QA focuses on the text-video alignment and the
relevance modeling between source and edited videos. It proposes a new assessment network for video editing that attains
superior performance in alignment with human preferences.
To the best of our knowledge, VE-Bench introduces the first
quality assessment dataset for video editing and an effective
subjective-aligned quantitative metric for this domain.

MOS: 1, 4, 5, 8 …

Quality Assessment

A polar bear is playing
guitar by the lake
Text-Target
Alignment

Technical
Distortion

Src-Target
Relation

Aesthetic

Score

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed VE-Bench.

Currently, quantitative metrics such as CLIP and LPIPS
scores (Radford et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2018), FVD (Unterthiner et al. 2018), and Warp scores (Ceylan, Huang, and
Mitra 2023; Kara et al. 2024) are commonly used in recent
works. They mainly quantify results based on objective measurements in dimensions like editing quality, temporal consistency, and text consistency. Nevertheless, these existing
metrics primarily face two main issues: (1) The tendency of
misalignment with human subjective perceptions. (2) Incomplete evaluation. As they mainly measure results from a single dimension, making it difficult to comprehensively reflect
the overall quality of the effects.
Traditional video quality assessment (VQA) methods (Wu et al. 2023a, 2022; Kou et al. 2023) have been
able to align with human perceptions. However, these methods are primarily designed for natural videos and struggle to
evaluate AIGC video editing tasks adequately. In this case,
these methods overlook the different distortions in AIGC
videos (Kou et al. 2024), such as irrational objects and irregular motion patterns. Besides, they do not simultaneously
consider text-video alignment and the inner connection between source and edited videos, which are crucial for the
assessment of editing results.
To address these challenges, we propose VE-Bench, a
specialized suite tailored for text-driven AIGC video edit-

Code — https://github.com/littlespray/VE-Bench
Datasets — https://openi.pcl.ac.cn/OpenDatasets
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.11481v2

Introduction
With the rise of the AI-Generated Content (AIGC) trend, an
increasing number of text-driven video editing methods (Ma
et al. 2024a,b, 2023, 2024c; Feng et al. 2024a) are gaining momentum and finding widespread application in daily
life. However, there remains a lack of a suitable quantitative metric to assess video editing quality. Currently, the
predominant evaluation method involves subjective experiments with human participants, which are costly and yield
non-reusable results.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7105

