The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Shield Synthesis for LTL Modulo Theories
Andoni Rodrı́guez 1,2,* , Guy Amir 3,* , Davide Corsi4 , César Sánchez1 , Guy Katz 5
1

IMDEA Software Institute, Spain
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
3
Cornell University, USA
4
University of California, Irvine, USA
5
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
andoni.rodriguez@imdea.org, gda42@cornell.edu, dcorsi@uci.edu, cesar.sanchez@imdea.org, guykatz@cs.huji.ac.il
2

Abstract

popularity, is shielding (Bloem et al. 2015; Alshiekh et al.
2018), i.e., the incorporation of an external component (a
“shield”) that forces an agent to behave safely according to a
given specification. This specification ϕ is usually expressed
as a propositional formula, in which the atomic propositions
represent the inputs (I) and outputs (O) of the system, controlled by the DNN in question. Once ϕ is available, shielding seeks to guarantee that all behaviors of the given system
D satisfy ϕ through the means of a shield S: whenever the
system encounters an input I that triggers an erroneous output (i.e., O : D(I) for which ϕ(I, O) does not hold), S corrects O and replaces it with another action O0 , to ensure that
ϕ(I, O’) does hold. Thus, the combined system D · S never
violates ϕ. Shields are appealing for multiple reasons: they
do not require “white box” access to D, a single shield S can
be used for multiple variants of D, it is usually computationally cheaper than static methods like DNN verification etc.
Moreover, shields are intuitive for practitioners, since they
are synthesized based on the required ϕ. However, despite
significant progress, modern shielding methods still suffer
from a main setback: they are only applicable to specifications in which the inputs/outputs are over Boolean atomic
propositions. This allows users to encode only discrete specifications, typically in Linear Temporal Logic (LTL). Thus,
as most real-world systems rely on rich data specifications,
this precludes the use of shielding in various such domains,
such as continuous input spaces.

In recent years, Machine Learning (ML) models have
achieved remarkable success in various domains. However,
these models also tend to demonstrate unsafe behaviors, precluding their deployment in safety-critical systems. To cope
with this issue, ample research focuses on developing methods that guarantee the safe behaviour of a given ML model.
A prominent example is shielding which incorporates an external component (a “shield”) that blocks unwanted behavior.
Despite significant progress, shielding suffers from a main
setback: it is currently geared towards properties encoded
solely in propositional logics (e.g., LTL) and is unsuitable for
richer logics. This, in turn, limits the widespread applicability of shielding in many real-world systems. In this work, we
address this gap, and extend shielding to LTL modulo theories, by building upon recent advances in reactive synthesis
modulo theories. This allowed us to develop a novel approach
for generating shields conforming to complex safety specifications in these more expressive, logics. We evaluated our
shields and demonstrate their ability to handle rich data with
temporal dynamics. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first approach for synthesizing shields for such expressivity.

Introduction
Recently, DNN-based agents trained using Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) have been shown to successfully control reactive systems of high complexity (e.g., (Marchesini
and Farinelli 2020)) , such as robotic platforms. However,
despite their success, DRL controllers still suffer from various safety issues; e.g., small perturbations to their inputs,
resulting either from noise or from a malicious adversary,
can cause even state-of-the-art agents to react unexpectedly
(e.g., (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014)) . This issue
raises severe concerns regarding the deployment of DRLbased agents in safety-critical reactive systems.
In order to cope with these DNN reliability concerns,
the formal methods community has recently put forth various tools and techniques that rigorously ensure the safe
behaviour of DNNs (e.g., (Katz et al. 2017)) , and specifically, of DRL-controlled reactive systems (e.g., (Bassan
et al. 2023)) . One of the main approaches that is gaining

In this work, we address this gap and present a novel
approach for shield synthesis that makes use of LTL modulo theories (LTLT ), where Boolean propositions are extended to literals from a (multi-sorted) first-order theory T .
Concretely, we leverage Boolean abstraction methods (Rodriguez and Sánchez 2023), which transform LTLT specifications into equi-realizable pure (Boolean) LTL specifications. We combine Boolean abstraction with reactive
LTLT synthesis (Rodriguez and Sánchez 2024), extending
the common LTL shielding theory into a LTLT shielding
theory. Using LTLT shielding, we are able to construct
shields for more expressive specifications. This, in turn, allows us to override unwanted actions in a (possibly infinite)
domain of T , and guarantee the safety of DNN-controlled
systems in such complex scenarios. In summary, our contributions are: (1) developing two methods for shield synthesis
over LTLT and presenting their proof of correctness; (2) an

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Main co-authors.

15134

