The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motion-aware Contrastive Learning for
Temporal Panoptic Scene Graph Generation
Thong Thanh Nguyen1 , Xiaobao Wu2 , Yi Bin1,3* ,
Cong-Duy T Nguyen2 , See-Kiong Ng1 , Anh Tuan Luu2
1

Institute of Data Science (IDS), National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore,
3
Tongji University, China
Abstract

0.6

To equip artificial intelligence with a comprehensive understanding towards a temporal world, video and 4D panoptic
scene graph generation abstracts visual data into nodes to
represent entities and edges to capture temporal relations.
Existing methods encode entity masks tracked across temporal dimensions (mask tubes), then predict their relations
with temporal pooling operation, which does not fully utilize the motion indicative of the entities’ relation. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a contrastive representation learning framework that focuses on motion pattern for
temporal scene graph generation. Firstly, our framework encourages the model to learn close representations for mask
tubes of similar subject-relation-object triplets. Secondly, we
seek to push apart mask tubes from their temporally shuffled versions. Moreover, we also learn distant representations
for mask tubes belonging to the same video but different
triplets. Extensive experiments show that our motion-aware
contrastive framework significantly improves state-of-the-art
methods on both video and 4D datasets.

IPS+T - Conv
Ours

0.5

R@50

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

on

standing on sitting on kicking
Predicate

running on opening

Figure 1: State-of-the-art IPS+T - Convolution (Yang et al.
2023) exhibits high R@50 scores for static relations, e.g. on,
sitting on, and standing on, than dynamic relations, e.g. kicking, running on, and opening. In contrast, our method can
perform effectively on both static and dynamic relations.
precise entity localization and thorough scene understanding including background components. Subsequently, because the temporal dimension undoubtedly provides richer
information than the static spatial dimension, recent works
(Yang et al. 2023, 2024) have shifted attention to the domain
of videos and 4D scenes, resulting in the tasks of panoptic
video and 4D scene graph generation.
Popular methods (Yang et al. 2023, 2024, 2022) for temporal panoptic scene graph generation produce entity masks
tracked across the temporal dimension, i.e. mask tubes, then
predict temporal relations among them. To conduct relation
prediction, these methods encode the segmentation mask
tubes, apply global pooling, then forward to a multi-layer
perceptron for classifying their relations. However, such
global pooling operation is well-known to be ineffective in
representing temporal or motion patterns, which are useful for determining the relation among the entities. Consequently, this would result in higher misclassification rates of
more dynamic relations (Wang et al. 2023; Nag et al. 2023;
Zhou et al. 2022), as illustrated in Figure 1.
To encourage temporal representation learning, current
research (Nguyen et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022; Zhou, Liu, and
Wang 2023) uses contrastive learning for videos. However,
they mainly seek to force two clips from the same video to
be close together. As such, they mostly capture the semantics

Introduction
The advent of autonomous agents, intelligent systems, and
robots warrants a comprehensive understanding of realworld environments (Ma et al. 2022; Driess et al. 2023; Raychaudhuri et al. 2023; Cheng et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023b,a).
Such understanding encompasses beyond merely recognizing individual entities, but also a sophisticated understanding of their relationships. To construct a detailed understanding, scene graph generation (SGG) research (Li, Yang, and
Xu 2022; Bin et al. 2019; Sudhakaran et al. 2023; Nag et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2024) has sought to provide relational perspective on scene understanding. In SGG frameworks, scene
graphs utilize nodes to represent entities and edges to represent relationships, constructing a comprehensive and structured understanding of visual scenes.
However, due to being primarily based on bounding boxes
to denote entities, scene graphs fall short of replicating human visual perception with a lack of granularity (Yang et al.
2023). To overcome this limitation, panoptic scene graph
generation (Yang et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2023) has been presented to expand the scope of SGG to incorporate pixel-level
* Yi Bin is the corresponding author, yi.bin@hotmail.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6218

