The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hyperparametric Robust and Dynamic Influence Maximization
Arkaprava Saha1,2 , Bogdan Cautis3 , Xiaokui Xiao4 , Laks V.S. Lakshmanan5
1

DesCartes Program, CNRS@CREATE, Singapore
Laboratoire d’Informatique de Grenoble, Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, France
3
Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Numérique, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, Île-de-France, France
4
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
5
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
arkaprava.saha@{cnrsatcreate.sg, univ-grenoble-alpes.fr}, bogdan.cautis@universite-paris-saclay.fr, xkxiao@nus.edu.sg,
laks@cs.ubc.ca
2

Abstract

been widely and successfully used in many IM settings, effectively capturing the key aspects of diffusion phenomena.
However, the most widely used diffusion models, including IC, have two major shortcomings that limit their practical applicability. Firstly, they assume that the influence
weight (or probability) between each pair of nodes is known
accurately beforehand. When this assumption does not hold,
i.e., the model is uncertain, existing IM algorithms can easily
fail: small perturbations in these weights can lead to drastic
changes in the solution quality (Goyal, Bonchi, and Lakshmanan 2011; Adiga et al. 2014), and even approximating the stability of a solution against small perturbations is
intractable (He and Kempe 2014). However, model uncertainty is unavoidable in practice, since diffusion probabilities need to be learned from available diffusion cascades.
To address this, in recent years robust IM has been studied (Chen et al. 2016; He and Kempe 2016; Ohsaka and
Yoshida 2017; Anari et al. 2019), where the goal is to maximize the influence spread over the entire set of possible
model instances. A particular line of research is where one
assumes that each node in the diffusion graph has some features encoding information about it (e.g., age or follower
count in a social network). Then, the influence weight between a pair of nodes is a function of their features and
a global low-dimensional hyperparameter (Vaswani et al.
2017; Kalimeris et al. 2018). This hyperparametric model
is intuitive (user characteristics can play an important role
in users influencing each other (Cialdini 2001; Platow et al.
2005)) and computationally light when inferring probabilities, due to a smaller search space (given node features, once
we find the right hyperparameter value, all probabilities are
known). The inherent uncertainty in model instances arises
from the potential values of the hyperparameter, which may
not be known exactly, but only within a certain range.
Secondly, most existing IM algorithms are designed for
a static network. Yet, in practice, networks are rarely static.
For example, in microblogging (e.g., X a.k.a. Twitter), users
may join and leave, may also create connections or remove them, at any time. Similarly, in ad-hoc communication networks between mobile devices (e.g., drones), which
must perform synchronization tasks regularly, communication links get made or broken as the nodes move about in
an urban landscape. In such scenarios, an IM solution may
be required frequently and must be readily available at any

We study the problem of robust influence maximization in dynamic diffusion networks. In line with recent works, we consider the scenario where the network can undergo insertion
and removal of nodes and edges, in discrete time steps, and
the influence weights are determined by the features of the
corresponding nodes and a global hyperparameter. Given this,
our goal is to find, at every time step, the seed set maximizing the worst-case influence spread across all possible values
of the hyperparameter. We propose an approximate solution
using multiplicative weight updates and a greedy algorithm,
with provable quality guarantees. Our experiments validate
the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed methods.

Code and Datasets — https://github.com/ArkaSaha/RDIM
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11827

1

Introduction

Motivated by applications in viral marketing (Domingos
and Richardson 2001), infection detection (Leskovec et al.
2007), misinformation mitigation (Simpson, Hashemi, and
Lakshmanan 2022), information and influence diffusion
over social networks have been extensively studied (Gionis, Terzi, and Tsaparas 2013; Tang, Shi, and Xiao 2015;
Li et al. 2018). The interest in and the applicability of studies of information propagation goes beyond social media,
as diffusion phenomena and algorithms for optimizing over
viral mechanisms may fit in diverse domains such as Internet virus spreading (Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani 2001),
biological systems (Borrvall, Ebenman, and Jonsson 2000),
failures in power grids (Kinney et al. 2005), or synchronization in ad-hoc communication networks (Yu et al. 2012).
There are many ways to model information propagation
in diffusion networks. A popular model is Independent Cascades (IC) (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), which is
markovian (memoryless), in that the activation probability
of a node only depends on the current state of the system,
and local, i.e., the activation of one node can only be caused
by its neighbors. Given such a stochastic diffusion model,
the classic influence maximization (IM) problem aims to
find the top k seed nodes maximizing the expected number of influenced nodes in the network. The IC model has
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12497

