The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

M3Net: Efficient Time-Frequency Integration Network with Mirror Attention
for Audio Classification on Edge
Xuanming Jiang1,3, Baoyi An2,3, Guoshuai Zhao1,4*, Xueming Qian1,4
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China
3
Xi’an Jiyun Technology Co., Ltd., Xi’an, China
4
Shaanxi Yulan Jiuzhou Intelligent Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd., Xi’an, China
jiangxm24@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, anby20@lzu.edu.cn, {guoshuai.zhao, qianxm}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
1

2

Abstract

In recent years, researchers have applied Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) to edge devices for addressing
multiple audio classification scenarios based on limited resources (Goulão et al. 2024; Lamrini, Chkouri, and Touhafi
2023; Hershey et al. 2017). Obviously, higher model complexity generally results in better performance (Lin and
Washington 2024; Abbas et al. 2024). However, State-ofthe-art (SOTA) methods currently struggle to achieve a required balance between performance and complexity, such
as a high-performance but highly complex Transformer
model (Elliott et al. 2021) still have room for improvement
when deployed on edge devices. Notably, the widely used
CNNs are originally designed for image-based tasks, which
may limit the performance of audio classification models
based on CNNs (Palanisamy, Singhania, and Yao 2020).
Currently, researchers predominantly focus on improving
model performance. For instance, EAT (Chen et al. 2024)
has achieved high accuracy on SpeechCommandsV2, but
the 88 million parameters limit its feasibility for deployment
on edge (Zhang et al. 2024). Many researchers have introduced various “attention” (Li et al. 2023) and compression
optimizations (Mishra and Gupta 2023) to deploy models on
edge. However, these models’ accuracy has been negatively
impacted in varying degrees due to the reduced parameters.
In this work, we propose Mirror Attention (MA) that can
be applied to lightweight CNNs and constructed M3Net.
Firstly, Mel-Spectrogram features are extracted from raw
audio. Diagonal Feature Processing (DFP) and Mirror Feature Processing (MFP) are performed separately after a few
convolutions to obtain the multi-view time-frequency feature maps. DFP includes a Convolutional Block (CB) with
one-dimensional Efficient Channel Attention (ECA) for extracting time-frequency information that is completely opposite to the original features. MFP includes a Mirror Block
(MB) that can perform the time-domain-based Horizontal
Feature Processing (HFP) and the frequency-domain-based
Vertical Feature Processing (VFP) while maintaining skip
connection with the original time-frequency features.

Audio classification plays a crucial role within fields such as
human-machine interaction and intelligent robotics. However, high-performance audio classification systems typically
demand significant computational and storage resources,
posing substantial challenges when deploying to the resource-constrained edge devices with an urgent need for such
capabilities. To achieve a new level of balance between
model complexity and performance, we introduce a novel
multi-view method for the separated time-frequency features
extraction and utilization, which exists within the proposed
Mini Mirror Multi-View Network (M3Net) in the form of the
Mirror Attention mechanism. M3Net enables reversible spatial transformation of spectral features is capable of efficiently leverages robust local and global features in the time
and frequency domains with low requirements for parameters.
Experiments based on Mel-Spectrogram without data augmentation and pre-training indicate that M3Net can achieve
classification accuracy over 97% on the UrbanSound8K and
SpeechCommandsV2 datasets with only 0.03 million parameters. The contribution of each functional segment in M3Net
is fully verified and explained in the ablation experiments.

Code — https://github.com/Mental-Scholar/M3Net
Video — https://github.com/Mental-Scholar/AAAI-25-oral

1

Introduction

With the advancements in auditory perception technology,
audio classification has become increasingly important in
human-machine interaction and intelligent robotics (Silva et
al. 2024; Latif et al. 2023; Bingol and Aydogmus 2020). In
such applications, audio processing requires high real-time
performance for immediate responses. A current method is
to move the data processing procedure from the cloud to the
edge for reducing latency, which not only places higher demands on model performance, but also imposes greater
computation cost on Microcontroller Units (MCUs) with
limited resources (Fu et al. 2023; Shuvo et al. 2022).

*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17644

