The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evaluating Index-based Treatment Allocation in Underresourced Communities
Niclas Boehmer* 1,2 , Yash Nair* 3 , Sanket Shah* 1 , Lucas Janson1 , Aparna Taneja4 , Milind Tambe1,4
1

Harvard University
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam
3
Stanford University
4
Google Deepmind
niclas.boehmer@hpi.de, yashnair@stanford.edu, sanketshah@g.harvard.edu, ljanson@fas.harvard.edu,
aparnataneja@google.com, milind tambe@harvard.edu
2

Abstract
In many applications of AI for Social Impact (e.g., when
allocating spots in support programs for underserved communities), resources are scarce and an allocation policy is needed
to decide who receives a resource. Before being deployed at
scale, a rigorous evaluation of an AI-powered allocation policy is vital. In this paper, we introduce the methods necessary
to evaluate index-based allocation policies, which allocate a
limited number of resources to those who need them the most.
Such policies create dependencies between agents, rendering
standard statistical tests invalid and ineffective. Addressing
the arising practical and technical challenges, we describe an
efficient estimator and methods for drawing valid statistical
conclusions. Our extensive experiments validate our methodology in practical settings while also showcasing its statistical
power. We conclude by proposing and empirically verifying
extensions of our methodology that enable us to reevaluate a
past randomized control trial conducted with 10 000 beneficiaries for a mHealth program for pregnant women. Our new
methodology allows us to draw previously invisible conclusions when comparing two different ML allocation policies.

1

Introduction

In treatment allocation, we have a limited number of intervention resources. The challenge is to devise an allocation policy
that decides who gets a resource to maximize social welfare.
Treatment allocation finds applications in various domains,
particularly prevalent in underresourced communities. Examples include when (i) allocating scarce medical resources
such as medication (Ayer et al. 2019; Deo et al. 2013) or
screening tools (Lasry et al. 2011; Deo et al. 2015; Bastani
et al. 2021), (ii) scheduling inspection visits, e.g., for railways
(Gerum, Altay, and Baykal-Gürsoy 2019) and wind farms
(Yeter, Garbatov, and Soares 2020), or (iii) allocating spots
in support programs, e.g., after-school programs (Mac Iver
et al. 2019) or vaccination (Kehinde et al. 2024) and mHealth
programs (Verma et al. 2023b) in underserved communities.
Treatment allocation is a common problem in statistics and
economics (Kitagawa and Tetenov 2018), and AI methods
are increasingly used to solve treatment allocation problems
of societal importance (Killian et al. 2021, 2019; Künzel et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27849

2019; Bastani et al. 2021). Two common strategies are to
make allocations based on predicted individualized measures
of risk (Kent et al. 2016; Mac Iver et al. 2019) or treatment
effects (Künzel et al. 2019; Verma et al. 2023b). Both of these
and many other strategies can be captured by index-based
allocation policies. Given a fixed number of resources, these
policies first compute an index (e.g., engagement or risk) for
each individual and subsequently allocate the resources to the
individuals with the lowest index. While there is a rich body
of work on the design of such allocation policies (see references above), we study the orthogonal problem of evaluating
the effectiveness of a policy using randomized control trials
(RCTs) (Hariton and Locascio 2018). The ability to quantify
the benefits of different index-based allocation policies is
crucial to deciding which policy should be deployed in the
field. This problem comes with novel technical and practical
challenges: Whether or not an individual gets selected for
treatment by an allocation policy depends on the other beneficiaries in the population. The resulting dependence between
beneficiaries renders central assumptions behind standard
statistical tests invalid (see Section 3). Unfortunately, the
problem of evaluating allocation policies has received almost
no attention so far and is particularly prevalent in social domains, where field trials have limited participants and are
expensive to conduct.
Bridging this gap, we provide the necessary tools to effectively draw reliable statistical conclusions about the quality
of index-based allocation policies. We describe a new estimator together with customized statistical inference techniques
and demonstrate its impact in the context of the large mobile
health program mMitra (Murthy et al. 2020) run by the Indian NGO ARMMAN in which an index-based allocation
policy was deployed. This program provides critical preventive health care information to enrolled pregnant women and
mothers of infants from underserved communities. To promote engagement in the program, health workers can call a
limited number of beneficiaries each week to provide them
with additional information and guidance. The deployed policy for allocating these service calls has been developed and
refined over a series of papers (Mate et al. 2022; Verma et al.
2023b; Wang et al. 2023; Shah et al. 2024) and has impacted
more than 350K beneficiaries since deployment.
To establish the benefit of live service calls and inform
policy design, Mate et al. (2022) and Verma et al. (2023a)

