The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Theoretical Framework for an Efficient Normalizing Flow-Based Solution to the
Electronic Schrödinger Equation
Daniel Freedman1 , Eyal Rozenberg2 , Alex Bronstein2
1

2

Independent Researcher
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract

2012; Gubernatis, Kawashima, and Werner 2016; Foulkes
et al. 2001; Needs et al. 2009). Solving for the ground state
is equivalent to finding the eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian
corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue (energy); this problem can be posed as the minimization of a Rayleigh quotient.
The issue is that both the numerator and denominator of the
Rayleigh quotient correspond to very high dimensional integrals. Variational Monte Carlo approximates these integrals
via sampling, and the approximated objective is optimized
over a family of wavefunctions, yielding an upper bound on
the ground state energy. The heart of this method is therefore
the wavefunction family, also known as the ansatz: the more
expressive the ansatz, the tighter the upper bound will be,
yielding better approximations to the ground state energy.
Neural Networks as the Ansatz Recent work has proposed
using neural networks as a flexible ansatz, and has achieved
very high quality results. The network must be adapted to respect the properties of electronic wavefunctions – particularly
antisymmetry, as electrons are Fermions. Important examples of this type of ansatz are PauliNet (Hermann, Schätzle,
and Noé 2020; Schätzle, Hermann, and Noé 2021) and FermiNet (Pfau et al. 2020; Spencer et al. 2020), both of which
attain excellent ground state energies (e.g. FermiNet achieves
99.8% of the correlation energy for boron atoms).
The Problem: Sampling Inefficiency In order to be able to
apply the Variational Monte Carlo formalism to the ansätze
just described, such as PauliNet or FermiNet, one must be
able to sample from the densities corresponding to the wavefunctions given by their neural networks. In general, this is
only possibly using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
techniques such as Langevin Monte Carlo (Umrigar, Nightingale, and Runge 1993) or any of several variations. The issue
with using such MCMC approaches to sampling is that they
are inherently time-consuming: each sample is itself the solution of a stochastic differential equation as time goes to
infinity.
Goals and Contributions The main goal of this paper is
to solve the problem of sampling inefficiency, thereby yielding faster algorithms for solving the Electronic Schrödinger
Equation. We achieve this goal by specifying a wavefunction
ansatz which is easy to sample from, yet satisfies the requisite quantum mechanical properties. In particular, we use an
ansatz based on specially designed normalizing flows. More
specifically, we provide the following contributions:

A central problem in quantum mechanics involves solving the
Electronic Schrödinger Equation for a molecule or material.
The Variational Monte Carlo approach to this problem approximates a particular variational objective via sampling, and then
optimizes this approximated objective over a chosen parameterized family of wavefunctions, known as the ansatz. Recently
neural networks have been used as the ansatz, with accompanying success. However, sampling from such wavefunctions
has required the use of a Markov Chain Monte Carlo approach,
which is inherently inefficient. In this work, we propose a solution to this problem via an ansatz which is cheap to sample
from, yet satisfies the requisite quantum mechanical properties. We prove that a normalizing flow using the following
two essential ingredients satisfies our requirements: (a) a base
distribution which is constructed from Determinantal Point
Processes; (b) flow layers which are equivariant to a particular
subgroup of the permutation group. We then show how to construct both continuous and discrete normalizing flows which
satisfy the requisite equivariance. We further demonstrate the
manner in which the non-smooth nature (“cusps”) of the wavefunction may be captured, and how the framework may be
generalized to provide induction across multiple molecules.
The resulting theoretical framework entails an efficient approach to solving the Electronic Schrödinger Equation.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.00047

1

Introduction

The Electronic Schrödinger Equation A central problem in quantum mechanics involves solving the Electronic
Schrödinger Equation to compute the ground state energy
and wavefunction of a molecule or material. This problem
has manifold applications in chemistry, condensed matter
physics, and materials science. However, solving the Electronic Schrödinger Equation can be tricky: analytical solutions only exist for certain very simple problems; and numerical solutions must cope with the curse of dimensionality,
due to the fact that the wavefunction’s dimensionality grows
linearly with the number of electrons.
Variational Monte Carlo A standard computational approach to this problem is based on Variational Monte Carlo
(Ceperley and Alder 1986; Austin, Zubarev, and Lester Jr
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

200

