The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalization Analysis for Deep Contrastive Representation Learning
Nong Minh Hieu 1, 2 , Antoine Ledent 2 , Yunwen Lei 3 , Cheng Yeaw Ku 1
1
2

School of Physical and Mathematical Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 188065
3
Department of Mathematics, University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong
mh.nong.2024@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, aledent@smu.edu.sg, leiyw@hku.hk, cyku@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
n
n
ok 
X
−
b un (f ) = 1
L
ℓ f (xj )⊤ (f (x+
)
−
f
(x
))
, (1)
j
ji
n j=1
i=1

In this paper, we present generalization bounds for the unsupervised risk in the Deep Contrastive Representation Learning framework, which employs deep neural networks as representation functions. We approach this problem from two angles. On the one hand, we derive a parameter-counting bound
that scales with the overall size of the neural networks. On
the other hand, we provide a norm-based bound that scales
with the norms of neural networks’ weight matrices. Ignoring logarithmic factors, the bounds are independent of k, the
size of the tuples provided for contrastive learning. To the best
of our knowledge, this property is only shared by one other
work, which employed a different proof strategy and suffers
from very strong exponential dependence on the depth of the
network which is due to a use of the peeling technique. Our
results circumvent this by leveraging powerful results on covering numbers with respect to uniform norms over samples.
In addition, we utilize loss augmentation techniques to further reduce the dependency on matrix norms and the implicit
dependence on network depth. In fact, our techniques allow
us to produce many bounds for the contrastive learning setting with similar architectural dependencies as in the study
of the sample complexity of ordinary loss functions, thereby
bridging the gap between the learning theories of contrastive
learning and DNNs.

where k is the number of negative samples per input data
tuple and ℓ : Rk → R+ is a contrastive loss function for
which popular choices include the hinge and logistic losses:
n
o
Hinge loss: ℓ(v) = max 0, 1 + max {−vi } ,
1≤i≤k
!
k
(2)
X
Logistic loss: ℓ(v) = log 1 +
exp(−vi ) .
i=1

The learned representations are then used for downstream
tasks like classification, clustering or visualization.
Owing to its simplicity and effectiveness, CRL has been
applied in a wide variety of machine learning tasks, ranging from computer vision (Chen et al. 2020; He et al. 2019;
Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis 2018), graph representation
learning (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020; Zhu et al. 2020;
Velickovic et al. 2019), natural language models (Gao, Yao,
and Chen 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Reimers and Gurevych
2021) and time-series forecasting (Lee, Park, and Lee 2024;
Yang, Zhang, and Cui 2022; Nie1 et al. 2023; Eldele et al.
2021). Despite the aforementioned successes, very few contributions have been made to explain the good performance
of CRL. Even though there are several empirical studies that
demonstrate the effectiveness of CRL (Chen et al. 2020; He
et al. 2019), there are limited theoretical analyses conducted
to explain its generalization behaviour.
In the work of Arora et al. (2019), a theoretical framework to study the generalization behaviour of CRL is proposed. Let F = {f : X → Rd |∥f (x)∥2 ≤ B} be a class
of representation functions and assume that the loss function
is ℓ∞ -Lipschitz with constant η > 0, where ∥ · ∥p denotes
the ℓp norm for p ≥ 1. The √
authors provided a bound that
scales in the order of O(ηB kRS (F )/n), where RS (F )
is a measure
√ of complexity for the function class F . However, the k dependency on negative samples is inconsistent with some of the works that suggest large number of
negative samples implicitly implies better generalization or
at least does not degrade generalization capability (Awasthi,
Dikkala, and Kamath 2022; Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020;

Arxiv URL — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12014

Introduction
Contrastive Representation Learning (CRL) is a powerful
framework that focuses on learning good data representations in an unsupervised learning manner. The CRL framework can be informally described as follows: given a dataset
−
−
n
comprising of data tuples S = {(xj , x+
j , xj1 , . . . , xjk )}j=1
where each data instance belongs to an input space X , the
key idea of CRL is to pull similar pairs (xj , x+
j ) closer together and to push apart dissimilar pairs (xj , x−
ji ) in a representation space R ⊂ Rd . This is accomplished by training
a representation function f : X → R that minimizes the
empirical unsupervised risk:
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17186

