The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S²MILE: Semantic-and-Structure-Aware Music-Driven Lyric Generation
Mu You1,2 , Fang Zhang1,2 , Shuai Zhang1 , Linli Xu1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
{youmu1998, fangzhang, shuaizhang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

cate relationship between music and lyrics (North, Krause,
and Ritchie 2021; Johnson, Huron, and Collister 2014;
Suharto 2004; Barradas and Sakka 2022; Mesaros and Virtanen 2008), previous works simplify this task to melodyto-lyric generation. Melodies, with their single-channel and
monophonic characteristics (Pinkerton 1956), have a simpler structure compared to complete music compositions,
making them more manageable for this purpose. Despite
this simplification, melodies play an important role in the
semantic expression of music (Wallace 1994), which is
why these approaches have still achieved impressive performance. Some of these works focus on establishing structural
correlations between melody and lyrics. For example, studies from (Watanabe et al. 2018) and (Lee, Fang, and Ma
2019) are based on the assumption that each musical note
corresponds to a syllable in the lyrics. The methodology is
further extended in SongMASS (Sheng et al. 2021) by leveraging well-annotated datasets that align notes with syllables
and words. Additionally, Ding et al. (2024) develop an automatic procedure to extract the melody from music and fully
fine-tune a large language model (LLM) to generate lyrics
based on the extracted melody. Other works introduce predefined conditions to control the generation of lyrics. Among
them, Ma et al. (2021) combine the structural details of the
melody and predefined keywords to generate lyrics from a
constrained vocabulary. Tian et al. (2023) design a template
with predetermined titles, genres, and keywords, which is
then filled with melodic structural details to create lyrics.
Ou, Ma, and Wang (2023) use predefined sentence lengths
and melodies as inputs for lyric generation.
While these methods have achieved certain success in
melody-to-lyric generation, they exhibit specific limitations
compared to human lyric writing:
Oversimplified structural alignment and lack of annotated
data. Both the one-to-one note-syllable mapping and the artificial mappings based on note sequence lengths and syllable stresses oversimplify the structural relationship between
music and lyrics. This simplification restricts the ability to
create diverse and natural lyrical compositions. Moreover,
the lack of data annotated by experts presents a significant
challenge to this task.
Inconsistency between assigned semantic conditions and
the inherent semantics of music. In traditional lyric composition, lyricists derive content from the inherent semantics of

The task of music-to-lyric generation aims to create lyrics that
can be sung in harmony with the music while capturing the
music’s intrinsic meaning. Previous efforts in this area have
struggled to effectively handle both the structural and semantic alignments of music and lyrics, often relying on rigid,
manually crafted rules or overlooking the semantic essence
of music, which deviates from the natural lyric-writing process of humans. In this paper, we bridge the structural and
semantic gap between music and lyrics by proposing an endto-end model for music-driven lyric generation. Our model
aims at generating well-formatted lyrics based solely on the
music while capturing its inherent semantic essence. In the
music processing phase, we introduce a hierarchical music
information extractor, which operates at both the song and
sentence levels. The song-level extractor focuses on discerning the overall semantic content of the music, such as themes
and emotions. Simultaneously, the sentence-level extractor
captures the local semantic and structural details from note
sequences. Additionally, we propose a lyric length predictor
that determines the optimal length for the generated lyrics.
During the lyric generation phase, the information gathered
by the above modules is integrated, providing essential guidance for the downstream lyric generation module to produce
coherent and meaningful lyrics. Experimental results on objective and subjective benchmarks demonstrate the capabilities of our proposed model in capturing semantics and generating well-formatted lyrics.

Introduction
Automatic music-to-lyric generation is an interesting and
challenging task in both academic research and industrial
domains. This task seeks to emulate the human process of
lyric composition, generating lyrics that are both semantically coherent and structurally aligned with the accompanying music.
In traditional lyric composition, lyricists first determine
the theme and content of lyrics by analyzing semantic elements embedded in the music, such as the emotional tone,
intensity, and associated imagery. Then, based on the music’s structural attributes, lyrics are completed with a specific format or style (Culler 2017). However, due to the intri* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22208

