The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Counting and Reasoning with Plans
David Speck1 , Markus Hecher2,3 , Daniel Gnad4 , Johannes K. Fichte4 , Augusto B. Corrêa1,5
1

University of Basel, Switzerland
Univ. Artois, CNRS, UMR 8188, Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Lens (CRIL), F-62300 Lens, France
3
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States
4
Linköping University, Sweden
5
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
davidjakob.speck@unibas.ch, hecher@mit.edu, {daniel.gnad,johannes.fichte}@liu.se, augusto.blaascorrea@chch.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

problems (CSP), more directed reasoning schemes exist
that are anchored around counting. The most prominent
and canonical counting problem is #SAT, also called model
counting, which asks to compute the number of models of a
formula. While #SAT is considered computationally harder
than asking whether a single model exists (SAT), it also allows for automated reasoning about the solution space (Darwiche 2001; Darwiche and Marquis 2002). Recent competitions illustrate that, despite high computational complexity, state-of-the-art solvers are effective in practice (Fichte,
Hecher, and Hamiti 2021). Due favorable reasoning power
and vast applications, counting techniques have been extended to other fields (Aziz et al. 2015; Fichte et al. 2017;
Hahn et al. 2022; Eiter, Hecher, and Kiesel 2024).
In this paper, we bridge the gap between model counting and classical planning by introducing a new framework
for reasoning and analyzing plan space. To do so, we consider all plans for a given planning task with polynomially
bounded length, consistent with the approach used in topquality planning (Katz and Sohrabi 2020).

Classical planning asks for a sequence of operators reaching a given goal. While the most common case is to compute a plan, many scenarios require more than that. However,
quantitative reasoning on the plan space remains mostly unexplored. A fundamental problem is to count plans, which relates to the conditional probability on the plan space. Indeed,
qualitative and quantitative approaches are well-established
in various other areas of automated reasoning.
We present the first study to quantitative and qualitative reasoning on the plan space. In particular, we focus on polynomially bounded plans. On the theoretical side, we study its
complexity, which gives rise to rich reasoning modes. Since
counting is hard in general, we introduce the easier notion of
facets, which enables understanding the significance of operators. On the practical side, we implement quantitative reasoning for planning. Thereby, we transform a planning task
into a propositional formula and use knowledge compilation
to count different plans. This framework scales well to large
plan spaces, while enabling rich reasoning capabilities such
as learning pruning functions and explainable planning.

Contributions Our main contributions are as follows:

Introduction

1. We introduce a taxonomy of counting and reasoning problems for classical planning with polynomially
bounded plan lengths and establish the computational
complexity of these problems.
2. We identify a class of reasoning problems on the plan
space, called facet reasoning, that are as hard as polynomially bounded planning and thus can be solved more
efficiently than counting problems.
3. We present a practical tool, Planalyst, that builds on
existing planning and knowledge compilation techniques
to answer plan-space reasoning queries and demonstrate
its practical feasibility.

The overarching objective of classical planning is to find a
plan, i.e., a sequence of operators, that transforms the current state into a goal state. While in some scenarios a single
plan is sufficient, in others, it may not be clear which plan
is preferable based on the description of the planning task.
To address this, solvers like top-k or top-quality planners
have been developed to enumerate the k shortest plans or all
plans up to a certain length bound allowing for post hoc consideration of the plan space and selection (Katz et al. 2018;
Katz and Sohrabi 2020; Speck, Mattmüller, and Nebel 2020;
von Tschammer, Mattmüller, and Speck 2022; Chakraborti
et al. 2024). Although this paradigm has been successfully
applied in practical areas such as malware detection (Boddy
et al. 2005) and scenario planning for risk management
(Sohrabi et al. 2018), it remains an indirect method for reasoning about the plan space of a planning task.
Considering fundamental problems in computer science,
such as the propositional satisfiability problem (SAT), answer set programming (ASP), and constraint satisfaction

In more detail, on the theoretical side, we formally define a taxonomy of counting and reasoning problems for
planning and analyze the computational complexity of these
problems. Among other results, we show that the problem
of probabilistic reasoning about the plan space such as deP
termining how many plans contain a given operator is C=
complete, which is considered computationally harder than
counting the number of plans, known to be #P-complete
(Speck, Mattmüller, and Nebel 2020). We also introduce the

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26688

