The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PromptHaze: Prompting Real-world Dehazing via Depth Anything Model
Tian Ye1 , Sixiang Chen1 , Haoyu Chen1 , Wenhao Chai2 , Jingjing Ren1 ,
Zhaohu Xing1 , Wenxue Li1 , Lei Zhu1,3 *
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
University of Washington
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{tye610, schen691, hchen794, jren044, zxing565}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
wchai@uw.edu, wxli408@gmail.com,leizhu@ust.hk
Abstract
Real-world image dehazing remains a challenging task due
to the diverse nature of haze degradation and the lack of
large-scale paired datasets. Existing methods based on handcrafted priors or generative priors struggle to recover accurate
backgrounds and fine details from dense haze regions. In this
work, we propose a novel paradigm, PromptHaze, for realworld image dehazing via the depth prompt from the Depth
Anything model. By employing a prompt-by-prompt strategy,
our method iteratively updates the depth prompt and progressively restores the background through a dehazing network
with controllable dehazing strength. Extensive experiments
on widely-used real-world dehazing benchmarks demonstrate
the superiority of PromptHaze in recovering authentic backgrounds and fine details from various haze scenes, outperforming state-of-the-art methods across multiple quality metrics.

Figure 1: We feed both real hazy images and their corresponding dehazed images into the Depth Anything Model,
and could observe that for more common haze scenarios,
the Depth Anything Model can provide fairly accurate scene
depth information. However, when faced with challenging
haze scenarios (the bottom sample), it struggles to provide
precise background depth information. The dehazed images
are generated by our PromptHaze.

Introduction
The objective of image dehazing (Cai et al. 2016; Liu et al.
2019; Qin et al. 2020) is to eliminate haze in images and
restore the fine details of a background accurately, which is
essential for numerous advanced computer vision tasks (Xie
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2020). The formation of a hazy image can be represented by a physical atmospheric scattering
model:
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)),

clean, ideal J(x). However, conventional prior-based methods (He, Sun, and Tang 2010; Berman, Avidan et al. 2016)
relying on hand-craft statistical priors often struggle to accommodate the wide variety of degradation scenarios encountered in the real world, resulting in subpar outcomes
in certain situations.
With the advancement of deep learning technologies, a
variety of powerful dehazing networks have emerged, such
as AECR-Net (Wu et al. 2021), FFA-Net (Qin et al. 2020),
PMNet (Ye et al. 2021), and Dehamer (Chun-Le Guo 2022).
However, these methods often achieve high PSNR/SSIM
metrics on synthetic dehazing benchmarks but do not generalize well to real-world hazy images. This discrepancy
is due to the diverse nature of real-world haze degradation, which the limited scale of synthetic datasets struggles
to fully represent. Additionally, the high cost of collecting authentic paired haze datasets makes it challenging to
gather a reliable real-world paired haze dataset for model
training. Therefore, there have been efforts to apply semisupervised (Chen et al. 2021), unsupervised (Li et al. 2021),
or Image2Image Translation techniques (Shao et al. 2020)
for real-world domain adaptation dehazing. Nonetheless, the
actual effectiveness of these methods remains limited and
could be further improved. With the development of Gen-

(1)

where I(x) signifies the hazy image, and J(x) represents
the corresponding clear image. Here, A refers to the global
atmospheric light value, and t(x) is the transmission map.
The equation for the transmission map, t(x) = eβd(x) , is
influenced by the scene’s depth d(x) and the haze density
coefficient β.
Image dehazing, as a classic ill-posed problem, presents
multiple possible solutions J(x) for a hazy image I(x).
There have been lots of approaches based on priors, such as
the dark channel prior (He, Sun, and Tang 2010), the color
attenuation prior (Katiyar and Verma 2016) and Non-local
prior (Berman, Avidan et al. 2016), attempting to recover a
* Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9454

