The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BloomScene: Lightweight Structured 3D Gaussian Splatting for
Crossmodal Scene Generation
Xiaolu Hou1 * , Mingcheng Li1 * , Dingkang Yang1† , Jiawei Chen1 , Ziyun Qian1 , Xiao Zhao1 ,
Yue Jiang1 , Jinjie Wei1 , Qingyao Xu1 , Lihua Zhang1,2,3,4,5†
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
Institute of Metaverse & Intelligent Medicine, Fudan University
3
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education
4
Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligence Science and Engineering
5
Artificial Intelligence and Unmanned Systems Engineering Research Center of Jilin Province
xlhou23@m.fudan.edu.cn, mingchengli21@m.fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

However, the shortage of annotated 3D datasets limits the
application of supervised learning in 3D content generation (Ouyang et al. 2023). To address this challenge, recent
studies (Poole et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023) extract 2D priors from diffusion models through a time-consuming distillation process to optimize the generation of 3D content.
However, these methods (Wang et al. 2024) have limitations when extended to fine-grained scenes with outwardfacing viewpoints. Therefore, several methods (Höllein et al.
2023; Ouyang et al. 2023; Hou et al. 2024) that combine
pre-trained text-to-image generation models (Rombach et al.
2022) with monocular depth estimators (Bhat et al. 2023;
Ranftl et al. 2020) are receiving increasing attention due to
their advantages in complex 3D scene generation.
Some methods (Höllein et al. 2023; Fridman et al. 2024)
generate 3D indoor scenes represented by mesh using a
progressive framework but are prone to distorted or oversmoothing regions when applied to outdoor scenes. With the
wide application of NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2021) in novel
view synthesis tasks, Text2NeRF (Zhang et al. 2024) generates 3D scenes represented by NeRF with a progressive
framework. Although this method can generate high-quality
scenes, the generation time is still quite long. Recently, 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023) has been
widely used for high-quality scene generation due to its
excellent generation quality and real-time rendering capabilities. Among them, LucidDreamer (Chung et al. 2023)
and Text2Immersion (Ouyang et al. 2023) use a progressive
generation framework that follows the optimization goals
of 3DGS to achieve domain-free 3D scene generation. Although previous 3DGS-based approaches have made some
progress in 3D scene generation, they still suffer from the
following limitations: (i) Rely only on photometric loss in
the scene optimization process, lack sufficient regularization
techniques, and are prone to artifacts and ambiguities.(ii)
3DGS requires millions of 3D Gaussians to represent each
scene, resulting in high memory requirements, increasing
storage costs, and end-device burden.
To address the above problems, we propose BloomScene, a lightweight structured 3D Gaussian splatting for
high-quality crossmodal 3D scene generation. BloomScene

With the widespread use of virtual reality applications, 3D
scene generation has become a new challenging research
frontier. 3D scenes have highly complex structures and need
to ensure that the output is dense, coherent, and contains
all necessary structures. Many current 3D scene generation
methods rely on pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models and monocular depth estimators. However, the generated
scenes occupy large amounts of storage space and often lack
effective regularisation methods, leading to geometric distortions. To this end, we propose BloomScene, a lightweight
structured 3D Gaussian splatting for crossmodal scene generation, which creates diverse and high-quality 3D scenes from
text or image inputs. Specifically, a crossmodal progressive
scene generation framework is proposed to generate coherent
scenes utilizing incremental point cloud reconstruction and
3D Gaussian splatting. Additionally, we propose a hierarchical depth prior-based regularization mechanism that utilizes
multi-level constraints on depth accuracy and smoothness to
enhance the realism and continuity of the generated scenes.
Ultimately, we propose a structured context-guided compression mechanism that exploits structured hash grids to model
the context of unorganized anchor attributes, which significantly eliminates structural redundancy and reduces storage overhead. Comprehensive experiments across multiple
scenes demonstrate the significant potential and advantages
of our framework compared with several baselines.

Code — https://github.com/SparklingH/BloomScene

Introduction
Currently, there is a growing demand for 3D content in virtual reality. However, creating 3D content is time-consuming
and requires deep expertise, making 3D content generation
a challenging frontier. In the 2D domain, sufficient annotated datasets have greatly contributed to the development
of text-to-image generation models (Rombach et al. 2022),
enabling users to generate images through natural language.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3536

