The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Global Graph Propagation with Hierarchical Information Transfer for Incomplete
Contrastive Multi-view Clustering
Guoqing Chao1 * , Kaixin Xu1 , Xijiong Xie2 , Yongyong Chen3
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai
2
Ningbo University
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen

Abstract

established in many real-world scenarios since some samples may only have incomplete views owing to sensor instability or other unavoidable factors. Therefore, incomplete
multi-view clustering (IMVC) has attracted increasing attention (Chao, Sun, and Bi 2021).
To deal with incomplete multi-view data problems, many
traditional incomplete multi-view clustering methods have
achieved great performance (Wang et al. 2020). These methods can be divided into three classes: matrix factorization based method (Hu and Chen 2019b), kernel learning
based method (Liu et al. 2019b,a), and graph learning based
method (Wen et al. 2019). Compared with recent deep learning based methods, these traditional approaches possess certain interpretability but limited representation capability. In
addition, commonly utilized singular value decomposition
and matrix inverse operations increase time complexity.
In recent years, many deep learning methods (Lin et al.
2022; Yu et al. 2024; Chao, Jiang, and Chu 2024) sprung
up. Some imputation-based deep learning clustering methods, for example, the generative adversarial network (GAN)
is used to recover the missing data and then perform traditional multi-view clustering (Wang et al. 2018). However,
there is no rigorous theory to guarantee the accuracy of the
recovered data, especially in high missing rates scenarios.
The imputation-free IMVC obtain the final clustering results
from the available views directly (Hu and Chen 2019b; Xu
et al. 2021, 2022a). The vast majority of these methods obtain a unified representation by mapping the individual view
data to a latent consensus space and fusing the multi-view
representation to perform traditional clustering methods finally (Li, Wan, and He 2021). Obviously, the imputationfree approaches cannot effectively use the information hidden in the missing data. Since most methods divide representation learning and clustering into two separate stages,
the final clustering performance will be suboptimal.
In this paper, we propose Global graph propagation with
Hierarchical information transfer for Incomplete Contrastive
Multi-view Clustering (GHICMC) to address the above
problems. Specifically, we use GCN to obtain the embedded
representations, which can capture the topological structure.
Further, we integrate the view-specific features into a consensus representation and use the global graph to transfer
information in the same layer of the graph neural networks.
In this way, missing data can be imputed adaptively in each

Incomplete multi-view clustering has become one of the important research problems due to the extensive missing multiview data in the real world. Although the existing methods
have made great progress, there are still some problems: 1)
most methods cannot effectively mine the information hidden
in the missing data; 2) most methods typically divide representation learning and clustering into two separate stages,
but this may affect the clustering performance as the clustering results directly depend on the learned representation.
To address these problems, we propose a novel incomplete
multi-view clustering method with hierarchical information
transfer. Firstly, we design the view-specific Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) to obtain the representation encoding the graph structure, which is then fused into the consensus representation. Secondly, considering that one layer
of GCN transfers one-order neighbor node information, the
global graph propagation with the consensus representation is
proposed to handle the missing data and learn deep representation. Finally, we design a weight-sharing pseudo-classifier
with contrastive learning to obtain an end-to-end framework
that combines view-specific representation learning, global
graph propagation with hierarchical information transfer, and
contrastive clustering for joint optimization. Extensive experiments conducted on several commonly-used datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method in comparison with other state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Multi-view data refers to the same data objects observed
from different viewpoints. These views provide diverse
knowledge about the same objects, which are generally complementary and consistent. Multi-view learning (Yan et al.
2021) is a popular machine learning paradigm to mine the
complementary and consistent information within multiview data, and multi-view clustering is the unsupervised
branch of multi-view learning. Multi-view clustering aims
to improve the clustering performance by exploiting the information within multiple views.
Most existing multi-view clustering methods generally
rely on the samples with complete view data (Chao et al.
2022; Xu et al. 2022b). However, this assumption is not
* Corresponding authors, guoqingchao10@gmail.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15713

