The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

M2 RL-Net: Multi-View and Multi-Level Relation Learning Network for
Weakly-Supervised Image Forgery Detection
Jiafeng Li1 , Ying Wen1 * , Lianghua He2
1

School of Communication and Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
51205904113@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, ywen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, helianghua@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

2024a; Zhu et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024; Ma et al. 2023) for
image forgery detection mainly focus on fully supervised
learning to extract tampered artifact features, requiring extensive pixel-level annotations. While effective to a certain
extent, these methods face high annotation costs and scalability issues. As image processing technologies evolve, traditional methods often fail to adapt to new types of manipulations, especially those generated using advanced AI
techniques (Qu et al. 2024; Zhang, Li, and Chang 2024;
Zhang et al. 2024b). Moreover, DL-based image forgery detection methods typically perform well on training datasets
but exhibit significant performance degradation on unknown
images, limiting their effectiveness in real-world applications. While pixel-level annotations provide full supervision
for differentiating between authentic and tampered regions,
their high cost restricts the number of training images.
Given these challenges, we propose a weakly-supervised
image forgery detection (W-IFD) method, called MultiView Multi-Level Relation Learning Network (M2 RL-Net),
which only requires binary image-level labels to localize the
manipulated area, eliminating the need for detailed pixellevel masks during training. In W-IFD, we commonly focus
on identifying inconsistencies between normal (authentic)
and abnormal (tampered) areas within an image. We posit
that by investigating how features in manipulated regions relate to those in surrounding areas across various views and
levels of detail, we can overcome the limitations associated
with relying exclusively on image-level annotations. Specifically, M2 RL-Net leverages multi-view feature representations (MFR) and employs two relation learning strategies:
patch-level self-consistency learning (PSL) and feature-level
contrastive learning (FCL) to improve its generalization in
detecting and localizing complex tampering scenarios.
MFR captures feature representations from both RGB and
noise views, where the RGB stream is designed to detect visually apparent tampering artifacts, while the noise stream
focuses on identifying distribution inconsistencies between tampered and authentic regions to identify semanticagnostic artifacts. PSL explores internal patch-level similarities to enforce consistency constraints within ambiguous areas of forgery localization. This self-supervised technique
utilizes generated pseudo-localization regions to correct potential false positives, precisely estimate inconsistent manipulation regions, and mitigate overfitting. FCL asserts that

As digital media manipulation becomes increasingly sophisticated, accurately detecting and localizing image forgeries
with minimal supervision has become a critical challenge.
Existing weakly supervised image forgery detection (W-IFD)
methods often rely on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and limited exploration of internal relationships, leading to
poor detection and localization performance with only imagelevel labels. To address these limitations, we introduce a
novel Multi-View and Multi-Level Relation Learning Network (M2 RL-Net) for W-IFD. M2 RL-Net effectively identifies forged images using only image-level annotations by
exploring relationships between different views and hierarchical levels within images. Specifically, M2 RL-Net achieves
patch-level self-consistency learning (PSL) and feature-level
contrastive learning (FCL) across different views, facilitating
more generalized self-supervised learning of forgery features.
In detail, PSL employs self-supervised learning to distinguish
consistent and inconsistent regions within images, enhancing
its ability to accurately locate tampered areas. FCL utilizes
feature-level self-view and multi-view contrastive learning to
differentiate between genuine and tampered image features,
thereby improving the recognition of authentic and manipulated content across different views. Extensive experiments
on various datasets demonstrate that M2 RL-Net outperforms
existing weakly supervised methods in detection and localization accuracy. This research sets a new benchmark for W-IFD
and lays a robust foundation for future studies in this field.

Introduction
Digital images play a crucial role in disseminating information and documenting reality. However, the proliferation of
advanced editing tools and models, such as Diffusion and
GANs (Franceschi et al. 2024; Rombach et al. 2022) has
made image manipulation increasingly accessible, challenging the notion of ”seeing is believing.” The edited or manipulated images can fabricate fake news, perpetrate academic
fraud, and facilitate illegal activities, thereby threatening social stability. Detecting such manipulation is difficult, making it imperative to advance image forgery detection to verify image authenticity and spot the tampered areas. Most
existing deep learning (DL)-based methods (Zhang et al.
* Corresponding author: Ying Wen.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4743

