The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Grained Query-Guided Set Prediction Network for Grounded Multimodal
Named Entity Recognition
Jielong Tang1 , Zhenxing Wang4 , Ziyang Gong2 , Jianxing Yu1,5 , Xiangwei Zhu3 , and Jian Yin1 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China
School of Atmospheric Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China
3
School of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Game, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China
{tangjlong3, gongzy23}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {issjyin, yujx26, zhuxw666}@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
wangzhenxing@iscas.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Multimodal Named Entity Recognition (Zhang et al. 2021a)
and Visual Grounding (Redmon and Farhadi 2018), adopting the pipeline approach to solve it, which leads to serious error propagation. To address this problem, recent research paradigm has transferred to detect span-type-region
triplets with unified model by formulating GMNER as machine reading comprehension (MRC) (Jia et al. 2023) or sequence generation (Yu et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2023).
Despite their remarkable performance, limitations still
exist. The MRC-based frameworks utilize human-designed
type-specific queries as prior instructions to simultaneously
guide entity recognition and entity grounding, struggling to
distinguish different ambiguous entities. For example in Figure 1 (a), with the input of multiple fixed person queries like
”Please extract person: People’s name...”, the model incorrectly detects off-White x Jordan (Shoes) as Jordan (Person) and assigns the wrong region originally belonging to
other entity (Kevin Durant). On the other hand, sequence
generation-based methods suffer from exposure bias. They
autoregressively decode span-type-region triples one by one
in predefined sequence order, resulting in the prediction of
off-White x Jordan region highly sensitive to errors in preceding Kevin Durant detection in Figure 1 (b).
In our perspective, the essence of these errors is the inappropriate modeling of multimodal entity relationships. (1)
Manually building specific query for each entity is laborintensive and impractical. Existing MRC-based frameworks
overlook the distinctions of intra-entity connection due to
their reliance on duplicate and untrainable type queries that
cannot distinguish intrinsic features of ambiguous entities.
(2) Sequence generation-based methods excessively rely on
inter-entity relationships between different multimodal entities elements, where the current output is vulnerable to
previous predictions. Therefore, we propose a novel unified
framework named MQSPN, mainly consisting of learnable
Multi-grained Query Set (MQS) and Multimodal Set Prediction Network (MSP) to focus on modeling appropriate
relationships at intra-entity and inter-entity levels.
We maintain that modeling intra-entity connections is
foundational; only when a model is capable of distinguishing individual entities can it further model inter-entity re-

Grounded Multimodal Named Entity Recognition (GMNER)
is an emerging information extraction (IE) task, aiming to simultaneously extract entity spans, types, and corresponding
visual regions of entities from given sentence-image pairs
data. Recent unified methods employing machine reading
comprehension or sequence generation-based frameworks
show limitations in this difficult task. The former, utilizing human-designed type queries, struggles to differentiate ambiguous entities, such as Jordan (Person) and offWhite x Jordan (Shoes). The latter, following the one-byone decoding order, suffers from exposure bias issues. We
maintain that these works misunderstand the relationships
of multimodal entities. To tackle these, we propose a novel
unified framework named Multi-grained Query-guided Set
Prediction Network (MQSPN) to learn appropriate relationships at intra-entity and inter-entity levels. Specifically,
MQSPN explicitly aligns textual entities with visual regions
by employing a set of learnable queries to strengthen intraentity connections. Based on distinct intra-entity modeling,
MQSPN reformulates GMNER as a set prediction, guiding
models to establish appropriate inter-entity relationships from
a optimal global matching perspective. Additionally, we incorporate a query-guided Fusion Net (QFNet) as a glue network to boost better alignment of two-level relationships. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performances in widely used benchmarks.

Code — https://github.com/tangjielong928/mqspn

Introduction
To effectively comprehend and manage vast amounts of
multimodal content from social media, recent research (Yu
et al. 2023a) proposes a nascent multimodal information extraction task named Grounded Multimodal Named Entity
Recognition (GMNER). It aims to extract multimodal entity
information, including entity spans, types, and corresponding regions of entities, from image-text pairs. Prior studies
decompose the GMNER task into several subtasks such as
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25246

