The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Gradient-Based Nonlinear Rehearsal Learning with Multivariate Alterations
Tian Qin, Tian-Zuo Wang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artifcial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{qint, wangtz, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) has made significant advancements
across various domains, with a shifting focus from purely
predictive tasks to decision-making. The recent proposal by
Zhou (2022b) introduced a line of research known as rehearsal
learning, which provides a novel perspective on modeling
decision-making tasks. However, previous studies mainly focused on the linear Gaussian setting to constrain the modeling
complexity. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that finding exact optimal multivariate decisions within the samplingbased rehearsal framework is computationally infeasible in
polynomial time, necessitating the development of approximate methods. In this work, we present Grad-Rh, the first
gradient-based rehearsal learning method that can efficiently
find multivariate decisions under nonlinear and non-Gaussian
settings. We address the uncertainty in decision-making tasks
using flexible and expressive conditional normalizing flow
models and derive four surrogate loss functions to enable efficient gradient-based optimization. Experimental results show
that Grad-Rh performs comparably to exact baselines on linear
data and significantly outperforms them on nonlinear data in
both decision quality and running time.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) has been successfully applied in various fields, including computer vision (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015), natural language processing (Vaswani et al.
2017; Brown et al. 2020), autonomous driving (Chen et al.
2015; Chitta et al. 2023), recommender systems (Cheng et al.
2016), etc. As the predictive abilities of machine learning
methods have been substantially enhanced by vast datasets,
accelerated hardware, and advanced algorithms, more attention has been paid to enabling ML models to make decisions
rather than merely provide predictions (Zhou 2022b).
Typically, ML models capture the correlation between feature variables and the label variable, which suffices for predictions in stationary distributions. However, decision-making
requires more concrete variable relationships that elucidate
how data are generated through concrete physical processes,
so that the model could identify the appropriate variables to
act upon to achieve decision goals. Researchers often turn to
causal relations (Lattimore, Lattimore, and Reid 2016; Lee
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26859

and Bareinboim 2018), which describe stable cause-effect
relationships among variables (Pearl 2009; Imbens and Rubin
2015). However, as noted by Zhou (2022b), a comprehensive understanding of causal surroundings is not always necessary for effective decision-making, and identifying exact
causal relations from data is challenging (Spirtes, Glymour,
and Scheines 2000) and often computationally impractical
(Chickering 1995). Additionally, real-world decision environments can be open and dynamic (Zhou 2022a), which can
undermine the stability of causal relations. Thus, the concept
of the influence relation was proposed (Zhou 2022b, 2023),
which lies between correlation and causation. Influence relations can model mutually influenced variables, and take
into account the dynamic and time-varying decision environments, which makes it a more natural modeling choice for
decision-making tasks.
Building on the influence relation, Qin, Wang, and Zhou
(2023b) introduced an effective decision-making framework
known as rehearsal learning, aimed at avoiding undesired
future events. For instance, if a machine learning model predicts a decline in future sales, a sales manager might seek to
prevent it, and rehearsal learning can leverage past data to
recommend effective actions to achieve that. They proposed
structural rehearsal models (SRM) to encode influence relations among variables and describe the data-generating process in such problems. A sampling-based method is then used
to execute rehearsals of potential decision outcomes given
the learned SRM, from which an optimal decision could be
found to achieve the decision goal. They derived an efficient
solution for the case with a single decision variable and linear
SRMs, but left the more practically important multi-variate
nonlinear case untouched. The main challenge lies in efficiently finding effective decisions given the structural model:
It has been proven that even for the simplest linear case, the
sampling-based approach does not permit polynomial-time
solutions if the number of decision variables is larger than
one (Qin, Wang, and Zhou 2023b), which highlights the need
for approximate solutions. Recently, Du et al. (2024) further
considered decision costs for the linear Gaussian case. The
nonlinear and non-Gaussian settings remain unexplored.
In this work, we propose the first gradient-based rehearsal
learning method that achieves efficient and effective nonlinear modeling and decision-finding with multi-variate decision variables. Specifically, we extend rehearsal learning to

