The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Adversarial Transferability with Adversarial Weight Tuning
Jiahao Chen1 * , Zhou Feng1 * , Rui Zeng1 , Yuwen Pu1 , Chunyi Zhou1† ,
Yi Jiang1 , Yuyou Gan1 , Jinbao Li23 and Shouling Ji1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Shandong Artificial Intelligence Institute
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Qilu University of Technology

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
examples (AEs) that mislead the model while appearing benign to human observers. A critical concern is the transferability of AEs, which enables black-box attacks without direct access to the target model. However, many previous attacks have failed to explain the intrinsic mechanism of adversarial transferability. In this paper, we rethink the property of
transferable AEs and reformalize the formulation of transferability. Building on insights from this mechanism, we analyze
the generalization of AEs across models with different architectures and prove that we can find a local perturbation to
mitigate the gap between surrogate and target models. We further establish the inner connections between model smoothness and flat local maxima, both of which contribute to the
transferability of AEs. Further, we propose a new adversarial
attack algorithm, Adversarial Weight Tuning (AWT), which
adaptively adjusts the parameters of the surrogate model using generated AEs to optimize the flat local maxima and
model smoothness simultaneously, without the need for extra data. AWT is a data-free tuning method that combines
gradient-based and model-based attack methods to enhance
the transferability of AEs. Extensive experiments on a variety
of models with different architectures on ImageNet demonstrate that AWT yields superior performance over other attacks, with an average increase of nearly 5% and 10% attack
success rates on CNN-based and Transformer-based models,
respectively, compared to state-of-the-art attacks.

Figure 1: The motivation of the proposed AWT that achieves
flat local minima via adjusting the surrogate model’s parameters θs to enable more transferable AEs. This plot illustrates
that we can achieve low ∇x′ ℓ(x′ , y; θs ) through the input
and parameter space. The colored dots represent the generated AEs with different loss value on the target model θt .

Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al. 2017), which are
intentionally crafted to mislead the model while appearing
benign to human observers.
From a practical perspective, one particularly concerning
aspect of AEs is their ability to transfer between different
models (Ma et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023), allowing attackers to craft effective perturbations without direct access to
the target model’s architecture or parameters (Dong et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2021c; Wang and He 2021). Recently,
researchers have proposed a variety of transferable attack
methods aiming to maximize the success rate of these attacks and avoid over-fitting to the surrogate models (Dong
et al. 2018, 2019). These methods leverage different strategies, such as input transformation by applying data augmentation (Xie et al. 2019), model ensemble that exploits the
outputs of multiple models in loss or logits (Liu et al. 2016)
and gradient rectification with momentum (Dong et al. 2018;
Lin et al. 2019), to generate transferable AEs across diverse
architectures of the surrogate model. Although these methods have presented better performance, there are no clear
explanations for the factors behind transferability.
To explain what factors have resulted in the different
transferability of different models, Wu et al. (Wu et al.
2018) explored how adversarial transferability relies on the

Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
remarkable success across a wide range of applications,
from computer vision (He et al. 2016) and natural language processing (Radford et al. 2019) to speech recognition (Povey et al. 2011) and autonomous driving (Caesar
et al. 2020). The proliferation of large-scale models (Rombach et al. 2022), empowered by advancements in computational resources and the availability of vast datasets, has
further accelerated the adoption of DNNs in real-world scenarios. Despite these achievements, DNNs have been shown
to be vulnerable to adversarial examples (AEs) (Goodfellow,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2061

