The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Designing Specialized Two-Dimensional Graph Spectral Filters
for Spatial-Temporal Graph Modeling
Yuxin Chen1 , Fangru Lin1 , Jingyi Huo1 , Hui Yan1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{cyx0520,linfangru,918101170104,yanhui}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

Prevailing methods in spatial-temporal graph modeling
commonly integrate Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2016) with temporal encoders (Tang et al. 2022)
to capture the interdependent nature of data across both spatial and temporal dimensions. These methods typically begin
by constructing graphs to represent spatial relations among
different entities. GNNs then adopt the adjacency matrices of these graphs to perform node-level aggregations for
spatial correlation modeling, while temporal encoders focus
on capturing dependencies for each entity across different
timestamps. By combining GNNs and temporal encoders
into a unified framework, many representative GNN-based
methods (Zhou et al. 2023) have been developed, achieving
advanced performance in spatial-temporal graph modeling.
In general, the node-level aggregation operations in these
GNN-based methods originate from a localized first-order
approximation of spectral graph convolutions (Du et al.
2022), which can be seen as a special form of low-pass filters. Existing studies (Bo et al. 2021) show that low-pass
filtering, which mainly retains the commonality of node features, is the key to developing stable and accurate GNNbased models for spatial-temporal learning. Early attempts
(Wu et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2020) adopt a fixed low-pass filter for node representation learning, that is, updating node
representation by aggregating neighbors’ information over
a fixed graph structure, which cannot model the evolving
node-wise relations in dynamic systems. Later advanced approaches (Li et al. 2023) adaptively build a series of lowpass filters, each tailored for different time steps, for better
spatial-temporal graph modeling.
Nevertheless, most of these works design filters exclusively for refining spatial information and require additional
temporal encoders to complete the spatial-temporal modeling. Such a separation of spatial and temporal modeling naturally violates the real-world unified spatial-temporal interdependencies (Song et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2024), which
largely hinders the forecasting performance of these models.
Moreover, these low-pass filters, focusing on retaining the
commonality of related nodes by forcing similar representations, fail to fully exploit systems with diverse node interactions, i.e., interactions between related nodes can result in
either similar or distinct observations. For example, in road
networks, intersections sharing an upstream-downstream relationship tend to exhibit similar traffic flow, while traffic

Spatial-temporal graph modeling is challenging due to the diverse node interactions across spatial and temporal dimensions. Recent studies typically adopt Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) to perform node-level aggregation at different time
steps, acting as a series of low-pass graph spectral filters,
for node interaction modeling. However, these filters, confined to the spatial dimension, are ill-suited for processing
signals of nodes with inherent spatial-temporal interdependencies. Moreover, oversimplified low-pass filtering fails to
fully exploit information from diverse node interactions. To
address these issues, we propose a Spatial-Temporal Spectral Graph Neural Network (STSGNN), which designs specialized two-dimensional (2-D) graph spectral filters for comprehensive spatial-temporal graph modeling. First, based on
the normalized Laplacian spectrum of spatial and temporal
graphs, we extend existing graph spectral theory from a univariate spatial dimension to a bivariate spatial-temporal dimension through a 2-D Discrete Graph Fourier Transform (2D DGFT). Then, we leverage the bivariate Bernstein polynomial approximation, with learned basis coefficients, to design 2-D filters with specialized spectral properties for unified spatial-temporal signal filtering. Finally, the filtered signals, with refined spatial-temporal representations, are fed
into well-designed pyramidal gated convolution modules to
acquire multiple ranges of spatial-temporal dependencies.
Experiments on traffic and meteorological prediction tasks
demonstrate that STSGNN achieves state-of-the-art performance. Additionally, we visualize the 2-D filters learned from
different inputs to enhance the model’s interpretability.

Introduction
Spatial-temporal graph modeling is a crucial research subject that focuses on representing and analyzing systems with
inherent spatial-temporal interdependencies using graph
structures. It has been widely applied to numerous realworld scenarios, such as traffic flow forecasting (Jiang et al.
2023) and air quality inference (Zhang et al. 2020). Effective
spatial-temporal graph modeling provides essential insights
and accurate predictions that are vital for decision-making
and policy formulation in various dynamic systems, thereby
improving the service quality of related applications.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11500

