The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Foundation Model Driven Appearance Extraction for Robust Multiple Object
Tracking
Teng Fu, Haiyang Yu, Ke Niu, Bin Li* , Xiangyang Xue*
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{tfu23, kniu22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {hyyu20, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in
computer vision. Existing methods utilize motion information or appearance information to perform object tracking.
However, these algorithms still struggle with special circumstances, such as occlusion and blurring in complex scenes.
Inspired by the fact that people can pinpoint objects through
verbal descriptions, we explore performing long-term robust
tracking using semantic features of objects. Motivated by the
success of the multimodal foundation model in text-image
alignment, we reconsider the appearance feature extraction
module in MOT and propose a Foundation model Driven
multi-object tracker (FDTracker). Specifically, we propose
a two-stage trained appearance feature extractor. In the first
stage, using a single image of the object as input, the model
could capture the attributes of objects with the assistance of
natural language instructions. In the second stage, using a sequence of images of objects as input, the model learns how
to use these attributes to distinguish between different objects
and connect the same object at different times. Finally, for coordinating appearance and motion information, we propose a
reasonable combined strategy, which better facilitates trajectory assignment and reconnection. Extensive experiments on
benchmarks demonstrate the robustness of FDTracker.

`

FDTracker

''A woman with short black hair is dressed in a blue shirt
and black pants, wearing black flats, and holding a black
shoulder bag.''

: Semantic Features Extraction

: Lost Tracklet Reconnection

Figure 1: FDTracker provide accurate verbal descriptions of
personal attributes. Thus, when a person disappears for a period of time and reappears, it can be reconnected to the original tracklet based on the appearance description.
detectors (Ge et al. 2021; Ren et al. 2015), those methods
tend to achieve higher performance.
Existing methods use motion or appearance information
to associate objects in consecutive frames. The former typically uses the Kalman Filter for spatial location information updating, while the latter uses a ReID model to extract the appearance feature vector. However, existing methods still have some shortcomings. On the one hand, some
methods use only a few frames or ignore the utilization of
temporal information. On the other hand, they still struggle
with special circumstances such as occlusion and blurring
in complex scenes. Although motion information has been
proven (Zhang et al. 2022b) to be good enough in existing
benchmarks, we believe that appearance features extracted
from long-time sequences are vital and promising solutions
for those complex scenes.
In our quest to develop a more robust model for appearance feature extraction, we have observed that humans can
quickly and clearly distinguish objects using natural language in complex scenarios. Inspired by the success of multimodal foundation models in text-image alignment (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022, 2023), we propose FDTracker, a Foundation model Driven tracker with robust appearance feature extraction capability, as shown in Figure 1.
Specifically, FDTracker processes each frame sequentially
and consists of three main stages: object detection, distance
matrix calculation and tracklet management. Firstly, a pretrained detection model will detect objects in the frame.
Then, the distance matrix calculation stage will calculate

Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision. Among many kinds of objects, pedestrian tracking is the most popular and valuable
research field and has many downstream tasks like video
surveillance and autonomous driving. MOT aims to localize
each object in the input sequences and assign a unique ID
to each object. There are two mainstream paradigms to address the task, Tracking-By-Detection (TBD) (Aharon, Orfaig, and Bobrovsky 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Zhou, Wang,
and Krähenbühl 2019) and Transformer-based methods (Cai
et al. 2022; Fu et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2023). The former calculates appearance similarity (Ma et al. 2022) and spatial
location similarity (Zhang et al. 2022b) between existing active tracklets and new detection results and then performs
the association using two distance metrics (or one of them).
Due to the high-quality detection results from the existing
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3031

