The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

WildFake: A Large-Scale and Hierarchical Dataset for AI-Generated Images
Detection
Yan Hong1 , Jianming Feng1 , Haoxing Chen1 , Jun Lan1 , Huijia Zhu1 ,
Weiqiang Wang1 , Jianfu Zhang2 *
1 Ant Group,
2 Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

yanhong.sjtu@gmail.com, hx.chen@hotmail.com
{fengji.fjm, yelan.lj, huijia.zhj, weiqiang.wwq}@antgroup.com, c.sis@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

and frequency analysis show limited efficacy, deep CNN models are more effective in pattern detection (Marra et al. 2018).
However, with the range of models available—from Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Alanov et al. 2023;
Sauer, Schwarz, and Geiger 2022; Pehlivan, Dalva, and Dundar 2023; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Esser, Rombach,
and Ommer 2021; Choi et al. 2020; Brock, Donahue, and
Simonyan 2018; Tao et al. 2023, 2022; Kang et al. 2023)
to Diffusion Models (DMs) (Saharia et al. 2022; Rombach
et al. 2022), users can now easily produce high-quality and diverse images with different types of model with personalized
weights. These images, often distributed across various social media platforms, present a significant challenge in terms
of generalization and robustness for detection technologies.
Existing detectors still face difficulties with generative models not encountered during their training phase (Aghasanli,
Kangin, and Angelov 2023; Wu, Zhou, and Zhang 2023;
Lorenz, Durall, and Keuper 2023; Wang et al. 2023). To aid
in the development of detectors, many datasets for general
AI-generated images are built (Wang et al. 2020; Verdoliva,
Cozzolino, and Nagano 2022; Sha et al. 2022; Bird and Lotfi
2023; Wang et al. 2022; Rahman et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2024). However, these existing
datasets often exhibit significant limitations. They are generally restricted to one or two types of generators, constrained
to producing images within fixed categories, or largely dependent on low-quality, user-generated images. These constraints
hinder the effectiveness and adaptability of detectors in recognizing a broader range of AI-generated images.

The development of text-to-image generative models has enabled the creation of images so realistic that distinguishing
between AI-generated images and real photos is becoming a
challenge. This progress offers new possibilities but also raises
concerns over privacy, authenticity, and security. Detecting
AI-generated images is crucial to prevent misuse. To assess the
generalizability and robustness of AI-generated image detection, we present a large-scale dataset, referred to as WildFake.
This dataset features cutting-edge image generators, a wide
variety of generator categories, and generators for various applications, organized in a hierarchical framework. WildFake
collects fake images from the open-source community, enriching its diversity with a broad range of image classes and
image styles. Its design significantly improves the effectiveness of detection algorithms, making it a valuable resource for
enhancing AI-generated image detection in practical applications. Our evaluations offer insights into the performance of
generative models at various levels, showcasing WildFake’s
unique hierarchical structure’s benefits.

1

Introduction

The development of generative models has markedly improved the creation of realistic images, simplifying the process of producing AI-generated images (i.e., fake images).
This boosted accessibility has amplified concerns regarding
the widespread spread of false information. Characterized
by their impressive visual clarity, AI-generated images are
particularly persuasive and have the potential to significantly
influence public opinion in critical domains such as politics
and economics. To counteract such harmful activities, the
development of technologies capable of detecting altered
images is essential.
Generative models typically introduce unique patterns,
which don’t appear in real images and vary depending on the
model and its corresponding training data (Marra et al. 2019).
Recent research in synthetic image detection has focused on
identifying these irregular patterns through methods like color
pattern analysis, light intensity evaluation, and Fourier spectrum analysis (Corvi et al. 2023; Frank et al. 2020). While
traditional techniques based on manually selected features

In this paper, we present WildFake, a comprehensive, largescale dataset specifically designed for the detection of AIgenerated images. We summarize the comparison among fake
image detection datasets in Table 1. WildFake stands out by
generating a diverse array of rich, stylistically varied, and
high-quality images. Within the WildFake dataset, to augment the dataset’s diversity, fake images are produced either
through our extensive generation pipeline or sourced from
open-source communities, where users share images created
with their personalized generative models. Real images are
gathered from open datasets used in various tasks like image
captioning, generation, and classification, ensuring a broad
spectrum of styles and content. We have conducted a series
of experiments on the WildFake dataset to assess the generalization capabilities of detectors trained on fake images,

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3500

