The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking Open-Vocabulary Segmentation of Radiance Fields in 3D Space
Hyunjee Lee* , Youngsik Yun* , Jeongmin Bae, Seoha Kim, Youngjung Uh†
Yonsei University
{hyunji12, bbangsik, jaymin.bae, hailey07, yj.uh}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Understanding the 3D semantics of a scene is a fundamental problem for various scenarios such as embodied agents.
While NeRFs and 3DGS excel at novel-view synthesis, previous methods for understanding their semantics have been
limited to incomplete 3D understanding: their segmentation
results are rendered as 2D masks that do not represent the
entire 3D space. To address this limitation, we redefine the
problem to segment the 3D volume and propose the following methods for better 3D understanding. We directly supervise the 3D points to train the language embedding field, unlike previous methods that anchor supervision at 2D pixels.
We transfer the learned language field to 3DGS, achieving
the first real-time rendering speed without sacrificing training time or accuracy. Lastly, we introduce a 3D querying and
evaluation protocol for assessing the reconstructed geometry
and semantics together. Code, checkpoints, and annotations
are available at the project page.

Project page — https://hyunji12.github.io/Open3DRF/

1

Figure 1: Previous works segment rendered 2D masks on
rendered features to understand radiance fields. Instead, we
reformulate the task to segment 3D volumes. Our approach
significantly improves 3D understanding of radiance fields.

Introduction

Semantically understanding 3D space is important for various computer vision tasks. For instance, it is crucial to segment 3D objects accurately for robot manipulation (Rashid
et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2024). Recently, several works have
focused on understanding 3D scenes represented by radiance
fields such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall
et al. 2020) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al.
2023). LERF (Kerr et al. 2023) introduces a language embedding field which is rendered on a chosen viewpoint to
be queried by open vocabulary. The language field is supervised by CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) embeddings from the
multi-scale patches to capture various sizes of objects. Subsequent works (Zhang, Li, and Ahuja 2024; Qin et al. 2023)
incorporate SAM masks (Kirillov et al. 2023) to supervise
the language field for clear segmentation boundaries.
We revisit the 3D understanding of NeRFs and 3DGS in
four aspects: problem setting, supervision, embeddings, and
evaluation. The problem setting of previous works leads to

limited 3D understanding as they merely produce rendered
2D masks for given viewpoints rather than 3D semantic volumes. On the other hand, we set the problem to segment 3D
volume regarding the semantics of 3D points.
The previous methods encourage the rendered embeddings, rather than the embeddings in 3D space, to match the
ground truth. Furthermore, their multi-scale language embeddings require finding the optimal scale for a given viewpoint and a query text, which is prone to multi-view inconsistency. In contrast, we encourage 3D points to learn language embeddings following our revisited problem setting.
Although the ground truth is still language embeddings of
2D images, changing the dimension for computing the loss
greatly improves 3D understanding as shown in Figure 1. In
addition, we remove multi-scale embeddings by encoding
masked objects, achieving multi-view consistent rendered
feature maps.
Meanwhile, previous works on understanding 3DGS explicitly add language embeddings for each Gaussian and
jointly train them (Qin et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023). How-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4491

