The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Chain of Thought Prompting in Large Language Models
via Reasoning Patterns
Yufeng Zhang1,2 , Xuepeng Wang1,3, * , Lingxiang Wu1,3, * , Jinqiao Wang1,2,3
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Wuhan AI Research, Wuhan, China
{yufeng.zhang, xuepeng.wang}@ia.ac.cn, {lingxiang.wu, jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

Chain of Thought (CoT) prompting can encourage language
models to engage in multi-step logical reasoning. The quality of the provided demonstrations significantly influences the
success of downstream inference tasks. Current unsupervised
CoT methods primarily select examples based on the semantics of the questions, which can introduce noise and lack interpretability. In this paper, we propose leveraging reasoning
patterns to enhance CoT prompting effectiveness. Reasoning
patterns represent the process by which language models arrive at their final results. By utilizing prior knowledge and
prompt-based methods from large models, we first construct
task-specific pattern sets. We then select diverse demonstrations based on different reasoning patterns. This approach not
only mitigates the impact of noise but also provides explicit
interpretability to help us understand the mechanisms of CoT.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method is more
robust and consistently leads to improvements across various
reasoning tasks.

Figure 1: Example of the chain-of-thought prompting. The
prompt influences how LLMs arrive at the final answer.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across a wide range of language tasks. In
general question-answering tasks (Kwiatkowski et al. 2019),
LLMs hold a distinct advantage over other language models due to their robust writing capabilities. However, when
it comes to more advanced tasks such as logical reasoning,
mathematical computation, and symbolic reasoning, LLMs
often fall short (Qiao et al. 2023; Huang and Chang 2023).
One effective approach to addressing these challenges
is Chain of Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al. 2022b).
By providing several demonstration examples that include
a problem, intermediate reasoning steps, and an answer,
CoT prompting serves as a contextual guide for downstream
tasks. This approach encourages LLMs to generate multistep logical reasoning, thereby maximizing the likelihood of
producing more plausible answers. The advantage of this
method lies in its simplicity and efficiency; unlike finetuning, it does not require extensive gradient updates or alter
the model’s inherent capabilities. Instead, it acts as an external augmentation of knowledge. For different reasoning

tasks, we can route the model to the appropriate context, and
then easily switch the demonstration sets to activate the relevant knowledge and abilities in the corresponding domain.
However, we argue that existing unsupervised CoT
prompting methods have two major shortcomings. First,
there remains a significant gap between the selected demonstration sets and the reasoning targets. Although extensive research (Zhang et al. 2023; Levy, Bogin, and Berant
2023; Yang et al. 2023; Shum, Diao, and Zhang 2023a)
has explored ways to provide CoT demonstrations to enhance LLMs’ reasoning capabilities, these methods largely
rely on the semantic features of the problem or the answer.
Such features introduce irrelevant noise on a global scale,
which can obscure the logical information needed for reasoning. Consequently, the constructed demonstration sets do
not effectively represent the domain-specific logical knowledge, and struggle to adequately trigger correct reasoning
in LLMs. Second, some demonstration selection methods
lack interpretability and scalability. These methods are primarily based on heuristic design (Wang et al. 2022; Zheng

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25985

