The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unveiling Multi-View Anomaly Detection: Intra-view Decoupling
and Inter-view Fusion
Kai Mao* , Yiyang Lian* , Yangyang Wang, Meiqin Liu, Nanning Zheng, Ping Wei †
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China

Abstract

single-view
AD model

Anomaly detection has garnered significant attention for its
extensive industrial application value. Most existing methods
focus on single-view scenarios and fail to detect anomalies
hidden in blind spots, leaving a gap in addressing the demands of multi-view detection in practical applications. Ensemble of multiple single-view models is a typical way to
tackle the multi-view situation, but it overlooks the correlations between different views. In this paper, we propose a
novel multi-view anomaly detection framework, Intra-view
Decoupling and Inter-view Fusion (IDIF), to explore correlations among views. Our method contains three key components: 1) a proposed Consistency Bottleneck module extracting the common features of different views through information compression and mutual information maximization; 2)
an Implicit Voxel Construction module fusing features of different views with prior knowledge represented in the form
of voxels; and 3) a View-wise Dropout training strategy enabling the model to learn how to cope with missing views
during test. The proposed IDIF achieves state-of-the-art performance on three datasets. Extensive ablation studies also
demonstrate the superiority of our methods.

single-view
AD model

voting

voting

Sample
Anomaly
Score 0.6

(a) Multiple single-view ensemble models
Multi-view learning

Fusion between Views

“1 + 1 > 2"

Single-view feature

AD model

Sample
Anomaly
Score 0.9

View-fusion feature

(b) Our proposed IDIF Multi-view Anomaly Detection model

Figure 1: Illustration of ensemble of single-view anomaly
detection (AD) models (Top) and our IDIF multi-view
Anomaly Detection model (Bottom).

Code — https://github.com/Kerio99/IDIF

Introduction

protocol is computationally expensive and neglects the potential correlations and complementary information between
different views, which could be critical for identifying certain types of anomalies.
On actual production lines, we find that human inspectors
check areas that are potentially abnormal from multiple angles. Observation from different views can provide information about how the same area behaves under different lighting conditions or depth flatness. Representations of anomalous regions of different views are complementary. We believe a single model of multi-view anomaly detection can
take advantage of the complementary property to improve
the confidence of anomaly detection, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
In this paper, we propose an Intra-view Decoupling and
Inter-view Fusion (IDIF) model for multi-view anomaly detection. Different from ensemble of models for each view,
IDIF pays more attention to utilizing the complementary
features of different views. Through intra-view decoupling,
IDIF is able to decompose the single view image features

Anomaly detection aims to distinguish different patterns
(i.e., abnormal samples) from known normal patterns. It
has various applications, such as industrial defect detection (Roth et al. 2022), medical image analysis (Raza and
Singh 2021; Liu, Aviles-Rivero, and Schönlieb 2023), and
autonomous driving (Zhang et al. 2023a).
While existing methods have made remarkable progress
in anomaly detection recently (Bergmann et al. 2019; Roth
et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023), most methods focus on
single-view anomaly detection, which would lead to missing anomalies hidden in blind spots. It is necessary to detect anomalies from multiple views. Training the model for
each view individually and voting on the results might be a
straightforward option, as shown in Fig. 1(a). However, such
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Ping Wei is the corresponding author (pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12381

