The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Read, Watch and Scream! Sound Generation from Text and Video
Yujin Jeong* , Yunji Kim, Sanghyuk Chun, Jiyoung Lee†
NAVER AI Lab

Abstract

while holding a toy in his mouth. A human can imagine the
sound of the video; the dog growls lowly, and the growling sounds like the dog is biting something. When the person grips and pulls the toy, the dog will treat the human by
growling louder. Finally, when the dog shakes his head, the
growling will become louder. If a generative model does not
understand the visual information, it will be a random growling sound, not like the dog biting something. If audio is not
controlled by text, the generated audio might be only related
to the dog, e.g., a barking sound.
Table 1 shows the recent attempts to generate an audio
sample from the given video or text. There are two major directions to generate an audio sample from the given
video directly. First, there have been studies of a sound effect (SFX) generation with short moments for video editing tasks (Comunità et al. 2024; Du et al. 2023), known
as Foley. They are restricted to the pre-defined sound effect classes and can only control discrete information, such
as onset. As another attempt, video-to-audio (V2A) generation methods have been proposed (Luo et al. 2024; Xing
et al. 2024; Iashin and Rahtu 2021; Sheffer and Adi 2023).
However, they still struggle to generate open-domain sounds
from multiple objects together. Furthermore, both SFX and
V2A methods cannot take text controls, more rich user control. Figure 1 shows the example when there is no text control; a V2A method just generates audio of “barking” rather
than “growling” by focusing on the dog in the video.
As another line of research, text-to-audio (T2A) generation has been actively studied (Huang et al. 2023a,b; Liu
et al. 2023, 2024; Ghosal et al. 2023). Despite their diverse
and high-quality audio generation quality, they lack a temporal understanding of video-only information. Like the example in Figure 1, the text-only condition can make irrelevant audio to the video (e.g., when the dog shakes heads).
To tackle the problem, we may need more controllability
to the T2A model, such as AudioLDM (Liu et al. 2023).
Recently, a few studies (Wu et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2024a;
Chung, Lee, and Nam 2024) tried to control the pre-trained
AudioLDM more precisely based on ControlNet (Zhang,
Rao, and Agrawala 2023). Although they can control the
pitch, temporal order, energy, or rhythm of the generated
audio, their generation process needs expensive timestampwise annotations for each control feature.
More recently, parallel to our study, SonicVisionLM (Xie

Despite the impressive progress of multimodal generative
models, video-to-audio generation still suffers from limited
performance and limits the flexibility to prioritize sound synthesis for specific objects within the scene. Conversely, textto-audio generation methods generate high-quality audio but
pose challenges in ensuring comprehensive scene depiction
and time-varying control. To tackle these challenges, we
propose a novel video-and-text-to-audio generation method,
called ReWaS, where video serves as a conditional control for
a text-to-audio generation model. Especially, our method estimates the structural information of sound (namely, energy)
from the video while receiving key content cues from a user
prompt. We employ a well-performing text-to-audio model
to consolidate the video control, which is much more efficient for training multimodal diffusion models with massive
triplet-paired (audio-video-text) data. In addition, by separating the generative components of audio, it becomes a more
flexible system that allows users to freely adjust the energy,
surrounding environment, and primary sound source according to their preferences. Experimental results demonstrate
that our method shows superiority in terms of quality, controllability, and training efficiency.

Code & demo — https://naver-ai.github.io/rewas
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.05551

1

Introduction

Generative models have developed dramatically, making
content creation easier for people. Especially, text-to-video
generation models such as Make-a-Video (Singer et al.
2022) and Sora (Brooks et al. 2024) show the impressive
emergence of generative models in the video domain, showing remarkable utility in film and advertising. While we are
fully immersed in the video content by watching and listening, unfortunately, these generated videos are silent. Generating the sound aligned to a video is a challenging task
requiring both a contextual and temporal understanding of
the video. Figure 1 shows an example of when text and
video controls are required to generate a sound that precisely matches the given scene. Here, the dog is growling
* Works done during an internship at NAVER AI Lab.
†

Corresponding author: lee.j@navercorp.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17590

