The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contract-based Design and Verification of Multi-Agent Systems
with Quantitative Temporal Requirements
Rafael Dewes, Rayna Dimitrova
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{rafael.dewes, dimitrova}@cispa.de

Abstract

manage interactions between agents. Compositional design
approaches employ different forms of contracts, such as
assume-guarantee contracts (Benveniste et al. 2007). However, traditional contract frameworks fall short in handling
complex quantitative requirements and ensuring optimal
collective performance, where agents must adapt to varying
conditions and still aim for the best possible outcomes.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of designing an expressive contract framework for the compositional and besteffort satisfaction of quantitative specifications in MAS with
collective goals. Our proposed framework extends traditional contract-based methods by incorporating quantitative
measures and best-effort guarantees. Agents must strive for
best possible outcomes even when perfect satisfaction is not
feasible, ensuring that the system remains functional and effective in suboptimal environments. The approach includes
formal verification methods to establish that the decomposition of global specifications into local contracts maintains
the integrity of overall system goals, ensuring that individual
agent behaviors align with the collective objectives.
We consider compositional specifications in the quantitative temporal logic LTL[F ] (Almagor, Boker, and Kupferman 2016), which extends linear temporal logic (LTL) with
quality operators. For a given trace, an LTL[F] formula evaluates to a value from a finite set of possible satisfaction values. We focus on specifications combining requirements local to individual agents and shared requirements constraining the agents’ interaction. Local requirements only include
actions of the respective agent, while shared objectives can
contain any actions but must be safety properties. Our framework ensures that individual agent behavior aligns with
both local and shared system-wide objectives. Existing work
mostly studies the qualitative case where agents have a common objective. In our model agents are cooperative, unlike
non-cooperative MAS where concepts like Nash equilibria
are central (Kupferman, Perelli, and Vardi 2016). Closest to
our approach is (Dewes and Dimitrova 2023), however our
framework is more expressive and, unlike (Dewes and Dimitrova 2023), our decomposition contracts are complete. We
will highlight these differences in Section 4.
Best-effort satisfaction means the highest satisfaction
value enabled by the environment must be met by the system. In contrast to previous work, our contracts take this into
account to allow for different levels of coordination based

Quantitative requirements play an important role in the context of multi-agent systems, where there is often a trade-off
between the tasks of individual agents and the constraints that
the agents must jointly adhere to. We study multi-agent systems whose requirements are formally specified in the quantitative temporal logic LTL[F ] as a combination of local task
specifications for the individual agents and a shared safety
constraint. The intricate dependencies between the individual
agents entailed by their local and shared objectives make the
design of multi-agent systems error-prone, and their verification time-consuming. In this paper we address this problem
by proposing a novel notion of quantitative assume-guarantee
contracts, that enables the compositional design and verification of multi-agent systems with quantitative temporal
specifications. The crux of these contracts lies in their ability to capture the coordination between the individual agents
to achieve an optimal value of the overall specification under any possible behavior of the external environment. We
show that the proposed framework improves the scalability
and modularity of formal verification of multi-agent systems
against quantitative temporal specifications.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent systems (MAS) have become increasingly important in various domains, such as robotics, distributed
computing, and autonomous vehicles. In MAS (Wooldridge
2009), agents operate autonomously but may need to interact with each other to achieve shared objectives. Compared
to larger monolithic systems, the ability of multiple agents
to work collaboratively towards a common goal offers significant advantages in terms of efficiency and flexibility.
Coordination in MAS is a major challenge, as it involves not only the synchronization of actions among agents
but also handles interdependencies and emergent conflicts.
While it is crucial for aligning strategies, it can also introduce overhead and complexity, especially in dynamic and
unpredictable environments. Additionally, achieving shared
goals often requires balancing individual agent preferences
and global objectives, which can introduce conflict.
To address these challenges, contract-based design (Benveniste et al. 2018) offers a structured way to define and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23152

