The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multifaceted User Modeling in Recommendation:
A Federated Foundation Models Approach
Chunxu Zhang1,2 , Guodong Long3 , Hongkuan Guo4 , Zhaojie Liu4 , Guorui Zhou4 , Zijian Zhang1,2 ,
Yang Liu5 , Bo Yang1,2 *
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
3
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
4
Kuaishou Technology
5
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
{zhangchunxu, zhangzijian, ybo}@jlu.edu.cn, guodong.long@uts.edu.au, {guohongkuan, zhouguorui}@kuaishou.com,
liuzj03@gmail.com, liuy03@air.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

recommender systems necessitates the aggregation of largescale user-item interaction data, which introduces significant
privacy concerns, including the risk of sensitive information
leakage. Addressing these privacy challenges is crucial for
the deployment of such systems in real-world settings.
Federated Foundation Models (FFMs) (Zhuang, Chen,
and Lyu 2023; Yu, Muñoz, and Jannesari 2023) offer an
innovative approach to addressing the privacy and security
challenges associated with traditional foundation model development. The key idea behind FFMs is to enable the training of foundation models on distributed data sources while
avoiding the sharing of raw user data. This collaborative
learning approach has emerged as a pioneering technique
within the foundation model domain, providing a promising
path for the development of powerful yet privacy-preserving
AI systems. However, two critical challenges arise when
constructing FFMs for recommender systems: First, existing FFMs generally optimize from a large-scale pre-trained
model, which presents significant deployment and computation burdens for portable devices of recommendation users.
Second, the naive FFMs regard clients equally and learn the
same model for all users, which contradicts the goal of delivering customized recommendations for end users.
This paper introduces the Multifaceted user modeling
in Recommendations with Federated Foundation models
(MRFF), to probe the new FFMs paradigm for recommendations. Specifically, we implement a lightweight foundation model on each client, training it from scratch to reduce the high deployment and computational overhead from
large-scale pre-trained models. Furthermore, we devise a
multifaceted user modeling mechanism to jointly learn userspecific and group-level personalization. On the one hand,
we privately separate certain model parameters to preserve
user preferences. In addition, we design a novel Transformer
layer and configure a group gating network on clients to hierarchically partition users into specific groups, enabling the
server to perform group-level parameters aggregation to capture user correlations. By incorporating user-specific modeling and group-level personalization, MRFF can harness a
synergistic effect, improving predictive performance while
safeguarding user privacy.

Multifaceted user modeling aims to uncover fine-grained
patterns and learn representations from user data, revealing their diverse interests and characteristics, such as profile, preference, and personality. Recent studies on foundation model-based recommendation have emphasized the
Transformer architecture’s remarkable ability to capture complex, non-linear user-item interaction relationships. This paper aims to advance foundation model-based recommendersystems by introducing enhancements to multifaceted user
modeling capabilities. We propose a novel Transformer layer
designed specifically for recommendation, using the selfattention mechanism to capture sequential user-item interaction patterns. Specifically, we design a group gating network to identify user groups, enabling hierarchical discovery across different layers, thereby capturing the multifaceted
nature of user interests through multiple Transformer layers. Furthermore, to broaden the data scope and further enhance multifaceted user modeling, we extend the framework
to a federated setting, enabling the use of private datasets
while ensuring privacy. Experimental validations on benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our
proposed method.

Code — https://github.com/Zhangcx19/AAAI-25-MRFF

Introduction
Foundation model-based recommendation methods (Harte
et al. 2023; Liu, Zhang, and Gulla 2023; Wu et al. 2023;
Zheng et al. 2024a; Wu et al. 2024) have emerged as a
promising paradigm in recommender systems. The central
idea is to leverage powerful foundation models, pre-trained
on extensive datasets, and adapt them to specific recommendation tasks. This is typically accomplished by fine-tuning
the models or incorporating them as key components within
the recommendation architecture. By harnessing the rich
knowledge encoded in the foundation models, these systems
are able to deliver more accurate and diverse recommendations. However, the deployment of foundation model-based
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13197

