The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Feature-Structure Adaptive Completion Graph Neural Network
for Cold-start Recommendation
Songyuan Lei1† , Xinglong Chang1,2† , Zhizhi Yu1 * , Dongxiao He1 ,
Cuiying Huo1 , Jianrong Wang1 , Di Jin1 *
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Qijia Youdao Network Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd., Beijing, China
{leisongyuan, changxinglong, yuzhizhi, hedongxiao, huocuiying, wjr, jindi}@tju.edu.cn
Abstract

Collaborative Filtering (CF) (Goldberg et al. 1992) techniques, especially the Matrix Factorization (MF) methods
(Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), have been widely applied
in recommender systems across various domains due to
their efficient predictive performance and scalability. However, these methods face challenges in handling sparse useritem interactions, especially when new users or items are
involved. That is, the dreaded ”cold-start” problem, which
leads to the degradation of recommendation performance.
Specifically, on the one hand, from the perspective of structure, newly registered users and newly launched products
typically lack sufficient historical interactions. Meanwhile,
long-tail items that are seldom viewed or purchased also
face a lack of interactions. These make it difficult for recommender systems to predict user preferences. On the other
hand, from the perspective of feature, the issue of feature
missing is widespread in recommender systems. For example, user information (e.g., nationality, age, and geographical location) may not be obtained due to privacy restrictions. Meanwhile, item information might also be incomplete, lacking detailed descriptions or classification tags. To
this end, we categorize the feature missing problem into two
types: user feature missing and item feature missing. The
feature missing problem makes it difficult for recommender
systems to fully utilize user/item feature information to enrich the representation of user/item nodes.

The cold-start recommendation has been challenging due to
the limited historical interactions for new users and new
items. Recently, methods based on meta-learning and graph
neural networks have been effective in this problem. However, these methods mainly focus on the missing user-item
interactions in cold-start scenarios, overlooking the missing
of user/item feature information, which significantly limits
the quality and effectiveness of node embeddings. To address this issue, we propose a new method called FeatureStructure Adaptive Completion Graph Neural Network (FSGNN), which is designed to tackle the cold-start problem by
simultaneously addressing the missing feature and structure
information in a bipartite graph composed of users and items.
Specifically, we first design a trainable feature completion
module that leverages the knowledge emergence abilities of
large language models to enhance node embedding and mitigate the impact of missing features. Then, we incorporate a
three-channel structure completion module to simultaneously
complete the structures among users-users, items-items, as
well as users-items. Finally, we adaptively integrate the feature and structure completion modules in an end-to-end fashion, so as to minimize cross-module interference when completing features and structures simultaneously. This generates
more comprehensive and robust embeddings for users and
items in recommendation tasks. Experimental results on multiple public datasets demonstrate significant improvements in
our proposed FS-GNN in cold-start scenarios, outperforming
or being competitive with state-of-the-art methods.

Several algorithms and models have been designed to
handle the cold-start problem, including active learning
(Zhu et al. 2020) or meta-learning (Dong et al. 2020; Lu,
Fang, and Shi 2020). In particular, Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017) have been adopted to enrich user-item interactions due to their powerful ability to
capture complex relational patterns and leverage the graph
structure (He et al. 2020). For example, PGD (Wang et al.
2021) and MvDGAE (Zheng et al. 2021) introduce user/item
features as nodes and form a heterogeneous graph in conjunction with the original user-item graph to enrich the final embeddings. MeGNN (Liu et al. 2023) explores enhancing meta-learning with GNN, which employs global neighborhood translation learning to achieve consistent interactions for new user and item nodes. However, these methods
struggle to preserve feature similarity between user and item
nodes and their feature nodes during propagation, exacerbating the over-smoothing phenomenon(Wang et al. 2023;

Introduction
With the rapid development of online information, recommender system has become a key tool for alleviating users’
information overload, especially on e-commerce and social media platforms. It mainly uses a personalized filtering
mechanism (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016; Ying et al.
2018) to filter out the content that users are interested in from
a massive amount of multimedia information including images, videos and audios, effectively improving the usability
of information and user experience.
†

These authors contributed equally.

* Corresponding authors.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12022

