The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SIGraph: Saliency Image-Graph Network for Retinal Disease Classification in
Fundus Image
Peng Zhang1 * , Yuan Li1 * , Haotian Song1 , Yankai Jiang1 , Yubo Tao1† , Hai Lin1† , Hongguang Cui2
1

State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, China
The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, China
zhpeng980@zju.edu.cn, yuanli@zju.edu.cn, hasong@zju.edu.cn, jyk1996ver@zju.edu.cn, taoyubo@cad.zju.edu.cn,
lin@cad.zju.edu.cn, 1189002@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

saliency-based models (Jiang et al. 2022; Demidov et al.
2023) to extract features from subtle lesion areas. The key
to these methods lies in utilizing saliency maps to match the
distribution of lesions, directing the network’s focus towards
these subtle areas and enhancing diagnostic accuracy. Although these methods have demonstrated effectiveness, they
overlook a critical aspect of retinal diseases: the spatial distribution pattern of lesion areas, i.e., the relative topological relationships of these lesions. Studies (Ong et al. 2023;
Walter et al. 2002) have shown that specific retinal diseases
tend to appear in particular areas of the retina, displaying
distinct patterns of lesion distribution. For example, in diabetic macular edema, hard exudates often appear in isolated
stripes or clusters or around large, ring-distributed microaneurysms. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of the
specific distribution patterns of lesion areas associated with
retinal diseases is essential for accurate diagnoses.
Graph-based methods have demonstrated efficacy in modeling topological data relationships. Recent advancements
have introduced Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to ophthalmology. For instance, DRG-NET (Feng et al. 2023) utilized
GNN for diabetic retinopathy grading. Other approaches
(Feng et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2023) integrate GNNs with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for retinopathy classification. However, these methods have not fully exploited the
correlation between lesion distribution patterns and associated diseases. Moreover, they often neglect the interconnections among subtle lesion areas in retinopathy, potentially
compromising diagnostic accuracy.
Building on these insights, we propose SIGraph, a novel
approach to incorporate the spatial distribution patterns of
subtle scattered lesion areas into the diagnostic process. Our
method enhances the granularity of lesion areas from image
patches to pixels and constructs a lesion graph on these pixels to capture the spatial distribution patterns of lesion areas.
However, constructing a complete graph on all latent lesion
pixels to obtain global distribution information incurs substantial computational costs. Utilizing neighborhood-based
graph construction algorithms, such as k-nearest neighbors
(k-NNs), may lead to graph disconnection, thereby losing
the global perception of lesion distribution. To address this
challenge, we propose an efficient graph construction algorithm based on the minimum Manhattan distance in four
quadrants, which ensures global connectivity while mini-

An efficient and precise diagnosis of retinal diseases is a
fundamental goal for auxiliary diagnostic systems in ophthalmology. Inspired by the importance of scattered subtle
lesions in manual retinal disease diagnosis, recent research
has achieved state-of-the-art performance by mining information related to subtle lesions, including their texture and
shape. However, the spatial distribution patterns of subtle lesion areas, which are also crucial in manual diagnosis, have
been overlooked in existing research. Neglecting these spatial distribution patterns (e.g., the ring distribution of microaneurysms in diabetic macular edema) may negatively
impact the diagnostic process. In this paper, we introduce
the Saliency Image-Graph (SIGraph) network to capture
the spatial distribution patterns of lesion areas. We first employ saliency-based perception to identify latent lesion pixels.
Subsequently, we propose a novel image-graph block to efficiently capture the global distribution of abundant lesion pixels with minimal information loss. By leveraging additional
distribution patterns, SIGraph achieves state-of-the-art performance with at least a 1.5% performance gain across three
datasets. Furthermore, ablation studies demonstrate that our
image-graph block can be integrated into other visual backbones and effectively boost performance.

Introduction
The prevalence of visual disorders such as glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, and age-related macular degeneration is
increasing as the global population ages. In this context, numerous deep-learning-based methods (Li et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2017; Han et al. 2021; Li et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2017; Han et al. 2021) have been developed to achieve highprecision automatic diagnosis. However, recent research has
demonstrated that directly employing networks designed for
general visual tasks may yield comparatively inferior results when applied to retinal disease classification. These
networks often overlook small, scattered lesions distributed
across the entire retina, such as microaneurysms and hemorrhages. In clinical practice, ophthalmologists routinely identify retinal diseases in fundus images by carefully examining these subtle features. Certain studies have developed
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10049

