The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Few-Shot Audio-Visual Class-Incremental Learning with Temporal Prompting
and Regularization
Yawen Cui1 , Li Liu2 * , Zitong Yu3 * , Guanjie Huang2 , Xiaopeng Hong4
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Great Bay University
4
Harbin Institute of Technology
yawencui@polyu.edu.hk, avrillliu@hkust-gz.edu.cn, yuzitong@gbu.edu.cn, ghuang565@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
hongxiaopeng@ieee.org
2

Abstract
Audio-Visual Learning (AVL) aims at the audio-visual perception with both audio and vision modalities. AVL also suffers from data insufficiency in many applications as with
other unimodal tasks. Concurrently, AVL often needs to continuously learn over time rather than all knowledge simultaneously. Considering the above two perspectives, our work
mainly focuses on benchmarking the unexplored Few-Shot
Audio-Visual Class-Incremental Learning (FS-AVCIL), i.e.,
continually perceiving novel categories described by a limited
number of labeled examples with audio and visual modalities.
Firstly, we provide the detailed task configuration together
with a thorough analysis of the challenges in FS-AVCIL:
(1) how to efficiently learn and fuse multimodal information with limited labeled examples; and (2) how to alleviate catastrophic forgetting cross-modal semantic correlations
with limited data. Then, we propose an efficient framework
based on Vision Transformer to solve FS-AVCIL, containing two parts: temporal-residual prompting for audio-visual
synergy adapter and temporal prompt regularization. Specifically, temporal-residual prompting is incorporated into the
audio-visual adapter to efficiently finetune the pre-trained
foundation model with limited data and capture audio-visual
correlation by learning temporal-relevant prompts. Besides,
we regularize temporal-relevant prompts to memorize previous knowledge by fully using the temporal knowledge from
various perspectives. This framework is validated in audiovisual classification tasks under the FS-AVCIL scenario, and
extensive experiments demonstrate its superior performance.

Figure 1: The configuration of FS-AVCIL. In the first session, a substantial dataset is presented. In subsequent sessions, the continual learning system is faced with a few-shot
audio-visual learning challenge. Here we employ a 2-way
2-shot scenario as an of the N-way K-shot few-shot audiovisual learning problem.
achieve this, the main challenge is how to fully take advantage of multimodal information to acquire these correlations.
Due to the modality discrepancy, learning-based AVL
methods, aggregating multimodal information to obtain the
semantic correlations generally requires encoding features
from different modalities into a common latent space and
then mapping the latent representations into the task space,
which consists of complicated architectures. These fusion
architectures usually contain numerous parameters trained
on a large amount of accurately labeled data.
However, collecting a large number of samples is prohibited due to privacy (e.g., medical images.) or even impossible due to the rarity (e.g., rare species like pandas.). Moreover, annotating examples requires expert knowledge, and it
is always costly. Few-Shot Learning (FSL) (Li, Wang, and
Hu 2021; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Snell, Swersky,
and Zemel 2017; Zhang et al. 2024) is proposed to tackle
this problem in which annotated samples are limited. As
with unimodal vision tasks, AVL also suffers from data in-

Introduction
Data in visual tasks is of multi-modal characteristics, which
inspires researchers to apply another one or two modalities
(e.g., audio and text) to compensate for information deficiencies and biases of the visual modality (Huang et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021). In this paper, we focus on audio-visual learning (AVL), which aims at audiovisual perception with both audio and vision modalities. The
target of AVL is modeling audio-visual modalities jointly
to capture cross-modal semantic correlations effectively. To
* Li Liu and Zitong Yu are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16118

