The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GCAD: Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series from the
Perspective of Granger Causality
Zehao Liu1 , Mengzhou Gao1,2 , Pengfei Jiao1,2,3 *
1

Zhuoyue Honors College, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
2
School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
3
Data Security Governance Zhejiang Engineering Research Center, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
{zehaoliu, mzgao, pjiao}@hdu.edu.cn
Abstract

prediction errors for anomaly detection (Jin et al. 2024). A
key problem is that these models only learn the similarity of
sequence embedding vectors without exploring the role of
the graph structure in the evolution of time series.
In real-world scenarios, anomalies in time series are often
accompanied by changes in dependency structures. For example, consider a simple pipeline in a water supply system.
Under normal conditions, when water pressure increases at
the inflow end, it leads to a corresponding increase at the
outflow end. However, if there is a leak in the pipeline, an
increase in inflow pressure may no longer result in the expected pressure increase at the outflow end. Therefore, learning interpretable dependency structures with causal relationships can effectively detect anomalies in the evolution patterns of time series. However, there are several key challenges in using causal relationships to detect anomalies:

Multivariate time series anomaly detection has numerous
real-world applications and is being extensively studied.
Modeling pairwise correlations between variables is crucial. Existing methods employ learnable graph structures and
graph neural networks to explicitly model the spatial dependencies between variables. However, these methods are primarily based on prediction or reconstruction tasks, which can
only learn similarity relationships between sequence embeddings and lack interpretability in how graph structures affect
time series evolution. In this paper, we designed a framework that models spatial dependencies using interpretable
causal relationships and detects anomalies through changes in
causal patterns. Specifically, we propose a method to dynamically discover Granger causality using gradients in nonlinear deep predictors and employ a simple sparsification strategy to obtain a Granger causality graph, detecting anomalies
from a causal perspective. Experiments on real-world datasets
demonstrate that the proposed model achieves more accurate
anomaly detection compared to baseline methods.

• Real systems have complex control logic and numerous
nonlinear associations, making it difficult to learn interpretable dependency relationships between variables in a
data-driven manner.
• The dependency relationships between variables are
time-varying, and dynamically capturing dependency
patterns in the system and identifying anomalies is a key
issue.

Introduction
Time series data are prevalent in the real world. Many industrial systems, such as water supply systems, aerospace,
and large server systems, have extensive sensor networks
that generate vast amounts of multivariate time series (MTS)
data. These systems exhibit complex internal dependencies and nonlinear relationships. With the rapid development in related fields, discovering system anomalies from
the large volumes of monitoring data generated by sensors
has become an important issue. This is crucial for maintaining the safe operation of systems and reducing economic
losses (Tuli, Casale, and Jennings 2022; Zhang et al. 2024).
Capturing inter-series relationships has been proven to effectively enhance the performance of MTS anomaly detection (Zheng et al. 2023; Zamanzadeh Darban et al. 2024).
Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown great
potential in time series anomaly detection by effectively capturing spatial dependencies between variables (Chen et al.
2021). Considering that most time series datasets do not provide readily available graphs, many existing methods adaptively learn graph structures, and then use reconstruction or

Time series causality is a promising tool for modeling
spatial dependencies. Granger introduced Granger causality (Granger 1969). The core idea of Granger causality is
straightforward: if using the series xi does not help reduce
the prediction error of another series xj , then xi does not
Granger-cause xj (Shojaie and Fox 2022). The original definition of Granger causality was intended for linear systems,
but recent studies (Khanna and Tan 2019; Liu et al. 2023;
Cheng et al. 2024) have extended Granger causality to nonlinear relationships.
In this paper, we propose a Granger Causality-based multivariate time series Anomaly Detection method (GCAD).
To address the first challenge, we combine deep models
with Granger causality. Deep networks have powerful modeling capabilities for nonlinear relationships. We leverage
this capability to uncover complex causal relationships from
black-box deep networks. To tackle the second challenge,
we propose using the gradients in nonlinear deep models to
dynamically mine causal dependencies. During the training

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19041

