The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VidEvent: A Large Dataset for Understanding Dynamic Evolution of Events in
Videos
Baoyu Liang1, 2 , Qile Su1, 2 , Shoutai Zhu1, 2 , Yuchen Liang1, 2 , Chao Tong1, 2 *
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, China
{liangbaoyu96, zy2423342, shoutaizhu, liangyuchen, tongchao}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

into several actions such as ’person standing on stage’, ’person holding a microphone’ and ’person making sound with
mouth’, while atomic actions can hardly describe such hierarchical relation. Distinguishing these actions from highlevel events is difficult and requires understanding different
semantic levels. (3) Dynamic logical evolution. Events are
dynamic and evolve over time, following logical sequences.
Understanding this evolution requires sophisticated event
comprehension and commonsense reasoning, which current
research finds challenging.
Recent video understanding methods have made progress
in tasks like predicting actions, detecting objects, and describing visual scenes (Wang et al. 2023a,b; Wei et al. 2023;
Duan et al. 2022; Ko et al. 2023). However, few studies have
focused on the analysis of structured and dynamic events,
which are crucial to human cognition and could significantly
advance computer vision (CV) research (Li et al. 2022).
Situation Recognition and Grounded Situation Recognition
(Sadhu et al. 2021b; Khan, Jawahar, and Tapaswi 2022) are
pioneering efforts in this direction, focusing on extracting
event structures. Nevertheless, these tasks mainly emphasize
event structures with limited consideration of the semantic
hierarchies and dynamic logical evolution of events, which
are crucial for cognitive understanding. We summarize these
tasks and datasets in Table 1 and further analyze them in the
Supplementary Materials due to the page limits.
In this paper, we further explore the understanding of
events from visual scenes and propose the task of video
event understanding that extract and induct with scripts of
hierarchical, and dynamically evolutionary events and as is
shown in Figure 1. Video event understanding focuses on the
logical evolution of events and thus encourages the extraction of highly conclusive events with high semantic levels
other than the atomic actions and the prediction of the key
relations that form complete logical chains.
To support the task, we publish a new large-scale video
event understanding dataset called VidEvent containing over
23,000 events and more than 17,000 relations from 1,110
movie recaps videos. VidEvent is characterized with complete event structures, macro event hierarchies and sophisticated event evolutionary chains. Events are ensured to have
common complete structures and broad semantic hierarchies by a meticulous annotation process under the wellestablished Propbank framework (Kingsbury and Palmer

Despite the significant impact of visual events on human cognition, understanding events in videos remains a challenging task for AI due to their complex structures, semantic hierarchies, and dynamic evolution. To address this, we propose the task of video event understanding that extracts event
scripts and makes predictions with these scripts from videos.
To support this task, we introduce VidEvent, a large-scale
dataset containing over 23,000 well-labeled events, featuring
detailed event structures, broad hierarchies, and logical relations extracted from movie recap videos. The dataset was created through a meticulous annotation process, ensuring highquality and reliable event data. We also provide comprehensive baseline models offering detailed descriptions of their
architecture and performance metrics. These models serve
as benchmarks for future research, facilitating comparisons
and improvements. Our analysis of VidEvent and the baseline models highlights the dataset’s potential to advance video
event understanding and encourages the exploration of innovative algorithms and models.

Introduction
Events are at the center of human experience(Radvansky and
Zacks 2017). We perceive events when observing, engage in
events when acting, learn from events and use event knowledge to solve problems. While understanding events with
our eyes is intuitive for humans, it remains a significant challenge for AI. Despite extensive research in natural language
processing (NLP) on events, dealing with events in visual
scenarios is still extremely difficult for AI models that are
good at capturing static entities such as actions (Wang et al.
2023a; Duan et al. 2022; Shi et al. 2023) and moving objects
(Wang et al. 2023b; Wei et al. 2023), but lack understanding
of dynamic events.
Unlike atomic actions or objects, events typically have
the following three characteristics: (1) Complex structure.
Events are composed of different constituents including participants, tools, time, and location, thus forming complex
structures, which require a comprehensive understanding
of the current situation. (2) Various semantic hierarchies.
Events usually contain different semantic levels and relations. For example, ’A singer sings on stage’ can be divided
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5128

