The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contrastive Auxiliary Learning with Structure Transformation for Heterogeneous
Graphs
Wei Du1 , Hongmin Sun1 , Hang Gao1 , Gaoyang Li2 , Ying Li1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Computer
Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji University, China
{weidu, liying}@jlu.edu.cn, {sunhm21, gaohang23}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, lgyzngc@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

structural and semantic information of the nodes (Yang et al.
2023).
Existing HGNN models mainly focus on designing effective neighbor aggregation and semantic fusion mechanisms,
paying little attention to how the structure of heterogeneous
graphs and the learning paradigm of the model affect performance in downstream tasks. In real-world heterogeneous
graphs, a large amount of data often lacks node features. In
such cases, relying solely on information learning mechanisms based on neighbor aggregation and semantic fusion
while ignoring the structural learning inherent in heterogeneous graphs can significantly impact the model’s performance on final downstream tasks. Furthermore, acquiring
node features may be time-consuming and labor-intensive
in many real-world applications involving heterogeneous
graphs. Therefore, it is urgent to address how to effectively
perform representation learning without node features and
the specific topology of heterogeneous graphs.
Regarding graph learning paradigms, they are primarily divided into supervised learning paradigms and selfsupervised learning paradigms. Supervised Graph Neural
Networks (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2020b) mainly perform representation learning by simply aggregating node features and
require the use of a large amount of labeled data for training,
thus enhancing their performance in downstream tasks. Despite their success, these studies do not fully leverage the
rich node and structure information of the graph. To address the limitations of supervised learning, a plethora of
self-supervised learning methods have emerged (Kipf and
Welling 2016; Veličković et al. 2019; Sun, Lin, and Zhu
2020), offering a new learning paradigm distinct from supervised learning. In self-supervised learning, the model is
trained by solving a series of manually-assisted tasks (socalled pretext tasks), where the supervisory signals are automatically obtained from the data without requiring manual annotation. With carefully designed pretext tasks, selfsupervised learning enables models to learn more informative representations from unlabeled data, leading to better
performance (Veličković et al. 2019), generalization (Hu
et al. 2020a), and robustness (You et al. 2020b) on various downstream tasks. So, given the powerful performance
of self-supervised learning, leveraging the self-supervised
learning paradigm to assist in supervised learning training

In recent years, methods based on heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNNs) have been widely used for embedding
heterogeneous graphs (HGs) due to their ability to effectively
encode the rich information from HGs into low-dimensional
node embeddings. Existing HGNNs focus on neighbor aggregation and semantic fusion while neglecting the HG structure and learning paradigms. However, the original data in the
HG might lack node features, which may not be effectively
accounted for by existing models. Additionally, exclusively
relying on a single supervised learning approach may only
partially leverage the invariant information in graph data. To
address these challenges, we introduce the Contrastive Auxiliary Learning Model for Heterogeneous Graphs (CALHG),
which combines edge perturbation and graph diffusion to enhance graph data, allowing it to capture the inherent structural
information within heterogeneous graphs fully. Additionally,
we employ a category-guided multi-view contrastive learning
optimizing strategy, which does not rely on positive and negative samples for model training, enabling us to capture the
intrinsic invariances in heterogeneous graph data. Extensive
experiments and analyses on five benchmark datasets without node features and three benchmark datasets with node
features validate the effectiveness and efficiency of our novel
method compared with several state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/mlcb-jlu/CALHG

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are learning and representation methods (Gori, Monfardini, and Scarselli 2005;
Scarselli et al. 2008) based on graph structures, and they
have wide applications in fields such as recommendation
systems and knowledge graphs. In recent years, many studies have shown that leveraging heterogeneous graphs can
better address problems in social networks (Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017), academic networks (Zhang et al. 2019),
knowledge graphs (Sun et al. 2019), and more. Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks (HGNNs) are specialized
deep learning models for heterogeneous graphs. They aim to
embed heterogeneous graph nodes from high-dimensional
space into low-dimensional space while preserving both
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16399

