The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Maximizing the Position Embedding for Vision Transformers
with Global Average Pooling
Wonjun Lee1,2 , Bumsub Ham1 , Suhyun Kim2 *
1

Yonsei University, Republic of Korea
Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
{velpegor, bumsub.ham}@yonsei.ac.kr, dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com
2

Abstract
In vision transformers, position embedding (PE) plays a crucial role in capturing the order of tokens. However, in vision transformer structures, there is a limitation in the expressiveness of PE due to the structure where position embedding is simply added to the token embedding. A layer-wise
method that delivers PE to each layer and applies independent Layer Normalizations for token embedding and PE has
been adopted to overcome this limitation. In this paper, we
identify the conflicting result that occurs in a layer-wise structure when using the global average pooling (GAP) method
instead of the class token. To overcome this problem, we propose MPVG, which maximizes the effectiveness of PE in a
layer-wise structure with GAP. Specifically, we identify that
PE counterbalances token embedding values at each layer in
a layer-wise structure. Furthermore, we recognize that the
counterbalancing role of PE is insufficient in the layer-wise
structure, and we address this by maximizing the effectiveness of PE through MPVG. Through experiments, we demonstrate that PE performs a counterbalancing role and that maintaining this counterbalancing directionality significantly impacts vision transformers. As a result, the experimental results show that MPVG outperforms existing methods across
vision transformers on various tasks.

Original

(Class token -> GAP)
+0.26%

Then,
Layer-wise + GAP ?

Layer-wise
(Class token -> GAP)

-0.16%
+0.73%

Original -> Layer-wise
(Class token)

+0.80%

Proposed Method
Layer-wise
(GAP + MPVG)

Figure 1: The conflicting result between the GAP method
and the Layer-wise method. In DeiT-Ti, using the GAP
method and the Layer-wise method separately results in performance improvements, but combining these two methods
leads to a decrease in performance. As a result, MPVG resolves this phenomenon between the GAP and Layer-wise
structure, maximizing the effect of PE.

Introduction
Recently, vision transformers have become essential architecture in the field of computer vision due to their superior
performance, surpassing CNNs in various tasks such as image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. This superiority has led to extensive research into numerous elements of vision transformer architecture, starting
with ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020).
Among the research on vision transformers, image representation methods for class prediction have been studied. In
ViT, the class token is used to perform image representation,
and the output of this token is then used to make class predictions via Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020). However, in several vision transformers, global average pooling (GAP) has been preferred over the class token
method due to its translation-invariant characteristics and superior performance (Chu et al. 2021b). As a result, the GAP

method has been widely adopted in vision transformers (Liu
et al. 2021; Chu et al. 2021a; Chang et al. 2023; Zhai et al.
2022).
Another research topic in vision transformers is position
embedding (PE). PE plays a crucial role in providing positional information of tokens in the vision transformer, as
the self-attention mechanism has an inherent deficiency in
capturing the ordering of input tokens (Wu et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2024). In the original vision transformer, the expressiveness of the PE is limited due to its structure, where PE
is simply added to the token embedding before being input
into the first layer. To address this problem, each layer has
independent Layer Normalizations (LNs) for the token embedding and PE, with PE being gradually delivered across

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18154

