The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Threshold UCT: Cost-Constrained Monte Carlo Tree Search with Pareto Curves
Martin Kurečka1 , Václav Nevyhoštěný1 , Petr Novotný1 , Vı́t Unčovský1
1

Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University
Botanická 68a, 612 00 Brno, Czech Republic
petr.novotny@fi.muni.cz

Abstract

the expected accumulated cost is below a given threshold
∆. Compared with ad-hoc reward shaping, the constrained
approach provides explicit and domain-independent way of
controlling agent safety. Hence, safe and efficient probabilistic planning (and indeed, also model-free reinforcement
learning, where algorithms such as MuZero (Schrittwieser
et al. 2020) are built on top of efficient MCTS planners)
necessitates the development of stable and sample-efficient
cost-constrained MCTS algorithms.

Constrained Markov decision processes (CMDPs), in which
the agent optimizes expected payoffs while keeping the expected cost below a given threshold, are the leading framework for safe sequential decision making under stochastic
uncertainty. Among algorithms for planning and learning in
CMDPs, methods based on Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS)
have particular importance due to their efficiency and extendibility to more complex frameworks (such as partially
observable settings and games). However, current MCTSbased methods for CMDPs either struggle with finding safe
(i.e., constraint-satisfying) policies, or are too conservative
and do not find valuable policies. We introduce Threshold UCT (T-UCT), an online MCTS-based algorithm for
CMDP planning. Unlike previous MCTS-based CMDP planners, T-UCT explicitly estimates Pareto curves of cost-utility
trade-offs throughout the search tree, using these together
with a novel action selection and threshold update rules to
seek safe and valuable policies. Our experiments demonstrate
that our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods from the literature.

1

Key Components of Constrained MCTS An efficient
constrained MCTS-based algorithm must be able to identify
safe and valuable policies.
Finding safe policies (i.e., those that do not exceed the
cost threshold) requires identifying “dangerous” (in terms of
future cost) decisions and keeping track of cost risk accumulated in stochastic decisions: a 50/50 gamble which incurs
cost C if lost contributes at least C/2 towards the expected
cost of the policy irrespective of the gamble’s outcome.
An agent which never moves might be safe but never does
anything useful. To identify reward-valuable policies among
the safe ones, the algorithm must not be constrained beyond
the requirements given by the threshold ∆ and hence it must
be able to reason about the trade-off between rewards and
costs during both tree search and actual action selection.

Introduction

Safe Decision Making and MCTS Monte-Carlo tree
search (MCTS) has emerged as the de-facto method for solving large sequential decision making problems under uncertainty (Browne et al. 2012). It combines the scalability
of sampling-based methods with the robustness of heuristic
tree search, the latter feature making it easily extendable to
settings with partial observability (Silver and Veness 2010),
multiple agents (Silver et al. 2018), or settings with historydependent optimal decisions (Chatterjee et al. 2018). While
MCTS-based methods demonstrated remarkable efficiency
in optimizing the agent’s performance across diverse domains, the deployment of autonomous agents in real-world
domains necessitates balancing the agent performance with
the safety of their behavior. In AI planning and reinforcement learning, the standard way of modeling safety issues is
via the constrained decision-making framework. Here, apart
from the usual reward signals, the agents are also collecting penalties (or costs), and the objective is to maximize
the expected accumulated reward under the constraint that

Limitations of previous approaches Two prominent examples of constrained MCTS-based algorithms are CCPOMCP (Lee et al. 2018) and RAMCP (Chatterjee et al.
2018). While these algorithms represented significant steps
towards practical constrained decision making, they exhibit
fundamental limitations in identifying both safe and valuable policies.
Safety limitations: A usual way of tracking the cost risk
is updating the current threshold ∆ appropriately after each
decision. As we discuss in Section 3, both CC-POMCP and
RAMCP perform this update in an unsound manner and
might thus produce policies violating the cost constraint
even if a safe policy exists within the explored part of the
tree.
Value limitations: Both CC-POMCP and RAMCP compute randomized policies, which are necessary for optimality in constrained decision-making scenarios (Altman 1999).
However, their reasoning about the reward-cost payoff is incomplete. RAMCP does not use the cost information during

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26569

