The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Online Training for Zero-Shot Time-Lapse Microscopy Denoising and
Super-Resolution
Ruian He, Ri Cheng, Xinkai Lyu, Weimin Tan* , Bo Yan*
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
rahe16@fudan.edu.cn, rcheng22@m.fudan.edu.cn, xklv23@m.fudan.edu.cn, wmtan@fudan.edu.cn, byan@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
In time-lapse microscopy, inherent noise significantly limits
imaging sensitivity and increases measurement uncertainty.
Due to the scarcity of clean data, zero-shot approaches have
emerged as highly data-efficient solutions for microscopy denoising. However, existing methods typically process video
frames independently, resulting in long training times and
issues such as temporal noise and over-smoothing. In this
paper, we introduce MDSR-Zero, a zero-shot online learning method designed for plug-and-play noise suppression and
super-resolution of microscopy videos. Our approach leverages an efficient online training strategy that reuses denoising models from previous frames. By treating the video as a
continuous stream, our model significantly reduces training
time and ensures temporally consistent denoising. Additionally, we propose a novel loss function tailored for denoising in
the context of super-resolution, which enhances the detail in
the denoised results. Extensive experiments on both synthetic
and real-world noise demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance among zero-shot denoising approaches and is competitive with self-supervised methods.
Notably, our method can reduce training time by up to 10x
compared to the previous SOTA method.

Figure 1: Comparison of the frameworks. Previous method
(Lequyer et al. 2022) needs training from scratch and suffered from the over-smooth problem and temporal noise,
while our method can recover high-frequency and timeconsistent details with 10x fast speed.

Introduction
Living organisms function through precisely coordinated
cellular and subcellular activities, both spatially and temporally. Observing and analyzing these activities under microscopy is essential for understanding biological processes
and providing evidence for medical treatment. (Ma et al.
2024) However, the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) creates
obstacles for microscopy analysis. This is because low-light
conditions and short exposure times are widely applied in
biological imaging for longer observations and lesser degradation of specimens (Li et al. 2023b). For example, in fluorescent microscopy, the low photon yield of fluorescent
indicators and their low concentration in labeled cells lead
to a scarcity of photons at the source (Hirano et al. 2022).
To get better imaging with less noise, researchers use highpower lasers or longer exposure times, which sacrifice imaging speed or even sample health, to get satisfactory imaging (Meiniel, Olivo-Marin, and Angelini 2018). As indicated

in the literature (Chenouard et al. 2014), lower SNR levels
make detection and tracking methods break down. Therefore, microscopy analysis calls for denoising methods that
can effectively restore clean signals.
Deep denoising methods (Lehtinen et al. 2018; Sheth
et al. 2021) provide a plausible solution to enhance the microscopy imaging quality. Recent advances (Lecoq et al.
2021; Li et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023) for microscopy
imaging enhancement are self-supervised, which focus on
learning from the noisy data itself and can perform blind denoising. However, self-supervised methods still require extra
training data for a specified microscopy. Zero-shot methods
(Lequyer et al. 2022; Mansour and Heckel 2023a; Qiao et al.
2024) further reduce the needs of training data by learning
denoising models directly from single images. These methods greatly improve imaging quality with limited data and
can facilitate microscopy analysis with high data efficiency.
Though zero-shot methodologies demonstrate superior
performance and efficiency in image denoising tasks, they

* Corresponding authors: Bo Yan, Weimin Tan.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3419

