The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MaFeRw: Query Rewriting with Multi-Aspect Feedbacks for
Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models
1

Yujing Wang1,2 , Hainan Zhang1,2 * , Liang Pang4 , Binghui Guo2 ,
Hongwei Zheng3 , Zhiming Zheng1,2

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
3
Beijing Academy of Blockchain and Edge Computing, China
4
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{wangyujing, zhanghainan}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

What is San Juan's history?

In a real-world RAG system, the current query often involves spoken ellipses and ambiguous references from dialogue contexts, necessitating query rewriting to better describe user’s information needs. However, traditional contextbased rewriting has minimal enhancement on downstream
generation tasks due to the lengthy process from query rewriting to response generation. Some researchers try to utilize
reinforcement learning with generation feedback to assist
the rewriter, but this sparse rewards provide little guidance
in most cases, leading to unstable training and generation
results. We find that user’s needs are also reflected in the
gold document, retrieved documents and ground truth. Therefore, by feeding back these multi-aspect dense rewards to
query rewriting, more stable and satisfactory responses can
be achieved. In this paper, we propose a novel query rewriting method MaFeRw, which improves RAG performance by
integrating multi-aspect feedback from both the retrieval process and generated results. Specifically, we first use manual
data to train a T5 model for the rewriter initialization. Next,
we design three metrics as reinforcement learning feedback:
the similarity between the rewritten query and the gold document, the ranking metrics, and ROUGE between the generation and the ground truth. Inspired by RLAIF, we train three
kinds of reward models for the above metrics to achieve more
efficient training. Finally, we combine the scores of these reward models as feedback, and use PPO algorithm to explore
the optimal query rewriting strategy. Experimental results on
two conversational RAG datasets demonstrate that MaFeRw
achieves superior generation metrics and more stable training
compared to baselines.

In 1509, Juan Ponce de Leon moved to a site
which was called at that time Puerto Rico.
When did the name get added?
In 1521, the name San Juan was added, and
the newer settlement was given its formal
name of San Juan Bautista de Puerto Rico.
①Rewrite

How popular in the present?
With its abundance of ..., Old San Juan is a
main spot for ... tourism.
How far from Puerto Rico?

②Retrieve

T5 Rewriter

How far from puerto rico from Puerto Rico

MaFeRw

How far is Old San Juan from Puerto Rico?

Gold Doc

...Old San Juan is located on..., about 35 miles
(56 km) from the east end of Puerto Rico...

Retrieved
Docs

reward

③Generate

sim
(1) ... Old San Juan is located on...about 35
miles (56 km) from the east end of Puerto Rico...
(2) ...the settlement was moved to a site which
rank
was called at the time "Puerto Rico"...
(3) ...Every alleyway in Old San Juan offers a
glimpse into a vibrant past...

Ground
Truth

Old San Juan is located on a small and narrow
island which lies along the north coast, about 35
miles from the east end of Puerto Rico.

Generated
Results

Old San Juan is located on a small island, about
35 miles from the east end of Puerto Rico.

ROUGE

Figure 1: An example of MaFeRw serving RAG and the
comparison with T5 rewriter. Green lines represent the inference process of rewriter and RAG, while Red lines indicate
the three types of reward metrics feedback to MaFeRw.

Code — https://github.com/TAP-LLM/MaFeRw

Introduction

2024; Wang et al. 2023), and virtual agents (Yang, Yue, and
He 2023; Schick et al. 2023; Zhang 2023). Real-world RAG
systems often rely on multi-turn dialogues, where queries
include spoken ellipses and ambiguous references from dialogue contexts (Mao et al. 2023b), making it challenging for
RAG systems to accurately understand user intent (Ye et al.
2024). In light of this challenge, effective query rewriting
is necessary to better describe user information needs and
ensure the accuracy of retrieval and generation in RAG.
Currently, RAG mainly performs context-based query

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) effectively addresses the issue of factual inaccuracy in large language
models (LLMs) by integrating relevant retrieved information. It is widely used in various fields such as QA systems (Du and Ji 2022; Siriwardhana et al. 2023; Sharma
et al. 2024), content generation (Zhao et al. 2024; Su et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25434

