The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Rectification of Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning Inconsistencies
by Abductive Reflection
Wen-Chao Hu1,2 , Wang-Zhou Dai1,3 , Yuan Jiang1,2 , Zhi-Hua Zhou1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
{huwc, daiwz, jiangy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
Abstract

of full symbolic reasoning ability often occurs during these
relaxation or approximation, hampering the ability of generating reliable output.
Abductive Learning (ABL) (Zhou 2019; Zhou and Huang
2022) is a framework for bridging machine learning and logical reasoning while preserving full expressive power in each
side. In ABL, the machine learning component first converts raw data into primitive symbolic outputs. These outputs can be utilized by the symbolic reasoning component,
which leverages domain knowledge and performs abduction
to generate a revised, more reliable output. However, previous implementations of ABL require a highly discrete combinatorial consistency optimization before applying abduction, and this optimization has high complexity which encumbers, thereby severely limiting the efficiency and applicability to large-scale scenarios.
Human reasoning naturally exploits both sides efficiently,
a hypothetical model for this process is called Cognitive Reflection, where the fast System 1 thinking is called to quickly
generate an approximate over-all solution, and then seamlessly hands the complicated parts to System 2 (Frederick
2005). The key to this process is the reflection mechanism,
which promptly detects which part in the intuitive response
may contain inconsistencies with domain knowledge and
invokes System 2 to rectify them. This reflection typically
positively associates with System 2 capabilities, as both are
closely linked to an individual’s mastery of domain knowledge (Sinayev and Peters 2015). Following the reflection,
the process of the step-by-step formal reasoning becomes
less complex: With a largely reduced search space, deriving
the correct solution for System 2 becomes straightforward.
Inspired by this phenomenon, we propose a general enhancement, Abductive Reflection (ABL-Refl). Based on ABL
framework, ABL-Refl preserves full expressive power of
neural networks and symbolic reasoning, while replacing the
time-consuming consistency optimization with the reflection
mechanism, thereby significantly improves efficiency and
applicability. Specifically, in ABL-Refl, a reflection vector
is concurrently generated with the neural network intuitive
output, which flags potential errors in the output and invokes
symbolic reasoning to perform abduction, thereby rectifying
these errors and generating a new output that is more consistent with domain knowledge. During model training, the
training information for the reflection derives from domain

Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) AI could be regarded as an analogy
to human dual-process cognition, modeling the intuitive System 1 with neural networks and the algorithmic System 2 with
symbolic reasoning. However, for complex learning targets,
NeSy systems often generate outputs inconsistent with domain knowledge and it is challenging to rectify them. Inspired
by the human Cognitive Reflection, which promptly detects
errors in our intuitive response and revises them by invoking
the System 2 reasoning, we propose to improve NeSy systems
by introducing Abductive Reflection (ABL-Refl) based on the
Abductive Learning (ABL) framework. ABL-Refl leverages
domain knowledge to abduce a reflection vector during training, which can then flag potential errors in the neural network
outputs and invoke abduction to rectify them and generate
consistent outputs during inference. ABL-Refl is highly efficient in contrast to previous ABL implementations. Experiments show that ABL-Refl outperforms state-of-the-art NeSy
methods, achieving excellent accuracy with fewer training resources and enhanced efficiency.

1

Introduction

Human decision-making is generally recognized as an interaction between two systems: System 1 quickly generates an intuitive response, and System 2 engages in further algorithmic and slow reasoning (Frederick 2005; Kahneman 2011). In Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) Artificial Intelligence (AI), neural networks often resemble System 1 for
rapid pattern recognition, and symbolic reasoning mirrors
System 2 to leverage domain knowledge and handle complex problems thoughtfully, yet in a slower and more controlled way (Bengio 2019). Like human System 1 reasoning, when facing complicated tasks, neural networks often
produce unreliable outputs which cause inconsistencies with
domain knowledge. These inconsistencies can then be reconciled with the help of the symbolic reasoning counterpart (Hitzler 2022).
To achieve the above process, some methods relax symbolic domain knowledge as neural network constraints (Xu
et al. 2018; Yang, Lee, and Park 2022), some attempt to approximate logical calculus using distributed representations
within neural networks (Wang et al. 2019). However, a loss
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17333

