The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FastLGS: Speeding up Language Embedded Gaussians with Feature Grid
Mapping
Yuzhou Ji1 * , He Zhu1 * , Junshu Tang2 , Wuyi Liu1 ,
Zhizhong Zhang1,3 , Xin Tan1† , Yuan Xie1
1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Computer Software Evaluating and Testing
xtan@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The semantically interactive radiance field has always been
an appealing task for its potential to facilitate user-friendly
and automated real-world 3D scene understanding applications. However, it is a challenging task to achieve high quality, efficiency and zero-shot ability at the same time with semantics in radiance fields. In this work, we present FastLGS,
an approach that supports real-time open-vocabulary query
within 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) under high resolution. We propose the semantic feature grid to save multiview CLIP features which are extracted based on Segment
Anything Model (SAM) masks, and map the grids to low dimensional features for semantic field training through 3DGS.
Once trained, we can restore pixel-aligned CLIP embeddings through feature grids from rendered features for openvocabulary queries. Comparisons with other state-of-the-art
methods prove that FastLGS can achieve the first place
performance concerning both speed and accuracy, where
FastLGS is 98 × faster than LERF, 4 × faster than LangSplat
and 2.5 × faster than LEGaussians. Meanwhile, experiments
show that FastLGS is adaptive and compatible with many
downstream tasks, such as 3D segmentation and 3D object
inpainting, which can be easily applied to other 3D manipulation systems.

Figure 1: Visualized relevancy (turbo) of query “Xbox wireless controller”. Our result is much more accurate in having
higher relevancy within queried areas and lower relevancy
among other regions compared with LangSplat.

Semantic-NeRF (Zhi et al. 2021), N3F (Tschernezki et al.
2022) and Panoptic Lifting (Siddiqui et al. 2023) successfully lift labels or noisy 2D features into 3D radiance fields,
providing semantic segmentations in certain scenes. However, their labels and low-level features (e.g., DINO (Caron
et al. 2021) features) are not sufficient for natural modality interactions since some methods require extra position
information (e.g., N3F (Tschernezki et al. 2022)) and others even do not provide any interaction (e.g., SemanticNeRF (Zhi et al. 2021) and Panoptic Lifting (Siddiqui et al.
2023)), and they also suffer from poor quality concerning
in-the-wild scenes due to the lack of zero-shot ability. One
possible solution for introducing zero-shot semantics with
friendly interactions is to use pre-trained text-image models
with high-level features. LERF (Kerr et al. 2023), as one of
the state-of-the-art examples, enables pixel-aligned queries
of the distilled 3D CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) embeddings,
supporting long-tail open-vocabulary queries. Nevertheless,
despite solving the problem of open-vocabulary interactions,
LERF’s results are completely not object-centric and can
only extract fuzzy relevancy maps. The following LEGaussians (Shi et al. 2024) proposes a dedicated embedding procedure to achieve smoother queries, but the results are still
unstable and inconsistent. The above discussion shows the
dilemma of balancing open-vocabulary ability and localizing accuracy when building a semantic field.
To get out of such a predicament, one may naturally
think of achieving object-centric along with CLIP embeddings, but this brings numerous problems. First, we need
to achieve the extraction of objects across all views to en-

Project page — https://george-attano.github.io/FastLGS

Introduction
With the potential in fields such as robotics and augmented
reality, 3D scene understanding has always been a conspicuous topic in the research community. Given a set of
posed images, the goal is to learn an effective and efficient
3D semantic representation along with scene reconstruction,
which should naturally support a wide range of downstream
tasks in scene manipulation. However, it remains a vital
challenge to simultaneously achieve accuracy, efficiency
and the grounding of open-vocabulary level semantics together.
Predominantly, existing methods usually only focus on
the accuracy of differentiating objects, which normally assign points with labels or low-level features. For example,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3922

