The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Undermining Mental Proof: How AI Can Make Cooperation Harder by Making
Thinking Easier
Zachary Wojtowicz1 and Simon DeDeo2,3
1

Department of Economics and Harvard Business School, Harvard University
2
Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Santa Fe Institute
zwojtowicz@fas.harvard.edu, sdedeo@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract

social practices. We may “know it when we see it” in any
particular case, but the lack of integrative scientific frameworks has made it difficult to formulate general solutions to
existing problems or foresee future harms.
In this paper, we highlight the key role that “mental proof”
plays in facilitating cooperation in low-trust environments.
Mental proofs are observable actions taken to certify unobservable facts about the minds who perform them. As we
describe fully below, people use two distinct mechanisms to
substantiate mental proofs: signaling theory (an idea primarily studied in economics and biology) and proof of knowledge protocols (studied in computer science). To function,
both mechanisms rely on implicit assumptions about the cost
structure of organic mental activity—assumptions that are
rapidly being disrupted by the proliferation of artificial intelligence in daily life.
An appreciation for the structure of mental proofs therefore helps elucidate the underlying logic of artificial intelligence’s various social consequences. In highlighting the importance of mental proof and its relationship to thinking machines, our paper contributes to a wider, cross-disciplinary
attempt to proactively understand and address the technology’s various social consequences (e.g., Solaiman et al.
2023; Weidinger et al. 2021; Mirsky and Lee 2021)
We illustrate the practical importance of mental proof in
two “worked examples” drawn from everyday social domains: sincere apology and subculture formation. In both
cases, we discuss how low-cost simulations of intelligent behavior undermine the efficacy of mental proofs and the vital
social benefits they provide.
As our discussion makes clear, mental proof is most valuable in situations where honesty cannot easily be enforced.
This implies that the category of harms we discuss will disproportionately impact those who are not already embedded
in high-trust networks and formal institutions, thereby reinforcing existing structural barriers to social mobility and
economic development. Our analysis does, however, suggest
effective strategies for mitigating these deleterious consequences, and we conclude with a sketch of the framework’s
implications for policy, technology, and everyday life.

Large language models and other highly capable AI systems
ease the burdens of deciding what to say or do, but this very
ease can undermine the effectiveness of our actions in social
contexts. We explain this apparent tension by introducing the
integrative theoretical concept of “mental proof,” which occurs when observable actions are used to certify unobservable mental facts. From hiring to dating, mental proofs enable
people to credibly communicate values, intentions, states of
knowledge, and other private features of their minds to one
another in low-trust environments where honesty cannot be
easily enforced. Drawing on results from economics, theoretical biology, and computer science, we describe the core theoretical mechanisms that enable people to effect mental proofs.
An analysis of these mechanisms clarifies when and how artificial intelligence can make low-trust cooperation harder despite making thinking easier.

1

Introduction

The widespread availability of generative artificial intelligence means that anyone can now cheaply and convincingly
simulate the output of human mental effort across an unprecedented variety of tasks. This promises numerous benefits across nearly every aspect of society, but it also has begun to disrupt an equally broad set of social practices, such
as sincere apologies (Glikson and Asscher 2023), college
assessment (Fitria 2023; Cardon et al. 2023), online dating
(Wu and Kelly 2020), and wedding vows (LaGorce 2023).
In light of these developments, many have come to see the
technology as a double-edged sword: artificial intelligence
cuts the cost of thinking, but it also—and, as we will argue,
for that very reason—threatens vital elements of the existing
social fabric, such as trust (Glikson and Woolley 2020), privacy (Jain, Hitzig, and Mishkin 2023), public safety (Leslie
2019), and even democracy itself (Allen and Weyl 2024;
Jungherr 2023). Indeed, a majority of survey respondents
now feel “more concerned than excited” about the increased
use of artificial intelligence in their daily lives (Tyson 2023).
Despite the urgency of these concerns, the scientific community has struggled to articulate general principles that explain why lowering mental costs through artificial intelligence undermines such a wide variety of seeming unrelated

2

Mental Proof

Communication can greatly enhance coordination. Our
species’ remarkable capacity for coordination relies, at its

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1592

