The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Monitoring Primitive Interactions During the Training of DNNs
Jie Ren1 , Xinhao Zheng1 , Jiyu Liu1,2 * , Andrew Lizarraga3 ,
Ying Nian Wu3 , Liang Lin4 , Quanshi Zhang1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Dartmouth College
3
University of California, Los Angeles
4
Sun Yat-Sen University

and Zhang (2023) discovered and Ren et al. (2024) proved1
that we can always use the numerical utility of a few symbolic interactions between input variables to accurately explain all subtle changes of network outputs under a massive
number of input variations. It is also found (Zhou et al. 2024)
that the complexity of interactions could explain the generalization power of DNNs.
Beyond the above explanation of a static (trained) DNN,
in this paper, we hope to explore whether the entire learning dynamics of a DNN, which is believed to be much more
complex than a static DNN, can also be concisely explained
as symbolic interactions. The explanation of the complex
learning dynamics is mentioned by several previous studies (Zhou et al. 2024; Li and Zhang 2023; Ren et al. 2024;
Chen et al. 2024; Cheng et al. 2024), and they all considered
this as the last piece of the puzzle of the interaction-based
explanation system, and also one of the biggest challenges
that has hampered the field for years.
The challenges of explaining learning dynamics come
from the high-dimensional changes in network parameters,
which are complex and even chaotic. However, we hope
• to summarize the highly complex learning dynamics of a
DNN into the dynamics of a few interactions;
• to explain the learning efficiency of a DNN, i.e., answering how many interactions are learned from the beginning of
the training and how many interactions are discarded later;
• to clarify whether the DNN learns all primitive patterns
simultaneously.
Originally, the interaction metric was used to quantify the
non-linear relationship encoded by a DNN. For example,
Figure 1(b) shows a DNN implicitly encodes an interaction
between two eye patches and a nose patch, and this interaction makes a numerical utility on the classification score
of cat. Masking any one among three patches will invalidate
this interaction and remove its utility from the output score.
However, in this study, we hope to use a few salient interactions (interactions with large interaction effects) to explain
even more complex learning dynamics. Thus, how to reduce

Abstract
This paper focuses on the newly emerged research topic, i.e.,
whether the complex decision-making logic of a DNN can
be mathematically summarized into a few simple logics. Beyond the explanation of a static DNN, in this paper, we hope
to show that the seemingly complex learning dynamics of a
DNN can be faithfully represented as the change of a few
primitive interaction patterns encoded by the DNN. Therefore, we redefine the interaction of principal feature components in intermediate-layer features, which enables us to
concisely summarize the highly complex dynamics of interactions throughout the learning of the DNN. The mathematical faithfulness of the new interaction is experimentally verified. From the perspective of learning efficiency, we find
that the interactions naturally belong to five groups (reliable, withdrawn, forgotten, betraying, and fluctuating interactions), each representing a distinct type of dynamics of an
interaction being learned and/or being forgotten. This provides deep insights into the learning process of a DNN.

1

Introduction

In the field of interpretable artificial intelligence, one of the
fundamental objectives of a theory system is to let the seemingly extremely complex decision-making logic of a deep
neural network (DNN) be faithfully explained as a small set
of simple logics. Unlike other explanation methods (Elhage
et al. 2021; Meng et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022; Park et al.
2022; Olsson et al. 2022; Fel et al. 2023), this is a newly
emerging mathematical problem in recent years, because it
aims to answer whether the essential logic of a DNN is simple enough to be explained to human beings, i.e., the existence of human-understandable explanation for a DNN.
Towards this problem, an interaction-based theory system
has been built up recently, containing about 20 papers (surveyed by Ren et al. (2024)). Typically, Ren et al. (2023a); Li
* This work was done when Jiyu Liu was at Shanghai Jiao Tong

University.
†
Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with Department of Computer Science and Engineering, John Hopcroft Center,
at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

Sparsity of interactions is proven by Ren et al. (2024) under
three common conditions for smooth inference on masked samples.
Please see Appendix C for details.

20183

