The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Control and Certificate Repair via Runtime Monitoring
Emily Yu1 , Ðord̄e Žikelić2 , Thomas A. Henzinger1
1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore, Singapore
emily.yu@ist.ac.at, dzikelic@smu.edu.sg, tah@ist.ac.at

Abstract

Lyapunov
function

policy

Learning-based methods provide a promising approach to
solving highly non-linear control tasks that are often challenging for classical control methods. To ensure the satisfaction of a safety property, learning-based methods jointly
learn a control policy together with a certificate function for
the property. Popular examples include barrier functions for
safety and Lyapunov functions for asymptotic stability. While
there has been significant progress on learning-based control
with certificate functions in the white-box setting, where the
correctness of the certificate function can be formally verified, there has been little work on ensuring their reliability
in the black-box setting where the system dynamics are unknown. In this work, we consider the problems of certifying
and repairing neural network control policies and certificate
functions in the black-box setting. We propose a novel framework that utilizes runtime monitoring to detect system behaviors that violate the property of interest under some initially
trained neural network policy and certificate. These violating
behaviors are used to extract new training data, that is used to
re-train the neural network policy and the certificate function
and to ultimately repair them. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach empirically by using it to repair and to
boost the safety rate of neural network policies learned by a
state-of-the-art method for learning-based control on two autonomous system control tasks.

Env

π
update

Learner

V

Monitor
B

barrier
function

Data

update
update

Figure 1: The monitor-learner framework.
interest is to compute a certificate function for that property (Dawson, Gao, and Fan 2023). A certificate function is
a mathematical object which proves that the system under
the control policy indeed satisfies the property. Common examples of certificate functions include Lyapunov functions
for stability (Khalil 2002) and barrier functions for safety
set invariance (Prajna and Jadbabaie 2004). While certificate functions are a classical and well-established concept
in control theory, earlier methods for their computation are
based either on polynomial optimization or rely on manually
provided certificates, which makes them restricted to polynomial systems and typically scalable to low-dimensional
environments (Ahmadi and Majumdar 2016; Dawson, Gao,
and Fan 2023; Srinivasan et al. 2021).
Recent years have seen significant progress in overcoming
these limitations, by utilizing machine learning to compute
certificates for non-polynomial environments with neural
network control policies (Abate et al. 2021b; Chang, Roohi,
and Gao 2019; Dawson et al. 2021; Qin, Sun, and Fan 2022;
Qin et al. 2021; Richards, Berkenkamp, and Krause 2018).
The key idea behind these methods is to jointly learn a policy
together with a certificate function, with both parametrized
as neural networks. This is achieved by defining a loss function that encodes all defining properties of the certificate
function. The learning algorithm then incurs loss whenever
some of the defining certificate conditions are violated at any
system state explored by the learning algorithm. Hence, the
training process effectively guides the learning algorithm towards a control policy that admits a correct certificate function. A survey of the existing approaches and recent advances can be found in (Dawson, Gao, and Fan 2023).
While the above approach guides the learning algorithm
towards a correct certificate, it does not guarantee that the

Introduction
The rapid advance of machine learning has sparked interest in using it to solve hard problems across various application domains, and autonomous robotic systems control is
no exception. Learning-based control methods obtain data
through repeated interaction with an unknown environment,
which is then used to learn a control policy. A popular example is (deep) reinforcement learning algorithms, which learn
neural network policies (Mnih et al. 2015; Sutton and Barto
2018). However, the complex and often uninterpretable nature of learned policies poses a significant barrier to their
safe and trustworthy deployment in safety-critical applications such as self-driving cars or healthcare devices (Amodei
et al. 2016; García and Fernández 2015).
In control theory, a classical method to certify the correctness of a control policy concerning some property of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26409

