The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Epistemic Bellman Operators
Pascal R. van der Vaart, Matthijs T. J. Spaan, Neil Yorke-Smith
Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands
{p.r.vandervaart-1, m.t.j.spaan, n.yorke-smith}@tudelft.nl

Abstract

bootstrap from the label of the next state, known as the target value. Uncertainty quantification in RL must consider
this sequential nature. At the heart of this problem is the fact
that uncertainty in the current state should include the uncertainty in the target values, which is the uncertainty in the
future states.
Adaptations of uncertainty quantification methods from
supervised learning have been applied to reinforcement
learning settings (Osband et al. 2016; Osband, Aslanides,
and Cassirer 2018; Fortunato et al. 2017; Azizzadenesheli,
Brunskill, and Anandkumar 2018; Burda et al. 2018;
Dwaracherla and Roy 2021; Schmitt, Shawe-Taylor, and van
Hasselt 2023; Van der Vaart, Yorke-Smith, and Spaan 2024)
with good practical results, but there is no guarantee that the
way these algorithms treat the uncertainty in the successor
state leads to a theoretically sound algorithm, in the sense
that the uncertainty quantification aspect can be expected to
converge to a solution at all. At least guaranteeing that these
methods work in potentially simplified scenarios is essential
for the adoption of uncertainty quantification in algorithms
in the real world. Furthermore, some algorithms seemingly
disagree in their decisions on how to treat the uncertainty in
the target values.
When adapting Deep Q-learning (DQN)-style algorithms
to uncertainty aware algorithms like BootDQN (Osband
et al. 2016), EVE (Schmitt, Shawe-Taylor, and van Hasselt 2023), Langevin-DQN (Dwaracherla and Roy 2021),
LMCDQN (Ishfaq et al. 2023), SMC-DQN (Van der Vaart,
Yorke-Smith, and Spaan 2024) and BDQN (Azizzadenesheli, Brunskill, and Anandkumar 2018), there are decisions to be made about how to use and update the target
parameters. Generally, these algorithms condition their posterior on a posterior of the target parameters. As a main problem, we highlight that there is no guarantee that the process
of repeatedly updating the current distribution, conditioned
on the distribution over target parameters, and copying it to
the target parameters will converge to a limiting distribution.
Recently, Fellows, Hartikainen, and Whiteson (2021)
studied this problem theoretically and contended that
Bayesian model-free reinforcement learning algorithms create a posterior over Bellman operators. They showed that
the posterior converges to the true Bellman operator in the
limit of infinite data. We instead take an arguably more natural and direct approach, and show that the problem can be

Uncertainty quantification remains a difficult challenge in reinforcement learning. Several algorithms exist that successfully quantify uncertainty in a practical setting. However it is
unclear whether these algorithms are theoretically sound and
can be expected to converge. Furthermore, they seem to treat
the uncertainty in the target parameters in different ways. In
this work, we unify several practical algorithms into one theoretical framework by defining a new Bellman operator on
distributions, and show that this Bellman operator is a contraction. We highlight use cases of our framework by analyzing an existing Bayesian Q-learning algorithm, and also introduce a novel uncertainty-aware variant of PPO that adaptively
sets its clipping hyperparameter.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have surpassed humans’ ability in many games (Mnih et al. 2015; Schrittwieser et al. 2020), and have now also found success
in real world problems such as controlling plasma in a
nuclear fusion reactor (Degrave et al. 2022), video compression (Mandhane et al. 2022), large language models (Ouyang et al. 2022) and algorithm design (Fawzi et al.
2022; Mankowitz et al. 2023). However, even for relatively
simple tasks, algorithms still require many simulations or
real interactions to learn a strong policy, making them inefficient. One approach to attack this problem is by making algorithms aware of their epistemic uncertainty, which
is uncertainty caused by a lack of data. This allows them
to explore only parts of the problem that are still uncertain,
decreasing the total amount of interactions required.
However, proper uncertainty quantification is still an
open problem in reinforcement learning. Many techniques
from supervised learning, such as ensembles (Dietterich
2000; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017) and
Bayesian methods (Chen, Fox, and Guestrin 2014; Liu and
Wang 2016; D’Angelo and Fortuin 2021; Wenzel et al.
2020), have found success in practice when applied to supervised learning tasks with labelled data. However, in reinforcement learning data is not labelled with a ground truth,
and instead the label for the current state is a self-supervised
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20973

