The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

One Token Can Help! Learning Scalable and Pluggable Virtual Tokens
for Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models
Yutao Zhu, Zhaoheng Huang, Zhicheng Dou* , Ji-Rong Wen
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
yutaozhu94@gmail.com, {huangzh, dou, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

LLMs by incorporating retrieved information into the input
along with appropriate prompts (Shi et al. 2023; Ram et al.
2023). This allows for straightforward application to any offthe-shelf LLM without tuning its parameters. However, its
effectiveness largely depends on the human experience in
crafting effective prompts and the LLM’s ability to interpret
these prompts. The second group focuses on training LLMs
to enhance their performance in RAG scenarios. This training might involve either end-to-end pre-training (Guu et al.
2020; Borgeaud et al. 2022) or fine-tuning (Lin et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2023) for specific tasks. These approaches can
often lead to better performance, but they require significant
computational resources. Recently, parameter-efficient finetuning techniques, such as LoRA (Hu et al. 2022), have been
widely studied, significantly reducing training costs. These
methods can optimize the LLMs’ parameters for RAG, but
unfortunately compromise the model’s general abilities in
non-RAG scenarios, such as commonsense reasoning and
in-context learning. All these limitations prevent their application to LLMs already operational in real-world settings.
Therefore, a critical research problem arises: Is it possible
to enhance LLMs’ performance under RAG scenarios while
preserving their general generation capabilities? To achieve
this, we introduce a novel, lightweight tuning method named
SPRING, which learns Scalable and Pluggable viRtual tokens for retrIeval-augmeNted Generation. Our basic idea
is to add trainable virtual tokens to help LLMs learn RAG
problems. Through fine-tuning, these virtual tokens effectively enhance the LLM’s capability to understand retrieved
information and its correlation with user inputs. Importantly,
as the LLM’s original parameters are frozen, its general generation abilities are preserved without any loss. During inference, when retrieval is triggered, these trained virtual tokens can be simply added to the prompt, which includes both
the retrieved results and user input, thereby significantly enhancing performance. Moreover, we employ a scalable training approach, allowing the number of virtual tokens to be
adjusted according to the needs of the inference scenario.
Various training strategies have been implemented to further
improve the generalizability of our method, ensuring robustness regardless of the number of the retrieved results.
In experiments, SPRING is trained with the base and
instruction fine-tuned versions of Mistral-7b, LLaMA-27b, and LLaMA-2-13b models and evaluated on 12 com-

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is a promising way to
improve large language models (LLMs) for generating more
factual, accurate, and up-to-date content. Existing methods
either optimize prompts to guide LLMs in leveraging retrieved information or directly fine-tune LLMs to adapt to
RAG scenarios. Although fine-tuning can yield better performance, it often compromises the LLMs’ general generation
capabilities by modifying their parameters. This limitation
poses challenges in practical applications, especially when
LLMs are already deployed, as parameter adjustments may
affect their original functionality. To address this, we propose
a novel method that involves learning scalable and pluggable
virtual tokens for RAG. By maintaining the LLMs’ original parameters and fine-tuning only the embeddings of these
pluggable tokens, our approach not only enhances LLMs’
performance but also preserves their general generation capabilities. Furthermore, we design several training strategies
to improve the scalability, flexibility, and generalizability of
our method. Comprehensive experiments across 12 questionanswering tasks demonstrate the superiority of our approach.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable
performance across various natural language processing
tasks (Brown et al. 2020; OpenAI 2023; Touvron et al.
2023). Despite their extensive parameters enabling them
to learn rich knowledge during pre-training, LLMs may
still generate hallucinated, outdated, or inaccurate content,
especially in scenarios requiring long-tail knowledge (Ji
et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023b). To address this problem,
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has emerged as a pivotal strategy. By explicitly decoupling knowledge retrieval
from the backbone LLMs, such architectures have achieved
more accurate and reliable content generation and shown
particularly enhanced performance on knowledge-intensive
tasks such as open-domain question answering (Petroni et al.
2021; Tan et al. 2024; Jin et al. 2024b).
Existing efforts in RAG development can be roughly categorized into two groups (as illustrated in Figure 1). The
first group leverages the in-context learning capabilities of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26166

