The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SpikingYOLOX: Improved YOLOX Object Detection with Fast Fourier
Convolution and Spiking Neural Networks
Wei Miao* 1, 2 , Jiangrong Shen* 3, 4 , Qi Xu1† , Timo Hamalainen2 , Yi Xu5 , Fengyu Cong6
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology,
2
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Jyväskylä,
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
4
State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University,
5
School of Control Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology,
6
School of Biomedical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
weimiao@jyu.fi, jrshen@zju.edu.cn, xuqi@dlut.edu.cn, timo.t.hamalainen@jyu.fi, yxu@dlut.edu.cn, cong@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

demonstrated remarkable potential and applicability across
various domains, including autonomous driving, surveillance, and medical imaging analysis. However, as data volumes increase and model sizes grow, there is an urgent
need to develop low-energy consumption object detection
models. Spiking neural networks (SNNs), regarded as potential competitors to artificial neural networks (ANNs) for
their high biological plausibility and low power consumption (Rueckauer et al. 2017; Tavanaei et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2018, 2023), offer promising potential for implementing
energy-efficient object detection models.
Recently, SNN-based techniques have been applied to object recognition and detection, achieving performance close
to that of ANNs on simpler classification datasets (Tavanaei
et al. 2019). To bridge the performance gap between ANNs
and SNNs, deeper network structures within SNNs, such as
ResNet, have been explored (Hwang et al. 2021; Hu, Tang,
and Pan 2021; Zheng et al. 2021; Samadzadeh et al. 2023).
Spiking-YOLO (Kim et al. 2020b) represents a pioneering
effort in this area, implementing channel-wise data-based
normalization to mitigate information loss; however, this approach led to significant performance degradation. To further narrow the gap between ANN- and SNN-based YOLO
models in object detection, EMS-YOLO (Su et al. 2023) was
the first to apply a trained Spiking ResNet to object detection. These studies have demonstrated the high-performance
potential of SNNs in object detection, as well as their low
energy consumption. Nevertheless, when faced with more
complex datasets, such as those found in the COCO dataset,
SNNs still significantly lag behind ANNs in object detection
scenarios. Therefore, we focus on how to improve the object
detection by using SNN.
One of the bottlenecks impacting the network’s ability to
extract features when using SNN on object detection is the
size and structure of the receptive field. In the context of
convolutional kernel operations, which are commonly used
to extract local features in object detection tasks, the receptive field refers to the region of the input image that a particular neuron is ”looking at.” As these operations are applied
in deep convolutional neural networks, successive convolu-

In recent years, with the advancements in brain science, spiking neural networks (SNNs) have garnered significant attention. SNNs can generate spikes that mimic the function of
neurons transmission in humans brain, thereby significantly
reducing computational costs by the event-driven nature during training. While deep SNNs have shown impressive performance on classification tasks, they still face challenges
in more complex tasks such as object detection. In this paper, we propose SpikingYOLOX, extending the structure of
the original YOLOX by introducing signed spiking neurons
and fast Fourier convolution (FFC). The designed ternary
signed spiking neurons could generate three kinds of spikes
to obtain more robust features in the deep layer of the backbone. Meanwhile, we integrate FFC with SNN modules to
enhance object detection performance, because its global receptive field is beneficial to the object detection task. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed SpikingYOLOX achieves state-of-the-art performance among other
SNN-based object detection methods.

Introduction
Significant advancements in deep learning have greatly enhanced the performance of object detection algorithms in
terms of both accuracy and real-time processing. Object detection focuses on identifying and locating multiple overlapping objects within an image, providing precise bounding
boxes for each object. Techniques based on deep networks,
such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Regionbased CNNs (R-CNN), and single-shot detectors like YOLO
(You Only Look Once), have been widely adopted. Notably,
the YOLO series (Redmon et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi
2017, 2018; Bochkovskiy, Wang, and Liao 2020; Jocher
2020; Li et al. 2022a; Ge et al. 2021; Wang, Bochkovskiy,
and Liao 2023) has consistently pursued optimal speed and
accuracy for real-time applications. These methods have
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author : Qi Xu, xuqi@dlut.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1465

