The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SGTC: Semantic-Guided Triplet Co-training for Sparsely Annotated
Semi-Supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Ke Yan1† , Qing Cai1† , Fan Zhang2* , Ziyan Cao1 , Zhi Liu3*
1

Faculty of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
2
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University
{yk6923, caoziyan}@stu.ouc.edu.cn, cq@ouc.edu.cn, zfnlxx@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, liuzhi@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract
Although semi-supervised learning has made significant advances in the field of medical image segmentation, fully annotating a volumetric sample slice by slice remains a costly
and time-consuming task. Even worse, most of the existing
approaches pay much attention to image-level information
and ignore semantic features, resulting in the inability to perceive weak boundaries. To address these issues, we propose
a novel Semantic-Guided Triplet Co-training (SGTC) framework, which achieves high-end medical image segmentation
by only annotating three orthogonal slices of a few volumetric samples, significantly alleviating the burden of radiologists. Our method consist of two main components. Specifically, to enable semantic-aware, fine-granular segmentation
and enhance the quality of pseudo-labels, a novel semanticguided auxiliary learning mechanism is proposed based on
the pretrained CLIP. In addition, focusing on a more challenging but clinically realistic scenario, a new triple-view disparity training strategy is proposed, which uses sparse annotations (i.e., only three labeled slices of a few volumes)
to perform co-training between three sub-networks, significantly improving the robustness. Extensive experiments on
three public medical datasets demonstrate that our method
outperforms most state-of-the-art semi-supervised counterparts under sparse annotation settings. The source code is
available at https://github.com/xmeimeimei/SGTC.

Figure 1: (a) The semantic guidance in visualization comparison. (b) The performance under different sparse annotation strategy. The S, C, and A indicate sagittal, coronal, and
axial annotated slices.

predominant strategy in medical domain, utilizing a limited
number of labeled data and lots of unlabeled data (Wang
et al. 2024; Wang and Li 2024; Zhang et al. 2022c; Cai et al.
2018; Zhou et al. 2023). Current semi-supervised medical
segmentation methods can be classified into two categories.
The first one is pseudo-label-based methods (Bai et al. 2017;
Yu et al. 2019; Bai et al. 2023), which estimate the pseudo labels based on a few labeled samples and then attach them to
unlabeled ones followed by a fine-tuning stage on the newly
enlisted training set. The other mainstream approaches are
consistency regularization (Chen et al. 2023; Shen et al.
2023; Li et al. 2020), which enforce the output consistency
for the inputs under different image or feature perturbations.
Despite the progress, these methods need dense annotations, requiring to fully annotate the entire volume of limited labeled data slice by slice, it remains a costly and timeconsuming task due to the considerable number of slices per
volume. Generally, radiologists only annotate a few slices
from the volumetric medical data and leave others unla-

Introduction
Segmentation of anatomical structures and pathology within
medical images holds paramount importance for clinical diagnosis (Zhou et al. 2019), treatment planning (Li et al.
2023b; Zhang et al. 2024a), and disease research (Zhang
et al. 2022b). While significant progress has been achieved
through deep learning-based segmentation techniques, many
approaches encounter substantial bottlenecks when lacking sufficient well-annotated datasets (Zhang et al. 2024c,
2022a). Consequently, there is a critical need to develop
more effective yet precise segmentation methods to decrease
the dependence on large-scale pixel-wise annotated data.
Considering that unlabeled data are easy to obtain, semisupervised medical image segmentation has emerged as the
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*

9112

