The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CDW-CoT: Clustered Distance-Weighted Chain-of-Thoughts Reasoning
Yuanheng Fang1 , Guoqing Chao* 1 , Wenqiang Lei2 , Shaobo Li1 , Dianhui Chu1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, 264209, Shandong, China
2
Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, Sichuan, China
23s130443@stu.hit.edu.cn, guoqingchao@hit.edu.cn, wenqianglei@scu.edu.cn, lishaobo@hit.edu.cn, chudh@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Initially, CoT prompting involved embedding manually
crafted exemplars within the model’s prompt to guide its
reasoning process—a method that was effective but laborintensive and not scalable (Wei et al. 2022). This approach
evolved into Zero-Shot-CoT (Kojima et al. 2022), which allowed models to engage in reasoning without task-specific
exemplars, relying on generic prompts to elicit intermediate reasoning steps. However, the absence of tailored guidance often limited its efficacy in more complex or domainspecific tasks.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently achieved impressive results in complex reasoning tasks through Chain
of Thought (CoT) prompting. However, most existing CoT
methods rely on using the same prompts, whether manually designed or automatically generated, to handle the entire dataset. This one-size-fits-all approach may fail to meet
the specific needs arising from the diversities within a single dataset. To solve this problem, we propose the Clustered
Distance-Weighted Chain of Thought (CDW-CoT) method,
which dynamically constructs prompts tailored to the characteristics of each data instance by integrating clustering
and prompt optimization techniques. Our method employs
clustering algorithms to categorize the dataset into distinct
groups, from which a candidate pool of prompts is selected
to reflect the inherent diversity within the dataset. For each
cluster, CDW-CoT trains the optimal prompt probability distribution tailored to their specific characteristics. Finally, it
dynamically constructs a unique prompt probability distribution for each test instance, based on its proximity to cluster centers, from which prompts are selected for reasoning.
CDW-CoT consistently outperforms traditional CoT methods across six datasets, including commonsense, symbolic,
and mathematical reasoning tasks. Specifically, when compared to manual CoT, CDW-CoT achieves an average accuracy improvement of 25.34% on LLaMA2 (13B) and 15.72%
on LLaMA3 (8B).

Figure 1: Using the same prompts for all instances in the
dataset resulted in significant performance variability across
different clusters, highlighting the limitations of Auto-CoT
in addressing diverse reasoning demands within different
data categories. This underscores the need for tailored
prompt strategies.

Introduction
Recent advancements in LLMs, such as GPT-3 (Brown et al.
2020), LLama2 (Touvron et al. 2023), and Llama3 (Dubey
et al. 2024), have significantly enhanced their capability to
tackle complex reasoning tasks. Some studies (Brown et al.
2020; Thoppilan et al. 2022) have demonstrated LLMs’ impressive performance in decomposing multi-step problems
into manageable intermediate steps, resulting in more accurate and contextually relevant answers. A technique that has
gained prominence in this context is CoT prompting, which
systematically structures the reasoning process into a series
of intermediate steps. This method has been shown to significantly improve the model’s performance on complex tasks
across various domains (Wei et al. 2022).

To address the intensive manual efforts required by
Manual-CoT, the Auto-CoT paradigm has been proposed (Zhang et al. 2022). This method automates the generation of reasoning chains by clustering related questions
and selecting a representative question from each cluster to
generate a reasoning chain using simple heuristics. Recent
works (Chu et al. 2023) focus on further automating (Shum,
Diao, and Zhang 2023) and refining the CoT generation process. Techniques such as Enhanced Reasoning (Wang et al.
2023; Li and Qiu 2023; Wu, Zhang, and Huang 2023), Voting and Ranking (Fu et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023, 2022),
and Verification and Refinement (Lyu et al. 2023; Shao

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23878

