The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

External Reliable Information-enhanced Multimodal Contrastive Learning
for Fake News Detection
Biwei Cao1, 2 , Qihang Wu1, 2 , Jiuxin Cao1, 2, 3 * , Bo Liu2, 3, 4 , Jie Gui1, 2, 3, 5 *
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information of Ministry of Education of China, Nanjing 211189, China
3
Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 210000, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
5
Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Application, Supervision And Management (Southeast University), Ministry of
Education
{caobiwei, wuqihang, jx.cao, bliu, guijie}@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

fake news does not only severely destroy the credibility and
social influence of mainstream media but also has the potential to cause panic in society. To mitigate the negative impact caused by fake news, automated fake news detection
has gradually become a research hotspot.
Early fake news detection mainly focused on propagation
structures or text-based detection(Shu et al. 2017a). With
the development of social network platforms, the news format has gradually shifted from pure text to multimodal content. Correspondingly, the research on fake news detection
has changed to multimodal fake news detection as well. Existing multimodal fake news detection methods mainly focus on how to integrate the news representation from multimodalities to improve detection performance, instead of doing in-depth research on the inconsistencies between images
and texts in fake news. Furthermore, the most multimodal
methods rarely explore external information and the external information used often lacks reliability or remains static
(Hu et al. 2023).
To address these issues, we propose a method that aligns
news text and image information to a shared feature space
through multimodal contrastive learning. Then, it obtains
enhanced multimodal representations via cross-modal semantic interaction. Additionally, to deepen the model understanding of news text, descriptions of knowledge entities
from Wikipedia are introduced as external reliable information. An external information enhancement module is employed, utilizing an attention mechanism to enhance the feature representation of news content with the external reliable
information. Our major contributions are summarized as follows.

With the rapid development of the Internet, the information dissemination paradigm has changed and the efficiency
has been improved greatly. While this also brings the quick
spread of fake news and leads to negative impacts on cyberspace. Currently, the information presentation formats
have evolved gradually, with the news formats shifting from
texts to multimodal contents. As a result, detecting multimodal fake news has become one of the research hotspots.
However, multimodal fake news detection research field still
faces two main challenges: the inability to fully and effectively utilize multimodal information for detection, and the
low credibility or static nature of the introduced external information, which limits dynamic updates. To bridge the gaps,
we propose ERIC-FND, an external reliable informationenhanced multimodal contrastive learning framework for fake
news detection. ERIC-FND strengthens the representation of
news contents by entity-enriched external information enhancement method. It also enriches the multimodal news information via multimodal semantic interaction method where
the multimodal constrative learning is employed to make different modality representations learn from each other. Moreover, an adaptive fusion method is taken to integrate the news
representations from different dimensions for the eventual
classification. Experiments are done on two commonly used
datasets in different languages, X (Twitter) and Weibo. Experiment results demonstrate that our proposed model ERICFND outperforms existing state-of-the-art fake news detection methods under the same settings.

Extended version and code —
https://github.com/Tarasom123/ERIC-FND

Introduction

• We propose ERIC-FND, an External Reliable
Information-enhanced multimodal Contrastive learning
method for Fake News Detection, which mainly consists
of three modules, namely external information enhancement module, multimodal information interactive
enhancement module and adaptive fusion-based classification module. The first two modules aim to leverage
external information for a deeper understanding of news
content and to enhance multimodal representation based
on multimodal information. The adaptive fusion based
classification module attempts to adaptively fuse the

With the rapid development and widespread use of the internet, the number of internet users has been increasing, making reading news online become an important part of daily
activities. The Internet provides great convenience for disseminating information on social network platforms, leading to a large amount of fake news published on the Internet for various intentions. The widespread dissemination of
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

31

