The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HeGTa: Leveraging Heterogeneous Graph-enhanced Large Language Models for
Few-shot Complex Table Understanding
Rihui Jin1,2 , Yu Li1,2 , Guilin Qi1,7 * , Nan Hu1,2 , Yuan-Fang Li3 , Jiaoyan Chen4 , Jianan Wang5 ,
Yongrui Chen1,2 , Dehai Min1,2 , Sheng Bi6
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and its Interdisciplinary Applications
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Monash University
4
The University of Manchester
5
Alibaba Group
6
Law and Innovation Lab, Law School, Southeast University, China
7
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{ari king, yuli 11, gqi, nanhu, yrchen, zhishanq, bisheng}@seu.edu.cn, yuanfang.li@monash.edu,
jiaoyan.chen@manchester.ac.uk, jn wang2@outlook.com

Abstract

still require considerable amounts of labeled data for taskspecific fine-tuning. Regarding the second challenge, while
current frameworks attempt to capture structural information in tables through the use of position embeddings (Wang
et al. 2020c) or by modeling tables as graphs (Jia et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2021), these methods are effective for simple
tables, but wane with complex tables. This shortfall arises
because the cell-to-cell relationships in complex tables are
more intricate than those in simple tables, as shown in Fig. 1.
Fortunately, recent advancements have introduced techniques that can be integrated into the TU framework to
tackle the challenges: 1) Large Language Models (LLMs)
have shown remarkable effectiveness in managing few-shot
tasks involving data in other modalities, such as vision (Liu
et al. 2023) and time series (Jin et al. 2023a). This is
achieved through instruction tuning and soft prompts, which
seek to align the semantic spaces of the other modality encoder with that of the LLM, a method that can also be applied to tabular data. 2) Self-supervised heterogeneous graph
(HG) pre-training (Ma, Liu, and Zuo 2023; Yang et al. 2022)
enables models to navigate multifaceted relationships within
data, such as complex intercell relationships in Fig. 1, using
substantial volumes of unlabeled data.
We propose HeGTa, an HG-enhanced LLM framework
for the few-shot complex TU. To enable HeGTa to model
intricate relationships within complex tables, HeGTa begins
with modeling the tabular data with the HG and then processing it through a tabular graph encoder to generate vectors imbued with structural information. Additionally, to ensure that the LLM achieves comparable performance in table tasks to its performance in natural language (NL) tasks,
especially in few-shot scenarios, we align the representation
spaces of the tabular graph encoder and the LLM via instruction tuning. Specifically, we integrate table vectors containing structural information as soft prompts within the LLM
inputs and innovatively design three multi-granularity selfsupervised tasks tailored for both tables and LLMs for pre-

Table Understanding (TU) has achieved promising advancements, but it faces the challenges of the scarcity of manually
labeled tables and the presence of complex table structures.
To address these challenges, we propose HeGTa, a heterogeneous graph (HG)-enhanced large language model (LLM)
designed for few-shot TU tasks. This framework aligns structural table semantics with the LLM’s parametric knowledge
through soft prompts and instruction tuning. It also addresses
complex tables with a multi-task pre-training scheme by incorporating novel multi-granularity self-supervised HG pretext tasks. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of
HeGTa, showing that it outperforms the SOTA for few-shot
complex TU on several benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Table Understanding (TU) seeks to learn informative embeddings of tables containing inherently tabular semantics,
often formatted in ways not easily interpretable by machines, as shown in Fig. 1. This endeavor enhances machine
performance across a range of table-related tasks, such as
Table QA (Wang et al. 2024), Cell Type Classification (Jia
et al. 2023) and Table Type Classification (Lu et al. 2024).
Yet, in real-world scenarios, TU faces the challenges of a
lack of sufficient human annotations and the presence of
complex table structures, which diminishes the effectiveness and applicability of existing frameworks. As for the first
challenge, the data-hungry nature of existing frameworks results in diminished performance in few-shot TU scenarios,
where only several samples are annotated. Although some
studies (Dong et al. 2022; Herzig et al. 2020) have adopted
pre-training with encoder-only architectures (Devlin et al.
2019) to alleviate the annotation burden, these solutions
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24294

