The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RefDetector: A Simple Yet Effective Matching-based Method
for Referring Expression Comprehension
Yabing Wang1 , Zhuotao Tian2 , Zheng Qin1 , Sanping Zhou1 , Le Wang1 *
1

2

Xi’an Jiaotong University
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen

Despite the rapid and substantial advancements in object detection, it continues to face limitations imposed by pre-defined
category sets. Current methods for visual grounding primarily
focus on how to better leverage the visual backbone to generate text-tailored visual features, which may require adjusting
the parameters of the entire model. Besides, some early methods, i.e., matching-based method, build upon and extend the
functionality of existing object detectors by enabling them to
localize an object based on free-form linguistic expressions,
which have good application potential. However, the untapped
potential of the matching-based approach has not been fully
realized due to inadequate exploration. In this paper, we first
analyze the limitations of the current matching-based method
(i.e., , mismatch problem and complicated fusion mechanisms),
then present a simple yet effective matching-based method,
namely RefDetector. To tackle the above issues, we devise
a simple heuristic rule to generate proposals with improved
referent recall. Additionally, we introduce a straightforward
vision-language interaction module that eliminates the need
for intricate manually-designed mechanisms. Moreover, we
have explored the visual grounding based on the modern detector DETR, and achieved significant performance improvement.
Extensive experiments on three REC benchmark datasets,
i.e., RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Linguistic
Backbone

Visual
Backbone

Regression Head

snowboarder
with blue pants

Cross-modal
Interaction

Abstract

Output coordinates
(x1,y1,x2,y2)

(a) Regression-based Method

Linguistic
Backbone

Detector

Referent Matching

snowboarder
with blue pants

Output best
matching proposal

(b) Matching-based Method

Figure 1: The comparison of REC pipelines. (a) Regressionbased pipeline, which focuses on cross-modal interaction or
extracts visual features guided by expression. (b) Matchingbased pipeline, which utilizes proposal-expression matching
to identify the most suitable proposal generated by the object
detector.

challenges. One of the main challenges is the lack of prior
information about the object, necessitating the model to learn
how to predict the location of the target object. Additionally,
these methods often require adjusting the parameters of the
entire model, leading to increased computational demands
and resource requirements.
Moreover, considering the remarkable progress of modern
object detectors, it is a natural solution to expand their capabilities, enabling them to accurately localize the target object
based on a given linguistic expression. In line with this, early
research (Yu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2021; Hong et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2019) endeavors to transform the localization task
into an expression-region matching task, expanding the capabilities of the detectors, as shown in Fig.1(b). These methods
effectively utilize the prior object information provided by
detectors, reducing the complexity of model learning. Unfortunately, the matching-based method has not received significant attention in recent years, and its full potential remains
untapped. Alternatively, in this study, we take a different
approach by revisiting the matching-based pipeline, and we
identify two key issues which are outlined as follows:
1) Mismatch problem: These methods assume that all pro-

Introduction
Referring expression comprehension (REC) is a multi-modal
task that aims to localize the object in an image conditioning
on a free-form linguistic expression. Unlike object detection, which focuses on predefined categories, REC identifies
a specific object mentioned in a sentence among multiple
instances. This task holds significant potential for various
applications, such as cross-modal retrieval (Wang et al. 2022,
2023, 2024b,a; Dong et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022a)
Recent advancements (Su et al. 2023; Deng et al. 2021;
Li and Sigal 2021; Zhu et al. 2022) predominantly adopt
the regression-based method, with a focus on generating texttailored visual features to accurately predict the bounding box
of the target object, as depicted in Figure 1 (a). Despite making great progress, these methods still encounter significant
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8033

