The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FATE: Feature-Adapted Parameter Tuning for Vision-Language Models
Zhengqin Xu, Zelin Peng* , Xiaokang Yang† , Wei Shen
MoE Key Lab of Artifcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{fate311, zelin.peng, xkyang, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
A photo of
dog

Following the recent popularity of vision language models,
several attempts, e.g., parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT),
have been made to extend them to different downstream tasks.
Previous PEFT works motivate their methods from the view
of introducing new parameters for adaptation but still need to
learn this part of weight from scratch, i.e., random initialization. In this paper, we present a novel strategy that incorporates the potential of prompts, e.g., vision features, to facilitate the initial parameter space adapting to new scenarios.
We introduce a Feature-Adapted parameTer Efficient tuning paradigm for vision-language models, dubbed as FATE,
which injects informative features from the vision encoder
into language encoder’s parameters space. Specifically, we
extract vision features from the last layer of CLIP’s vision
encoder and, after projection, treat them as parameters for
fine-tuning each layer of CLIP’s language encoder. By adjusting these feature-adapted parameters, we can directly enable
communication between the vision and language branches,
facilitating CLIP’s adaptation to different scenarios. Experimental results show that FATE exhibits superior generalization performance on 11 datasets with a very small amount of
extra parameters and computation.

Text Encoder

Prompt Space

(a)
Image Encoder

A photo of
dog

Text Encoder

Parameter Space

(b)

Image Encoder

Parameter Space

A photo of
dog

(c)

Text Encoder

Projector

Image Encoder

Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed impressive developments in vision-language modelling. Many foundation models (Dou et al. 2022b; Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022a;
Kim, Son, and Kim 2021; Li et al. 2021; Kamath et al. 2021;
Dou et al. 2022a; Li et al. 2022b), e.g., CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), have facilitated many vision tasks: instead of training
a model from scratch for each individual task, one can simply apply these pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs)
and then (partially) fine-tuning them on various downstream
tasks to achieve promising performance.
Existing algorithms often perform fine-tuning in an efficient style, which mainly encompasses two techniques: (i)
Prompt learning (Rao et al. 2022; Tsimpoukelli et al. 2021;
Bulat and Tzimiropoulos 2023; Yao, Zhang, and Xu 2023a;
Zhou et al. 2022b,a). They often attempt to incorporate tunable or task-orientated prompts, e.g., vision features (Zhou

Figure 1: Comparative Overview: Previous Methods vs.
FATE. Previous method using (a) Prompt Learning, (b)
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning. (c) our proposed FATE.

et al. 2022a), with handcrafted input prompts of a model, targeted adjust the initial prompt space to satisfy downstream
scenarios (see Fig. 1 (a)). (ii) Parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) (Chen et al. 2022a,b; Gao et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2022;
Mou et al. 2024). As shown in Fig. 1 (b), their common idea
is to learn a small set of parameters from scratch to help the
initial parameter space adapt to new scenarios. Considering
features can be treated as a type of pre-trained parameter incorporated into a prompt space tailored for new scenarios,
we raise a question by the light of nature: Is there any way
to take advantage of these informative features for the initial
parameter space to facilitate its adaptation?
In this paper, to offer a solution to this question, we

* Project Leader
†

Corresponding Author: Xiaokang Yang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9014

