The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Image Regeneration: Evaluating Text-to-Image Model via Generating Identical
Image with Multimodal Large Language Models
Chutian Meng, Fan Ma, Jiaxu Miao, Chi Zhang, Yi Yang, Yueting Zhuang*
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{12321215, mafan, jiaxumiao, 12321216, yangyics, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have revitalized the image generation domain and play crucial roles in both academic research and
artistic expression. With the emergence of new diffusion
models, the evaluation of the performance of text-to-image
models has become increasingly important. Current metrics
focus on directly matching the input text with the generated
image, but due to cross-modal information asymmetry, this
leads to unreliable or incomplete assessment results. Motivated by this, we introduce the Image Regeneration task
in this study to assess text-to-image models by tasking the
T2I model with generating an image according to the reference image. We use GPT4V to bridge the gap between the
reference image and the text input for the T2I model, allowing T2I models to understand the content of the image.
This evaluation process is simplified, as comparisons between
the generated image and the reference image are straightforward. Two regeneration datasets spanning content-diverse
and style-diverse evaluation dataset are introduced to evaluate
the leading diffusion models currently available. Additionally, we present ImageRepainter framework to enhance the
quality of generated images by improving content comprehension via MLLM guided iterative generation and revision.
Our comprehensive experiments have showcased the effectiveness of this framework in assessing the generative capabilities of models. By leveraging MLLM, we have demonstrated that a robust T2M can produce images more closely
resembling the reference image.

Figure 1: Workflow comparison among (a) pre-trained
model evaluation, (b) QG&QA(Question Generation &
Question Answering) evaluation, (c) image regeneration
task evaluation, where our approach (c) achieves better
alignment with human cognition.

more, holding significant importance in academic and creative domains.
Despite rapid advancements in related algorithms and applications, a research gap remains in evaluating the quality
of these generative models. Current T2I model evaluation
focuses on two modalities: text input and image output. For
example, CLIP score (Radford et al. 2021) is widely used to
measure the semantic information within images based on
user prompts. However, the CLIP score has lower sensitivity
to fine-grained details and visual variances and cannot reflect the quality of generated images. Similarly, the recently
popular evaluation method QG&QA (Question Generation
and Question Answering) generates several questions and
answers related to the generated image using the textual input and employs VQA methods to compare and evaluate the
image, such as T2I-CompBench (Huang et al. 2023). Although such methods have achieved some results in measuring the consistency between text and image content, they
cannot effectively assess the model’s overall performance
under complex prompt conditions.
We can derive two insights from the current evalua-

Code&Datasets: https://github.com/SPEEDSRER/ImageRegeneration

Introduction
With the rise of generative AI, there has been a surge in
the development of text-to-image (Rombach et al. 2022a;
Podell et al. 2023; Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022;
Yu et al. 2022) and text-to-video (Khachatryan et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2024) models in recent years. The primary goal of
such algorithms is to generate visual content based on user
prompts. These technologies have broad applications (Yang
et al. 2024b), such as style transfer (Zhang et al. 2023; Wang,
Zhao, and Xing 2023), image editing (Gal et al. 2022; Ruiz
et al. 2023a,b; Zhou et al. 2024b,a; Liang et al. 2024), and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6090

