The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FIND: A Framework for Discovering Formulas in Data
Tingxiong Xiao1 , Yuxiao Cheng1 , Jinli Suo1,2,*
1

2

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Institute for Brain and Cognitive Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
jlsuo@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

algorithms (Koza 1994) to explore the search space and
find the best mathematical expression, and many researchers
have begun to integrate deep learning with SR. Hernandez
et al. develop a machine-learning algorithm based on SR
in the form of genetic programming that is capable of discovering accurate, computationally efficient many-body potential models (Hernandez et al. 2019). Weng et al. use SR
to guide the design of new oxide perovskite catalysts with
improved oxygen evolution reaction activities (Weng et al.
2020). Cranmer et al. adopt sparse latent representations
when training a GNN in a supervised setting, and then apply
SR to components of the learned model to extract explicit
physical relations (Cranmer et al. 2020). Kamienny et al.
task a Transformer to directly predict the full mathematical
expression, constants included and subsequently refined the
predicted constants by feeding them to the non-convex optimizer as an informed initialization (Kamienny et al. 2022).
Above SR methods can generate explicit expressions, which
helps in understanding the underlying mechanisms of the
observations. However, due to the typically large and complex search space of symbolic regression, the algorithms often suffer from limited efficiency and scalability, and most
discovered formulas have no physical meaning.

Scientific discovery serves as the cornerstone for advances
in various fields, from the fundamental laws of physics to
the intricate mechanisms of biology. However, two existing
mainstream methods—symbolic regression and dimensional
analysis, are significantly limited in this task: the former suffers from low computational efficiency due to the vast search
space and often results in formulas without physical meaning; the latter provides a useful theoretical framework but
also struggles in searching in a huge space because of lacking effective analysis for the latent variables. To address this
issue, here we propose a framework for efficiently discovering underlying formulas in data, named FIND. We draw
inspiration from Buckingham’s Pi theorem, imposing dimensional constraints on the input and output, thereby ensuring
discovered expressions possess physical meaning. Additionally, we propose a theoretical scheme for identifying the latent structure as well as a coarse-to-fine framework, significantly reducing the search space of latent variables. This
framework not only improves computational efficiency but
also enhances model interpretability. From comprehensive
experimental validation, FIND showcases its potential to uncover meaningful scientific insights across various domains,
providing a robust tool for advancing our understanding of
unknown systems.

Dimensional analysis (DA) aims to discover dimensionless equations with Buckingham’s Pi theorem (Buckingham
1914). As is described, almost all physical laws can be expressed as dimensionless relationships with fewer dimensionless numbers and in a more compact form (Barenblatt
2003). Dimensionless numbers are power-law monomials
of some physical quantities (Tan 2011), which can simplify
a problem by reducing the number of variables. Xie et al.
propose two-level optimization schemes with dimensional
invariance to efficiently discover dimensionless numbers in
static and dynamic systems (Xie et al. 2022). HiDeNN draws
on the Pi theorem and designs a universal dimensionless
learning AI framework to solve challenging computational
science and engineering problems with little or no available
physics as well as with extreme computation cost (Saha et al.
2021). Bakarji et al. develop three data-driven techniques
that use the Buckingham Pi theorem as a constraint and show
decent accuracy, robustness, and computational complexity
(Bakarji et al. 2022). DHC-GEP effectively discovers function forms and coefficients using basic mathematical operators and physical variables, without preassumed candidate

Introduction
Over the years, researchers have actively devoted large efforts in the field of scientific discovery (Bergen et al. 2019;
Bhaskar and Nigam 1990; Camps-Valls et al. 2023; Xiao
et al. 2024a; Bongard and Lipson 2007; Wang et al. 2023;
Iten et al. 2020). In the quest for valuable domain knowledge
and deeper field understanding, it is pivotal to explore the
underlying formulas buried under data observations, which
can assist in dimension reduction, prediction, or discovering
the laws of nature.
There are two mainstream methods for formula discovery. Symbolic regression (SR) (Schmidt and Lipson 2009;
Makke and Chawla 2024) is a machine learning technique
that aims to automatically discover mathematical expressions to fit the given data, which can be used to discover
physical laws, establish mathematical models, and predict
unknown data. SR typically employs methods like genetic
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21653

