The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reinforcement Active Client Selection for
Federated Heterogeneous Graph Learning
Jia Wang1,2 , Yawen Li3 * , Yingxia Shao1,2 , Zhe Xue1,2 , Zeli Guan1,2 , Ang Li1,2 , Guanhua Ye1,2
1

School of Computer Science (National Pilot School of Software Engineering), Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Telecommunication Software and Multimedia
3
SChool of Economics and Management, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing 100876, PR China
Wangj2021110865, shaoyx, xuezhe, guanzeli, david.lee, g.ye@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract

with Federated Heterogeneous Graph Learning (FHGL) allowing local clients to maintain Heterogeneous Information
Network (HIN) data with multiple node or edge types. Common FHGL still requires all clients to participate in global
aggregation, resulting in significant computational resource
and communication time wastage or randomly select clients
for global training without the ability to choose clients that
could better aid global model convergence or performance
improvement (Fu and King 2023; Yan et al. 2023; Qu et al.
2022; Song et al. 2023). Although existing client selection
(CS) (Ribero and Vikalo 2020) algorithms have been extensively studied in the context of Euclidean data, the utilization of CS algorithms on FHGL has not received much attention. Furthermore, the unique characteristics of HIN and
the complexity of HGNN make it challenging to accurately
assess client contributions and select appropriate clients for
aggregation in the FHGL scenario.
In FHGL scenarios, client selection (CS) faces two main
challenges. On one hand, the diverse node and edge types in
HINs introduce complex topological information, requiring
more advanced HGNN architectures to handle more difficult
tasks. Existing CS algorithms that rely on model information and performance metrics introduce biases when evaluating client quality (Wang et al. 2024; Shi and Shen 2021).
As a result, when applied to FHGL, these CS algorithms
struggle to accurately select clients that most contribute to
global model aggregation. On the other hand, existing CS
algorithms often face a trade-off between convergence and
generalization due to high data heterogeneity (Zhan, Li, and
Guo 2020; Guan et al. 2023). The complexity and diversity
of HIN increase the data heterogeneity in FL. Data distributions across clients may vary significantly, with diverse node
and edge combinations creating complex topological information, challenging FL’s robustness in managing data heterogeneity (Song et al. 2023; Yang, Liu, and Kassab 2023).
Traditional CS algorithms may worsen the trade-off between
convergence and accuracy in such scenarios (Goetz et al.
2019; Rjoub et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2022).
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach, Reinforcement Active Client Selection-based Federated Heterogeneous Graph Learning (RAFHGL), which combines Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Active Learning (AL) to

Careful client selection for aggregation can help improve
the global model’s performance. However, existing research
on federated heterogeneous graph learning (FHGL) has paid
limited attention to the client selection (CS) problem. Current CS algorithms struggle to accurately assess client contributions and select suitable participants in FHGL, creating a
trade-off between convergence and accuracy. In this paper, we
propose a Reinforcement Active client selection based Federated Heterogeneous Graph Learning (RAFHGL), which precisely evaluates the importance of local heterogeneous graph
data and selects high-contributing clients for aggregation.
RAFHGL employs an active learning agent to select representative nodes for local training. The statistical features of
the active scores are used to assess client contributions. A
client selection agent then chooses clients conducive to global
model convergence for aggregation. To address heterogeneity
introduced by sample and client selection, the training process stabilizes by correcting local losses based on data prototypes. Experimental results on 4 publicly available heterogeneous graph datasets show that RAFHGL outperforms existing Client Selection algorithms in federated heterogeneous
graph learning scenarios in terms of performance and convergence.

Introduction
Similar to other neural networks, a substantial amount of
data can enhance the performance of Heterogeneous Graph
Neural Network (HGNN). However, in reality, it is often
challenging to collect extensive data for training due to constraints such as hardware limitations or privacy concerns
from multiple data sources (Lin et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2022a; Chen et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2021). Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Chai et al. 2020; Dennis, Li,
and Smith 2021) has emerged as a promising approach for
collaborative model training without the need to exchange
raw data, particularly well-suited for training machine learning models on distributed devices. Consequently, research
on Federated Graph Learning (FGL) (Zhang et al. 2021; Liu
et al. 2022b; Tan et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2022) has emerged,
* Corresponding author.(warmly0716@126.com)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21117

