The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Solving Robust Markov Decision Processes: Generic, Reliable, Efficient
Tobias Meggendorfer1 * , Maximilian Weininger2 * , Patrick Wienhöft3,4 *
1
Lancaster University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria
3
Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany
4
Centre for Tactile Internet with Human-in-the-Loop (CeTI), Dresden, Germany
tobias@meggendorfer.de, maximilian.weininger@ista.ac.at, patrick.wienhoeft@tu-dresden.de
2

Abstract

in, e.g., healthcare applications (Zhang, Steimle, and Denton 2017). However, existing approaches to solving RMDP
suffer from significant drawbacks, e.g. they are limited to
very specific objectives or classes of uncertainty sets, or do
not provide any guarantees on the correctness of their result.
Alleviating all these problems, we present a framework for
solving RMDPs that is generic, reliable, and efficient.

Markov decision processes (MDP) are a well-established
model for sequential decision-making in the presence of probabilities. In robust MDP (RMDP), every action is associated
with an uncertainty set of probability distributions, modelling
that transition probabilities are not known precisely. Based
on the known theoretical connection to stochastic games, we
provide a framework for solving RMDPs that is generic, reliable, and efficient. It is generic both with respect to the model,
allowing for a wide range of uncertainty sets, including but not
limited to intervals, L1 - or L2 -balls, and polytopes; and with
respect to the objective, including long-run average reward,
undiscounted total reward, and stochastic shortest path. It is
reliable, as our approach not only converges in the limit, but
provides precision guarantees at any time during the computation. It is efficient because – in contrast to state-of-the-art
approaches – it avoids explicitly constructing the underlying
stochastic game. Consequently, our prototype implementation
outperforms existing tools by several orders of magnitude and
can solve RMDPs with a million states in under a minute.

Code — https://zenodo.org/records/14385450
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10185

1

Introduction

Robust Markov decision processes. Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman 1994) are the standard model for
sequential decision making and planning in the context of
non-determinism and uncertainty. In brief, an MDP proceeds
as follows: Starting in some state of the modelled system, an
agent chooses an action (resolving non-determinism) and the
MDP continues to a successor state, sampled from a probability distribution associated with the state-action pair (resolving
uncertainty). In practice, this uncertainty is often not known
precisely, but rather estimated from data. Robust Markov decision processes (RMDPs) (Nilim and Ghaoui 2005; Iyengar
2005) are an extension of MDPs that lift the assumption of
knowing every transition probability exactly. Instead of one
precise probability distribution per state-action pair, RMDPs
have an uncertainty set consisting of (potentially uncountably) many probability distributions. RMDPs have been used
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26631

Generic Uncertainty Sets. In the literature, many variants of uncertainty sets exist: Firstly, polytopic uncertainty
sets (Chatterjee et al. 2024) generalize simple interval uncertainty, e.g. (Givan, Leach, and Dean 2000; Tewari and
Bartlett 2007), L1 -balls around a given probability distribution, e.g. (Strehl and Littman 2004; Ho, Petrik, and
Wiesemann 2018), and contamination models (Wang et al.
2024). Definable uncertainty sets (Grand-Clément, Petrik,
and Vieille 2023) are a recent generalization of polytopic uncertainty. Secondly, non-polytopic (and non-definable) uncertainty sets include the Chi-square (Iyengar 2005), KullbackLeibler divergence (Nilim and Ghaoui 2005), and Wasserstein distance (Yang 2017) uncertainty sets, and Lp -balls
around a distribution for 1 < p < ∞, all of which stateof-the-art methods cannot handle in general. In this paper,
we introduce the Constant-Support Assumption, which intuitively requires that the successors of an action are certain,
and only the transition probabilities are unknown. It allows
us to capture all the listed non-polytopic variants and more.
Constant-Support uncertainty sets are incomparable to both
polytopic and definable uncertainty sets, i.e. there exists polytopic (and definable) uncertainty sets that do not satisfy the
Constant-Support Assumption and vice versa.
Solution algorithms are always restricted to some particular representation of uncertainty. Considering more general
uncertainty sets comes with several complications, e.g. that
in some cases optimal policies may cease to exist (see Ex. 1).
In this work, we consider a large class of uncertainty sets
by investigating ones that are polytopic or that satisfy the
Constant-Support Assumption.
Generic Objectives. RMDPs mainly have been investigated with discounted or finite-horizon objectives, which put
an emphasis on the immediate performance of the system,
see e.g. the seminal works (Nilim and Ghaoui 2005; Iyengar
2005) or the recent overview (Wang et al. 2024, Sec. 1.2).
While these objectives can be included in our framework,

