The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Region-Based Optimization in Continual Learning for Audio Deepfake Detection
Yujie Chen 1 , Jiangyan Yi 3,* , Cunhang Fan 1 , Jianhua Tao 3, 4 , Yong Ren 2 , Siding Zeng 2 , Chu
Yuan Zhang 3 , Xinrui Yan 2 , Hao Gu 2 , Jun Xue 1 , Chenglong Wang 2 , Zhao Lv 1 , Xiaohui Zhang 2,*
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
4
Beijing National Research Center for lnformation Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
e22201148@stu.ahu.edu.cn, yijy@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

detection. In addition, the introduction of pre-trained audio models significantly improves the effectiveness of audio deepfake detection, achieving impressive performance
on publicly available datasets. (Tak et al. 2022; Wang and
Yamagishi 2022; Hsu et al. 2021)

Rapid advancements in speech synthesis and voice conversion bring convenience but also new security risks, creating
an urgent need for effective audio deepfake detection. Although current models perform well, their effectiveness diminishes when confronted with the diverse and evolving nature of real-world deepfakes. To address this issue, we propose a continual learning method named Region-Based Optimization (RegO) for audio deepfake detection. Specifically,
we use the Fisher information matrix to measure important
neuron regions for real and fake audio detection, dividing
them into four regions. First, we directly fine-tune the less important regions to quickly adapt to new tasks. Next, we apply
gradient optimization in parallel for regions important only to
real audio detection, and in orthogonal directions for regions
important only to fake audio detection. For regions that are
important to both, we use sample proportion-based adaptive
gradient optimization. This region-adaptive optimization ensures an appropriate trade-off between memory stability and
learning plasticity. Additionally, to address the increase of
redundant neurons from old tasks, we further introduce the
Ebbinghaus forgetting mechanism to release them, thereby
promoting the model’s ability to learn more generalized discriminative features. Experimental results show our method
achieves a 21.3 percent improvement in EER over the stateof-the-art continual learning approach RWM for audio deepfake detection. Moreover, the effectiveness of RegO extends
beyond the audio deepfake detection domain, showing potential significance in other tasks, such as image recognition.

Despite the significant advancements in audio deepfake
detection models, their performance is still limited when
confronted with diverse and unseen forged audio in realworld scenarios. To address this challenge, two primary approaches have been developed. The first approach utilizes
data augmentation and multi-feature fusion techniques to extract robust audio features, improving the generalization of
model across various datasets (Wang et al. 2023; Fan et al.
2024). The second approach is based on continual learning
(Ma et al. 2021), where the model incrementally learns from
both new and old datasets, allowing it to integrate previously
learned discriminative information. This enhances its detection capability for diverse and unseen deepfakes, achieving
a balance between memory stability (the model’s ability
to retain performance on old tasks) and learning plasticity
(the model’s ability to perform on new tasks). Currently, the
most advanced continual learning methods for audio deepfake detection, Regularized Adaptive Weight Modification
(RAWM) (Zhang et al. 2023) and Radian Weight Modification (RWM) (Zhang et al. 2024), overcome catastrophic
forgetting by introducing trainable gradient correction directions to optimize weights. While RAWM and RWM exhibit
notable effectiveness in overcoming catastrophic forgetting,
the use of Recursive Least Squares (RLS) (Shah, Palmieri,
and Datum 1992) to approximate the gradient plane of previous tasks can introduce errors (Liavas and Regalia 1999).
Moreover, applying gradient modification to all neurons restricts the model’s learning plasticity for new tasks.

Introduction
Recently, with the rapid development of speech synthesis
and voice conversion technologies, the distinction between
real and fake audio has become increasingly blurred, posing significant security risks to society. Consequently, researchers are increasingly focusing on audio deepfake detection mechanisms (Yi et al. 2023b). Community-led initiatives, such as the ASVspoof Challenges (Kinnunen et al.
2017; Todisco et al. 2019; Yamagishi et al. 2021) and the
Audio Deepfake Detection (ADD) Challenges (Yi et al.
2022, 2023a), significantly advance the field of fake audio

To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a continual learning method for audio deepfake detection, named
Region-Based Optimization (RegO). Under the same acoustic environments, real audio exhibits a more compact feature
distribution compared to fake audio (Ma et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2023, 2024), so they can be seen as a whole from the
same dataset. Based on this observation, we propose that for
new tasks, gradient updates for real audio should be parallel
to the gradient directions of previous tasks, while the updates
for fake audio should be orthogonal to the previous task gra-

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23651

