The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hedging and Approximate Truthfulness in Traditional Forecasting Competitions
Mary Monroe, Anish Thilagar, Melody Hsu, Rafael Frongillo
University of Colorado Boulder

Abstract

The ubiquity of Simple Max may be partly due to folklore that the advantage of deviating from reporting truthfully is attenuated by the large number of events typically
used, relative to the number of forecasters. For example, Aldous (2019) states that “in the long run it is best to be ‘honest.’” However, the community lacks any theoretical analysis
backing up this claim. Indeed, we lack any strategic analysis of the Simple Max mechanism beyond a single event—a
major omission given its ubiquity.
In this paper, we give the first strategic analysis of Simple Max for multiple events, with a goal of understanding
when the long-run-truthfulness folklore does and does not
hold. We first identify a natural example where folklore fails:
when the best forecaster is much better than the rest. Here
forecasters will not be truthful in equilibrium, even for an
arbitrarily large number of events. In particular, it is strictly
better for the best forecaster to hedge their report towards
the others’ reports to reduce the variance of their scores.
We next study the two-forecaster case and identify a
regime where contestants will be approximately truthful:
when they both believe they have a shot at winning but
have sufficient uncertainty about the report of their opponent. These conditions can be difficult to achieve if the number of events is large, as the scores of forecasters with fixed
skill will separate and the worse forecaster will no longer
have a shot at winning. Therefore we expect our result to apply in settings where the number of events is not too large,
such as geopolitical forecasting competitions, or in data science competitions with sufficient noise in the leaderboard.
Taken together, our results show that behavior under the
Simple Max mechanism is not as straightforward as folklore
claims. If platforms care about eliciting true beliefs from
contestants, our counterexample shows that there are settings they need to avoid. Meanwhile, our approximate truthfulness result shows that, at least in some regimes, forecasters will behave in accordance with their beliefs. We conclude with several other implications and future work.

In forecasting competitions, the traditional mechanism scores
the predictions of each contestant against the outcome of each
event, and the contestant with the highest total score wins.
While it is well-known that this traditional mechanism can
suffer from incentive issues, it is folklore that contestants will
still be roughly truthful as the number of events grows. Yet
thus far the literature lacks a formal analysis of this traditional mechanism. This paper gives the first such analysis.
We first demonstrate that the “long-run truthfulness” folklore
is false: even for arbitrary numbers of events, the best forecaster can have an incentive to hedge, reporting more moderate beliefs to increase their win probability. On the positive
side, however, we show that two contestants will be approximately truthful when they have sufficient uncertainty over
the relative quality of their opponent and the outcomes of the
events, a case which may arise in practice.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19477

1

Introduction

In a forecasting competition, multiple forecasters submit
predictions on multiple events or held-out data points.
Prominent examples include geopolitical forecasting tournaments like the Good Judgment Project and the Hybrid Forecasting Competition, and data science competitions such as
those hosted on Kaggle. The most popular mechanism platforms use to select a winner is the traditional mechanism we
call Simple Max: after scoring each forecaster’s predictions
against the realized event outcomes, the forecaster with the
highest total score wins.
While intuitive, it is well-established that Simple Max is
not a truthful mechanism (Lichtendahl and Winkler 2007;
Witkowski et al. 2023). To maximize their chance of winning the competition, forecasters have incentives to submit
predictions which differ substantially from their true beliefs.
Several mechanisms have been proposed to address this
problem, such as Event Lotteries Forecasting (Witkowski
et al. 2023) and Follow the Regularized Leader (Frongillo
et al. 2021). Yet implementation of these proposals remains
rare, while Simple Max continues to enjoy widespread popularity despite its incentive issues.

1.1

Related Work

Non-truthful behavior in forecasting competitions under
Simple Max is well-documented in previous work. Lichtendahl and Winkler (2007) first showed that forecasters extremize their reports when they want to maximize the chance
they win under Simple Max. Witkowski et al. (2018, 2023)

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14011

