The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fully-Scalable Massively Parallel Algorithm for k-center with Outliers
Di Wu 1,2 , Qilong Feng 1,2,* , Junyu Huang 1,2 , Jinhui Xu 3 , Ziyun Huang 4 , Jianxin Wang 1,2,5,*
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha 410205, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, NY, USA
4
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Penn State Erie, The Behrend College
5
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
csuwudi@csu.edu.cn, csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn, junyuhuangcsu@foxmail.com, jinhui@buffalo.edu, zxh201@psu.edu,
jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn
Abstract

widely studied over the past decades and was also known
to be NP-hard even in a plane (Megiddo and Supowit 1984;
Feder and Greene 1988). Gonzalez (Gonzalez 1985) demonstrated that a 2-approximate solution can be achieved with
linear running time in the data size using a greedy strategy,
matching the approximation lower bound of the problem.

In this paper, we consider the k-center problem with outliers
(the (k, z)-center problem) in the context of Massively Parallel Computation (MPC). Existing MPC algorithms for the
(k, z)-center problem typically require Ω(k) local space per
machine. While this may be feasible when k is small, these
algorithms become impractical for large k, where each machine may lack sufficient space for computation. This motivates the study of fully-scalable algorithms with sublinear local space. We propose the first fully-scalable MPC algorithm
for the (k, z)-center problem. The main challenge is to design
an MPC algorithm that operates with sublinear local space
for finding the inliers close to the optimal clustering centers, and ensuring the approximation loss remains bounded.
To address this issue, we propose an iterative sampling-based
algorithm with sublinear local space in the data size. A key
component of our approach is an outliers-removal algorithm
that adjusts the sample size in each iteration to select inliers
as clustering centers. However, the number of discarded inliers increases with the iteration of the outliers-removal algorithm, making it difficult to bound. To address this, we
propose a self-adaptive method that can automatically adjust
sample size to account for different data distributions on each
machine, ensuring a lower bound on the sampling success
probability. With these techniques, we present an O(log∗ n)approximation MPC algorithm for the (k, z)-center problem
in constant-dimensional Euclidean space. The algorithm discards at most (1 + ϵ)z outliers, completing in O(log log n)
computation rounds while using Θ(nδ ) local space per machine.

In recent years, much attention has been paid to distributed and parallel computing (Ding et al. 2016; Guha, Li,
and Zhang 2017; Chen, Azer, and Zhang 2018; Bateni et al.
2021; Cohen-Addad, Mirrokni, and Zhong 2022; Im et al.
2023; Coy, Czumaj, and Mishra 2023). MPC model is a theoretical model of parallel computation, capturing the major
facets of large-scale computational systems such as MapReduce (Dean and Ghemawat 2008), Hadoop (White 2015),
Dryad (Isard et al. 2007) and Spark (Zaharia et al. 2010).
In the MPC model, the computation proceeds in rounds and
each machine performs local computations. The goal is to
design parallel algorithms that use machines with sublinear
space and operate in a sublinear (and hopefully sublogarithmic) number of computation rounds. In parallel settings, the
data often exhibit non-homogeneity and heterogeneity, making the MPC model sensitive to outliers. This sensitivity motivates us to study the clustering problem with outliers in
the MPC model. The k-center problem is well-known for
its sensitivity to outliers, as noted by (Charikar et al. 2001).
One of the major challenges for clustering is how to deal
with data noises. Charikar et al. (Charikar et al. 2001) formulated and studied the (k, z)-center problem. The (k, z)center problem is to find a set of no more than k centers and
a set of z outliers such that the maximum distance from all
but at most z outliers of the input dataset to their nearest center is minimized. This variant has been widely studied in sequential algorithms (Ding, Yu, and Wang 2019; Chakrabarty,
Goyal, and Krishnaswamy 2016; Ding et al. 2016; Guha, Li,
and Zhang 2017; Chen, Azer, and Zhang 2018).

Introduction
Clustering is one of the most fundamental computational
tasks in the field of machine learning. The goal of clustering is to partition the given dataset into several clusters such
that the points in the same cluster are more similar to each
other, while the points in different clusters have less similarity. Among different clustering objectives, the k-center is an
important clustering formulation, where the goal is to minimize the maximum distances between data points to their
closest clustering centers. The k-center problem has been

In this paper, we focus on the (k, z)-center problem in the
MPC model, called MPC (k, z)-center problem. Malkomes
et al. (Malkomes et al. 2015) proposed a 2-round (13 + ϵ)approximation
MPC algorithm for the (k, z)-center problem
p
e
with O( n(k + z)) space per machine. Ceccarello et al.
(Ceccarello, Pietracaprina, and Pucci 2019) improved this
result to a 2-round (3 + ϵ)-approximation MPC algorithm

* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21519

