The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

STD-PLM: Understanding Both Spatial and Temporal Properties of
Spatial-Temporal Data with PLM
Yiheng Huang1 * , Xiaowei Mao1 * , Shengnan Guo1,2 , Yubin Chen1 , Junfeng Shen1 , Tiankuo Li1 ,
Youfang Lin1,2 , Huaiyu Wan1,2†
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, Beijing, China
{huangyiheng,maoxiaowei,guoshn,chenyubin,tanklee,jfshen,yflin,hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

tive traffic management and travel planning, while spatialtemporal imputation enables precise analysis of spatialtemporal patterns and supporting other dependent tasks. Although extensive studies have achieved satisfactory accuracy
in spatial-temporal forecasting and imputation, they rely on
extensive historical data for training. However, obtaining
comprehensive datasets for all the studied regions is challenging due to the high cost of collecting long-term data.
Some studies (Miao et al. 2024) have enhanced data utilization through continuous learning, but they still fall short in
handling scenarios with extremely scarce data. Therefore,
the capability for zero-shot (Wang et al. 2019) and fewshot (Wang et al. 2020) learning is crucial for the broader
applicability of spatial-temporal models. Moreover, existing
methods are usually tailored to specific tasks and not designed for both forecasting and imputation. Each method requires domain expertise and task-specific designs, increasing costs and complicating the deployment of forecasting
and imputation methods. While some studies (Miao et al.
2022) have applied multi-task learning to integrate various
objectives, they mainly focus on forecasting tasks rather than
jointly addressing forecasting and imputation. To summarize, we need a method that possesses powerful zero-shot
and few-shot learning capabilities and is versatile for both
spatial-temporal forecasting and imputation tasks, making it
practical and applicable in real-world scenarios.

Spatial-temporal forecasting and imputation are important for
real-world intelligent systems. Most existing methods are tailored for individual forecasting or imputation tasks but are
not designed for both. Additionally, they are less effective
for zero-shot and few-shot learning. While pre-trained language model (PLM) have exhibited strong pattern recognition and reasoning abilities across various tasks, including
few-shot and zero-shot learning, their applications in spatialtemporal data understanding has been constrained by insufficient modeling of complex correlations such as the temporal correlations, spatial connectivity, non-pairwise and highorder spatial-temporal correlations within data. In this paper, we propose STD-PLM for understanding both spatial
and temporal properties of Spatial-Temporal Data with PLM,
which is capable of implementing both spatial-temporal forecasting and imputation tasks. STD-PLM understands spatialtemporal correlations via explicitly designed spatial and temporal tokenizers. Topology-aware node embeddings are designed for PLM to comprehend and exploit the topology
structure of data in inductive manner. Furthermore, to mitigate the efficiency issues introduced by the PLM, we design
a sandglass attention module (SGA) combined with a specific constrained loss function, which significantly improves
the model’s efficiency while ensuring performance. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that STD-PLM exhibits competitive
performance and generalization capabilities across the forecasting and imputation tasks on various datasets. Moreover,
STD-PLM achieves promising results on both few-shot and
zero-shot tasks.

We have noticed that PLM are widely recognized for
strong performance in zero-shot and few-shot learning
across a diverse range of tasks (Ge et al. 2024). However,
due to the significant differences between spatial-temporal
and textual data, it is challenging for PLM to comprehend spatial-temporal data. In addition, training a spatialtemporal PLM from scratch is non-trivial due to the limited availability of spatial-temporal data compared to textual data. To address this issue, researchers have attempted
to adapt PLM for understanding spatial-temporal data (Liu
et al. 2024b,a; Zhang et al. 2024). However, these methods
offer insufficient representation for spatial-temporal data.
Thus, they are less effective for understanding both spatial
and temporal properties of spatial-temporal data with PLM.
First, existing PLM-based methods design tokens along the
spatial dimension but ignore the tokens obtained from the
temporal dimension. Second, topological connectivity information inherent in spatial-temporal data is less explored.

Code — https://github.com/Hyheng/STD-PLM

Introduction
Understanding both spatial and temporal properties of
spatial-temporal data is crucial for various real-world dynamic systems such as intelligent transportation (Ding,
Zhao, and Jiao 2002) and urban planning (Song, Li, and Li
2017). In practice, spatial-temporal forecasting and imputation are the two most pivotal and common tasks. Specifically, precise spatial-temporal forecasting aids in effec* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: hywan@bjtu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11817

