The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Transfer Learning Meets Functional Linear Regression: No Negative Transfer
Under Posterior Drift
Xiaoyu Hu1 , Zhenhua Lin2
1

2

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Department of Statistics and Data Science, National Univeristy of Singapore
huxiaoyu2019@gmail.com, linz@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

the task on the target data is a popular topic known as transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2009; Zhuang et al. 2020).
Transfer learning has been widely applied to various
tasks, including text classification (Xue et al. 2008), recommendation systems (Pan and Yang 2013), and medical diagnosis (Hajiramezanali et al. 2018). Although many methodologies have been developed in the machine learning community, less attention is paid to the statistical properties and
theoretical guarantees. Recently, some works have begun to
explore transfer learning algorithms in different statistical
models (Cai and Wei 2021; Li, Cai, and Li 2022; Tian and
Feng 2023; Tian, Weng, and Feng 2022; Zhang and Zhu
2022; Li et al. 2024; Li, Cai, and Li 2023; Jin et al. 2024).
However, in the context of functional linear regression, the
estimation performance under transfer learning remains unclear. For prediction, Lin and Reimherr (2024) considered
using reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS) and derived the error bound on the excess prediction risk under
transfer learning. In contrast, estimation in functional linear regression is a more difficult problem than prediction, as
measured by the minimax optimal rate (Cai and Hall 2006;
Hall and Horowitz 2007). The impact on slope estimation,
which matters for understanding the effect of functional explanatory variables on the response, has not yet been investigated in the context of transfer learning.
In this paper, we study the slope estimation problem in
functional linear regression under the transfer learning setting. Specifically, we focus on the case of posterior drift,
where the relationship between responses and covariates
changes while the covariate distributions remain unchanged
(Kouw and Loog 2018; Cai and Wei 2021; Li, Cai, and
Li 2022; Maity et al. 2024). Notably, we can relax the
condition of unchanged covariate distributions to aligned
eigenspaces of the functional covariates, see Sections 2 and
3 for details. Since the slope function is intrinsically infinitedimensional, truncation is indispensable to balance bias and
variance during estimation. Our main idea involves constructing the estimator using the approximated least square
method. We project all functional covariates onto the common eigenspace estimated from the auxiliary data and define
the transformed variables as scores. We use the scores from
the source data to obtain an initial estimator, then correct the
bias with a lasso penalty using the target data (Tibshirani
1996).

Posterior drift refers to changes in the relationship between
responses and covariates while the distributions of the covariates remain unchanged. In this work, we explore functional
linear regression under posterior drift with transfer learning.
Specifically, we investigate when and how auxiliary data can
be leveraged to improve the estimation accuracy of the slope
function in the target model when posterior drift occurs. We
employ the approximated least square method together with
a lasso penalty to construct an estimator that transfers beneficial knowledge from source data. Theoretical analysis indicates that our method avoids negative transfer under posterior
drift, even when the contrast between slope functions is quite
large. Specifically, the estimator is shown to perform at least
as well as the classical estimator using only target data, and
it enhances the learning of the target model when the source
and target models are sufficiently similar. Furthermore, to address scenarios where covariate distributions may change, we
propose an adaptive algorithm using aggregation techniques.
This algorithm is robust against non-informative source samples and effectively prevents negative transfer. Simulation and
real data examples are provided to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Functional data analysis (FDA) has gained increasing attention over the past two decades. Two monographs, Ramsay
and Silverman (2005) and Hsing and Eubank (2015), provide comprehensive treatments on methodologies and theories of FDA. In particular, functional linear regression has
emerged as a crucial tool and has been extensively studied
in the literature, including Yao, Müller, and Wang (2005);
Cai and Hall (2006); Hall and Horowitz (2007); Li and Hsing (2007); Crambes, Kneip, and Sarda (2009); Yuan and
Cai (2010). The aforementioned methodologies are developed and can be successful when there is sufficient training
data for the target task. However, in many real-world applications, the available training data is often limited, leading to
unsatisfactory estimation results. Fortunately, samples from
different but related sources can provide beneficial information to boost performance on the target problem. The process
of transferring knowledge from additional data to improve
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17351

