The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hybrid Phenology Modeling for Predicting Temperature Effects on Tree
Dormancy
Ron van Bree 1 , Diego Marcos 2 , Ioannis N. Athanasiadis 1
1

Artificial Intelligence Group, Wageningen University & Research,
2
Inria, University of Montpellier
ron.vanbree@wur.nl, diego.marcos@inria.fr, ioannis.athanasiadis@wur.nl

Abstract

long record of flowering dates throughout the country (going back ∼1200 years in Kyoto (Aono and Kazui 2008)).
Trends in cherry tree blooming dates data have been used as
an indicator of changes in climate (Aono and Omoto 1993;
Primack, Higuchi, and Miller-Rushing 2009).
Biophysical phenology models generally assume the daily
accumulation of temperature-dependent units towards some
threshold at which a phenological transition occurs. Models
typically distinguish between endodormancy, in which a period of cold temperatures needs to be endured, and a subsequent requirement for warmer temperatures during ecodormancy. Commonly used models, however, differ in how they
relate daily temperature to their contribution towards endodormancy release and display differences in behaviour
under the same climate scenarios (Luedeling and Brown
2011; Fernandez, Whitney, and Luedeling 2020). The models have typically been proposed as the simplest functions
that are able to explain observations from controlled experiments on optimal chilling temperatures and effective temperature ranges, and weight their contribution accordingly.
These models work well for predicting blooming dates but
do not fully capture the true dynamics that are known to be
more complex (Kaufmann and Blanke 2019). Given the uncertainty in our understanding of these biological processes,
choosing a particular model often introduces a strong bias.
The increasing availability of data on climate conditions,
along with large datasets on corresponding plant phenology,
allows for a more data driven approach to model these
dynamics through expressive machine learning methods (Masago and Lian 2022). Complex over-parameterized
models, due to their tendency to overfit to the training
conditions, have difficulty matching simple process-based
models based on biological insights when tasked to predict
dormancy release based solely on temperature data (Saxena
et al. 2023). (Nagai, Morimoto, and Saitoh 2020) show
self-organizing maps can be used to predict flowering dates,
but show higher prediction error than process-based models.
Moreover, the inherent interpretability provided by these
process-based models is lost (Rudin 2019). Introducing the
appropriate inductive bias to machine learning models by
coupling them with mechanistic models (an approach often
referred to as hybrid modelling) is widely recognized as a
means to improve their data-efficiency and interpretability
by constraining them to solutions that are consistent with

Biophysical models offer valuable insights into climatephenology relationships in both natural and agricultural settings. However, there are substantial structural discrepancies
across models which require site-specific recalibration, often yielding inconsistent predictions under similar climate
scenarios. Machine learning methods offer data-driven solutions, but often lack interpretability and alignment with existing knowledge. We present a phenology model describing
dormancy in fruit trees, integrating conventional biophysical
models with a neural network to address their structural disparities. We evaluate our hybrid model in an extensive case
study predicting cherry tree phenology in Japan, South Korea
and Switzerland. Our approach consistently outperforms both
traditional biophysical and machine learning models in predicting blooming dates across years. Additionally, the neural
network’s adaptability facilitates parameter learning for specific tree varieties, enabling robust generalization to new sites
without site-specific recalibration. This hybrid model leverages both biophysical constraints and data-driven flexibility,
offering a promising avenue for accurate and interpretable
phenology modeling.

Code —
https://github.com/WUR-AI/HybridML-Phenology

Introduction
Modeling tree phenology is important to understand the
effects of a changing climate on natural and agricultural
ecosystems. Temperate trees require a sustained period of
cold temperatures to overcome dormancy, protecting them
from harsh winter conditions. Temperature changes can delay or accelerate this process, making this phenological process an important component in modeling secondary effects, such as impacts on orchard yields (Baldocchi and
Wong 2008; Luedeling 2012), biological carbon sequestration (Cleland et al. 2007; Richardson et al. 2010) and the
phenological stages of other organisms (Visser and Holleman 2001; Kudo 2014)). Cherry trees are of special interest in climate change research, as their flowering dates are
strongly temperature dependent (Samish 1954) and their cultural significance in Japan has allowed the collection of a
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28458

