The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

First Line of Defense: A Robust First Layer Mitigates Adversarial Attacks
Janani Suresh1 , Nancy Nayak2 , Sheetal Kalyani1
1

Indian Institute Of Technology, Madras
2
Imperial College London
ee22s079@smail.iitm.ac.in, n.nayak@imperial.ac.uk, skalyani@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract

adversarial attacks, have garnered great interest (Ma, Dong,
and Xu 2024).
AT is widely used among different defense methods, and
it primarily focuses on improving adversarial robustness by
training the network architectures with adversarial samples.
AT is computationally intensive because iterative algorithms
like PGD or AA require multiple gradient computations per
training iteration. In the case of AA, the algorithm uses a
combination of different attack techniques (e.g., extended
version of PGD, white-box, and decision-based attacks) to
generate a wide range of adversarial examples. Running
multiple attacks increases computation time as one needs to
execute several different adversarial generation processes.
However, the influence of architectural components on
adversarial robustness remains under explored compared
to AT methods. Salman et al. (2020) propose a denoised
smoothing procedure that acts as an image preprocessing
technique and when used with a pretrained classifier, gives
robustness against Gaussian noise corrupted inputs. The
resultant smooth classifier is certifiably robust against ℓ2 perturbations of its input. The effectiveness of this denoiser
depends on the noise level with which it is trained. Verma
et al. (2023) propose a certified Zeroth Order preprocessing technique to train a robust UNet denoiser to prepend
to the black-box models to defend it against adversarial attacks on high-dimensional datasets. In contrast, the proposed
method’s focus is on getting implicit robustness from the
architecture and defending against white-box attacks under
the l∞ norm without incorporating noise-specific training.
Huang et al. (2021) investigate the impact of architectural
elements such as topology, depth, and network width on
the robustness of adversarially trained DNNs with a focus
on ResNets to enhance the adversarial robustness. To circumvent the complexity associated with AT, Lukasik et al.
(2023) investigate native robustness. They show that while
the models trained with clean samples often prioritize highfrequency information, AT shifts focus from high-frequency
to low-frequency details. By leveraging this fact, the authors
enhance the native robustness through the regularization of
filters with high frequencies. We show that one can achieve
native robustness by designing an Adversarial Noise Filter
(ANF) that inhibits the passage of adversarial noise, thereby
achieving a robust neural network by using only our proposed ANF layer as the very first layer. Xie et al. (2019) use

Adversarial training (AT) incurs significant computational
overhead, leading to growing interest in designing inherently robust architectures. We demonstrate that a carefully
designed first layer of the neural network can serve as an
implicit adversarial noise filter (ANF). This filter is created
using a combination of large kernel size, increased convolution filters, and a maxpool operation. We show that integrating this filter as the first layer in architectures such as
ResNet, VGG, and EfficientNet results in adversarially robust networks. Our approach achieves higher adversarial accuracies than existing natively robust architectures without
AT and is competitive with adversarial-trained architectures
across a wide range of datasets. Supporting our findings, we
show that (a) the decision regions for our method have better margins, (b) the visualized loss surfaces are smoother, (c)
the modified peak signal-to-noise ratio (mPSNR) values at
the output of the ANF are higher, (d) high-frequency components are more attenuated, and (e) architectures incorporating
ANF exhibit better denoising in Gaussian noise compared to
baseline architectures.

1

Introduction

In adversarial attacks, a subtle perturbation to the input
can cause the model to make erroneous predictions, leading to a significant drop in accuracies (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014). This necessitates robust defense mechanisms, which have garnered significant research interest
(Chakraborty et al. 2021). The white-box attacks like Fast
Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014), Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) (Madry
et al. 2017), and Auto Attack (AA) (Croce and Hein 2020b)
have full access to model architecture and parameters which
leads to significant performance loss. Several defense methods have been proposed to obtain robust Deep Neural Networks (DNN) (Dhillon et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2018) starting from adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al. 2017) to
data preprocessing techniques (Zhang et al. 2019). Yan et al.
(2021) enhances the adversarial robustness of convolutional
neural networks by channel-wise importance-based feature
selection during AT. Randomized defense mechanisms, introducing various perturbations during inference to disrupt
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7176

