The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improved Bounds for Online Facility Location with Predictions
Dimitris Fotakis1,2 , Evangelia Gergatsouli3,4 , Themistoklis Gouleakis5 ,
Nikolas Patris6,2 , Thanos Tolias1,2
1

National Technical University of Athens, Greece
2
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
3
University of Wisconsin - Madison, WI, USA
4
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
5
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
6
University of California, Irvine, CA, USA
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr, egergatsouli3@gatech.edu, themis.gouleakis@ntu.edu.sg, npatris@uci.edu, thanostolias@mail.ntua.gr
Abstract

error, we should be able to come up with almost optimal solutions. In reality, this turns out not to be true, since the error
of the learner may vary across different parts of the input
and could propagate along different phases of the algorithm.
Lykouris and Vassilvitskii (2018) proposed a framework
aiming to provide formal guarantees for such learningaugmented online algorithms, in terms of their consistency
and robustness. They require the algorithm to be near optimal, if the predictions about the future input are accurate (consistency), while for arbitrary erroneous predictions,
the competitive ratio should gracefully degrade to (and not
exceed by far) the worst-case one (robustness). The idea
of combining online algorithms with ML advice is that in
the end, we should be able to overcome the worst-case
lower bounds and get the best of both worlds. In the framework of Lykouris and Vassilvitskii (2018); Purohit, Svitkina,
and Kumar (2018); Antoniadis et al. (2023), the learningaugmented algorithm, given some predictions of total error η, is required to make decisions online and its competitive ratio is given as a function of η. Many online problems have been studied under this framework, such as ski
rental, scheduling, metrical task systems (see e.g., the survey
of Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii (2020)). In this work we
investigate the competitive ratio of Online Facility Location
in the framework of learning-augmented online algorithms,
following an approach similar to (Jiang et al. 2022).

We consider Online Facility Location (OFL) in the framework of learning-augmented online algorithms. In OFL, demands arrive one-by-one in a metric space and must be (irrevocably) assigned to an open facility upon arrival, without any knowledge about future demands. We focus on uniform facility opening costs and present an online algorithm
for OFL that exploits potentially imperfect predictions on the
locations of the optimal facilities. We prove that the competitive ratio decreases from sublogarithmic in the number of
demands n to constant as the total prediction error η1 , i.e.,
the sum of distances of the predicted locations to the optimal
facility locations, decreases. E.g., our analysis implies that if
for some ε > 0, η1 = OPT/nε , where OPT is the optimal
cost, the competitive ratio becomes O(1/ε). We complement
our analysis with a matching lower bound establishing that
the dependence of the algorithm’s competitive ratio on the η1
error is optimal, up to constant factors.

1

Introduction

Online algorithms deal with decision making in cases where
the input data is not known in advance, but rather arrives sequentially. The algorithm makes irrevocable decisions, only
based on the input data received so far, and incurs the corresponding irrevocable cost. Traditionally, in the analysis of
online algorithms we assume, rather pessimistically, that an
adversary always presents the algorithm with the worst-case
input. The performance of online algorithms is evaluated by
the competitive ratio (Borodin and El-Yaniv 1998), which is
the worst-case ratio of the total algorithm’s cost to the cost
of a computationally unrestricted optimal algorithm aware
of the request sequence in advance.
On the other hand, machine learning (ML) aims to predict the unknown based on historical data and to learn how
the world looks like. A recent trend aims to use ML predictions about the future input in order to deal with the inherent
uncertainty in online algorithms, while still providing worstcase performance guarantees. One might think that directly
using machine learning in online problems should enhance
their performance, since by predicting the input, with some

Online Facility Location (OFL) was introduced by Meyerson (2001) and considers a sequence of demands located in
an underlying metric space. Each demand must be connected
to an open facility upon arrival. Each facility has an opening cost, which is irrevocable in the sense that once opened,
facilities cannot be closed. Every demand incurs its assignment cost, which is the distance to the closest open facility
at the demand’s assignment time. Our goal is to decide when
and where to open the facilities, so that we minimize the total
facility opening cost plus demand assignment cost. Meyerson (2001) presented an elegant randomized algorithm with
competitive ratio O(log n/ log log n), where n is the number
of demands. Since then, there has been a significant volume
of work on OFL and its many variants (see Section 1.2).
Online Facility Location with Predictions. In OFL with
predictions (OFLpred), every demand v in the request se-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26973

