The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semantic-guided Masked Mutual Learning for Multi-modal Brain Tumor
Segmentation with Arbitrary Missing Modalities
Guoyan Liang1,2 * , Qin Zhou3 * , Zhe Wang3† , Jingyuan Chen1 ,
Lin Gu4 , Chang Yao1,2† , Sai Wu1,2 , Bingcang Huang5 , Kai Chen5
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, ECUST, China
4
RIKEN AIP, The University of Tokyo
5
Gongli Hospital of Shanghai Pudong New Area
{guoyanl, jingyuanchen, wusai, changy}@zju.edu.cn, {sunniezq, wangzhe}@ecust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

and Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (Flair) images,
are combined to enable accurate brain tumor segmentation.
However, it is not uncommon for one or more modalities to
be absent due to image corruption, artifacts, acquisition protocols, allergies to contrast agents, or cost constraints (Qiu
et al. 2023). Recently, incomplete multi-modal brain tumor
segmentation has been frequently studied to deal with various missing modality scenarios (Ding, Yu, and Yang 2021;
Zhang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023). Despite significant advancements, it remains challenging to extract robust and discriminative multi-modal features when dealing with arbitrary missing modalities, which impacts segmentation performance.
Based on the assumption that brain tumor segmentation
should yield consistent outcomes with the ground truth, irrespective of the modality combinations (e.g., T1+T2 or
Flair+T2+T1ce) used for patient examination, we propose
an innovative Semantic-guided Masked Mutual Learning
(SMML) framework to integrate hierarchical consistency
constraints along with auxiliary semantic priors from SAM,
enhancing the robustness and discriminative ability of incomplete multi-modal learning. Our framework employs a
masked dual-branch architecture to emulate a patient undergoing various examination scenarios with different missing
modalities. Initially, full modality inputs are fed into both
branches. We then randomly mask one or more modalities in
each branch. The training process for each branch is supervised by the proposed hierarchical consistency constraints
and the semantic prior derived from the SAM method.
To enhance the robustness of our dual-branch learning
scheme with diverse missing modality inputs, we introduce hierarchical consistency constraints. These constraints
operate on two levels: pixel-level and feature-level. The
pixel-level bidirectional constraint enforces detailed consistency, ensuring that only reliable knowledge is exchanged
during mutual learning. Simultaneously, to incorporate relational context into the distillation process, we leverage
a feature-level constraint that explores the consistency of
inter-sample and inter-class relationships between the two
branches within the latent feature space.
To further improve the discriminative ability of each stu-

Malignant brain tumors have become an aggressive and dangerous disease that leads to death worldwide. Multi-modal
MRI data is crucial for accurate brain tumor segmentation, but missing modalities common in clinical practice can
severely degrade the segmentation performance. While incomplete multi-modal learning methods attempt to address
this, learning robust and discriminative features from arbitrary missing modalities remains challenging. To address this
challenge, we propose a novel Semantic-guided Masked Mutual Learning (SMML) approach to distill robust and discriminative knowledge across diverse missing modality scenarios.
Specifically, we propose a novel dual-branch masked mutual
learning scheme guided by Hierarchical Consistency Constraints (HCC) to ensure multi-level consistency, thereby enhancing mutual learning in incomplete multi-modal scenarios. The HCC framework comprises a pixel-level constraint
that selects and exchanges reliable knowledge to guide the
mutual learning process. Additionally, it includes a featurelevel constraint that uncovers robust inter-sample and interclass relational knowledge within the latent feature space. To
further enhance multi-modal learning from missing modality data, we integrate a refinement network into each student branch. This network leverages semantic priors from the
Segment Anything Model (SAM) to provide supplementary
information, effectively complementing the masked mutual
learning strategy in capturing auxiliary discriminative knowledge. Extensive experiments on three challenging brain tumor
segmentation datasets demonstrate that our method significantly improves performance over state-of-the-art methods in
diverse missing modality settings.

Introduction
The accurate segmentation of brain tumors is crucial for
clinical assessment and surgical planning (Bakas et al. 2017;
Yan et al. 2020). In clinical practice, MRI scans across
multiple imaging modalities, including T1-weighted (T1),
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (T1ce), T2-weighted (T2),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5137

