The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multimodal Class-aware Semantic Enhancement Network for
Audio-Visual Video Parsing
Pengcheng Zhao* , Jinxing Zhou* , Yang Zhao, Dan Guo† , Yanxiang Chen†
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
{stevenzhao1001, zhoujxhfut}@gmail.com, {yzhao, guodan, chenyx}@hfut.edu.cn

(a) audio-visual video parsing task

Abstract

Audio
(A)

The Audio-Visual Video Parsing task aims to recognize and
temporally localize all events occurring in either the audio or
visual stream, or both. Capturing accurate event semantics for
each audio/visual segment is vital. Prior works directly utilize
the extracted holistic audio and visual features for intra- and
cross-modal temporal interactions. However, each segment
may contain multiple events, resulting in semantically mixed
holistic features that can lead to semantic interference during
intra- or cross-modal interactions: the event semantics of one
segment may incorporate semantics of unrelated events from
other segments. To address this issue, our method begins with
a Class-Aware Feature Decoupling (CAFD) module, which explicitly decouples the semantically mixed features into distinct
class-wise features, including multiple event-specific features
and a dedicated background feature. The decoupled classwise features enable our model to selectively aggregate useful semantics for each segment from clearly matched classes
contained in other segments, preventing semantic interference from irrelevant classes. Specifically, we further design
a Fine-Grained Semantic Enhancement module for encoding
intra- and cross-modal relations. It comprises a Segment-wise
Event Co-occurrence Modeling (SECM) block and a LocalGlobal Semantic Fusion (LGSF) block. The SECM exploits
inter-class dependencies of concurrent events within the same
timestamp with the aid of a new event co-occurrence loss. The
LGSF further enhances the event semantics of each segment
by incorporating relevant semantics from more informative
global video features. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of the proposed modules and loss functions, resulting
in a new state-of-the-art parsing performance.

1

Visual
(V)
0s

1s

2s

3s

4s

5s

6s

7s

8s

9s

10s

Speech

A-Events

Violin
Violin

V-Events

Accordion

AV-Events

Violin

(b) previous methods

(c) our method

Audio
0s

Visual 0s

1s

4s

10s

0s

4s

10s

0s

intra-modal interaction
semantically mixed
holistic features

×

1s

4s

10s

4s

10s

cross-modal interaction
background
feature

×

no interaction
decoupled eventspecific features

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the AVVP task. (b) Previous
methods rely on semantically mixed holistic audio/visual
features for intra- and cross-modal interactions, leading to
semantic interference. (c) In contrast, we utilize decoupled
class-aware features to aggregate event semantics for each
segment from only matched classes during interactions.

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on the task of Audio-Visual Video
Parsing (AVVP) for the fundamental understanding of audiovisual scenes. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), given an audible
video, the AVVP task seeks to temporally localize all events
of interest, including audio events, visual events, and audiovisual events (both audible and visible). Notably, the audio
and visual signals are not required to be temporally aligned in
this task. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the event Speech is present
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10448

only in the audio modality while the Accordion is solely
present in the visual modality. Moreover, multiple events can
overlap on the timeline. To discern various types of events, an
AVVP model needs to accurately perceive event semantics
for each audio/visual segment. Given the multimodal and temporal characteristics of this task, the model must be carefully
designed to not only utilize event semantics shared across audio and visual modalities but also maintain the unique event
semantics inherent to each modality.
Previous works (Tian, Li, and Xu 2020; Yu et al. 2022;
Lai, Chen, and Yu-Chiang 2023) have progressed this task by
developing various sophisticated network architectures. For
instance, one representative work, HAN (Tian, Li, and Xu
2020), introduces a hybrid attention network that utilizes selfattention and cross-attention mechanisms to capture event
semantics through the modeling of temporal relations within

