The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cluster-guided Contrastive Class-imbalanced Graph Classification
Wei Ju1 , Zhengyang Mao2 , Siyu Yi3 * , Yifang Qin2 , Yiyang Gu2 , Zhiping Xiao4 ,
Jianhao Shen5 , Ziyue Qiao6 , Ming Zhang2*
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
School of Computer Science, State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
PKU-Anker LLM Lab, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
College of Mathematics, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
4
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
5
Huawei Hisilicon, Shanghai, China
6
School of Computing and Information Technology, Great Bay University, Dongguan, China
{juwei, siyuyi}@scu.edu.cn, zhengyang.mao@stu.pku.edu.cn, {qinyifang, yiyanggu, mzhang cs}@pku.edu.cn,
patxiao@uw.edu, jhshen95@gmail.com, zyqiao@gbu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

one of the most interesting also popular topics, which aims
to classify the class labels of graphs and has emerged as a
significant research focus in various scenarios like molecular property prediction and protein functional analysis.

This paper studies the problem of class-imbalanced graph
classification, which aims at effectively classifying the graph
categories in scenarios with imbalanced class distributions.
While graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable success, their modeling ability on imbalanced graphstructured data remains suboptimal, which typically leads to
predictions biased towards the majority classes. On the other
hand, existing class-imbalanced learning methods in vision
may overlook the rich graph semantic substructures of the
majority classes and excessively emphasize learning from the
minority classes. To address these challenges, we propose a
simple yet powerful approach called C3 GNN that integrates
the idea of clustering into contrastive learning to enhance
class-imbalanced graph classification. Technically, C3 GNN
clusters graphs from each majority class into multiple subclasses, with sizes comparable to the minority class, mitigating class imbalance. It also employs the Mixup technique to
generate synthetic samples, enriching the semantic diversity
of each subclass. Furthermore, supervised contrastive learning is used to hierarchically learn effective graph representations, enabling the model to thoroughly explore semantic
substructures in majority classes while avoiding excessive focus on minority classes. Extensive experiments on real-world
graph benchmark datasets verify the superior performance of
our proposed method against competitive baselines.

To well solve this task, graph neural networks (GNNs)
(Kipf and Welling 2016) have recently emerged as powerful approaches attributed to the message propagation and
feature transformation mechanisms (Gilmer et al. 2017).
However, the success of existing GNN methods typically
relies on the assumption that the class distribution in the
dataset is balanced. Unfortunately, this assumption fails in
many real-world scenarios, where a large portion of classes
have a small number of labeled graphs (minority classes)
while a few classes have a significantly large number of labeled graphs (majority classes), exhibiting severely skewed
class distributions. For instance, the NCI dataset comprises
graphs of chemical compounds (Wale, Watson, and Karypis
2008), where only approximately 5% of molecules are labeled as active in the anti-cancer bioassay test, while the
remaining molecules are labeled as inactive. This classimbalanced issue can lead to the notorious prediction bias
phenomenon (Zhou et al. 2020), where the GNN classifier
favors the majority classes and ignore the minority classes.
Consequently, directly applying GNNs to class-imbalanced
graphs poses a significant challenge in real-world situations.
Actually, the issue of imbalance in visions has received
increasing attention and efforts have been devoted to addressing it over a significant period. In general, the solutions
can be categorized into three main groups: re-sampling,
re-weighting, and ensembling learning. Re-sampling strategies (Chawla et al. 2002; Han, Wang, and Mao 2005; Guo
and Wang 2021) attempt to balance the class distribution
by generating synthetic training data. Re-weighting strategies (Cui et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2019; Hou et al. 2023) focus
on adjusting the loss function to assign different weights to
the training samples from various classes. For ensembling
learning approaches (Xiang, Ding, and Han 2020; Wang
et al. 2020), they integrate multiple classifiers within a multiexpert framework to achieve robust predictions.

Introduction
Graphs are widely recognized as highly effective structured
data for representing complex relationships among objects
in various domains (Ju et al. 2024a), including social analysis, bioinformatics, and recommender systems. As such,
there is considerable interest in exploring the potential of
analyzing graph data, covering a broad spectrum of graph
learning tasks, such as node classification (Luo et al. 2023a),
graph classification (Mao et al. 2023), and graph clustering (Yi et al. 2023a). Among these, graph classification is
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11924

