The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fields of The World: A Machine Learning Benchmark Dataset for Global
Agricultural Field Boundary Segmentation
Hannah Kerner1 * , Snehal Chaudhari1 * , Aninda Ghosh1 * , Caleb Robinson2 * ,
Adeel Ahmad3 4 , Eddie Choi4 , Nathan Jacobs4 , Chris Holmes5 , Matthias Mohr5 ,
Rahul Dodhia2 , Juan M. Lavista Ferres2 , Jennifer Marcus5
1

Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA, hkerner@asu.edu
2
Microsoft AI for Good Research Lab, Redmond, WA 98052 USA
3
Taylor Geospatial Institute, St Louis, MO 63108 USA
4
Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63130 USA
5
Taylor Geospatial Engine, St Louis, MO 63130 USA

Abstract
Crop field boundaries are foundational datasets for agricultural monitoring and assessments but are expensive to collect manually. Machine learning (ML) methods for automatically extracting field boundaries from remotely sensed images could help realize the demand for these datasets at a
global scale. However, current ML methods for field instance
segmentation lack sufficient geographic coverage, accuracy,
and generalization capabilities. Further, research on improving ML methods is restricted by the lack of labeled datasets
representing the diversity of global agricultural fields. We
present Fields of The World (FTW)—a novel ML benchmark
dataset for agricultural field instance segmentation spanning
24 countries on four continents (Europe, Africa, Asia, and
South America). FTW is an order of magnitude larger than
previous datasets with 70 462 samples, each containing instance and semantic segmentation masks paired with multidate, multi-spectral Sentinel-2 satellite images. We provide
results from baseline models for the new FTW benchmark,
show that models trained on FTW have better zero-shot and
fine-tuning performance in held-out countries than models
that aren’t pre-trained with diverse datasets, and show positive qualitative zero-shot results of FTW models in a realworld scenario – running on Sentinel-2 scenes over Ethiopia.

Figure 1: Training samples from four continents, demonstrating the diversity within Fields of The World.

Code — https://github.com/fieldsoftheworld/ftw-baselines
Datasets — https://beta.source.coop/repositories/kernerlab/fields-of-the-world/

1

challenging. Field morphologies, agricultural practices, and
climate patterns vary greatly across the world. For example, average field sizes range from 1.6 hectares (ha) in SubSaharan Africa to 121 ha in North America (Debats et al.
2016). Motivated by this global diversity, we present a novel
dataset for agricultural field instance segmentation: Fields of
The World (FTW). FTW spans diverse landscapes in 24 countries on 4 continents (Europe, Asia, Africa, and South America). Fields of The World aims to catalyze field instance segmentation research and enable consistent, granular evaluation of different modeling approaches.
Field boundary datasets enable field-scale monitoring
of crop conditions, yield, pest/diseases, farming practices, resource utilization, and other agricultural characteris-

Introduction

Crop field boundary datasets are urgently needed in agricultural monitoring, sustainable agriculture, and development
applications (Nakalembe and Kerner 2023). However, these
datasets do not exist for most of the world. Automatic field
delineation in globally available satellite imagery offers a
promising solution, but semantic reasoning about globally
diverse agricultural landscapes in satellite imagery remains
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28151

