The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

High-Fidelity Polarimetric Implicit 3D Reconstruction
with View-Dependent Physical Representation
Yu Qiu, Sijia Wen* , Hainan Zhang, Zhiming Zheng
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing, School of Aritificial Intelligence,
Beihang University, Beijing, China
{qiuyu 13, sijiawen, zhanghainan}@buaa.edu.cn, zzheng@pku.edu.cn

Reference

Abstract

AoLP

DoLP

Neural implicit methods have made remarkable progress in
3D reconstruction. However, previous methods often assume
view-independent properties of target objects, which fails to
accurately reconstruct objects with challenging characteristics, such as transparency and high reflectivity. To address
this limitation, we propose a polarimetric implicit 3D reconstruction method that integrates geometric and polarization
information, enabling the production of high-quality meshes
in complex scenes. For high-fidelity surface reconstruction,
we introduce a view-dependent physical representation that
thoroughly analyzes the subtle physical properties of reflections. The reconstruction process is further enhanced by a
simple yet effective view-dependent detection algorithm and
optimized using the principles of ray tracing and polarization.
Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance
of the proposed method in both real and synthetic scenarios.

Introduction

PANDORA

High-fidelity 3D reconstruction remains a significant challenge across numerous fields, including virtual reality, autonomous driving, robotics, and medical visualization. With
the development of implicit surface representation (Park
et al. 2019) and neural radiance fileds (Mildenhall et al.
2021), neural implicit methods (Yariv et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2021; Yariv et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021) have made
significant progress recently. Despite the remarkable shape
recovery results, most methods still rely on photometric
consistency, which presents significant challenges for highfidelity reconstruction. The high complexity of light paths in
these objects entangles the surface color with their geometry, environmental lighting, and viewing direction, making it
difficult to achieve pleasing neural inverse rendering.
To overcome the view-dependent issues caused by surface characteristics, Ref-NeuS (Ge et al. 2023) separates
the view-dependent and view-independent components of
the surface reflection to reduce the impact of reflective
areas. NeRO (Liu et al. 2023) assumes opaque surfaces
with BRDF to recover the shape of the reflective objects.
PANDORA (Dave, Zhao, and Veeraraghavan 2022) and
NeRSP (Han et al. 2024) decompose specular and diffuse

NeRSP

Ours

Figure 1: Compared to the state-of-the-art methods, PANDORA (first column) and NeRSP (second column), the proposed method delivers superior 3D reconstruction results,
including high-quality meshes and normal maps. The reference image, along with AoLP and DoLP, are displayed in
the top row.

reflections and generate meshes using polarization information. However, these methods only consider reflection and
cannot address other complex surface characteristics of objects, such as transmission.
For complex materials and textures, some methods employ silhouette constraints for shape recovery, but this often results in overly smooth surfaces. Li et al. (Li, Yeh,
and Chandraker 2020) modeled complex light paths to reconstruct transparent object with sparse images, yet it still
suffers from excessive smoothness. Other researchers (Tsai,
Veeraraghavan, and Sankaranarayanan 2015; Lyu et al.
2020; Xu et al. 2022) utilize a static background with a
coded pattern to establish a mapping between the camera’s
view rays and corresponding locations. This mapping constrains the light path, aiding in the detailed reconstruction
of an object’s shape. However, these methods often require

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6621

