The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks Still Catastrophically Forget but Differently from
MLP
Anton Lee1 , Heitor Murilo Gomes1 , Yaqian Zhang2 , W. Bastiaan Kleijn1
1

School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington 6140, New Zealand
2
University of Waikato, Hamilton 3240, New Zealand
anton.lee@vuw.ac.nz, heitor.gomes@vuw.ac.nz, yaqian.zhang@waikato.ac.nz, bastiaan.kleijn@vuw.ac.nz

Abstract
Catastrophic forgetting is when a neural network loses previously learnt information after learning a new task sequentially. Avoiding catastrophic forgetting could reduce the resources necessary to update neural networks. Recently, Kolmogorov–Arnold Networks (KAN) gained the community’s
attention as preliminary experiments suggest KAN avoid
catastrophic forgetting. KAN replace neural network edges
with learnable B-splines and sum incoming edges in nodes.
Proponents of KAN argue they avoid forgetting, are more accurate, are interpretable, and use fewer parameters. Our work
investigates the claims that KAN avoid catastrophic forgetting, finding that they fail to do so on more complex datasets
containing features that overlap between tasks. We give a simple explanation as to why and how KAN catastrophically forget. Motivated by evidence suggesting KAN are superior for
symbolic regression, we augment KAN in the same ways as
multilayer perceptron (MLP) to perform continual learning
tasks, making special accommodations to support KAN. Our
experiments found that unmodified KAN often forget more
than MLP, but KAN can be better than MLP when combined
with continual learning strategies. We aim to highlight some
of the current shortcomings and strengths associated with
KAN for continual learning.

Figure 1: This figure replicates a key experiment of Liu
et al. (2024). The experiment demonstrates that KAN avoid
catastrophic forgetting in this specific scenario. However, we
show that this advantage does not generalize to other scenario.

goes beyond this initial simple experiment, it could lead to
more efficient and more cheaply updated models. Alongside this demonstration, Liu et al. (2024) claim that KAN
are more precise, interpretable, and have lower parameter
counts than their MLP counterparts on symbolic regression
datasets inspired by physics. This paper explores KAN for
Continual Learning, discovering that KAN remain susceptible to catastrophic forgetting in most circumstances. Despite this, we modify KAN with a novel parameter isolation
method and pre-existing regularisation strategies to take advantage of their other benefits. With these modifications, we
discover that KAN give modest improvements on some regression problems over MLP, and without the modifications,
KAN are more forgetful than MLP.
Figure 1 contrasts a KAN’s and an MLP’s performance
on a simple continual learning regression problem. In it, we
observe that KAN exhibit no catastrophic forgetting, unlike
the MLP; this simple experiment inspired this paper. Liu
et al. (2024) argues that KAN avoid catastrophic forgetting
by leveraging the locality of splines: “...since spline bases
are local, a sample will only affect nearby spline coefficients,
leaving faraway coefficients intact (which is desirable since
faraway regions may have already stored information that
we want to preserve).” In other words, each coefficient in the
spline is responsible for a particular interval. The first coefficient, for example, might only contribute when the input is

Code — https://github.com/tachyonicClock/AAAI25-clkan

Introduction
Recently, Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KAN) (Liu et al.
2024) attracted attention within the deep learning research
community, leading to hundreds of related works within
a few months of its initial release. KAN replace edges in
multilayer perceptron (MLP) with learnable 1D curves. Liu
et al. (2024)’s simple continual learning experiment contributed to the excitement, suggesting KAN are more resilient to catastrophic forgetting—the longstanding problem
in artificial neural networks where learning new information
causes the forgetting of previously learnt information (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; French 1999; Kudithipudi et al.
2022). Catastrophic forgetting makes updating neural networks inefficient since a portion of each batch contains old
samples to prevent forgetting rather than entirely new samples. If KAN’s ability to overcome catastrophic forgetting
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18053

