The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DMT-RoleBench: A Dynamic Multi-Turn Dialogue Based Benchmark for
Role-Playing Evaluation of Large Language Model and Agent
Dingbo Yuan, Yipeng Chen, Guodong Liu, Chenchen Li, Chengfu Tang, Dongxu Zhang, Zhenkui
Wang, Xudong Wang, Song Liu*
Ant Group
{zhouchunyi.zcy,cyp430380,guodong.lgd,lichenchen.lcc,tangchengfu.tcf,
jingxi.zdx,wangzhenkui.wzk,xiumin.wxd,yanda.ls}@antgroup.com
Abstract

have given rise to a plethora of role-playing agents and application platforms(Coze 2023; Character.ai 2023). The emergence of these sophisticated agents and platforms, such as
casual chat bots based on fictional roles, professional assistants for various occupations, and immersive Multiple Massive Online games, signifies a new era where artificial intelligence blurs the lines between virtual and real-world interactions, significantly enhancing human’s experiences and
daily life across multiple domains.
However, there is a significant dearth of systematic and
comprehensive evaluation benchmark that is well aligned
with real-world interaction scenarios for assessing the roleplaying capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) and
agents(Chen et al. 2024b).
RoleEval(Shen et al. 2024) primarily concentrates on
assessing the model’s proficiency in role knowledge acquisition and reasoning. TimeChara(Ahn et al. 2024) and
RoleAD(Tang et al. 2024), on the other hand, focus on constructing misleading character information and trap questions to assess the ability of models being tested to identify
and correct errors. CharacterEval(Tu et al. 2024) assesses
the role-playing ability by challenging models to complete
pre-designed ground truth conversations between two fictional characters from Chinese film and TV series.
Role knowledge acquisition and misleading information
identification are just merely facets of a larger picture. Dialogue completion does not align with real-world application
scenarios, since the pre-designed ground truth conversations
are not genuine outputs of the model or agent being tested,
rather, they primarily test the model’s capability to mimic
based on in-context learning. In essence, a more comprehensive approach that encompasses diverse role types and evaluates models under conditions which are well aligned with
users’ real-world interactions would be necessary to fully
assess the role-playing competencies of LLMs and agents.
To address the aforementioned gaps, this paper introduces
DMT-RoleBench, a Chinese role-playing evaluation benchmark based on dynamic multi-turn dialogue. Figure 1 illustrates the overview construction and evaluation flow of the
benchmark.
Recognizing that the quality of role-playing cannot be adequately assessed through single-turn question-and-answer
sessions, and acknowledging that methods like CharacterEval’s (Tu et al. 2024) use of pre-defined contexts for di-

Recent years have witnessed a profound evolution in the
abilities of Large Language Model, which has significantly
boosted the proliferation of role-playing agents and platforms. Nonetheless, there is a conspicuous absence of systematic and comprehensive evaluations of role-playing abilities which are truly aligned with users’ interaction scenarios in real-world. To address this gap, we have devised
DMT-RoleBench, a benchmark designed to evaluate the roleplaying abilities of large language models and agents based
on dynamic multi-turn dialogues. Compared with existed
role-playing benchmarks, DMT-RoleBench boasts several
principal advantages: (1) It contains a more diverse role types
and system prompts of different formats. (2) We propose an
innovative evaluation paradigm to assess role-playing abilities based on dynamically generating multi-turn dialogues
constrained by specific evaluation intents and topics, which
is well aligned with users’ interaction scenarios in real-world.
(3) We define a three-tiered metric system and provide DMTRM, which is a judge model aligned with human annotations,
to annotate the dialogues. And we propose DMT-Score to calculate the final scores based on the annotated dialogues. Our
experiments and analysis of leading models equipped with
role-playing abilities have demonstrated the effectiveness of
DMT-RoleBench.

Code —
https://github.com/DMT-RoleBench/DMT-RoleBench

Introduction
The rapid advancement in foundational capabilities of Large
Language Models in recent years(Brown et al. 2020; OpenAI et al. 2024), including creative text generation, incontext learning, instruction-following, and knowledge acquisition, has facilitated notable progress in the iterative refinement of role-playing models and agents (Brown et al.
2020; Park et al. 2023; Xi et al. 2023; Tian et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2024a). These models, alongside agents, can not only
acquire knowledge pertinent to various roles but also emulate the linguistic styles, behavioral patterns, and personality traits of corresponding personas. Such advancements
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25760

