The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Conditional Latent Coding with Learnable Synthesized Reference for Deep Image
Compression
Siqi Wu1 * , Yinda Chen2† , Dong Liu2 , Zhihai He3‡
1

University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
3
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2

Abstract

made in the past two decades. The early attempt is to extract
low-level feature patches from external images as a dictionary for image super-resolution (Sun et al. 2003) and quality
enhancement (Xiong, Sun, and Wu 2010). Yue et al. (Yue
et al. 2013) proposed a cloud-based image coding scheme
that utilizes a large-scale image database for reconstruction,
achieving high compression ratios while maintaining visual
quality. As data compression has shifted to the deep image/video compression paradigm in recent years, we would
like to explore how to utilize the external dictionary of images to generate a dynamic reference representation to perform conditional coding of the input image within the deep
image compression framework.
Deep neural network-based image compression methods (Ballé, Laparra, and Simoncelli 2017; Toderici et al.
2017; Lee, Cho, and Beack 2019) have made significant
progress in recent years, surpassing traditional transform
coding methods like JPEG in compression efficiency. However, current deep learning compression still faces challenges in efficiently exploring the source correlation of the
image and maintaining high reconstruction quality at low
bit rates. To further improve compression efficiency, researchers have begun to explore the use of external images
as side information in distributed deep compression. For example, Ayzik et al. (Ayzik and Avidan 2020) used auxiliary
image information to perform block matching in the image
domain, while Huang et al. (Huang et al. 2023) extended
this concept by introducing a multi-scale patch matching approach. However, this approach relies on specific auxiliary
images, limiting its applicability and improvement.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel framework called Conditional Latent Coding (CLC), which uses
auxiliary information as a conditional probability at both the
encoder and decoder. Our approach constructs a universal
image feature dictionary using a multi-stage process involving modified spatial pyramid pooling (SPP), dimensionality
reduction, and multi-scale feature clustering. For each input image, we generate a conditioning latent by adaptively
selecting and learning to combine relevant features from
the dictionary to generate a highly efficient reference representation, called conditioning latent, for the input image.
We then apply an advanced feature matching and alignment
strategy, comprising a Conditional Latent Matching (CLM)
module and a Conditional Latent Synthesis (CLS) module.

In this paper, we study how to synthesize a dynamic reference
from an external dictionary to perform conditional coding of
the input image in the latent domain and how to learn the conditional latent synthesis and coding modules in an end-to-end
manner. Our approach begins by constructing a universal image feature dictionary using a multi-stage approach involving
modified spatial pyramid pooling, dimension reduction, and
multi-scale feature clustering. For each input image, we learn
to synthesize a conditioning latent by selecting and synthesizing relevant features from the dictionary, which significantly
enhances the model’s capability in capturing and exploring
image source correlation. This conditional latent synthesis
involves a correlation-based feature matching and alignment
strategy, comprising a Conditional Latent Matching (CLM)
module and a Conditional Latent Synthesis (CLS) module.
The synthesized latent is then used to guide the encoding process, allowing for more efficient compression by exploiting
the correlation between the input image and the reference dictionary. According to our theoretical analysis, the proposed
conditional latent coding (CLC) method is robust to perturbations in the external dictionary samples and the selected
conditioning latent, with an error bound that scales logarithmically with the dictionary size, ensuring stability even with
large and diverse dictionaries. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that our new method improves the coding performance by a large margin (up to 1.2 dB) with a very
small overhead of approximately 0.5% bits per pixel.

Code — https://github.com/ydchen0806/CLC.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of the Internet and mobile devices, billions of images are available in the world. For a
given image, it is easy to find many correlated images on the
Internet. It will be very interesting to explore how to utilize
this vast amount of data to establish a highly efficient representation of the input image to improve the performance
of deep image compression. Continuous efforts have been
* This work was completed during Siqi Wu’s visiting research
period at Southern University of Science and Technology.
†
Co-first author.
‡
Corresponding author. Email: hezh@sustech.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12863

