The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Visual Prompting Upgrades Neural Network Sparsification:
A Data-Model Perspective
Can Jin1 * , Tianjin Huang2,3 * , Yihua Zhang4 ,
Mykola Pechenizkiy2 , Sijia Liu4 , Shiwei Liu5 , Tianlong Chen6
1
Rutgers University
Eindhoven University of Technology
3
University of Exeter,
4
Michigan State University
5
University of Oxford
6
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2

inferring the GPT-3 with 175B parameters requires at least
five 80GB A100 GPUs (Frantar and Alistarh 2023).
To establish economic and lightweight network alternatives, model compression serves as an effective tool, gaining great popularity (Dettmers et al. 2022; Frantar and
Alistarh 2023). Among plenty of efforts for compression,
model pruning (LeCun, Denker, and Solla 1989; Frankle and
Carbin 2018) is one of the dominant approaches, aiming
to trim down the least significant weights without hurting
model performance. It is usually applied subsequent to the
convergence of training (Chen et al. 2020), during training
process (Chen et al. 2021a), and even prior to the initiation
of training (Lee, Ajanthan, and Torr 2019). The resulting
sparsity ranges from fine-grained elements like individual
weights (Zhu and Gupta 2017) to coarse-grained structures
such as neurons (Hu et al. 2016) and blocks (Lagunas et al.
2021). It is worth mentioning that the majority, if not all, of
the conventional pruning algorithms, produce sparse neural
networks in a model-centric fashion – analyzing architecture
topologies and capturing their key subset by learning parameterized weight masks (Sehwag et al. 2020) or calculating
proxy heuristics based on training dynamics (Han, Mao, and
Dally 2015), architecture properties (Hoang et al. 2023), etc.
Thanks to the recent advances in large language models
(LLMs), the data-centric AI regains a spotlight. Techniques
like in-context learning (Brown et al. 2020) and prompting (Liu et al. 2023a) construct well-designed prompts or
input templates to empower LLMs and reach impressive performances on a variety of tasks. It evidences that such datacentric designs effectively extract and compose knowledge
in learned models (Wei et al. 2022), which might be a great
assistant to locating critical model topologies. Nevertheless,
the influence of data-centric methods on network sparsification has been less studied. To our best knowledge, only one
concurrent work (Xu et al. 2023) has explored the possibility of learning post-pruning prompts to recover compressed
LLMs. Thus, We focus on a different aim:
How to leverage prompts to upgrade vision model
sparsification, from a data-model perspective?
Note that the effect of visual prompts on sparse vision models remains mysterious. Also, visual prompts are inherently

Abstract
The rapid development of large-scale deep learning models questions the affordability of hardware platforms, which
necessitates the pruning to reduce their computational and
memory footprints. Sparse neural networks as the product,
have demonstrated numerous favorable benefits like low complexity, undamaged generalization, etc. Most of the prominent pruning strategies are invented from a model-centric
perspective, focusing on searching and preserving crucial
weights by analyzing network topologies. However, the role
of data and its interplay with model-centric pruning has remained relatively unexplored. In this research, we introduce
a novel data-model co-design perspective: to promote superior weight sparsity by learning important model topology and adequate input data in a synergetic manner. Specifically, customized Visual Prompts are mounted to upgrade
neural Network sparsification in our proposed VPNs framework. As a pioneering effort, this paper conducts systematic
investigations about the impact of different visual prompts on
model pruning and suggests an effective joint optimization
approach. Extensive experiments with 3 network architectures and 8 datasets evidence the substantial performance improvements from VPNs over existing start-of-the-art pruning
algorithms. Furthermore, we find that subnetworks discovered by VPNs from pre-trained models enjoy better transferability across diverse downstream scenarios. These insights
shed light on new promising possibilities of data-model codesigns for vision model sparsification.

Introduction
Large-scale neural networks like vision and language models (Brown et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2023) have attracted
stupendous attention in nowadays deep learning community,
which pose significantly increased demands to computing
resources. While remarkable performance has been offered,
they suffer from prohibitively high training and inference
costs, and deployment of these gigantic models entails substantial memory and computational overhead. For instance,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4111

