The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AI-Powered Algorithm-Centric Quantum Processor Topology Design
Tian Li1 , Xiao-Yue Xu1 , Chen Ding1 , Tian-Ci Tian1 , Wei-You Liao1 ,
Shuo Zhang1 , He-Liang Huang1 *
1

Henan Key Laboratory of Quantum infommation and Cryptography
Zhengzhou, Henan, 450000, China.
quanhhl@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Beer et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2021; Ding,
Bao, and Huang 2022) and quantum chemistry (Bauer et al.
2020; Cao et al. 2019), remains a huge challenge. This is
primarily attributed to the fragile nature of physical qubits
on noisy quantum processors (Schlosshauer 2019), making
it difficult to execute complex quantum algorithms reliably.
A pivotal strategy to mitigate the impact of noise is to minimize the depth of quantum circuits, which underscores the
imperative for an efficient quantum circuit compilation process. This process involves mapping theoretical quantum algorithms onto the physical qubits within a processor, taking
into account the native gate set and the processor’s topology, with the goal of achieving the shallowest possible circuit depth.
Previous works have predominantly concentrated on circuit mapping for fixed processor topologies (Zhang et al.
2021; Li, Ding, and Xie 2019; Wille, Burgholzer, and
Zulehner 2019; Zulehner, Paler, and Wille 2018; Siraichi
et al. 2018; Li, Zhou, and Feng 2021; Zhou, Feng, and
Li 2022; Nannicini et al. 2022), such as linear or twodimensional grid configurations. The topology of a processor significantly influences the depth of the mapped circuits, with higher connectivity generally leading to shallower depths. However, for certain quantum algorithms, a
one-size-fits-all topology is not always necessary; instead,
the processor can be tailored to the algorithm for optimal
performance. This raises an intriguing question: Can tailoring the topology to specific circuits lead to further reductions
in circuit depth? If affirmative, what methodologies can be
employed to effectively engineer such tailored topologies?
Our work addresses these questions by harnessing machine
learning to simultaneously optimize the quantum processor
topology and map quantum circuits for the intended quantum algorithm, thereby significantly reducing the depth of
the mapped circuits. We summarize our key contributions as
follows:

Quantum computing promises to revolutionize various fields,
yet the execution of quantum programs necessitates an effective compilation process. This involves strategically mapping quantum circuits onto the physical qubits of a quantum
processor. The qubits’ arrangement, or topology, is pivotal to
the circuit’s performance, a factor that often defies traditional
heuristic or manual optimization methods due to its complexity. In this study, we introduce a novel approach leveraging
reinforcement learning to dynamically tailor qubit topologies
to the unique specifications of individual quantum circuits,
guiding algorithm-driven quantum processor topology design
for reducing the depth of mapped circuit, which is particularly
critical for the output accuracy on noisy quantum processors. Our method marks a significant departure from previous
methods that have been constrained to mapping circuits onto
a fixed processor topology. Experiments demonstrate that we
have achieved notable enhancements in circuit performance,
with a minimum of 20% reduction in circuit depth in 60% of
the cases examined, and a maximum enhancement of up to
46%. Furthermore, the pronounced benefits of our approach
in reducing circuit depth become increasingly evident as the
scale of the quantum circuits increases, exhibiting the scalability of our method in terms of problem size. This work advances the co-design of quantum processor architecture and
algorithm mapping, offering a promising avenue for future
research and development in the field.

Code — https://github.com/qclab-quantum/Qtailor

1

Introduction

The advent of quantum computing marks a significant leap
forward in computational capabilities (Wu et al. 2021;
Nielsen and Chuang 2010; Shor 1997; Deutsch and Jozsa
1997; Shor 1994; Zhu et al. 2022), offering the potential
to outperform classical computing in solving specific intricate problems. The field has witnessed remarkable progress
in recent decades (Arute et al. 2019), having now entered
the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era(Huang
et al. 2023, 2020; Wu et al. 2021). Despite this progress, the
realization of quantum advantage in practical applications,
such as quantum machine learning (Biamonte et al. 2017;

• We introduce Qtailor, a novel framework that utilizes
Reinforcement Learning (RL) to determine the optimal
quantum processor topology for a specific quantum algorithm, within the constraints of a processor’s connectivity. Experimental tests with small-scale circuits indicate that Qtailor can significantly reduce circuit depth,
with enhancements reaching up to 46% over the current state-of-the-art model, Qiskit (Contributors and IBM

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

442

