The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Where Precision Meets Efficiency: Transformation Diffusion Model for Point Cloud
Registration
Yongzhe Yuan1,2 , Yue Wu1,2 * , Xiaolong Fan1,3 , Maoguo Gong1,4 , Qiguang Miao1,2 , Wenping Ma5
1

MoE Key Lab of Collaborative Intelligence Systems, Xidian University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
3
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University
4
Academy of Artificial Intelligence, College of Mathematics Science, Inner Mongolia Normal University
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University
{yyz@stu., ywu@, qgmiao@, wpma@mail.}xidian.edu.cn, xiaolongfan@outlook.com, gong@ieee.org
Abstract

methods have advanced from the most basic technique of
utilizing regression to predict transformation parameters in
the correspondence-free methods (Huang, Mei, and Zhang
2020; Mei 2021; Mei et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2021), employing correspondence-based methods (Bai et al. 2021; Choy,
Dong, and Koltun 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Yew and Lee
2022) and leveraging SVD decomposition to obtain rigid
transformations in partially overlapping scenarios. Specifically, in the correspondence-free methods, they are often
necessary to seek differences between global features and
require features to be sensitive to posture. On the basis of
the correspondence-based methods, it is necessary to find the
overlapping parts of the point cloud through precise matching and inlier estimation. However, point cloud registration
faces a fundamental challenge, how to balance precision and
efficiency? Correspondence-free methods tend to prioritize
efficiency but exhibit significantly lower precision compared
to correspondence-based methods, which leverage larger network structures to enhance performance. On the contrary,
employing correspondence-based method enhances precision
but this comes at the expense of efficiency.
Inspired by the remarkable achievements of diffusion models in generative AI, we adapt diffusion models to handle the
point cloud registration and treat transformation parameters
prediction as a generation task. We argue that the process of
“noise-to-transformation” in point cloud registration is analogous to the process of “noise-to-point cloud” in point cloud
generation, which gradually remove noise from point clouds
to generate point clouds with different shapes. Diffusion models have achieved significant success in various generative
tasks (Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried 2022) and recently
have applied in some discriminative tasks (Brempong et al.
2022; Graikos et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2023a). However, the application of diffusion models to point cloud registration lags
significantly in discriminative tasks and we aim to ulteriorly
push forward the development of the point cloud registration
pipeline.
Motivated by the discussion above, in this paper, we propose a Transformation Diffusion Model (TDM) for point
cloud registration from a novel perspective, intending to simultaneously achieve higher precision and efficiency. Our
method formulates point cloud registration as a denoising

We propose a transformation diffusion model for point cloud
registration to balance precision and efficiency. Our method
formulates point cloud registration as a denoising diffusion
process from noisy transformation to object transformation,
which is represented by quaternion and translation. Specifically, in training stage, object transformation diffuses from
ground-truth transformation to random distribution, and the
model learns to reverse this noising process. In sampling stage,
the model refines randomly generated transformation to the
optimal transformation in a progressive way. We derive the
variational bound in closed form for training and provide
instantiation of the model. Our diffusion model maps transformation into latent space, and splits the transformation into
two components (rotation and translation) based on the fact
that they belong to different solution spaces. In addition, our
work provides the following crucial findings: (i) Point cloud
registration, one of the representative discriminative tasks, can
be solved by a generative way and mapped into latent space to
obtain new unified probabilistic formulation. (ii) Our model,
Transformation Diffusion Model (TDM) can be a plug-andplay agent for point cloud registration, making our method
applicable to different deep registration networks. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
that, in correspondence-free and correspondence-based scenarios, TDM can both achieve exceeding 60% performance
improvements and higher efficiency simultaneously.

Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D data acquisition technology
(Guo, Zhu, and Chen 2023), point cloud registration, as a
fundamental visual task, plays an crucial role in the 3D vision
field, and has been widely applied in various high-level tasks,
such as 3D scene reconstruction (Guo et al. 2022), object pose
estimation (Jiang et al. 2024), and Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) (Zhu et al. 2022). Given two 3D point
clouds, the goal of point cloud registration is to find a rigid
transformation to align one point cloud to another.
Rigid point cloud registration methods have been evolving
in response to the growing complexity of scenarios. These
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9734

