The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RhythmMamba: Fast, Lightweight, and Accurate
Remote Physiological Measurement
Bochao Zou1 , Zizheng Guo1 , Xiaocheng Hu2 , Huimin Ma1 *
1

University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
China Academy of Electronics and Information Technology, Beijing, China
zoubochao@ustb.edu.cn, guozizheng@xs.ustb.edu.cn, 675342900@qq.com, mhmpub@ustb.edu.cn
2

Abstract

have garnered increasing attention (McDuff 2023; Li, Yu,
and Shi 2023; Choi, Kang, and Kim 2024).
Early rPPG research primarily relied on traditional signal processing methods to recover weak rPPG signals from
facial videos, which are susceptible to interference from
environmental light, motion, and other noises. In complex
environments, relying solely on signal processing methods
often struggles to achieve satisfactory accuracy. In recent
years, data-driven methods have become mainstream, represented by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and transformers. However, CNNs have limited receptive fields and
transformer-based architectures exhibit mediocre performance in capturing long-term dependencies from the computational complexity perspective, especially when dealing
with long video sequences.
Recently, Mamba (Dao and Gu 2024) has emerged with
its selective state space model, striking a balance between
maintaining linear complexity and facilitating long-term dependency modeling. It has been successfully applied to various artificial intelligence tasks such as video understanding
(Li et al. 2025). For rPPG tasks that typically require longterm monitoring and are suitable for deployment on mobile
devices, the linear complexity and ability to capture longterm dependencies give Mamba an advantage.
However, the direct application of Mamba to rPPG tasks
performs poorly. Our experiments reveal that embedding
spatiotemporal information into token sequences through
patch embedding leads to spatial information significantly
disrupting Mamba’s comprehension of temporal information (see Section 4.5). This phenomenon may stem from
Mamba’s linear modeling characteristics, where the states
are associated with the temporal phases of the rPPG signals. The incorporation of spatial information increases the
dimensionality of the state transition process, thereby adding
complexity and impeding the model’s learning efficacy.
Motivated by the aforementioned discussion, we propose RhythmMamba, a state space model-based architecture
for remote physiological measurement. The proposed frame
stem embeds spatial information from a single frame into
the channels, thereby viewing the rPPG task as a time series task, allowing the periodic variations in pulse waves to
be modeled as state transitions. As shown in Fig. 1, considering the linear modeling characteristics of Mamba, the
phase shifts of rPPG signals can be viewed as state tran-

Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) is a method for noncontact measurement of physiological signals from facial
videos, holding great potential in various applications such as
healthcare, affective computing, and anti-spoofing. Existing
deep learning methods struggle to address two core issues of
rPPG simultaneously: understanding the periodic pattern of
rPPG among long contexts and addressing large spatiotemporal redundancy in video segments. These represent a trade-off
between computational complexity and the ability to capture
long-range dependencies. In this paper, we introduce RhythmMamba, a state space model-based method that captures
long-range dependencies while maintaining linear complexity. By viewing rPPG as a time series task through the proposed frame stem, the periodic variations in pulse waves are
modeled as state transitions. Additionally, we design multitemporal constraint and frequency domain feed-forward, both
aligned with the characteristics of rPPG time series, to improve the learning capacity of Mamba for rPPG signals. Extensive experiments show that RhythmMamba achieves stateof-the-art performance with 319% throughput and 23% peak
GPU memory.

Code — https://github.com/zizheng-guo/RhythmMamba

1

Introduction

Blood Volume Pulse (BVP) is a vital physiological signal,
further enabling the extraction of key signs such as heart rate
(HR) and heart rate variability (HRV). Photoplethysmography (PPG) is a non-invasive monitoring method that utilizes
optical means to measure changes in blood volume within
living tissues. The physiological mechanism of PPG stems
from variations in blood volume during cardiac contraction
and relaxation in subcutaneous blood vessels, leading to
changes in light absorption and scattering. These changes
result in periodic color signal variations on imaging sensors, which are imperceptible to the human eye (Verkruysse,
Svaasand, and Nelson 2008; Chen and McDuff 2018). Traditionally, BVP extraction requires the use of contact sensors,
which brings inconvenience and limitations. In recent years,
non-contact methods for obtaining BVP, particularly rPPG,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11077

