The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Characterising Simulation-Based Program Equilibria
Emery Cooper, Caspar Oesterheld, Vincent Conitzer
Carnegie Mellon University
emerycooper@cmu.edu, oesterheld@cmu.edu, conitzer@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

games could model interactions between principals designing AI agents, interactions between AI agents themselves,
or smart contracts. This could include interactions between
large language models where the programs are prompts
provided by humans and interpreted by the models. Program games can also model some interactions between humans, such as those involving mutually conditional commitments, or transparent institutions (Critch, Dennis, and Russell 2022).
Tennenholtz (2004) proves a folk theorem for program
equilibria (cf. Rubinstein 1998, Sect. 10.4): any set of feasible and individually rational (i.e., better-than-minimax) payoffs of a game is achievable in a program equilibrium. However, this result is proved using programs based on syntactic
comparison, such as the above CliqueBot in the prisoner’s
dilemma. Such equilibria are extremely fragile: if someone,
perhaps from a different community, writes a slightly different version of CliqueBot (CliqueBot’), then CliqueBot and
CliqueBot’ will defect on each other.
Previous authors have proposed different ways of achieving more robust program equilibria. One proposal is that of
Löbian programs (Bárász et al. 2014; Critch 2019; Critch,
Dennis, and Russell 2022; Oesterheld 2022). In the prisoner’s dilemma, the Löbian FairBot roughly works by cooperating if and only if it can prove the opponent cooperates.
The Löbian FairBots cooperate against each other. Unfortunately, there are practical difficulties with this approach. If
the opponent program is not very interpretable (e.g., a large
neural net), it may be difficult or impossible to prove things
about its output.
We therefore turn our attention to simulation-based approaches, such as Oesterheld’s (2019) ϵGroundedFairBot
and ϵGroundedπBot. In the prisoner’s dilemma, the
ϵGroundedFairBot cooperates with probability ϵ and otherwise simulates the opponent and cooperates if and only
if in the simulation the other player cooperates. If two
ϵGroundedFairBots play against each other, the simulated
player may in turn simulate the other, etc., but eventually
the ϵ-probability case will be triggered, ensuring termination. This program is easy to implement and can be used
against programs that are not very interpretable.
We can view Oesterheld’s (2019) ϵGroundedπBot as simulating a repeated game. With probability ϵ, the program is
on the first ‘time step’, and does not observe any previous ac-

In Tennenholtz’s program equilibrium, players of a game
submit programs to play on their behalf. Each program receives the other programs’ source code and outputs an action. This can model interactions involving AI agents, mutually transparent institutions, or commitments. Tennenholtz
(2004) proves a folk theorem for program games, but the
equilibria constructed are very brittle. We therefore consider
simulation-based programs – i.e., programs that work by running opponents’ programs. These are relatively robust (in particular, two programs that act the same are treated the same)
and are more practical than proof-based approaches. Oesterheld’s (2019) ϵGroundedπBot is such an approach. Unfortunately, it is not generally applicable to games of three or more
players, and only allows for a limited range of equilibria in
two player games. In this paper, we propose a generalisation
to Oesterheld’s (2019) ϵGroundedπBot. We prove a folk theorem for our programs in a setting with access to a shared
source of randomness. We then characterise their equilibria in
a setting without shared randomness. Both with and without
shared randomness, we achieve a much wider range of equilibria than Oesterheld’s (2019) ϵGroundedπBot. Finally, we
explore the limits of simulation-based program equilibrium,
showing that the Tennenholtz folk theorem cannot be attained
by simulation-based programs without access to shared randomness.

1

Introduction

Consider a game in which, rather than choosing actions,
players submit programs (McAfee 1984; Howard 1988; Rubinstein 1998, Sect. 10.4; Tennenholtz 2004). Programs
receive as input the source code of the opponents’ programs, and output actions. E.g., in the (one-shot) prisoner’s
dilemma, the programs might be CliqueBots: ‘cooperate if
the other program is equal to this program, else defect’.
CliqueBots form a cooperative equilibrium. This illustrates
how such games – program games – allow for new equilibria.
Traditional game-theoretic concepts, such as Nash equilibrium, have been developed without mutual transparency
in mind, and may therefore be less relevant to interactions
involving AI agents whose source codes might be available
to other agents (Conitzer and Oesterheld 2023). Program
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13735

