The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RCTrans: Radar-Camera Transformer
via Radar Densifier and Sequential Decoder for 3D Object Detection
Yiheng Li1,2, * , Yang Yang1,2, * , Zhen Lei 1,2,3,†
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
liyiheng2024@ia.ac.cn, yang.yang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, zhen.lei@ia.ac.cn
60

Abstract

58

NDS(%)

In radar-camera 3D object detection, the radar point clouds
are sparse and noisy, which causes difficulties in fusing camera and radar modalities. To solve this, we introduce a novel
query-based detection method named Radar-Camera Transformer (RCTrans). Specifically, we first design a Radar Dense
Encoder to enrich the sparse valid radar tokens, and then
concatenate them with the image tokens. By doing this, we
can fully explore the 3D information of each interest region
and reduce the interference of empty tokens during the fusing stage. We then design a Pruning Sequential Decoder to
predict 3D boxes based on the obtained tokens and random
initialized queries. To alleviate the effect of elevation ambiguity in radar point clouds, we gradually locate the position
of the object via a sequential fusion structure. It helps to get
more precise and flexible correspondences between tokens
and queries. A pruning training strategy is adopted in the decoder, which can save much time during inference and inhibit
queries from losing their distinctiveness. Extensive experiments on the large-scale nuScenes dataset prove the superiority of our method, and we also achieve new state-of-the-art
radar-camera 3D detection results.

56
54

RCBEVDet

BEVPoolv2

CRN

StreamPETR

SoloFusion

52

40

42

：448×800 DLA34
：256×704 Res50

CRAFT
50

：256×704 Res18
43

44
mAP(%)

46

48

50

Figure 1: Comparison between RCTrans and other camera
or radar-camera 3D detection methods. The size of the circle represents the time consumption of inference. All experiments are conducted on nuScenes val set and the speed is
measured on a single NVIDIA RTX3090 GPU.
However, the radar sensor has two inherent drawbacks,
i.e., sparsity and noise. Firstly, a radar typically releases
mmWave into the physical space, which hits the object and
then is reflected to the receiver. Due to the lack of diffused
reflection, only a small part of objects can be reflected to the
radar receiver (Singh et al. 2023). The number of non-empty
radar pillars is only approximately 10% of average numbers
in LiDAR pillars (Bang et al. 2024). Secondly, the radar used
in autonomous driving (such as in nuScenes (Caesar et al.
2020)) cannot obtain an accurate height of objects, which
can bring the noise in azimuth (x) and depth (z) components
(Singh et al. 2023). In addition, some noise may also be led
to the axes when the beam-width of the mmWave radar is too
large (Singh et al. 2023). The sparsity and noise of radar data
will bring challenges to the cross-modality fusion. Specifically, sparsity causes too much invalid radar representation,
while noise makes wrong or inaccurate alignments between
camera and radar representation.
As shown in Fig. 1, we compare RCTrans with existing models on nuScenes val set. Previous methods may
overlook the sparsity of the radar (Kim et al. 2023b,a), or
need the radar cross-section (RCS) as the prior (Lin et al.

Code — https://github.com/liyih/RCTrans

1

RCTrans (Ours)

Introduction

3D object detection is an important perceptual task that can
be widely applied in many fields. Existing high-precision detection algorithms often rely on the input of LiDAR(Yan,
Mao, and Li 2018; Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021). However, LiDAR is expensive and easily damaged (Lin et al.
2024), which is not conducive to the commercialization of
the algorithm. To reduce the practical cost, recent works begin to focus on using low-cost radars and multi-view cameras to improve detection performance. Camera sensors can
provide rich texture information, while radar sensors can
provide three-dimensional information that is not affected
by different weather conditions (Kim et al. 2023a).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5048

