The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Binary Matrix Factorization Using Proximal Optimization
Sebastian Dalleiger,1 Jilles Vreeken,2 Michael Kamp3
1 KTH Royal Institute of Technology

2 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

3 Institute for AI in Medicine, UK Essen and Ruhr University Bochum, Monash University

sdall@kth.se, jv@cispa.de, michael.kamp@uk-essen.de

2000), singular value decomposition (Golub and Loan 1996),
and principal component analysis (Golub and Loan 1996),
do not achieve interpretable results for binary data (Miettinen
et al. 2008; Dalleiger and Vreeken 2022).
Boolean Matrix Factorization (BMF) alleviates this problem by approximating a centralized Boolean target matrix
𝐴 ∈ {0, 1} 𝑛×𝑚 by the Boolean product
Ü
𝐴 ≈ [𝑈 ◦ 𝑉] 𝑖 𝑗 =
𝑈𝑖𝑙 ∧ 𝑉𝑙 𝑗

Abstract
Identifying informative components in binary data is an essential task in many application areas, including life sciences,
social sciences, and recommendation systems. Boolean matrix
factorization (BMF) is a family of methods that performs this
task by factorizing the data into dense factor matrices. In realworld settings, the data is often distributed across stakeholders
and required to stay private, prohibiting the straightforward
application of BMF. To adapt BMF to this context, we approach the problem from a federated-learning perspective,
building on a state-of-the-art continuous binary matrix factorization relaxation to BMF that enables efficient gradient-based
optimization. Our approach only needs to share the relaxed
component matrices, which are aggregated centrally using a
proximal operator that regularizes for binary outcomes. We
show the convergence of our federated proximal gradient descent algorithm and provide differential privacy guarantees.
Our extensive empirical evaluation shows that our algorithm
outperforms, in quality and efficacy, federation schemes of
state-of-the-art BMF methods on a diverse set of real-world
and synthetic data.

𝑙∈ [ 𝑘 ]

Replication Material — doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14501661

1

Introduction

Discovering patterns and dependencies in distributed binary
data sources is a common problem in many applications, such
as cancer genomics (Liang, Zhu, and Lu 2020), recommender
systems (Ignatov et al. 2014), and neuroscience (Haddad et al.
2018). Data is often distributed horizontally (i.e., the rows of
the data matrix are split across hosts) and may not be pooled.
For example, biopsies are performed in different hospitals,
with each location measuing the expression of a common
set of genes. Although there exists an explicit interest in
analyzing this data jointly, privacy regulations mandate that
these measurements may not be shared, thereby limiting the
applicability of traditional centralized methods.
Federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017) enables learning from distributed datasets without disclosing sensitive
data. Existing methods for federated non-negative matrix factorization (Li et al. 2021) are specific to real-valued data,
and similar to non-federated Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) (Paatero and Tapper 1994; Lee and Seung 1999,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
16144

of two low-rank Boolean factor matrices (Miettinen et al.
2008), 𝑈 ∈ {0, 1} 𝑛×𝑘 (feature matrix) and 𝑉 ∈ {0, 1} 𝑘×𝑚
(coefficient matrix).
Although there are myriad heuristics to approximate this
NP-hard problem, doing so for distributed data without
sharing private information remains an open problem. Even
though we could approach distributed binary data with standard federated learning techniques, e.g. aggregating locallyobtained BMF results into a shared matrix, this requires an
aggregation into binary values, such as rounded average, majority vote, and logical or. Such techniques, however, lack
the precision required by binary data.
To visualize the extent of this problem, we show the impact
of straightforward aggregation in Fig. 1(a), which highlights
that even the best combination of a local factorization algorithm and an aggregation scheme—here, A SSO (Miettinen
et al. 2008) using logical or—leads to bad reconstructions.
Recently, Dalleiger and Vreeken (2022) showed we can
continuously relax BMF into a regularized binary matrix factorization problem using linear (rather than Boolean) algebra
and proximal gradients, yielding an efficient and scalable approach with state-of-the-art performance. Taking advantage
of this relaxation, we propose the F ELB algorithm that locally
factorizes while centrally, yet privacy-consciously aggregates
coefficients using a proximal aggregation, thereby efficiently
yielding valid global binary matrices. On our toy example in
Fig. 1(b) it achieves a nearly perfect reconstruction.
We show that F ELB converges to binary matrices, provide
differential privacy guarantees using, e.g., the Gaussian mechanism (Balle and Wang 2018), and we experimentally validate that the utility remains high. Moreover, we demonstrate
that F ELB outperforms baselines derived via straightforward
parallelization of state-of-the-art BMF methods on numerous
real-world and synthetic datasets.

