The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Active Fourier Auditor
for Estimating Distributional Properties of ML Models
Ayoub Ajarra1 , Bishwamittra Ghosh2 , Debabrota Basu1
1

Équipe Scool, Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189- CRIStAL, Lille, France
2
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Germany
ayoub.ajarra@inria.fr, bghosh@mpi-sws.org, debabrota.basu@inria.fr

Abstract

safe integration of of ML in high-risk applications. Thus, estimating these model properties under minimum interactions
with the models has become a central question in algorithmic auditing (Raji et al. 2020; Wilson et al. 2021; Metaxa
et al. 2021; Yan and Zhang 2022).
Example 1. Following (Ghosh, Basu, and Meel 2021, Example 1), let us consider an ML model that predicts who
is eligible to get medical insurance given a sensitive feature
‘age’, and two non-sensitive features ‘income’ and ‘health’.
Owing to historical bias in the training data, the model, i.e.
an explainable decision tree, discriminates against the ‘elderly’ population by denying their health insurance and favors the ‘young’ population. Hence, an auditor would realize that the model does not satisfy group fairness since the
difference in the probability of approving health insurance
between the elderly and the young is large. In addition, the
model violates individual fairness, where perturbing the feature ‘age’ from elderly to young increases the probability of
insurance. Further, the model lacks robustness if perturbing
any feature by an infinitesimal quantity flips the prediction.
Related Work: Towards trustworthy ML, several methods have been proposed to ally audit an ML model by estimating different distributional properties of it, such as fairness and robustness, where the model hyper-property has to
be assessed against the distribution of inputs. A stream of
work focuses on property verification that verifies whether
these properties are violated above a pre-determined threshold (Goldwasser et al. 2021; John, Vijaykeerthy, and Saha
2020; Mutreja and Shafer 2023; Herman and Rothblum
2022; Kearns et al. 2018). Thus, we focus on estimating
these properties instead of a ‘yes/no’ answer, which is a
harder problem than verification (Goldwasser et al. 2021).
On estimating distributional properties, (Neiswanger, Wang,
and Ermon 2021) proposed a Bayesian approach for estimating properties of black-box optimizers and required a
prior distribution of models. (Wang et al. 2022) studies simpler distributional properties, e.g. the mean, the median, and
the trimmed mean defined as a conditional expectation, using offline and interactive algorithms. (Yan and Zhang 2022)
considered a frequentist approach for estimating group fairness but assumed the knowledge of the model class and a
finite hypothesis class under audit. These assumptions are
violated if we do not know the model type and can be challenging for complex models, e.g. deep neural networks. (Al-

With the pervasive deployment of Machine Learning (ML)
models in real-world applications, verifying and auditing
properties of ML models have become a central concern. In
this work, we focus on three properties: robustness, individual fairness, and group fairness. We discuss two approaches
for auditing ML model properties: estimation with and without reconstruction of the target model under audit. Though
the first approach is studied in the literature, the second approach remains unexplored. For this purpose, we develop a
new framework that quantifies different properties in terms
of the Fourier coefficients of the ML model under audit but
does not parametrically reconstruct it. We propose the Active Fourier Auditor (AFA), which queries sample points according to the Fourier coefficients of the ML model, and further estimates the properties. We derive high probability error
bounds on AFA’s estimates, along with the worst-case lower
bounds on the sample complexity to audit them. Numerically
we demonstrate on multiple datasets and models that AFA is
more accurate and sample-efficient to estimate the properties
of interest than the baselines.

Code — https://github.com/ayoubajarra/afamp
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08111

1

Introduction

As Machine Learning (ML) systems are pervasively being
deployed in high-stake applications, mitigating discrimination and guaranteeing reliability are critical to ensure the
safe pre and post-deployment of ML (Madiega 2021). These
issues are addressed in the growing subfield of ML, i.e. trustworthy or responsible ML (Rasheed et al. 2022; Li et al.
2023), in terms of robustness and fairness of ML models.
Robustness quantifies how stable are a model’s predictions
under perturbation of its inputs (Xu and Shie 2011; Kumar
et al. 2020). Fairness (Dwork et al. 2012; Barocas, Hardt,
and Narayanan 2023) seeks to address discrimination in predictions both at the individual level and across groups. Thus,
AI regulations, such as the European Union AI Act (Madiega 2021), increasingly suggest certifying different model
properties, such as robustness, fairness, and privacy, for a
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15330

