The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

D IFF IM: Differentiable Influence Minimization with
Surrogate Modeling and Continuous Relaxation
Junghun Lee, Hyunju Kim, Fanchen Bu, Jihoon Ko, Kijung Shin
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
{junghun.lee, hyunju.kim, boqvezen97, jihoonko, kijungs}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In social networks, people influence each other through social
links, which can be represented as propagation among nodes
in graphs. Influence minimization (IMIN) is the problem of
manipulating the structures of an input graph (e.g., removing
edges) to reduce the propagation among nodes. IMIN can
represent time-critical real-world applications, such as rumor
blocking, but IMIN is theoretically difficult and computationally expensive. Moreover, the discrete nature of IMIN hinders
the usage of powerful machine learning techniques, which
requires differentiable computation. In this work, we propose
D IFF IM, a novel method for IMIN with two differentiable
schemes for acceleration: (1) surrogate modeling for efficient
influence estimation, which avoids time-consuming simulations (e.g., Monte Carlo), and (2) the continuous relaxation
of decisions, which avoids the evaluation of individual discrete decisions (e.g., removing an edge). We further propose
a third accelerating scheme, gradient-driven selection, that
chooses edges instantly based on gradients without optimization (spec., gradient descent iterations) on each test instance.
Through extensive experiments on real-world graphs, we show
that each proposed scheme significantly improves speed with
little (or even no) IMIN performance degradation. Our method
is Pareto-optimal (i.e., no baseline is faster and more effective
than it) and typically several orders of magnitude (spec., up to
15,160×) faster than the most effective baseline, while being
more effective.

Code, datasets and online appendix —
https://github.com/junghunl/DiffIM

1

Introduction

In both online and offline social networks, a common phenomenon is influence. That is, people influence other people
through social links. Typical examples include the spread
of information (e.g., rumors) and the contagion of a disease
(e.g., COVID-19). We can model social networks as graphs
and use the propagation among nodes to simulate such processes (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2005), and several
diffusion models mathematically model such propagation.
While the problem of influence maximization has been
widely studied, prior research has also explored influence
minimization (IMIN), where one aims to manipulate graph

structures to reduce the propagation among nodes. IMIN is
relevant to real-world scenarios, such as blocking the spread
of rumors or diseases, and it has been studied with several different formulations (Yan et al. 2019; Ni, Zhu, and
Wang 2023). In this work, we mainly focus on a formulation with edge removal under the independent cascade (IC)
model (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), due to its realisticness and generality; and we provide discussions and
experiments on other models, spec., the linear threshold (LT)
model (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003) and the general Markov chain susceptible-infected-recovered (G-SIR)
model (Yi et al. 2022), in Appendix B. Specifically, the IC
model is realistic and widely considered for modeling the
spread of information (Tripathy, Bagchi, and Mehta 2010)
and diseases (Borgs et al. 2014); and edge removal is general,
including node removal, another widely considered graph
manipulation, as a special case. For such real-world scenarios, we need timely actions since any delay could witness an
exponential explosion in the spread of information (Jin et al.
2013) and diseases (Platto et al. 2021).
However, this problem is NP-hard, and even simply computing influence under the IC model is computationally expensive (spec., #P-hard; Chen, Wang, and Wang 2010). Therefore, several ideas, including Monte Carlo (MC) simulation,
bond percolation (Kimura, Saito, and Motoda 2009), reverse
influence sampling (Borgs et al. 2014; Yi et al. 2022), and
marginal-decrement heuristics (Yan et al. 2019), are available
for influence estimation. However, they offer limited speed
improvements (e.g., due to extensive sampling requirements)
and/or rely on assumptions (e.g., acyclic input graphs) that
do not generally hold in practice.
Notably, existing methods approach the IMIN problem as a
discrete optimization problem, which hinders the application
of powerful continuous-optimization (e.g., gradient descent)
and machine-learning (e.g., neural networks) techniques.
Instead, we propose a novel method for IMIN, called D IF F IM, with two main differentiable schemes: (1) surrogate
modeling for efficient influence estimation, and (2) continuous relaxation of edge removal. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to approach influence minimization using differentiable learning instead of discrete optimization.
Surrogate modeling. First, we propose an efficient scheme
for influence estimation. Inspired by Ko et al. (2020), we pro-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18128

