The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

State Encodings for GNN-Based Lifted Planners
Rostislav Horčík, Gustav Šír, Vítězslav Šimek, Tomáš Pevný
Czech Technical University in Prague
xhorcik@fel.cvut.cz, gustav.sir@cvut.cz, simekvi1@fel.cvut.cz, pevnak@protonmail.ch

Abstract

State

The application of graph neural networks (GNNs) to learn
heuristic functions in classical planning is gaining traction.
Despite the variety of methods proposed in the literature to
encode classical planning tasks for GNNs, a comparative study
evaluating their relative performances has been lacking. Moreover, some encodings have been assessed solely for their expressiveness rather than practical effectiveness in planning.
This paper provides an extensive comparative analysis of existing encodings. Our results indicate that the smallest encoding
based on Gaifman graphs, not yet applied in planning, outperforms the rest due to its fast evaluation times and the informativeness of the resulting heuristic. The overall coverage
measured on the IPC almost reaches that of the state-of-theart planner LAMA while exhibiting rather complementary
strengths across different domains.

Graph
GNN

Heuristic

Search

Figure 1: A GNN-based pipeline in classical planning.

Code — https://github.com/pevnak/NeuroPlanner.jl

1

Encoding

Introduction

The use of neural networks (NNs) to learn heuristic functions in classical planning is on the rise. Initial efforts developed neural network architectures based on grounded representations of planning tasks, such as ASNets (Toyer et al.
2018) and STRIPS-HGNs (Shen, Trevizan, and Thiébaux
2020). However, these grounded representations are usually quite large, resulting in significantly large NNs. Consequently, their evaluation time renders them less competitive
in typical search algorithms compared to classical planners
like LAMA (Richter and Westphal 2010). This has shifted
current research focus primarily towards the application of
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to lifted representations instead (Chen, Thiébaux, and Trevizan 2024; Ståhlberg, Bonet,
and Geffner 2022a,b, 2023). To effectively utilize GNNs as
heuristic functions for planning tasks, it is necessary to represent planning states as appropriate graph structures referred
to as state encodings, as illustrated in the general GNN-based
pipeline shown in Figure 1.
Existing studies typically fix a particular state encoding
and measure the performance of the resulting heuristic function represented by the pipeline. However, no comparative
study has investigated the performance effect of different
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26525

kinds of state encodings on the pipeline. The performance
measurement depends on the pipeline’s application mode.
The existing approaches work either in an offline or online setting. The offline setting incorporates the pipeline’s
heuristic function into a standard heuristic search algorithm
like Greedy Best First Search (Chen, Thiébaux, and Trevizan 2024). In constrast, the online setting employs the
pipeline’s heuristic to construct the corresponding greedy
policy (Ståhlberg, Bonet, and Geffner 2022a,b, 2023). In the
offline setting, it is crucial to balance evaluation time with
informativeness, given the time constraints on the search.
Conversely, the online setting must optimize for informativeness and less for evaluation time.
The informativeness is tightly connected to the pipeline’s
expressiveness, determining the range of heuristic functions
that can be learned. This expressiveness was investigated
in (Horčík and Šír 2024) where the state encodings for GNNs
were compared based on their ability to differentiate between
states, as it is assumed that a network capable of distinguishing more states is more powerful and ultimately leads to
stronger heuristics. While this is true, the computational complexity is the other side of the problem, impacting the heuristic’s overall effectiveness, especially in the offline setting.
Consequently, a less powerful but computationally cheaper
heuristic may be more advantageous.
This paper, therefore, discusses the computational aspects
of different state encodings and compares them across problems from the IPC 2023 learning track. In particular, we study
not only the obtained coverage for a given time limit but also
the size of the state encodings, evaluation time, the number
of expanded states during the search, and plan lengths. To
evaluate the state encodings, we apply them offline to simultaneously measure the evaluation time and the informativeness
via the number of expanded states. We leverage A∗ as the
search algorithm.
To construct the GNN-based pipeline, we consider all the
relevant state encodings from the literature, namely (Chen,
Thiébaux, and Trevizan 2024; Ståhlberg, Bonet, and Geffner

