The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deterministic Policy Gradient Primal-Dual Methods
for Continuous-Space Constrained MDPs
Sergio Rozada 1 , Dongsheng Ding 2 , Antonio G. Marques 1 , Alejandro Ribeiro 2
1

Dept. of Signal Theory and Communications, King Juan Carlos University
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania
s.rozada.2019@alumnos.urjc.es, dongshed@seas.upenn.edu, antonio.garcia.marques@urjc.es, alejandro.ribeiro@seas.upenn.edu
2

Abstract

tion (Paternain et al. 2022), video compression (Mandhane
et al. 2022), and finance (Chow et al. 2018).
This paper is motivated by two observations. First, continuous state-action spaces are pervasive in dynamical systems,
yet most methods in constrained RL are designed for discrete
state and/or action spaces (Borkar 2005; Efroni, Mannor, and
Pirotta 2020; Ding et al. 2022; Singh, Gupta, and Shroff
2022). Second, the literature on constrained RL largely focuses on stochastic policies. However, randomly taking actions by following a stochastic policy is often prohibitive in
practice, especially in safety-critical domains (Sehnke et al.
2010; Li et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023). Deterministic policies
alleviate such concerns, but (i) they might lead to sub-optimal
solutions (Ross 1989; Altman 2021); and (ii) computing them
is NP-complete (Feinberg 2000; Dolgov 2005). Nevertheless,
there is a rich body of constrained control literature that
studies problems where optimal policies are deterministic
(Posa, Kuindersma, and Tedrake 2016; Tsiamis et al. 2020;
Zhao and You 2021; Ma et al. 2022). Viewing this gap, we
study the problem of finding optimal deterministic policies
for constrained MDPs with continuous state-action spaces.
A key consideration of this paper is the fact that deterministic policies are sub-optimal in finite state-action spaces, but
sufficient for constrained MDPs with continuous state-action
spaces (Feinberg and Piunovskiy 2002, 2019). This enables
our formulation of a constrained RL problem with deterministic policies. To develop a tractable deterministic policy search
method, we introduce a regularized Lagrangian approach that
leverages proximal optimization methods. Moreover, we use
function approximation to ensure scalability in continuous
state-action spaces. Our main contribution is four-fold.

We study the problem of computing deterministic optimal
policies for constrained Markov decision processes (MDPs)
with continuous state and action spaces, which are widely
encountered in constrained dynamical systems. Designing deterministic policy gradient methods in continuous state and
action spaces is particularly challenging due to the lack of enumerable state-action pairs and the adoption of deterministic
policies, hindering the application of existing policy gradient
methods. To this end, we develop a deterministic policy gradient primal-dual method to find an optimal deterministic policy
with non-asymptotic convergence. Specifically, we leverage
regularization of the Lagrangian of the constrained MDP to
propose a deterministic policy gradient primal-dual (D-PGPD)
algorithm that updates the deterministic policy via a quadraticregularized gradient ascent step and the dual variable via a
quadratic-regularized gradient descent step. We prove that
the primal-dual iterates of D-PGPD converge at a sub-linear
rate to an optimal regularized primal-dual pair. We instantiate D-PGPD with function approximation and prove that the
primal-dual iterates of D-PGPD converge at a sub-linear rate
to an optimal regularized primal-dual pair, up to a function
approximation error. Furthermore, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in two continuous control problems:
robot navigation and fluid control. This appears to be the first
work that proposes a deterministic policy search method for
continuous-space constrained MDPs.

Code — https://github.com/sergiorozada12/d-pg-pd
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10015

1

Introduction

Constrained Markov decision processes (MDPs) are a standard framework for incorporating system specifications into
dynamical systems (Altman 2021; Brunke et al. 2022). In recent years, constrained MDPs have attracted significant attention in constrained Reinforcement Learning (RL), whose goal
is to derive optimal control policies through interaction with
unknown dynamical systems (Achiam et al. 2017; Tessler,
Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018). Policy gradient-based constrained learning methods have become the workhorse driving recent successes across various disciplines, e.g., navigaCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(i) We introduce a deterministic policy constrained RL problem for a constrained MDP with continuous state-action
spaces and prove that the problem exhibits zero duality
gap, despite being constrained to deterministic policies.
(ii) We propose a regularized deterministic policy gradient
primal-dual (D-PGPD) algorithm that updates the primal
policy via a proximal-point-type step and the dual variable
via a gradient descent step, and we prove that the primaldual iterates of D-PGPD converge to a set of regularized
optimal primal-dual pairs at a sub-linear rate.
(iii) We propose an approximation for D-PGPD by including
function approximation. We prove that the primal-dual

20200

