The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TAIL-MIL: Time-Aware and Instance-Learnable Multiple Instance Learning for
Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
Jaeseok Jang and Hyuk-Yoon Kwon

*

Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University of Science and Technology
{jangjs1027, hyukyoon.kwon}@seoultech.ac.kr

Abstract
This study addresses the challenge of detecting anomalies in
multivariate time series data. Considering a bag (e.g., multisensor data) consisting of two-dimensional spaces of time
points and multivariate instances (e.g., individual sensors),
we aim to detect anomalies at both the bag and instance level
with a unified model. To circumvent the practical difficulties
of labeling at the instance level in such spaces, we adopt a
multiple instance learning (MIL)-based approach, which enables learning at both the bag- and instance- levels using only
the bag-level labels. In this study, we introduce time-aware
and instance-learnable MIL (simply, TAIL-MIL). We propose
two specialized attention mechanisms designed to effectively
capture the relationships between different types of instances.
We innovatively integrate these attention mechanisms with
conjunctive pooling applied to the two-dimensional structure at different levels (i.e., bag- and instance-level), enabling TAIL-MIL to effectively pinpoint both the timing and
causative multivariate factors of anomalies. We provide theoretical evidence demonstrating TAIL-MIL’s efficacy in detecting instances with two-dimensional structures. Furthermore, we empirically validate the superior performance of
TAIL-MIL over the state-of-the-art MIL methods and multivariate time-series anomaly detection methods.

Figure 1: A two-dimensional time-aware bag (TAB) for multivariate time series data (blue: normal data, red: abnormal
data). Since all VI-TPIMs, including X(2,2) , in a TPIM X2
are normal, X2 is normal. On the other hand, because a
TPIM XN includes an abnormal VI-TPIM, X(N,T ) , XN is
abnormal. Consequently, the TAB including XN is also considered abnormal.

Introduction
Anomaly refers to data that deviates from normal patterns,
and abnormal patterns in data typically arise when the relationships between instances in the data deviate from the
norm (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009). Anomalies
can manifest in various forms across domains such as healthcare, finance, smart grids, manufacturing, and education,
appearing as diseases, fraud, system malfunctions, operational errors, defects, violence, and more (Wong et al. 2002;
Sailusha et al. 2020; Wang, Masoud, and Khojandi 2020;
Liebert et al. 2022; Pang et al. 2021; Bermejo Nievas et al.
2011). Due to these diverse manifestations, active research
efforts have been undertaken in each domain to detect and
prevent anomalies.
This study deals with the problem of detecting anomalies in multivariate time series. In the problem of detecting which variate at which time point caused an anomaly

in multivariate time series data, the space can be considered two-dimensional, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Here, the entire dataset is composed of a collection of time-aware bags
(TABs), where each bag consists of time-point instances
with multivariate (TPIMs). Each TPIM, in turn, is composed
of multivariate instances in TPIM (VI-TPIMs). When an
anomaly occurs in a TAB, it means that one or more TPIMs
within the TAB have anomalies, as illustrated in Figure 1.
An anomaly in a TPIM indicates that one or more VI-TPIMs
within the TPIM have anomalies. This study aims to design
a unified model that can effectively detect anomalies for 1)
TABs, 2) TPIMs, and 3) VI-TPIMs. Specifically, instancelevel anomaly detection for 2) and 3) has the effect of explaining the cause of the detected anomaly bag in a twodimensional time-aware data structure. Labeling anomalies,
known for their extremely rare occurrence in the overall
data, usually requires substantial time and resources from

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17582

