The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Assessing Pre-Trained Models for Transfer Learning Through
Distribution of Spectral Components
Tengxue Zhang1 , Yang Shu1 * , Xinyang Chen2 * , Yifei Long1 , Chenjuan Guo1 , Bin Yang1
1

School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{txzhang, yflong}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {yshu, cjguo, byang}@dase.ecnu.edu.cn, chenxinyang@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Model Pool

Ranking

Labeled
Target Data
…

Fine-tuning

…

Predicted Performance

Designed
Metric

Pre-trained model assessment for transfer learning aims to
identify the optimal candidate for the downstream tasks from
a model hub, without the need of time-consuming fine-tuning.
Existing advanced works mainly focus on analyzing the intrinsic characteristics of the entire features extracted by each
pre-trained model or how well such features fit the target labels. This paper proposes a novel perspective for pre-trained
model assessment through the Distribution of Spectral Components (DISCO). Through singular value decomposition of
features extracted from pre-trained models, we investigate
different spectral components and observe that they possess distinct transferability, contributing diversely to the finetuning performance. Inspired by this, we propose an assessment method based on the distribution of spectral components which measures the proportions of their corresponding singular values. Pre-trained models with features concentrating on more transferable components are regarded as better choices for transfer learning. We further leverage the labels of downstream data to better estimate the transferability of each spectral component and derive the final assessment criterion. Our proposed method is flexible and can be
applied to both classification and regression tasks. We conducted comprehensive experiments across three benchmarks
and two tasks including image classification and object detection, demonstrating that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance in choosing proper pre-trained models from the
model hub for transfer learning.

1

Accurate and Efficient

Accurate but Time-consuming

Figure 1: The overall framework for assessing pre-trained
models for transfer learning. Given a model pool, a designed
metric quickly predicts and ranks model performance on
the target dataset. The predicted rankings are expected to
strongly correlate with the ground-truth fine-tuning results.

et al. 2020), and large corpus for natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2018; Brown et al. 2020), there is no single pre-trained model that excels in all downstream tasks
across various domains. Consequently, selecting the best
pre-trained model to apply to downstream tasks has become
a challenging problem. Fine-tuning each pre-trained model
on the target dataset is a straightforward way to obtain the
ground-truth performance and select the best model. However, this procedure can be time-consuming with a largescale pool of pre-trained models. As a result, recent works
have focused on designing a metric to quickly predict the
performance of models on the target dataset for pre-trained
model selection (Ding et al. 2024), as illustrated in Figure 1.
Most of these works calculate the transferability metric
based on the original features of the target dataset extracted
by pre-trained models. Some primarily consider statistical
information (Nguyen et al. 2020), such as the expected conditional probability of target labels given the pre-training labels, to evaluate how well the extracted features fit the target
labels. Others focus on the intrinsic characteristics of the entire extracted features, such as inter-class separation or intraclass and inter-class structure (Wang et al. 2023).
One significant limitation of previous methods is their re-

Introduction

With the widespread use of deep neural networks, numerous
pre-trained models are readily available in the artificial intelligence community, such as those found on HuggingFace
(Wolf et al. 2019) and TensorFlowHub (Abadi et al. 2016).
Thanks to being trained on large-scale datasets, these models provide fundamental and general knowledge for downstream tasks. Fine-tuning is a successful paradigm that leverages this knowledge to enhance performance on target tasks,
without having to start the training process from scratch. Despite the remarkable capabilities of pre-trained models, such
as those pre-trained on large-scale images for computer vision (Russakovsky et al. 2015; He et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22560

