The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Linear Streaming Bandit: Regret Minimization and Fixed-Budget Epsilon-Best
Arm Identification
Yuming Shao1,2 , Zhixuan Fang1,2 *
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China
shaoym21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zfang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Jin et al. 2021; Assadi and Wang 2020, 2022; Agarwal,
Khanna, and Patil 2022; Li et al. 2023; Assadi and Wang
2023; Wang 2023), motivated by the explosive growth of
data and the convenience of processing arms in a streaming
manner. In this streaming scenario, a large number of arms
arrive one by one, while the algorithm is limited in its storage capacity. The algorithm can only pull the arms temporarily stored in its memory. To accommodate future arms in the
stream, it must discard some existing arms from memory. In
the streaming bandit setting, both Regret Minimization and
Best Arm Identification problems have been considered in
the literature. However, existing streaming bandit algorithms
unexceptionally face a serious problem: their theoretical upper bounds for either regret or sample complexity become
loose very quickly as the number of arms K increases. For
example, Agarwal, Khanna,
√  and Patil (2022) introduce an
algorithm with Õ T α K regret, where T is the time horizon and α > 12 . If the magnitude of K is comparable to T ,
i.e., K = Ω(T ), the algorithm loses theoretical guarantees
since the upper bound scales at least linearly with T . Besides, Jin et al. (2021) propose Fixed-Confidence Best Arm
Identification (to satisfy a given error probability requirement using as few samples as possible) algorithms whose
sample complexity bounds grow linearly with K. In summary, existing streaming bandit algorithms are not good at
processing a large amount of arms.
One crucial reason for this scalability issue is that every
new arm in the stream must be carefully, or even equally,
evaluated, as the previous arms provide no information
about it. This phenomenon could lead to a waste of time
and resources on sub-optimal arms, as each encounter must
be handled anew, resulting in the unsatisfactory performance
of existing algorithms. In fact, it is both reasonable and practical to assume that some useful information is revealed as
soon as a new arm is encountered, which can be utilized
to efficiently judge whether the arm is sub-optimal. For instance, consider a real-world recruitment scenario (Jin et al.
2021), where a company plans to hire a highly qualified employee from among many sequentially arriving applicants
by interviewing them. Typically, applicants are required to
submit their curricula vitae, which can provide insight into
their true talents. It is also common practice for a company
to screen out unsuitable applicants based on their CVs.
Motivated by the above observation, we propose the Lin-

Recently, there has been a focus on the streaming setting in a
line of works on the Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB). In this scenario, a large number of arms arrive in a streaming manner,
and the algorithm scans through the stream and stores some
arms in its limited processing memory. We advance this line
of research by introducing the Linear Streaming Bandit setup,
where the arriving arms have profile vectors observable to the
algorithm. The profile of an arm has a linear correlation with
the expected reward. This setup is motivated by real-world
applications, such as when a company or a crowdsourcing
platform hires a worker from many sequentially arriving applicants with their resumes. We address two problems in this
setup: Regret Minimization and Fixed-Budget ϵ-Best Arm
Identification. For the former, we propose an algorithm whose
regret is independent of the number of arms, thus it is able to
handle arbitrarily long arm streams. For the latter, we present
a multi-pass algorithm whose error probability is sub-linear
w.r.t. the number of arms, and an algorithm identifying the
exact best arm in only a single pass. We validate the effectiveness of all proposed algorithms through experiments on
both synthetic and real-world datasets.

Introduction
The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) (Lattimore and Szepesvári
2020) is a simple but powerful model in online decisionmaking scenarios. Researchers have found a wide range
of industrial applications for MAB, from online advertising (Schwartz, Bradlow, and Fader 2017; Avadhanula et al.
2021; Yang and Lu 2016) to clinical trials (Villar, Bowden,
and Wason 2015; Aziz, Kaufmann, and Riviere 2021). In a
MAB instance, there is a set of arms K. The decision maker
(also called the algorithm) continuously selects arms from
the set, yielding a sequence of reward values that help the decision maker understand each arm’s profitability. There are
two problems that attract research interest in MAB: Regret
Minimization and Best Arm Identification. In the former, the
decision maker aims to generate as much cumulative reward
as possible within a time constraint, while in the latter, the
objective is to find the arm with the highest expected reward.
Recently, a rapidly developing line of work on MAB studies the streaming arm model (Maiti, Patil, and Khan 2020;
* Corresponding author: Zhixuan Fang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20354

