The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Federated Domain Generalization Through Dynamical Weights
Calculated from Data Influences on Global Model Update
Zikun Zhou1 , Wen Huang1 * , Xingyi Wang1 , Zhishuo Zhang2 ,
Zhun Zhang2 , Jian Peng1 , Feihu Huang3
2

1
Sichuan University
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Civil Aviation Flight university of China
zhouzikun@stu.scu.edu.cn {wen, jianpeng }@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
With the popularity of federated learning, federated domain
generalization (FedDG) has attracted more and more attentions. Existing works of federated learning indicate that the
generalization performance of the global model can be improved when the global model is obtained by aggregating
local models according to a suitable weights. However, the
existing methods to calculate weights do not fully utilize the
data influences on the global model update, which gives us an
opportunity to improve the generalization performance of the
global model further. In this paper, we propose the method
DI (data influences), which utilizes the data influences on the
global model update to calculate dynamical weights of local
model in each round of training. Specifically, the first component data influences calculator (DIC) of DI calculates the local weights of local model from the influences of each data on
the global model update and we introduce the influences function to complete the calculation process. The second component data influences adjuster (DIA) of DI calculates the
global weights (which are used in the aggregation process of
the global model) from local weights. Extensive experiments
indicate that our method improves the generalization performance of models significantly. In particular, our method improves model accuracy on benchmark datasets PACS, OfficeHome, and Office-31 by 1.79%, 1.61%, and 2.39% on average, respectively. Source code is publicly available at github.

Figure 1: Scenario of FedDG. FedDG aims at generalizing
models trained by source domains to unseen domains.

weights. Specifically, the global model is updated according to local models together with assigned weights. For example, FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) assigns weights to
local models trained in each source domain by the data volumes of the source domain. Based on the idea that the global
model with fair performance across all source domains has
better generalization performance, GA (generalization adjuster) (Zhang et al. 2023) dynamically updates the weights
of local models by the differences among models of different
source domains.
However, existing methods (McMahan et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2022; Seunghan et al. 2024; Shenaj
et al. 2023) of assigning weights to local models do not fully
utilize the influences of data in source domains on the generalization performance of the global model. For example,
FedAvg assigns weights to each local model only by the data
volumes of source domain.
Assigning weights to local models according to data influences on global model update has great potential to further
improve the generalization performance of global model. In
each round of training, the global model is an aggregation of
local models trained by the data in source domains, result-

Code — https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Fed-DI

Introduction
With the popularity of federated learning (Fan et al. 2022; Li
et al. 2020a), federated domain generalization (FedDG) has
attracted more and more attentions. As demonstrated in Figure 1, FedDG (Liu et al. 2021; Jiang, Wang, and Dou 2022;
Zhuang et al. 2022) aims at that: models trained by federated
learning not only perform well on source domains involved
in training, but also perform well on unseen domains not
involved in training. In brief, FedDG aims to improve generalization of models, which is a meaningful but challenging
task.
At present, the most effective method of improving
FedDG is to aggregate local models according to suitable
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23045

