The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DSGram: Dynamic Weighting Sub-Metrics for Grammatical Error Correction in
the Era of Large Language Models
Jinxiang Xie12 * , Yilin Li1 , Xunjian Yin1 , Xiaojun Wan1
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University,
2
Beijing Jiaotong University
xiejinxiang@bjtu.edu.cn, wanxiaojun@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Input sentence: Though it is said that genetic testing involves
emotional and social risks due to the test results, while the potential
negative impacts of the risk still exist, the consequence will be
significant if other members of his or her family do not know.

Evaluating the performance of Grammatical Error Correction (GEC) models has become increasingly challenging,
as large language model (LLM)-based GEC systems often
produce corrections that diverge from provided gold references. This discrepancy undermines the reliability of traditional reference-based evaluation metrics. In this study, we
propose a novel evaluation framework for GEC models, DSGram, integrating Semantic Coherence, Edit Level, and Fluency, and utilizing a dynamic weighting mechanism. Our
framework employs the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP)
in conjunction with large language models to ascertain the
relative importance of various evaluation criteria. Additionally, we develop a dataset incorporating human annotations
and LLM-simulated sentences to validate our algorithms and
fine-tune more cost-effective models. Experimental results indicate that our proposed approach enhances the effectiveness
of GEC model evaluations.

Reference: Though it is said that genetic testing involves emotional
and social risks due to the test results, while the potential negative
impacts of the risk still exist, the consequences will be significant if
other members of his or her family do not know.
BLEU: 1.00

SOME: 0.83

ChatGPT Output Sentence: Though it is said that genetic testing
involves emotional and social risks due to the test results, and the
potential negative impacts of the risk still exist, the consequences will
be significant if other members of his or her family do not know.
BLEU: 0.94

F0.5 Score: 0.555

SOME: 0.83

Grammarly Output Sentence: Though it is said that genetic testing
involves emotional and social risks due to the test results, while the
potential negative impacts of the risk still exist, the consequence
will be significant if other members of his or her family do not know.

Code — https://github.com/jxtse/GEC-Metrics-DSGram
Datasets — https://huggingface.co/datasets/jxtse/DSGram

1

F0.5 Score: 1

BLEU: 0.94

F0.5 Score: 0

SOME: 0.81

Figure 1: Running examples and evaluation results of several
existing metrics. The sentence is from Fang et al. (2023b).
This figure illustration presents the outcomes of an input
sentence processed through two representative GEC models
and also the corresponding reference. The metrics’ scores
are placed under the output. The highlighted in blue represents the over-correction. The highlighted in red indicates
poor fluency. Notably, BLEU fails to differentiate between
over- and under-correction, whereas SOME cannot capture
over-correction.

Introduction

Grammatical Error Correction (GEC) models aims to automatically correct grammatical errors in natural language
texts, enhancing the quality and accuracy of written content. Traditionally, the evaluation of GEC models has employed a variety of metrics, categorized into those requiring
a reference (reference-based evaluation) and those that do
not (reference-free evaluation).
Reference-based metrics such as BLEU (Papineni et al.
2002), ERRANT (Bryant et al. 2017), and M² (Dahlmeier
et al. 2012) compare the model-generated text with a correct reference text to evaluate the accuracy of grammatical
corrections, and they are widely used in this area. Despite
the usefulness of these metrics, they possess inherent limitations. For example, the golden reference may not encompass all potential corrections (Choshen et al. 2018), and the
alignment of existing automatic evaluation metrics with human judgment is often weak (Coyne et al. 2023). Additionally, LLMs-based GEC models may excessively correct sen-

tences, resulting in unnecessary editing not captured by traditional metrics (Fang et al. 2023b).
Conversely, reference-free metrics like Perplexity, GLEU
(Napoles et al. 2015), and SOME (Yoshimura et al. 2020) assess the quality of generated text directly, proving beneficial
when a correct reference text is unavailable, or when a single (or several) reference is insufficient for GEC evaluation
in the era of LLMs. While existing reference-free evaluation metrics like SOME offer an analytical foundation, they
no longer fully encompass the scope of GEC evaluation. It
is necessary to design new sub-metrics based on the original

* Work performed as a research intern at Peking University.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25561

