The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HiGDA: Hierarchical Graph of Nodes to Learn Local-to-Global Topology
for Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
Ba Hung Ngo1 * , Doanh C. Bui2 * , Nhat-Tuong Do-Tran3 , Tae Jong Choi1†
1

Graduate School of Data Science, Chonnam National University, South Korea
2
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University, South Korea
3
Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
ngohung@chonnam.ac.kr, doanhbc@korea.ac.kr, tuongdotn.cs11@nycu.edu.tw, ctj17@jnu.ac.kr
Abstract

Airplane

The enhanced representational power and broad applicability of deep learning models have attracted significant interest
from the research community in recent years. However, these
models often struggle to perform effectively under domain
shift conditions, where the training data (the source domain)
is related to but exhibits different distributions from the testing data (the target domain). To address this challenge, previous studies have attempted to reduce the domain gap between source and target data by incorporating a few labeled
target samples during training—a technique known as semisupervised domain adaptation (SSDA). While this strategy
has demonstrated notable improvements in classification performance, the network architectures used in these approaches
primarily focus on exploiting the features of individual images, leaving room for improvement in capturing rich representations. In this study, we introduce a Hierarchical Graph
of Nodes designed to simultaneously present representations
at both feature and category levels. At the feature level, we
introduce a local graph to identify the most relevant patches
within an image, facilitating adaptability to defined main object representations. At the category level, we employ a global
graph to aggregate the features from samples within the same
category, thereby enriching overall representations. Extensive
experiments on widely used SSDA benchmark datasets, including Office-Home, DomainNet, and VisDA2017, demonstrate that both quantitative and qualitative results substantiate the effectiveness of HiGDA, establishing it as a new stateof-the-art method.

Clock

Figure 1: Overview of the hierarchical graph of nodes. Input
images are considered global nodes, each comprising multiple sub-patches that are considered local nodes.

et al. 2016; Saito et al. 2018; Li et al. 2021b; Yan et al. 2022;
Yu and Lin 2023) have been proposed to bridge the domain
gap between source and target domains at both the feature
and category levels.
At the feature level, early DA approaches (Ganin et al.
2016; Saito et al. 2018) employed convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as the standard backbone to encode the semantic representations of input images. CNNs (Kayhan and
van Gemert 2020) use sliding convolutions with learnable
kernels to introduce shift-invariance. As a result, the CNN
architecture tends to preserve local spatial relationships, extracting discriminative features that cover only a specific region of pixels at a time. Consequently, the CNN backbone
is not flexible enough to capture complex objects, such as
images consisting of multiple similar contexts located at
different positions. In contrast, recent DA methods (Zhu,
Bai, and Wang 2023; Yang et al. 2023) leverage the crossattention mechanism in the vision transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) to better comprehend image features. The
ViT architecture treats an image as a sequence of patches
and explores their relationships, effectively capturing global
relations at the feature level. However, it struggles to recognize representations of the main object when the input images contain irrelevant objects or a dominant background,
as it assumes all patches in an image are correlated. To address this problem, (Ngo et al. 2024) introduces a hybrid approach that leverages the advantages of both ViT and CNN
models. These models complement each other’s information via a co-training strategy, alleviating their weaknesses

Introduction
Over the past decade, deep learning models have achieved
remarkable success in various vision-based tasks, largely
based on the assumption that the training and testing datasets
share identical distributions. However, in real-world applications, the training samples (source domain) are often collected from a domain that differs from the testing samples
(target domain). As a result, models trained on the source domain frequently underperform when applied to the target domain due to the domain shift problem (Long et al. 2017). To
address this issue, domain adaptation (DA) methods (Ganin
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6191

