The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Retrieving Versus Understanding Extractive Evidence in Few-Shot Learning
Karl Elbakian1 , Samuel Carton1
1

University of New Hampshire
karl.elbakian@unh.edu, samuel.carton@unh.edu

Abstract

that take advantage of their emergent capabilities. Free-text
explanations can provide clear, comprehensible, and interactive descriptions of why an LM made a certain prediction (Singh et al. 2024), while work in LM reasoning such
as Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al. 2022) and its descendants
force the model to break its reasoning into discrete steps
which can be individually inspected. What unites these approaches is that they are abstractive, synthesizing the raw
input into a concise and human-comprehensible form.
By contrast, extractive approaches to interpretability
such as rationale models (Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016)
or LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) have fallen
somewhat out of vogue because of their inexpressiveness
compared to abstractive approaches (Siegel et al. 2024; Hu
et al. 2023), as well as the parametric and/or computational
overhead they add to models which are already large, unwieldy, and in some cases accessible via API only. However,
some recent work has examined the ability of LMs to generatively mimic extractive explanations, or “self-rationalize”,
via prompting, finding them of comparable quality to traditional methods (Huang et al. 2023).
However, when we want to verify an LM’s prediction
over an input document, there are basic questions that are
more appropriately answered by extractive approaches than
abstractive ones. Namely: what evidence from the input
document is the model using as the basis for its decision,
and does that evidence support its predicted label? Fully
abstractive explanations don’t directly elucidate the relationship between the within-text evidence and label, and can in
fact obfuscate it. Figure 1 shows a simple example where
abstractive explanations of a moderation decision are inadequate for refuting it.
The problem of verification is related to the problem of
faithfulness (Jacovi and Goldberg 2020), the idea that a
model’s explanation should be coupled with, and thus display the true underlying logic of, its prediction. Promptbased explanations, abstractive or extractive, are intrinsically unfaithful by this definition, as they are just a proximal
generation by the model alongside the label (Lyu et al. 2023;
Turpin et al. 2023). For the purpose of verification, however,
we are less interested in answering “what does the explanation tell us about the model’s prediction?” than “what does
the correctness of the model’s explanation tell us about the
correctness of its prediction?” Analogous to the concept of

A key aspect of alignment is the proper use of withindocument evidence to construct document-level decisions.
We analyze the relationship between the retrieval and interpretation of within-document evidence for large language
models in a few-shot setting. Specifically, we measure the extent to which model prediction errors are associated with evidence retrieval errors with respect to gold-standard humanannotated extractive evidence for five datasets, using two
popular closed proprietary models. We perform two ablation
studies to investigate when both label prediction and evidence
retrieval errors can be attributed to qualities of the relevant
evidence. We find that there is a strong empirical relationship between model prediction and evidence retrieval error,
but that evidence retrieval error is mostly not associated with
evidence interpretation error–a hopeful sign for downstream
applications built on this mechanism.

Code — https://github.com/kelbakian/llm-rationale-fidelity

1

Introduction

AI alignment refers to the goal of ensuring that model output is aligned with human intents and values (Shen et al.
2023; Anwar et al. 2024; Shen et al. 2024). One key element of alignment is verification, the ability to confirm
that a model’s predictions have indeed accorded with those
intents and values. When we use models to automate or
assist human-affecting tasks such as moderation (Kumar,
AbuHashem, and Durumeric 2024), resume screening (Gan,
Zhang, and Mori 2024), grading (Pinto et al. 2023), or medical decision-making (Thirunavukarasu et al. 2023), we want
a human auditor to be able to review their decisions for mistakes or pathologies of behavior such as bias or the use of
spurious evidence. Verification has traditionally been one
of the major goals of model interpretability (Fok and Weld
2023). Implicitly, the assumption underlying this function is
that it is easier for a human auditor to catch model mistakes
at the explanation level and propagate them upward to an
appropriate skepticism about the model’s overall prediction,
than to inspect that prediction alone.
With the rise of large language models (LMs), the discourse on AI interpretability has turned towards methods
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27268

