The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Privacy-and-Utility-Aware Publishing of Schedules
Maike Basmer1 , Stephan A. Fahrenkrog-Petersen1,2 , Ali Kaan Tutak1 , Arik Senderovich3 ,
Matthias Weidlich1
1

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Unter den Linden 6, 10117 Berlin, Germany
2
Weizenbaum Institute, Hardenbergstraße 32, 10623 Berlin, Germany
3
York University, 4700 Keele St, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada
{basmermo,fahrenks,tutakali,matthias.weidlich}@hu-berlin.de
sariks@yorku.ca
Clinic

Abstract
attend

Scheduling is adopted in various domains to assign jobs to resources, such that an objective is optimized. While schedules
enable the analysis of the underlying system, publishing them
also incurs a privacy risk. Recently, privacy attacks on schedules have been proposed, which may reveal sensitive information on the jobs by solving an inverse scheduling problem.
In this work, we study the protection against such attacks. We
formulate the problem of privacy-and-utility preservation of
schedules, which bounds both, the privacy leakage and the
loss in the utility of the schedule due to obfuscation. We address the problem based on a set of perturbation functions for
schedules, study their instantiations for standard scheduling
problems, and implement privacy-and-utility-aware publishing of a schedule using constraint programming. Experiments
with synthetic and real-world schedules demonstrate the feasibility, robustness, and effectiveness of our mechanism.

1

Patients

create optimal
schedule

use
Infusion schedule Schedule

share
analysis results
Consulting Firm
publish
schedule
(possibly Schedule
perturbed)

Analysis

Figure 1: Healthcare example for schedule publishing.
treatments. To optimize the operational processes, the clinic
shares schedules with an external consulting firm, which analyzes the impact of operational decisions on performance
indicators (e.g., wait time, resource utilization). Although
the priorities that encode sensitive information on patients
are not published with the schedule, they may potentially be
reconstructed through an inverse scheduling attack.
We set out to address this challenge by an approach for
the release of schedules that preserves the undisclosed characteristics of jobs, while maintaining the utility of the schedule in terms of the properties that are deemed relevant for
some analysis. Based on a formal characterization of the
problem, we propose perturbation functions for schedules,
explore their instantiation, and operationalize our approach
to publishing of schedules using constraint programming.
Specifically, we make the following contributions:
• We define the problem of Privacy-and-Utility Preservation (PUP) when releasing schedules. Given a schedule,
this problem points to the existence of a transformed
schedule that satisfies a privacy loss threshold, in addition to a utility loss threshold.
• We instantiate the PUP with a set of perturbation functions for schedules; and study them for two wellestablished scheduling problems for parallel machines:
the minimization of (i) the total weighted completion
times and (ii) the makespan for jobs with release dates.
• To solve the instantiated PUP, we provide a formulation
using constraint programming. It exploits the neighborhood of a schedule as induced by the perturbations.
We experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of our perturbation functions: We solve the PUP for 58-80% of synthetic
schedules, and 20-83% of real-world schedules from a medical clinic. We also highlight the effectiveness of the PUP:
Important analytical properties of schedules are preserved,
even when they are not incorporated in the utility function.

Introduction

By assigning resources to tasks while incorporating a certain
objective, schedules enable the efficient utilization of scarce
resources (Pinedo 2016). Consequently, they are employed
in a variety of domains, such as healthcare, production, or
service industries. Reflecting the underlying processes and
decisions, they lend themselves to analysis and data mining (Harding et al. 2005; Li and Olafsson 2005), which possibly entails sharing them with third parties.
Publishing schedules, however, holds the risk of exposing
sensitive information. In particular, an adversary may link
knowledge of the environment constraining the scheduling
outcome with the published schedule to infer private properties of the jobs (Fahrenkrog-Petersen et al. 2023). Due to
legal regulations, economic implications, and ethical considerations, it is essential to counteract the threat of privacy
leakage from schedules. At the same time, the publishing of
schedules shall still be facilitated, for operational management and the improvement of the underlying system.
As a real-world example from healthcare, taken up again
in our evaluation, consider the scheduling of infusions in
a clinic, see Fig. 1. The schedules are guided by priorities
that emerge from factors such as the patients’ medical conditions, and optimize the total weighted completion time of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26446

