The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UrBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Evaluating Large Multimodal Models
in Multi-View Urban Scenarios
Baichuan Zhou1* , Haote Yang1* , Dairong Chen4,2* , Junyan Ye2,1 * ,
Tianyi Bai1 , Jinhua Yu2 , Songyang Zhang1 , Dahua Lin1,3 ,
Conghui He1,3† , Weijia Li2†
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory
Sun Yat-Sen University
3
Sensetime Research
4
Wuhan University
{chendr7, yejy53, yujh56}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liweij29@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
{zhoubaichuan, yanghaote, baitianyi, zhangsongyang, lindahua, heconghui}@pjlab.org.cn
2

Abstract
Recent evaluations of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs)
have explored their capabilities in various domains, with only
few benchmarks specifically focusing on urban environments.
Moreover, existing urban benchmarks have been limited to
evaluating LMMs with basic region-level urban tasks under
singular views, leading to incomplete evaluations of LMMs’
abilities in urban environments. To address these issues, we
present UrBench, a comprehensive benchmark designed for
evaluating LMMs in complex multi-view urban scenarios.
UrBench contains 11.6K meticulously curated questions at
both region-level and role-level that cover 4 task dimensions:
Geo-Localization, Scene Reasoning, Scene Understanding,
and Object Understanding, totaling 14 task types. In constructing UrBench, we utilize data from existing datasets and
additionally collect data from 11 cities, creating new annotations using a cross-view detection-matching method. With
these images and annotations, we then integrate LMM-based,
rule-based, and human-based methods to construct largescale high-quality questions. Our evaluations on 21 LMMs
show that current LMMs struggle in the urban environments
in several aspects. Even the best performing GPT-4o lags behind humans in most tasks, ranging from simple tasks such
as counting to complex tasks such as orientation, localization
and object attribute recognition, with an average performance
gap of 17.4%. Our benchmark also reveals that LMMs exhibit
inconsistent behaviors with different urban views, especially
with respect to understanding cross-view relations.

Figure 1: Comparison between UrBench and previous
works. (1) UrBench contains both region-level and role-level
questions, while previous benchmarks generally focus on
region-level questions. (2) In addition to single-view questions in satellite or street view, UrBench also incorporates
cross-view questions. (3) It evaluates LMMs on a comprehensive range of 14 diverse tasks in 4 evaluation dimensions.

Project — https://opendatalab.github.io/UrBench/
Appendix — https://github.com/opendatalab/UrBench/
blob/master/static/appendix.pdf

benchmarks (Yue et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2023b). The central
purpose behind these explorations is to build human-centric
AI models that can serve as helpful assistants for everyday
life. Given that over 57% of the global population resides in
urban areas (World Bank 2024), it is crucial that these AI
models should be capable of performing a variety of urban
tasks, such as assisting government officials to manage urban development and facilitating citizens to make decisions
in daily life (Zhou et al. 2024b; Feng et al. 2024a). On the
other hand, urban areas are often captured from various perspectives, including the vertical view from satellite or aerial

Introduction
Recently, the research community has witnessed an emergent interest in developing Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs) (Achiam et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024b; Chen et al.
2024) that have exhibited impressive abilities in a variety of
* These authors contributed equally.
†

W. Li and C. He are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10707

