The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Interpretable Face Anti-Spoofing: Enhancing Generalization
with Multimodal Large Language Models
Guosheng Zhang* 1 , Keyao Wang* 1 , Haixiao Yue* 1 , Ajian Liu†2 , Gang Zhang1 ,
Kun Yao1 , Errui Ding1 , Jingdong Wang1
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc
CBSR&MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
{zhangguosheng, wangkeyao, yuehaixiao, zhanggang03, yaokun, dingerrui}@baidu.com, ajian.liu@ia.ac.cn,
wangjingdong@outlook.com
2

AUC(%)

Abstract
Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS) is essential for ensuring the security and reliability of facial recognition systems. Most
existing FAS methods are formulated as binary classification tasks, providing confidence scores without interpretation.
They exhibit limited generalization in out-of-domain scenarios, such as new environments or unseen spoofing types. In
this work, we introduce a multimodal large language model
(MLLM) framework for FAS, termed Interpretable Face
Anti-Spoofing (I-FAS), which transforms the FAS task into
an interpretable visual question answering (VQA) paradigm.
Specifically, we propose a Spoof-aware Captioning and Filtering (SCF) strategy to generate high-quality captions for
FAS images, enriching the model’s supervision with natural language interpretations. To mitigate the impact of noisy
captions during training, we develop a Lopsided Language
Model (L-LM) loss function that separates loss calculations
for judgment and interpretation, prioritizing the optimization
of the former. Furthermore, to enhance the model’s perception of global visual features, we design a Globally Aware
Connector (GAC) to align multi-level visual representations
with the language model. Extensive experiments on standard
and newly devised One to Eleven cross-domain benchmarks,
comprising 12 public datasets, demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Comparison of performance under a challenging
One to Eleven benchmark, where training is restricted to a
single source domain (CelebA-Spoof) while testing across
11 target domains. The graph illustrates the notable superiority of our method (red point) compared to existing methods under the condition of a limited source domain.

Introduction
Facial recognition technology has become increasingly sophisticated and is widely utilized for its inherent convenience and contactless operation. These systems are effectively employed in various applications, particularly in online payment and identity verification. However, they remain vulnerable to environmental fluctuations and diversified spoofing types, such as printed images, video replays (Boulkenafet et al. 2017), and even high-fidelity 3D
masks (Liu et al. 2022a). Consequently, face anti-spoofing
is developed to enhance the security and effectiveness of facial recognition systems in a variety of applications. Previ-

ous FAS methods (Liu, Jourabloo, and Liu 2018; Yu et al.
2020b) have demonstrated significant achievements, particularly in intra-domain scenarios, but they generally exhibit
poor generalization when applied to cross-domain contexts,
encountering novel environments, or spoof instruments.
One prevalent approach to improving cross-domain generalization is Domain Adaptation (DA) (Wang et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2022c; Zhou et al. 2022; Yue et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2024d), which aims to reduce the discrepancy between the
source and target domains. However, these methods often
require access to target domain data during training, which
is not always feasible. Another alternative approach is Domain Generalization (DG) (Cai et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023;

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9896

