The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoMT: A Novel Benchmark for Chain of Multi-modal Thought on Large
Vision-Language Models
Zihui Cheng1,2 * , Qiguang Chen3 * , Jin Zhang3 , Hao Fei4 ,
Xiaocheng Feng3 , Wanxiang Che3 , Min Li1 , Libo Qin1,2† ,
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, China
Key Laboratory of Data Intelligence and Advanced Computing in Provincial Universities, Soochow University, China
3
Research Center for SCIR, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
4
National University of Singapore, Singapore
czh up@csu.edu.cn, qgchen@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have recently
demonstrated amazing success in multi-modal tasks, including advancements in Multi-modal Chain-of-Thought (MCoT)
reasoning. Despite these successes, current benchmarks still
follow a traditional paradigm with multi-modal input and
text-modal output, which leads to significant drawbacks such
as missing visual operations and vague expressions. Motivated by this, we introduce a novel Chain of Multi-modal
Thought (CoMT) benchmark to address these limitations. Different from the traditional MCoT benchmark, CoMT requires
both multi-modal input and multi-modal reasoning output,
aiming to mimic human-like reasoning that inherently integrates visual operations. Specifically, CoMT consists of four
categories: (1) Visual Creation, (2) Visual Deletion, (3) Visual
Update, and (4) Visual Selection to comprehensively explore
complex visual operations and concise expression in real scenarios. We evaluate various LVLMs and strategies on CoMT,
revealing some key insights into the capabilities and limitations of the current approaches. We hope that CoMT can inspire more breakthroughs on introducing multi-modal generation into the reasoning process.

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) traditional multi-modal
CoT and (b) chain of multi-modal thought, where images in
rationales are needed to be generated from LVLMs to assist
textual reasoning in rationale.

Code — https://github.com/czhhzc/CoMT
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12932

1

Introduction

Recently, large vision-language models (LVLMs) have
achieved remarkable success across various multi-modal
tasks (Liu et al. 2024b; Zhu et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2024b;
Zhang et al. 2024b; Fei et al. 2024b). In addition, LVLMs
have also emerged with amazing capabilities, especially
the capability of chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning, which
can perform step-by-step reasoning (Lu et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2024b; Xu et al. 2024; Fei et al. 2023). Specifically,
Zhang et al. (2023) first formally introduce the concept of
Multimodal-CoT (MCoT) and extend it into a rationalizinganswering stages paradigm. Wang et al. (2024a) propose TSciQ to distill the advanced large language models (LLMs)

to smaller models for better MCoT reasoning. Building on
this foundation, Zheng et al. (2024) propose DDCoT, utilizing advanced LLMs to split questions into a series of subquestions and then answer them by LVLMs. Mondal et al.
(2024) further inject the knowledge graph information into
the MCoT reasoning process, reducing the hallucinations of
LLMs. He et al. (2024) devise a novel latent space learning
approach to acquire image features through diffusion processes, achieving more complex CoT reasoning capabilities.
While remarkable success has been witnessed in MCoT,
current MCoT benchmarks still follow a traditional
paradigm that reads multi-modal input but can only produce
single-modal reasoning output. Such a paradigm lacks integrated multi-modal reasoning output, leading to the following issues:

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23678

