The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HUANG: A Robust Diffusion Model-based Targeted Adversarial Attack
Against Deep Hashing Retrieval
Chihan Huang , Xiaobo Shen*
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
huangchihan@njust.edu.cn, njust.shenxiaobo@gmail.com

Abstract

Yosinski, and Clune 2015). Attackers can introduce small,
imperceptible perturbations to images, causing DNNs to
make incorrect classifications or predictions. Unfortunately,
deep hashing inherits this vulnerability from DNNs, resulting in the retrieval system returning irrelevant or specific
other images. Most existing research on adversarial attack
focuses on classification, with limited work addressing retrieval tasks. Retrieval models map query images to hash
codes rather than categories (Wang et al. 2015), presenting
a different attack surface for image retrieval. Consequently,
the target labels cannot be directly used as learning objectives for adversarial samples, making adversarial attacks on
retrieval more challenging.
Research on adversarial attacks can be divided into two
categories: untargeted attacks and targeted attacks. In untargeted attacks, the generated adversarial samples cause the
model’s retrieval results to be semantically unrelated to the
query image. Targeted attacks, on the other hand, aim to
make the retrieval results correspond to a specified category,
making them more challenging and destructive. Currently,
major untargeted attack methods include HAG (Yang et al.
2020) and AACH (Li et al. 2021). Targeted attack methods
include ProsGAN (Zhang et al. 2022), AdvHash (Hu et al.
2021), and TTA-GAN (Zhu et al. 2024b).
Nevertheless, in black-box scenarios, where targeted
model details are inaccessible, existing adversarial attack
methods for deep hashing generally suffer from poor robustness. Additionally, the generated images often have inferior
visual quality and require longer inference time. The main
contribution of the paper can be summarized as follows:

Deep hashing models have achieved great success in retrieval
tasks due to their powerful representation and strong information compression capabilities. However, they inherit the
vulnerability of deep neural networks to adversarial perturbations. Attackers can severely impact the retrieval capability
of hashing models by adding subtle, carefully crafted adversarial perturbations to benign images, transforming them into
adversarial images. Most existing adversarial attacks target
image classification models, with few focusing on retrieval
models. We propose HUANG, the first targeted adversarial
attack algorithm to leverage a diffusion model for hashing
retrieval in black-box scenarios. In our approach, adversarial denoising uses adversarial perturbations and residual image to guide the shift from benign to adversarial distribution. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
HUANG across different datasets, achieving state-of-the-art
performance in black-box targeted attacks. Additionally, the
dynamic interplay between denoising and adding adversarial
perturbations in adversarial denoising endows HUANG with
exceptional robustness and transferability.

Introduction
With the exponential growth of information on the internet in recent years, the need for fast and accurate information retrieval has become increasingly important. In the
Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) algorithms widely
used in search engines, hashing techniques convert highdimensional media data into compact binary codes, enabling
rapid computation of Hamming distances between hash
codes to search for similar images (Andoni and Indyk 2006).
Due to the powerful learning capabilities of Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), deep hashing that leverages DNNs for
automatic feature extraction has made significant progress
(Mnih et al. 2015). This approach substantially reduces retrieval time through efficient similarity computation of hash
codes while achieving excellent retrieval accuracy, generally
outperforming traditional hashing methods.
Although deep hashing methods have achieved remarkable retrieval performance (Cao et al. 2018), research has
shown that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, posing significant security risks to existing models (Nguyen,

• We propose Hashing RobUst Attack with DiffusioN
model for TarGeted scenarios (HUANG), an adversarial
attack algorithm for black-box hashing retrieval. To the
best of our knowledge, it is the first time to use diffusion
model for adversarial attacks on deep hashing.
• We propose adversarial denoising within the diffusion
model. By incorporating the residual image, we enhance
the robustness and transferability of the final generated
adversarial image through the dynamic interplay between
adding adversarial perturbations and denoising.
• Comprehensive experiments reveal that HUANG greatly
outperforms prior models, setting a new benchmark for
targeted black-box attacks. Evaluation against adversar-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3626

