The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Vision-Language Models with Morphological and Taxonomic
Knowledge: Towards Coral Recognition for Ocean Health
Hongyong Han1 , Wei Wang1 * , Gaowei Zhang1 , Mingjie Li2, 3 , Yi Wang1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Technology Innovation Center for South China Sea Remote Sensing, Surveying and Mapping Collaborative Application,
Ministry of Natural Resources
3
South China Sea Development Research Institute, Ministry of Natural Resources
{hanhongyong, weiwang, zhanggaowei, yiwang}@bupt.edu.cn, lmj 21@163.com

Abstract

ingly applied in underwater coral monitoring (Williams et al.
2019; Teague et al. 2022). While state-of-the-art methods
have shown commendable accuracy, they are usually designed to predict a specific, predetermined set of coral taxa.
Therefore, generalization remains one of the most significant barriers to applying AI in coral reef protection. Complex marine environments, characterized by factors such
as temperature, light, and salinity, vary significantly across
different locations and consequently support diverse coral
species. The substantial morphological differences among
these coral species primarily rely on expert knowledge and
make existing classification methods difficult to generalize
to new, unseen coral species in unexplored oceans.

Coral reefs play a crucial role in marine ecosystems, offering a nutrient-rich environment and safe shelter for numerous marine species. Automated coral image recognition aids
in monitoring ocean health at a scale without experts’ manual effort. Recently, large vision-language models like CLIP
have greatly enhanced zero-shot and low-shot classification
capabilities for various visual tasks. However, these models
struggle with fine-grained coral-related tasks due to a lack of
specific knowledge. To bridge this gap, we compile a finegrained coral image dataset consisting of 16,659 images with
taxonomy labels (from Kingdom to Species), accompanied by
morphology-specific text descriptions for each species. Based
on the dataset, we propose CORAL-Adapter, integrating two
complementary kinds of coral-specific knowledge (biological taxonomy and coral morphology) with general knowledge
learned by CLIP. CORAL-Adapter is a simple yet powerful
extension of CLIP with only a few parameter updates and can
be used as a plug-and-play module with various CLIP-based
methods. We show improvements in accuracy across diverse
coral recognition tasks, e.g., recognizing corals unseen during
training those are prone to bleaching or from different oceans.

Caltech101 Dataset

Count

3200
2800
2400
2000
1600
1200
800
400
0.1

0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

Prediction Confidence

Introduction

1200
1050
900
750
600
450
300
150
0.1

HSCR16K Dataset

Count

2

0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

Prediction Confidence

Figure 1: Histograms of confidence scores from zero-shot
predictions of CLIP on datasets Caltech101 and HSCR16K.
While CLIP is confident for online images in Caltech101
(left), its performances are far from satisfying for classifying
coral images (right).

Coral reefs are among the most biodiverse ecosystems on
the earth, providing habitats for over a quarter of marine
species, including fish, mollusks, and crustaceans. Unfortunately, coral reefs face significant threats from human activities as well as natural challenges like global warming and
ocean acidification. According to studies (ICRAN Online;
accessed 25-May-2014; Elawady 2015), more than 70% of
coral reefs globally are unhealthy. If current trends continue,
all coral reefs worldwide could be bleached by the end of
the century. To offer early warnings, assess harmful factors,
and ensure the resilience of coral reef ecosystems, continuous monitoring of their benthic communities is essential.
During this monitoring process, accurate coral recognition
is crucial, as scientists use annotated coral data for statistical analyses of coral habitat coverage, spatial relationships,
and health status (Beijbom et al. 2012).
With advancements in deep learning, computer vision,
and AUV, automated coral recognition has been increas-

Recently, vision-language models (VLMs) pre-trained on
hundreds of millions of paired image-text data, such as
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021),
have demonstrated extraordinary generalization capabilities
on aligning image and text modalities in new domains. They
enable zero-shot or few-shot learning for a wide range of
image classification tasks (Pourpanah et al. 2022). However,
while performing superb in general purpose online images
(see the distribution of the confidence scores in Fig. 1.left),
they are not directly applicable for classifying coral images
due to unique coral features (see Fig. 1.right). Due to two
major challenges, the first is the Lack of a coral-specific
recognition dataset. Current coral-related datasets neither
follow biological taxonomy (from Kingdom and Phylum to
Genus and Species) nor contain rich stony coral species
which are more vital for ocean health for serving as habitats,

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28052

