The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Uncommon Belief in Rationality
Qi Shi, Pavel Naumov
University of Southampton, UK
qi.shi@soton.ac.uk; p.naumov@soton.ac.uk

Abstract

a

Common knowledge/belief in rationality is the traditional
standard assumption in analysing interaction among agents.
This paper proposes a graph-based language for capturing
significantly more complicated structures of higher-order beliefs that agents might have about the rationality of the other
agents. The two main contributions are a solution concept
that captures the reasoning process based on a given belief
structure and an efficient algorithm for compressing any belief structure into a unique minimal form.

a

a

b

c

b

c

(i) RCBR

(ii)

(iii)

a

a

b

b
c

(iv)

Figure 1: Different RBR graphs among agents a, b, c.
rationality of an agent and each path1 of at least two nodes
corresponds to a sequence in the belief hierarchy of RCBR.
Specifically, in Figure 1(i), the node labelled with a corresponds to the rationality of agent a; the path labelled with
(b, c, b, a) corresponds to the belief sequence “agent b believes that agent c believes that agent b believes that agent
a is rational”. We denote this belief sequence by the tuple
(b, c, b, a) henceforth. Notice that no self-loop exists due to
the assumption that agents do not have introspective beliefs
about their own rationality (Dekel and Siniscalchi 2015).
Yet, the RCBR assumption is too strong, especially in a
system consisting of different types of agents. For example,
when two adults a and b interact with a child c, who is too
young to possess rationality (i.e. the ability to do mathematical optimisation), the RCBR assumption is satisfied only between a and b. Then, the belief hierarchy can be captured by
Figure 1(ii). Notice that, the irrational agent c is not included
in the graph because of the assumption that irrational agents
act arbitrarily and do not possess beliefs about the other
agents’ rationality.2 This assumption also implies that a belief hierarchy about rationality should be “prefix-closed”. In
other words, if agent a believes that agent b believes that
agent c is rational, then agent a must believe that agent b is
rational, the latter of which further implies that agent a must
be rational. This property makes it possible to illustrate a
belief hierarchy with a digraph.
Now we consider the situation that the child c, although
young, is a genius. The adults a and b neglect the talent of c.
But c not only is rational and believes in the RCBR between

Full version — https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.09407

1

b

Introduction

In the orthodox studies of game theory and game-modelled
multiagent systems, the rationality of agents is usually assumed to be common knowledge (Aumann 1976). Albeit
called “knowledge”, it does not have to be the case. This
is because, as defined in epistemology, knowledge is something that must be true and justifiable (Steup and Neta 2024).
However, from the perspective of each single agent, it is hard
to verify that the other agents are indeed rational. As discussed by Lewis (1969), what really matters in the reasoning
process is the agents’ rationality and belief about the other
agents’ rationality, the latter of which, unlike knowledge,
is not necessarily true or justifiable. Indeed, in the discussion of epistemic game theory (Dekel and Siniscalchi 2015),
the assumption of rationality and common belief in rationality (RCBR) serves as the foundation of the major solution concepts such as Nash equilibrium (Nash 1950), correlated equilibrium (Aumann 1987; Brandenburger and Dekel
1987), and rationalisability (Pearce 1984; Bernheim 1984).
As Lewis (1969) and Schiffer (1972) interpret, RCBR
consists of the rationality of all agents and a belief hierarchy that contains all finite sequences in the form that “a1
believes that a2 believes . . . that ai→1 believes that ai is
rational”, where a1 , a2 , . . . , ai→1 , ai are (possibly duplicated) agents. Observe that RCBR can be expressed with
a complete digraph. For instance, Figure 1(i) illustrates the
RCBR among agents a, b, c, where each node represents the

1

A path refers to a nonempty sequence of connected and possibly duplicated nodes. Hence, a single node forms a singleton path.
2
Irrational agents’ beliefs about others’ rationality, even if exist,
do not influence strategic behaviours since irrational agents always
act arbitrarily. Thus, such beliefs can be disregarded safely when
studying the strategic behaviours in a multiagent system.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
14120

