The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SpikeGS: Reconstruct 3D Scene Captured by a Fast-Moving Bio-Inspired Camera
Yijia Guo1 * , Liwen Hu1 * , Yuanxi Bai2 , Jiawei Yao3 , Lei Ma1,2† , Tiejun Huang1
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University
3
University of Washington
{2301112015, 230121059}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {liwenhu, leima, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, jwyao@uw.edu

Abstract

or more. In the near future, the speed of camera capture,
rather than training speed, may become the limiting factor
in 3D reconstruction. Presently, the demand for sharp images also limits the application of 3DGS in scenarios when
cameras are mounted on high-speed vehicles, e.g., trains
and UAVs. Although many deblurring methods (Chen and

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has been proven to exhibit exceptional performance in reconstructing 3D scenes. However,
the effectiveness of 3DGS heavily relies on sharp images, and
fulfilling this requirement presents challenges in real-world
scenarios particularly when utilizing fast-moving cameras.
This limitation severely constrains the practical application of
3DGS and may compromise the feasibility of real-time reconstruction. To mitigate these challenges, we proposed Spike
Gaussian Splatting (SpikeGS), the first framework that integrates the Bayer-pattern spike streams into the 3DGS pipeline
to reconstruct 3D scenes captured by a fast-moving high temporal resolution color spike camera in one second. With accumulation rasterization, interval supervision, and a special
designed pipeline, SpikeGS realizes continuous spatiotemporal perception while extracts detailed structure and texture from Bayer-pattern spike stream which is unstable and
lacks details. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of SpikeGS
compared with existing spike-based and deblurring 3D scene
reconstruction methods.

RGB
camera
Input

3DGS Result

GT

Spike SpikeGS Result
camera PSNR: 28.46
Input

GT

GT

Spike SpikeGS Result
camera
PSNR: 32.70
Input

GT

PSNR: 19.80

RGB
3DGS Result
camera
PSNR: 24.77
Input

Figure 1: Brief introduction of SpikeGS. Given high temporal resolution but texture lacking spike stream captured by
a fast-moving spike camera in one second, our method can
reconstruct a sharp radiance field in minutes and achieves
clear real-time rendering results.

Code — https://spikegs.github.io.

Introduction
Speed remains a critical challenge in the area of 3D reconstruction. The achievement of Neural Radiance Field
(Mildenhall et al. 2021) has been notably successful. However, the training and rendering processes associated with
the neural implicit representation entail a substantial time
commitment, resulting in a significant bottleneck. 3DGS
(Kerbl et al. 2023) has effectively addressed this challenge,
remarkably improving reconstruction speeds to minutes and
achieving real-time rendering, while InstantSplat (Fan et al.
2024) has further reduced reconstruction time to seconds.
However, ultra-fast reconstruction speeds do not inherently
guarantee a real-time reconstruction pipeline. Both 3DGS
and the majority of methods relying on 3DGS, such as InstantSplat, require sharp image inputs, resulting in the necessity for slow camera movements to prevent motion blur.
Capturing even the most basic scenes often needs minutes

Liu 2024; Zhao, Wang, and Liu 2024) attempt to address
these challenges and free the constraint on camera motion,
the limitations of traditional RGB camera sensors greatly
hinder their ability to mitigate motion blur effectively. Bioinspired cameras, characterized by their high temporal resolution, are considered promising solutions to address these
issues at their core. Bio-inspired cameras such as event and
spike (Huang et al. 2023) cameras have been widely applied in 3D reconstruction (Rudnev et al. 2023; Xiong et al.
2024; Zhu et al. 2024) of high-speed scenes with significant success. However, event-based camera approaches may
lack adequate visual texture and frequently rely on supplementary traditional cameras for reconstruction (Qi et al.
2023), thereby constraining their applicability. Spike cameras, which capture rich visual textures, are more suitable
for independent 3D reconstruction. However, prior solutions
(Guo et al. 2024b; Zhu et al. 2024) have encountered difficulties in training and rendering efficiency, which posing
an insurmountable challenge for real-time rendering and

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3293

