The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimizing Label Assignment for Weakly Supervised Person Search
Haiyang Zhu, Xi Yang* , Nannan Wang
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an
710071, China
zhuhaiyang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yangx@xidian.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Instance feature

Weakly supervised person search aims to detect and match
individuals jointly using only bounding box annotations. The
existing methods primarily employ clustering to generate
pseudo labels and then proceed to training, alternating between these two stages. In the clustering stage, label assignment tasks are handled at the instance level, while in the training stage, they are managed at the proposal level. In the clustering phase, the conventional use of the DBSCAN algorithm
for clustering pedestrian instance features often neglects key
contextual information such as scene context and relative positioning of individuals. During the training phase, the Region Proposal Network assigns labels based on the MaxIoU,
which tends to produce locally ambiguous labels. Finally, the
proposals updated to the memory bank with extensive background information tend to interfere with the task of pseudolabel generation. To address these issues, this paper proposes
an Optimizing Label Assignment (OLA) for weakly supervised person search. Firstly, in the clustering phase, Context
Aware Clustering is introduced to integrate contextual information and constraints, enhancing the accuracy of clustering.
Secondly, in the training phase, we adopt Prototype Matching based on the Optimal Transport theory to optimize label
distribution from a global perspective. Furthermore, we propose Dual Memory Bank Enhancement that effectively enhances the accuracy of label assignment. Extensive experiments conducted on the CUHK-SYSU and PRW datasets
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in weakly supervised person search.

Proposal feature
Cosine distance
DBSCAN

Instance Image (Clustering)

Cosine distance
Scene
Context

Outlier
Points

Label assignment for Instance
Cosine distance

MaxIoU
Proposal Image (Training)

Update
Feature

Ambiguous
Points

Label assignment for Proposal

Figure 1: Label assignment in weakly supervised person
search.

(He et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021) has significantly advanced
the capabilities of person search systems. To achieve high
performance, existing methods (Zheng et al. 2017; Chen
et al. 2018; Xiao et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2020b; Lee et al.
2022; Yan et al. 2021) are commonly trained in a fully supervised setting where the bounding boxes and identity labels are required. However, annotating bounding boxes and
identity labels on a large-scale dataset is exceptionally timeconsuming and labor-intensive. Given the relative ease of
annotating bounding boxes over personal identities, coupled with scale person search solutions without extensive
resource investment, this paper explores weakly supervised
person search that relies solely on bounding box annotations.
In weakly supervised person search, several contrastive
learning based one-step methods (Yan et al. 2022; Han et al.
2021a; Wang et al. 2023, 2024) have been proposed. These
methods all employ two distinct contrastive learning strategies: memory-based contrast, which leverages a cluster-level
ReID memory bank for feature learning across the dataset,
and intra-image contrast, which leverages contrast information within individual images for feature learning by extracting two ground truth ReID features in separate branches and
enforcing their consistency both with and without contextual
information. However, the above methods only focus on representation learning and ignore the issue of label inaccuracy.
This challenge significantly impacts the stability of the ob-

Introduction
Person search has been a challenging computer vision
task, which aims to localize (detection) and re-identification
(ReID) a target person from a gallery set of uncropped
scene images. Successfully addressing this task has profound implications across various domains, enhancing intelligent surveillance with real-time tracking capabilities, refining behavior analysis with more accurate individual identification, and bolstering public security systems through improved crowd monitoring and management.
Recent progress in the fields of person detection (Chen
et al. 2019a; Zhu et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021) and ReID
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10941

