The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ARNet: Self-Supervised FG-SBIR with Unified Sample Feature Alignment and
Multi-Scale Token Recycling
Jianan Jiang1,4 , Hao Tang2∗ , Zhilin Jiang1 , Weiren Yu3 , Di Wu1,4∗
1

Hunan University
Peking University
3
University of Warwick
4
ExponentiAI Innovation
{jiangjn22, zhilin, dwu}@hnu.edu.cn, haotang@pku.edu.cn, weiren.yu@warwick.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Fine-Grained Sketch-Based Image Retrieval (FG-SBIR) aims
to minimize the distance between sketches and corresponding images in the embedding space. However, scalability is
hindered by the growing complexity of solutions, mainly due
to the abstract nature of fine-grained sketches. In this paper,
we propose an effective approach to narrow the gap between
the two domains. It mainly facilitates unified mutual information sharing both intra- and inter-samples, rather than treating
them as a single feature alignment problem between modalities. Specifically, our approach includes: (i) Employing dual
weight-sharing networks to optimize alignment within the
sketch and image domain, which also effectively mitigates
model learning saturation issues. (ii) Introducing an objective optimization function based on contrastive loss to enhance the model’s ability to align features in both intra- and
inter-samples. (iii) Presenting a self-supervised Multi-Scale
Token Recycling (MSTR) Module featured by recycling discarded patch tokens in multi-scale features, further enhancing representation capability and retrieval performance. Our
framework achieves excellent results on CNN- and ViT-based
backbones. Extensive experiments demonstrate its superiority
over existing methods. We also introduce Cloths-V1, the first
professional fashion sketch-image dataset, utilized to validate
our method and will be beneficial for other applications.

Figure 1: [Left] Comparison of our objective function with
traditional methods based on Triplet Loss (TL) and Contrastive Loss (CL). [Right] Comparison of our method with
previous methods for handling Patch Tokens in ViTs.

2022b), and out-of-sample learning (Sain et al. 2023) have
emerged. These approaches aim to refine the model’s retrieval capabilities. However, such strategies may introduce
instability during model training and pose challenges in tuning hyperparameters, such as gradient vanishing and hyperparameter sensitivity in (Sain et al. 2021; Bhunia et al.
2021). These challenges collectively compromise the overall model scalability, making it challenging for researchers
to further expand their research. Furthermore, several methods (Sain et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021; Pang et al. 2020)
divide input sketches into strokes or layers, adding additional complexity. These might be less compatible with other
datasets and less adaptable for broader exploration. In summary, triplet loss has achieved widespread adoption and
spurred the development centered on its selection and optimization. However, this advancement has come at the cost
of modeling complexity and a compromise in stability.
The introduction of Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) has introduced a new architectural backbone and powerful performance in the field of computer vision. However, existing methods (Abhra et al. 2022; Sain
et al. 2023) typically utilize the [CLS] Token as feature output, discarding the features of other Patch Tokens as shown
in Fig. 1, or employing common aggregation methods such
as AvgPool or MaxPool, etc. We found that there are differences between these discarded Patch Tokens, which may
contain potential useful information. Therefore, reasonable
recycling of useful features from these discarded tokens will
improve the representation ability of the model.

Code — https://github.com/ExponentiAI/ARNet

Introduction
Starting with (Yu et al. 2016), the triplet loss has gained
prominence in the field of Fine-Grained Sketch-Based Image Retrieval (FG-SBIR). It encourages proximity among
similar samples (Pos) in the embedding space while pushing different samples (Neg) farther apart, as shown in
Fig. 1 (a), thereby achieving effective separation of the samples. However, the selection of suitable triplets necessitates
further refinement to achieve optimal performance. Moreover, in some cases, the triplet loss might not provide sufficient gradient signals, affecting the model optimization process. To address these challenges, methods such as reinforcement learning (Muhammad et al. 2018; Bhunia et al.
2020, 2022a), meta-learning (Sain et al. 2021; Bhunia et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding Authors.

3985

