The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

C RADLE -VAE: Enhancing Single-Cell Gene Perturbation Modeling with
Counterfactual Reasoning-based Artifact Disentanglement
Seungheun Baek1 * , Soyon Park1 * , Yan Ting Chok1 , Junhyun Lee1 , Jueon Park1 ,
Mogan Gim2†‡ , Jaewoo Kang13†
1
Department of Computer Science, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Yongin, South Korea
3
AIGEN Sciences, Seoul 04778, South Korea
{sheunbaek, soyon park, yanting1412, ljhyun33, jueon park, kangj}@korea.ac.kr, gimmogan@hufs.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Predicting cellular responses to various perturbations is a critical focus in drug discovery and personalized therapeutics,
with deep learning models playing a significant role in this
endeavor. Single-cell datasets contain technical artifacts that
may hinder the predictability of such models, which poses
quality control issues highly regarded in this area. To address this, we propose C RADLE -VAE, a causal generative
framework tailored for single-cell gene perturbation modeling, enhanced with counterfactual reasoning-based artifact
disentanglement. Throughout training, C RADLE -VAE models the underlying latent distribution of technical artifacts and
perturbation effects present in single-cell datasets. It employs
counterfactual reasoning to effectively disentangle such artifacts by modulating the latent basal spaces and learns robust
features for generating cellular response data with improved
quality. Experimental results demonstrate that this approach
improves not only treatment effect estimation performance
but also generative quality as well.

Figure 1: Training and generative process of C RADLE -VAE.

Code — https://github.com/dmis-lab/CRADLE-VAE

Introduction

and Leskovec 2024; Cui et al. 2024). Another centralizes
around employing variational autoencoders (VAE) which
learn causal representations of single cells through modeling
the disentanglement of its perturbation effects (Lopez et al.
2023). SAMS-VAE models the addition of two disentangled
factors which are perturbation-independent cell representation (i.e., basal state) and sparse latent effects of gene perturbations (i.e., intervention) (Bereket and Karaletsos 2024).
Despite the endeavor in accurately predicting cellular responses, the quality of training data used in previous works
or data generated by their proposed models is not adequately
evaluated. scRNA-seq datasets suffer from quality issues
which are attributed to the limitations of existing sequencing protocols related to measurement of cells being stressed,
broken, or killed. Some data might also correspond to empty
droplets or droplets with multiple cells (i.e., doublets) (Ilicic
et al. 2016). Conventional quality control (QC) guidelines
state that these data are deemed under-qualified and the distortions that arise from the limitations of scRNA-seq protocols are said to be technical artifacts (Hong et al. 2022).

Understanding cellular responses to gene perturbations is
crucial for identifying potential therapeutic targets. Singlecell technologies such as Perturb-seq (Dixit et al. 2016)
have facilitated application of machine learning methodologies in addressing this task due to their high-resolution and
high-throughput production of single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) data.
Previous works have proposed various computational
methods for effectively modeling single-cell gene perturbation outcomes (i.e., treatment effects), mostly involving prediction of scRNA-seq gene expression profiles. One line of
work features explicitly modeling the gene-gene relationships, incorporating prior knowledge graphs or networks
inferred from the transcriptional data (Roohani, Huang,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors
Completed during the author’s postdoc at Korea University
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

15445

