The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Combating Multimodal LLM Hallucination via Bottom-Up Holistic Reasoning
Shengqiong Wu1 , Hao Fei1 * , Liangming Pan2 , William Yang Wang3
Shuicheng Yan4,5 , Tat-Seng Chua1
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
University of Arizona, USA
3
University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
4
Skywork AI, Singapore
5
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
swu@u.nus.edu, {haofei37, dcscts}@nus.edu.sg, liangmingpan@arizona.edu
william@cs.ucsb.edu, shuicheng.yan@gmail.com
Case 1: Can the two people lift the suitcase in
the image?
Sure, the suitcase is a regular travel accessary
designed for easy lifting.

Abstract
Recent advancements in multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) have shown unprecedented capabilities in advancing various vision-language tasks. However, MLLMs face
significant challenges with hallucinations, and misleading
outputs that do not align with the input data. While existing efforts are paid to combat MLLM hallucinations, several
pivotal challenges are still unsolved. First, while current approaches aggressively focus on addressing errors at the perception level, another important type at the cognition level requiring factual commonsense can be overlooked. In addition,
existing methods might fall short in finding a more effective
way to represent visual input, which is yet a key bottleneck
that triggers visual hallucinations. Moreover, MLLMs can
frequently be misled by faulty textual inputs and cause hallucinations, while unfortunately, this type of issue has long been
overlooked by existing studies. Inspired by human intuition in
handling hallucinations, this paper introduces a novel bottomup reasoning framework. Our framework systematically addresses potential issues in both visual and textual inputs by
verifying and integrating perception-level information with
cognition-level commonsense knowledge, ensuring more reliable outputs. Extensive experiments demonstrate significant
improvements in multiple hallucination benchmarks after integrating MLLMs with the proposed framework. In-depth
analyses reveal the great potential of our methods in addressing perception- and cognition-level hallucinations.

1

Case 2: What can you see in the bowl?
The bowl on the table contains some fruits like
bananas and oranges.
Case 3: What color is the cat sitting near the
front of the bus?
The cat sitting near the front of the bus is a
yellow black with a white patch on its chest.
- CounterCommonsense
- Over Generalization
-…

Commonsence

Cognition
level

MLLM
Hallucination

Perception
level

Vision

Text

- Object Hallucination
- Attribution Hallucination
- Relationship Hallucination

- Object Confliction
- Attribute Confliction
- Relation Confliction

Figure 1: On the top, we illustrate three hallucination cases:
overgeneralization (case 1), vision object hallucination (case
2), and text object conflict (case 3), where hallucinations
are marked in red. On the bottom, we categorize hallucinations into three types: vision, text, and commonsense, ranging from perception to cognition levels.

Introduction

Recent advancements in MLLMs (Liu et al. 2023a; Wang
et al. 2023b; Chen et al. 2023) have demonstrated impressive abilities in understanding the semantics of multimodal data and achieving promising results in a variety
of tasks such as visual question answering (VQA; Gurari et al. 2018; Anderson et al. 2018), multimodal dialogue (Wu et al. 2023a; Wang, Zhuang, and Wu 2024; Wu
et al. 2024c), image captioning (Milewski, Moens, and Calixto 2020; Liu et al. 2023a; Ji et al. 2021), and retrieval
(Fang et al. 2024a; Li et al. 2024; Fang et al. 2024b). However, much like the hallucination issues observed in traditional LLMs due to their generative nature, MLLMs also

suffer from hallucinations, leading to factual discrepancies
between the model’s response and factual reality (Tong et al.
2024; Du et al. 2023). This significantly undermines their
practical value. Various types of hallucinations have been
identified, prompting many research efforts to address this
problem. Existing approaches include fine-tuning MLLMs
on more robust instruction datasets (Wang et al. 2024; Liu
et al. 2024a), proposing vision-aware inference interventions
(Favero et al. 2024; Deng, Chen, and Hooi 2024; Fang et al.
2023), and employing a post-correction method where re-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8460

