The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KITS: Inductive Spatio-Temporal Kriging with Increment Training Strategy
Qianxiong Xu1 , Cheng Long1 * , Ziyue Li2 * , Sijie Ruan3 , Rui Zhao4 , Zhishuai Li4
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
University of Cologne
3
Beijing Institute of Technology
4
SenseTime Research
{qianxiong.xu, c.long}@ntu.edu.sg, zlibn@wiso.uni-koeln.de, sjruan@bit.edu.cn, {zhaorui, lizhishuai}@sensetime.com
Abstract

the actual sparsely deployed sensors are far from sufficient
to support various services that require fine-grained data.
To address this problem, Inductive Spatio-Temporal Kriging (Wu et al. 2021a) is proposed to estimate the values of
unobserved nodes (without sensors) by using the values of
observed nodes (with sensors) across time.
The common settings of inductive kriging are: (1) the training is only based on observed nodes; (2) when there are
new unobserved nodes inserted during inference, the model
can naturally transfer to them without re-training, i.e., being inductive. To enable such transferability, existing inductive methods mainly adopt the following training strategy
(illustrated in Figure 1(a)): it constructs a graph structure on
top of observed nodes (e.g., based on the spatial proximity of the nodes (Barthélemy 2011)), randomly masks some
observed nodes’ values, and then trains a model (which is
mostly Graph Neural Network based) to reconstruct each
node’s value. In this strategy, the graph structure is commonly used to capture node correlations and the inductive
GNNs such as GraphSAGE (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017) accommodate different graph structures during inference, as shown in Figure 1(b), where the values of new nodes
4-5 will be inferred by the model trained from nodes 1-3. We
name this strategy as Decrement training strategy since it
decrements the number of observed nodes during training
(by masking their values) and use them to mimic the unobserved nodes to be encountered during inference.
Unfortunately, such strategy inevitably suffers from the
graph gap issue, i.e., the graph used for training is much
sparser than that for inference, and it will aggravate with
more nodes unobserved. Expressly, the training graph is
based only on observed nodes, whereas the inference graph
would be based on observed and unobserved nodes. There
would be a clear gap between the two graphs: (1) the latter
has more nodes than the former; and (2) their topologies are
different (e.g., the latter could be denser). This graph gap
would pose a challenge to transfer from the training graph
to the inference graph. For example, as a scenario shown in
Figure 1(c), where red pins represent observed nodes, and
blue pins represent unobserved nodes, the training graph
(based on only red pins nodes) would significantly differ
from the inference graph (based on red and blue pins). As
shown in our empirical studies in Appendix, the average
node degree of the training graphs from the decrement meth-

Sensors are commonly deployed to perceive the environment.
However, due to the high cost, sensors are usually sparsely
deployed. Kriging is the tailored task to infer the unobserved
nodes (without sensors) using the observed nodes (with sensors). The essence of kriging task is transferability. Recently,
several inductive spatio-temporal kriging methods have been
proposed based on graph neural networks, being trained
based on a graph built on top of observed nodes via pretext tasks such as masking nodes out and reconstructing them.
However, the graph in training is inevitably much sparser than
the graph in inference that includes all the observed and unobserved nodes. The learned pattern cannot be well generalized for inference, denoted as graph gap. To address this
issue, we first present a novel Increment training strategy: instead of masking nodes (and reconstructing them), we add
virtual nodes into the training graph so as to mitigate the
graph gap issue naturally. Nevertheless, the empty-shell virtual nodes without labels could have inferior features and lack
supervision signals. To solve these issues, we pair each virtual node with its most similar observed node and fuse their
features together; to enhance the supervision signal, we construct reliable pseudo labels for virtual nodes. As a result, the
learned pattern of virtual nodes could be safely transferred to
real unobserved nodes for reliable kriging. We name our new
Kriging model with Increment Training Strategy as KITS.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that KITS consistently
outperforms existing methods by large margins, e.g., the improvement over MAE score could be as high as 18.33%.

Code — https://github.com/Sam1224/KITS

Introduction
Sensors play essential roles in various fields like vision (Xu
et al. 2023b, 2024a, 2025), traffic monitoring (Zhou et al.
2021), energy control (Liu et al. 2022b), road extraction (Xu
et al. 2023a), trajectory learning (Liu et al. 2022a, 2024c),
forecasting (Miao et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024b,a) and
anomaly detection (Xu et al. 2024b). For example, loop detectors are installed on roads to perceive traffic dynamics,
such as vehicle flows and speeds. Nevertheless, due to the
high cost of devices and maintenance (Liang et al. 2019),
* Co-corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12945

