The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Trustworthy Knowledge Graph Reasoning:
An Uncertainty Aware Perspective
Bo Ni1 , Yu Wang2 , Lu Cheng3 , Erik Blasch4 , Tyler Derr1
1

Vanderbilt University
University of Oregon
3
University of Illinois Chicao
4
Air Force Research Lab
{bo.ni, tyler.derr}@vanderbilt.edu, yuwang@uoregon.edu, lucheng@uic.edu, erik.blasch.1@us.af.mil
2

Abstract
Recently, Knowledge Graphs (KGs) have been successfully
coupled with Large Language Models (LLMs) to mitigate
their hallucinations and enhance their reasoning capability, e.g., KG-based retrieval-augmented framework. However,
current KG-LLM frameworks lack rigorous uncertainty estimation, limiting their reliable deployment in high-stakes
applications Directly incorporating uncertainty quantification into KG-LLM frameworks presents challenges due to
their complex architectures and the intricate interactions
between the knowledge graph and language model components. To address this crucial gap, we propose a new
trustworthy KG-LLM framework, UAG (Uncertainty Aware
Knowledge-Graph Reasoning), which incorporates uncertainty quantification into the KG-LLM framework. We design an uncertainty-aware multi-step reasoning framework
that leverages conformal prediction to provide a theoretical
guarantee on the prediction set. To manage the error rate of
the multi-step process, we additionally introduce an error rate
control module to adjust the error rate within the individual components. Extensive experiments show that UAG can
achieve any pre-defined coverage rate while reducing the prediction set/interval size by 40% on average over the baselines.

Figure 1: An illustration of uncertainty quantification in the
context of knowledge graph question answering. By quantifying a confidence boundary (dashed lines), UQ methods
can capture more correct answers (red circles) when facing
uncertainties under different scenarios.
reliable external sources, ensuring the currency and faithfulness of the additional context upon which LLMs generate
answers. Second, KGs are typically represented as triplets
where entities are connected by heterogeneous relations,
providing explicit logic to enable reasoning and fulfilling
complex tasks. To effectively leverage the above two advantages of KGs to enhance LLMs, two representative methods
have been developed: LLM-based Structural Query and KGbased Retrieval-augmented Generation (KG-RAG). Structural Query relies on LLMs to generate structural queries
such as SPARQL (Jiang et al. 2023) or traverse the KG via
beam search (Sun et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024). KG-RAG
works by deriving factually correct and context-relevant
content from KG to augment the generation of LLMs (Luo
et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2022; Baek, Aji, and
Saffari 2023; Yang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a).
Despite KG-RAG and Structural Queries’ effectiveness in
various real-world applications, there is no systematic investigation into the uncertainty quantification (UQ) aspect
of KG-LLM systems, and therefore, their deployment remains limited in high-stakes scenarios (e.g., medical analysis, financial decision-making, etc.) where the cost-of-errors
is significant. As illustrated in Figure 1, without proper un-

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently achieved impressive performance in question-answering tasks due to
their unprecedented capability of understanding complex
linguistic patterns and generating coherent responses (OpenAI et al. 2024; Huang and Chang 2022). However, LLM’s
frequent hallucination (Huang et al. 2023b; Mündler et al.
2024) and lack of reasoning capability (Lin, Hilton, and
Evans 2021; Fu et al. 2023) still limit their practical usage
when facing domain-specific or complex questions.
To address the challenges, recently knowledge graphs
(KGs) have been coupled with LLMs to provide factual
data and contextual grounding, enhancing the reliability and
accuracy of their responses. Knowledge graphs, as a form
of structural knowledge representation consisting of factual
triplets, provide two unique advantages to overcome the
aforementioned challenges of LLMs. First, the additional
information retrieved from KGs is directly extracted from
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12417

