The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Task-Specific Preconditioner for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Suhyun Kang1 , Jungwon Park2 , Wonseok Lee3 , Wonjong Rhee2,3 *
2

1
Samsung Research, Seoul, South Korea
Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
3
IPAI, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
su1019.kang@samsung.com; {quoded97, dnjstjr1017, wrhee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Leveraging the Meta-Dataset, various Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL) methods have been developed (Requeima et al. 2019; Bateni et al. 2020, 2022; Liu
et al. 2021; Triantafillou et al. 2021; Li, Liu, and Bilen
2021, 2022; Dvornik, Schmid, and Mairal 2020; Liu et al.
2020; Guo et al. 2023; Tian et al. 2024), demonstrating significant advancements in this field. These approaches typically parameterize deep neural networks with a large set
of task-agnostic parameters alongside a smaller set of taskspecific parameters. Task-specific parameters are optimized
to the target task through an adaptation mechanism, generally following one of two primary methodologies. The first
approach utilizes an auxiliary network functioning as a parameter generator, which, upon receiving a few labeled examples from the target task, outputs optimized task-specific
parameters (Requeima et al. 2019; Bateni et al. 2020, 2022;
Liu et al. 2020, 2021). The second approach directly finetunes the task-specific parameters through gradient descent
using a few labeled examples from the target task (Dvornik,
Schmid, and Mairal 2020; Li, Liu, and Bilen 2021; Triantafillou et al. 2021; Li, Liu, and Bilen 2022; Tian et al.
2024).
While both approaches have improved CDFSL performance through adaptation mechanism, a common limitation
persists in the optimization strategies employed by these
methods. Specifically, both approaches employ a fixed optimization strategy across different target tasks. However,
Figure 1a shows that the optimal choice of optimizer may
vary significantly depending on the given domain or target
task. This implies that the performance can be significantly
improved by adapting an optimization strategy to align well
with the target domain and task. However, devising an effective and reliable scheme for its implementation has been
challenging.
One promising approach for establishing a robust adaptive optimization scheme is to leverage Preconditioned Gradient Descent (PGD) (Himmelblau et al. 2018). PGD operates by specifying a preconditioning matrix, often referred
to as a preconditioner, which re-scales the geometry of the
parameter space. In the field of machine learning, previous
research has shown that if the preconditioner is positive definite (PD), it establishes a valid Riemannian metric, which
represents the geometric characteristics (e.g., curvature) of
the parameter space and steers preconditioned gradients in

Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL) methods typically parameterize models with task-agnostic and taskspecific parameters. To adapt task-specific parameters, recent
approaches have utilized fixed optimization strategies, despite
their potential sub-optimality across varying domains or target tasks. To address this issue, we propose a novel adaptation mechanism called Task-Specific Preconditioned gradient descent (TSP). Our method first meta-learns DomainSpecific Preconditioners (DSPs) that capture the characteristics of each meta-training domain, which are then linearly
combined using task-coefficients to form the Task-Specific
Preconditioner. The preconditioner is applied to gradient descent, making the optimization adaptive to the target task. We
constrain our preconditioners to be positive definite, guiding
the preconditioned gradient toward the direction of steepest
descent. Empirical evaluations on the Meta-Dataset show that
TSP achieves state-of-the-art performance across diverse experimental scenarios.

1

Introduction

Few-Shot Learning (FSL) aims to learn a model that
can generalize to novel classes using a few labeled examples. Recent advancements in FSL have been significantly propelled by meta-learning methods (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Sung
et al. 2018; Oreshkin, Rodrı́guez López, and Lacoste 2018;
Garnelo et al. 2018; Rajeswaran et al. 2019). These approaches have achieved outstanding results in single domain
FSL benchmarks such as Omniglot (Lake et al. 2011) and
miniImagenet (Ravi and Larochelle 2016). However, recent
studies (Chen et al. 2019; Tian et al. 2020) have revealed that
many existing FSL methods struggle to generalize in crossdomain setting, where the test data originates from domains
that are either unknown or previously unseen. To study the
challenge of generalization in cross-domain few-shot tasks,
Triantafillou et al. (2019) introduced the Meta-Dataset, a
more realistic, large-scale, and diverse benchmark. It includes multiple datasets from a variety of domains for both
meta-training and meta-testing phases.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17760

