The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ID-Sculpt: ID-aware 3D Head Generation from Single In-the-wild Portrait Image
Jinkun Hao1 , Junshu Tang1 , Jiangning Zhang2 , Ran Yi1 * , Yijia Hong1 , Moran Li2 ,
Weijian Cao2 , Yating Wang1 , Chengjie Wang1, 2 , Lizhuang Ma1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{leo hao, tangjs, ranyi, hyj542682306, wyating 0929, lzma}@sjtu.edu.cn;
{vtzhang, moranli, weijiancao, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com;
Reference

Abstract
While recent works have achieved great success on imageto-3D object generation, high quality and fidelity 3D head
generation from a single image remains a great challenge.
Previous text-based methods for generating 3D heads were
limited by text descriptions and image-based methods struggled to produce high-quality head geometry. To handle this
problem, we propose a novel framework, ID-Sculpt, to generate high-quality 3D heads while preserving their identities.
Our work incorporates the identity information of the portrait image into three parts: 1) geometry initialization, 2) geometry sculpting, and 3) texture generation stages. Given a
reference portrait image, we first align the identity features
with text features to realize ID-aware guidance enhancement,
which contains the control signals representing the face information. We then use the canny map, ID features of the portrait image, and a pre-trained text-to-normal/depth diffusion
model to generate ID-aware geometry supervision, and 3DGAN inversion is employed to generate ID-aware geometry
initialization. Furthermore, we use ID-aware guidance to calculate ID-aware Score Distillation (ISD) for geometry sculpting. For texture generation, we adopt the ID Consistent Texture Inpainting and Refinement which progressively expands
the view for texture inpainting to obtain an initialization UV
texture map. We then use the ID-aware guidance to provide
image-level supervision for noisy multi-view images to obtain refined texture maps. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that we can generate high-quality 3D heads with accurate geometry and texture from a single in-the-wild portrait image.

Reference

Figure 1: ID-Sculpt can generate a high-quality 3D head
with detailed face geometry and photo-realistic texture given
an in-the-wild portrait image.

Grassal et al. 2022) to achieve high-quality 3D head generation. The former necessitates multi-view images or several minutes of monocular video, which are not applicable
to a single in-the-wild portrait image. Moreover, 3D face
shape prior models typically focus on the face region, failing to accurately reconstruct the entire head shape and being
unable to handle elements such as long hair and clothing.
An alternative approach involves employing Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to accomplish 3D head generation, which is constrained by limited training data and typically produces frontal-facing faces. Moreover, they struggle
to preserve identity consistency when presented with images of large head poses. Recently, text-to-image (Ramesh
et al. 2021, 2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022;
Han et al. 2023; Pei et al. 2024) generation models trained
on large-scale image datasets have achieved significant success. Some approaches employ SDS loss (Poole et al. 2022)
to ensure similarity between the generated 3D model and
images, facilitating image-to-3D (Melas-Kyriazi et al. 2023;
Tang et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023c,b; Long et al. 2023) or textto-3D (Poole et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023; Sanghi et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2022, 2024). However, when employing these
methods for customized 3D head generation, the absence of
identity information makes it difficult to reproduce the geometric details and texture realism in the portrait image.
Through analyzing previous methods, we summarize the
key challenges from the three stages in the optimizationbased 3D head generation approach: 1) Geometry Initialization: Previous image-to-3D methods used an ellipsoid as the

Project page — https://jinkun-hao.github.io/IDSculpt/

1

Reference

Introduction

3D head generation aims to create high-quality 3D digital
assets of human heads that align with user preferences, utilizing various input data, which has significant applications
in film character creation, gaming, online meetings, education, etc. Conventional methods rely on multi-view geometric consistency (Kirschstein et al. 2023; Zheng et al.
2023a; Munkberg et al. 2022; Yariv et al. 2021) or statistical
3D face prior model (Bai et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2023b;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3383

