The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DrugHash: Hashing Based Contrastive Learning for Virtual Screening
Jin Han1 * , Yun Hong2 * , Wu-Jun Li1†
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, School of Computer Science, Nanjing University
2
Kuang Yaming Honors School, Nanjing University
{hanjin, hongy}@smail.nju.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

two requirements for effective VS: a large-scale molecular
database and an effective VS algorithm.
Numerous large-scale molecular databases have been developed for drug discovery. For instance, ZINC (Irwin
and Shoichet 2005), a widely used commercial database,
contains over 1.4 billion compounds in its latest release
called ZINC20 (Irwin et al. 2020). The Enamine REAL
database (Shivanyuk et al. 2007) contains over 6.75 billion molecules. Despite the availability of these extensive
databases, existing VS methods often struggle to handle
their scale. Traditional VS methods, such as molecular docking methods, are particularly time-consuming when screening large molecular databases. For instance, AutoDock
Vina (Kitchen et al. 2004) requires around 70 seconds
to dock a single molecule with a single-core CPU when
the exhaustiveness is set to 8. Hence, docking millions of
molecules, the scale of which is comparable with or even
smaller than those in many real applications, would take
Vina over two years. While increasing the number of CPUs
can reduce docking time, it comes with substantial resource
consumption.
In contrast, the learning-based VS methods (Zheng, Fan,
and Mu 2019; Jones et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023; Wu
et al. 2022; Yazdani-Jahromi et al. 2022) are relatively more
resource-efficient. However, most of the existing methods
focus on predicting the binding affinity or interactions between the proteins and molecules, As a result, they often
fail to outperform traditional docking methods in VS benchmarks. Recently, DrugCLIP (Gao et al. 2023) proposes to
formulate VS as a retrieval task rather than learning the binding affinity or protein-molecule interaction. Through contrastive learning, DrugCLIP learns real-valued vector representations for both proteins and molecules, enabling it to
surpass traditional docking methods. However, the use of
real-valued vector representations for molecular databases,
particularly those containing billions of molecules, presents
a significant challenge on memory consumption. For example, DrugCLIP encodes molecules into 128-dimensional
real-valued vectors, and hence the real-valued vector representations for the Enamine REAL database would have a
memory cost of nearly 3TB, which is extremely large for
local computer memory. Additionally, loading pre-encoded
vectors from storage, computing similarity scores between
billions of vectors, and ranking the results can be time-

Virtual screening (VS) is a critical step in computer-aided
drug discovery, aiming to identify molecules that bind to a
specific target protein. Traditional VS methods, such as docking, are often too time-consuming to efficiently screen largescale molecular databases. Recent advances in deep learning have demonstrated that learning vector representations
for both proteins and molecules using contrastive learning
can outperform traditional docking methods. However, considering that the target databases often contain billions of
molecules, real-valued vector representations adopted by existing methods can still incur large memory and time cost
in VS. To address this problem, we propose DrugHash, a
hashing-based contrastive learning method for VS. DrugHash
formulates VS as a retrieval task that leverages binary hash
codes for efficient retrieval. In particular, DrugHash designs
a simple yet effective hashing strategy to enable end-toend learning of binary hash codes for both proteins and
molecules, which can dramatically reduce the memory and
time cost with higher accuracy compared with existing methods. Experimental results show that DrugHash can outperform existing methods to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy,
with at least a 32× reduction in memory cost and a 4.6×
improvement in speed.

Introduction
Due to the high failure rate of drug candidates, drug discovery requires a long development cycle and substantial
cost (Gorgulla et al. 2020). Virtual screening (VS) is a critical step in computer-aided drug discovery, aiming to identify
molecules that bind to a specific target protein. High-quality
VS can streamline the drug discovery process by identifying promising lead compounds, thereby reducing both time
and resource cost. One of the key factors influencing the
effectiveness of VS is the size of the molecular database.
A larger database generally includes more potential binding
molecules, increasing the likelihood of identifying effective
drug candidates. However, as shown in (Lyu et al. 2019), a
poorly performing VS method will increase the false positive rate when the database is enlarged. This highlights
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17041

