The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multiple Trade-offs: An Improved Approach for Lexicographic Linear Bandits
Bo Xue, Xi Lin, Xiaoyuan Zhang, Qingfu Zhang∗
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
The City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
{boxue4-c, xi.lin, xzhang2523-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

MOMAB is a decision-making system that operates over
T rounds (Drugan and Nowe 2013). In the t-th round, the
agent chooses an arm at from the arm set [K]1 , and then
receives a reward vector [yt1 , yt2 , . . . , ytm ] ∈ Rm . Here, m
is the number of objectives, and yti represents the reward of
the i-th objective, i ∈ [m]. This reward is a random variable
with expectation E[yti ] = µi (at ). Most existing work evaluates the performance of the agent by Pareto regret (Van Moffaert et al. 2014; Turgay, Oner, and Tekin 2018; Lu et al.
2019; Cai et al. 2023; Xu and Klabjan 2023), which regards
all objectives as equivalent. Therefore, minimizing the regret of any objective ensures an optimal Pareto regret bound.
Specifically, Theorem 4.1 of Xu and Klabjan (2023) states
that the Pareto regret is smaller than the regret of any objective i ∈ [m]. Therefore, a nearly optimal Pareto regret bound
can be achieved by applying the UCB strategy (Auer 2002)
to any of the m objectives. However, the remaining m − 1
objectives may still suffer the linear regret bounds O(T ).
To deal with this inherent drawback, lexicographic order
is adopted (Ehrgott 2005), where the priority over m objectives is given by their indices, such that for i, j ∈ [m], the
i-th objective is more important than the j-th objective if and
only if i < j. When it comes to bandit model, different arms
are compared by the lexicographic order on their expected
rewards (Hüyük and Tekin 2021). Precisely, given two arms
a and a0 with expected rewards [µ1 (a), µ2 (a), . . . , µm (a)]
and [µ1 (a0 ), µ2 (a0 ), . . . , µm (a0 )], arm a is said to lexicographically dominate arm a0 if and only if µ1 (a) > µ1 (a0 )
or ∃ i∗ ∈ {2, . . . , m}, µi (a) = µi (a0 ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ i∗ − 1
∗
∗
and µi (a) > µi (a0 ). An arm a∗ is lexicographic optimal
if and only if no other arms lexicographically dominate it.
In a recent study, Hüyük and Tekin (2021) investigated the
MOMAB problem under lexicographic ordering and proposed a priority-based regret as follows

This paper studies lexicographic online learning within
the framework of multiobjective stochastic linear bandits
(MOSLB), where the agent aims to simultaneously maximize
m objectives in a hierarchical manner. Previous literature has
investigated lexicographic online learning in multiobjective
multi-armed bandits, a special case of MOSLB. They proe 32 )
vided a suboptimal algorithm whose regret bound is O(T
based on a priority-based regret metric. In this paper, we propose an algorithm for lexicographic online learning in the
MOSLB
√ model, achieving an almost optimal regret bound of
e
T ) when evaluated by the general regret metric. Here,
O(d
d is the dimension of arm vectors and T is the time horizon. Our method introduces a new arm filter and a multiple
trade-offs approach to effectively balance the exploration and
exploitation across different objectives. Experiments confirm
the merits of our algorithms and provide compelling evidence
to support our analysis.

Introduction
Sequential decision-making under uncertainty arises in numerous real-world applications, including medical trials
(Robbins 1952), recommendation systems (Bubeck and
Cesa-Bianchi 2012), and autonomous driving (Huang et al.
2019). This has motivated the development of the stochastic
multi-armed bandits (MAB). In MAB, an agent repeatedly
selects an arm from K arms and receives a single-valued
reward sampled from a fixed but unknown distribution specific to the selected arm (Agrawal 1995; Auer 2002; Audibert, Munos, and Szepesvári 2009; Yu et al. 2018; Huang,
Dai, and Huang 2022). The goal of the agent is to minimize the regret, which is the cumulative difference between
the expected reward of the selected arm and that of the best
arm. However, the aforementioned scenarios can be better
modeled if multiple objectives are considered. For example, an online advertising system needs to maximize both
the click-through rate and the click-conversion rate (Rodriguez, Posse, and Zhang 2012). Therefore, multiobjective
multi-armed bandits (MOMAB) model is proposed, which
replaces the single-valued reward in MAB with a reward
vector (Drugan and Nowe 2013).

bi (T ) =
R

T
X



µi (a∗ ) − µi (at ) I Ai (at ) , i ∈ [m]. (1)

t=1

Here, a∗ is the lexicographic optimal arm in [K], I(·) is the
indicator function, and Ai (at ) is the event that at has the
same expected rewards as the optimal arm for the previous
i − 1 objectives, i.e., Ai (at ) = {µj (a∗ ) = µj (at ), 1 ≤

∗

Qingfu Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

21850

We use [N ] to denote the set {1, 2, . . . , N }.

