The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GTG: Generalizable Trajectory Generation Model for Urban Mobility
Jingyuan Wang 1, 2, 3, * , Yujing Lin1 , Yudong Li1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
MIIT Key Laboratory of Data Intelligence and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Trajectory data mining is crucial for smart city management.
However, collecting large-scale trajectory datasets is challenging due to factors such as commercial conflicts and privacy regulations. Therefore, we urgently need trajectory generation techniques to address this issue. Existing trajectory
generation methods rely on the global road network structure of cities. When the road network structure changes, these
methods are often not transferable to other cities. In fact, there
exist invariant mobility patterns between different cities: 1)
People prefer paths with the minimal travel cost; 2) The travel
cost of roads has an invariant relationship with the topological features of the road network. Based on the above insight,
this paper proposes a Generalizable Trajectory Generation
model (GTG). The model consists of three parts: 1) Extracting city-invariant road representation based on Space Syntax
method; 2) Cross-city travel cost prediction through disentangled adversarial training; 3) Travel preference learning by
shortest path search and preference update. By learning invariant movement patterns, the model is capable of generating trajectories in new cities. Experiments on three datasets
demonstrates that our model significantly outperforms existing models in terms of generalization ability.

(a) New York, USA

Figure 1: Similar local topological structures in New York
(left) and Chicago (right).

et al. 2015; Pappalardo, Rinzivillo, and Simini 2016). These
methods typically analyze human behavior using coarsegrained grids and derive physical priors with practical significance. By empirically summarizing human mobility behavior, these methods have achieved notable results in macroscopic traffic trajectory simulations. However, to capture human mobility behavior with finer granularity, data-driven approaches are increasingly emphasized.
Data-driven methods utilize deep neural networks to
capture complex mobility patterns in trajectory data. Based
on different architectures, these algorithms can be categorized into Seq2Seq-based (Park et al. 2018), GAN-based (Yu
et al. 2017), VAE-based (Long et al. 2023; Huang et al.
2019), and Diffusion-based (Zhu et al. 2023) methods. With
the advancements in data collection and management (Chen
et al. 2017; Ding et al. 2018), data-driven methods have been
widely applied. Although they have achieved significant success by learning from large datasets, they also lead to data
dependency.
Knowledge-driven methods require less trajectory data
but struggle to capture complex mobility patterns. In contrast, data-driven methods, while offering better performance, face challenges in generalizing to new cities. In datadriven models, changes in a city’s topological structure can
prevent the effective transfer of previously learned road representations to the new network.
The key to achieving cross-city trajectory generation
is capturing the invariant human mobility patterns across
different urban environments. Based on existing research
(Wang et al. 2019b; Wang, Wu, and Zhao 2021), we have the

Code — https://github.com/lyd1881310/GTG

1

(b) Chicago, USA

Introduction

Trajectory data is essential for intelligent transportation
(ITS) (Wu et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2024), smart cities (Hettige et al. 2024; Ji et al. 2022), and location-based services
(LBS) (Wang, Wang, and Wu 2018; Wang et al. 2021b).
Trajectory generation is key to addressing the issue of insufficient trajectory data, especially in scenarios involving
privacy protection and conflicts of commercial interests.
Urban trajectory generation is an active research field, and
different types of methods have been proposed. These methods can be divided into two categories: knowledge-driven
methods and data-driven methods (Kong et al. 2023).
Knowledge-driven methods generate trajectories based
on empirical and statistical patterns of human mobility, including the Gravity Model (Zipf 1946), Intervening Opportunities Model (Stouffer 1940), and EPR model (Pappalardo
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

834

