The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Deep Dissipative Dynamics
Yuji Okamoto1 * , Ryosuke Kojima1, 2 *
1

Kyoto University, Japan
2
RIKEN BDR, Japan
{okamoto.yuji.2c, kojima.ryosuke.8e}@kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract

Contour of storage energy

This study challenges strictly guaranteeing “dissipativity” of
a dynamical system represented by neural networks learned
from given time-series data. Dissipativity is a crucial indicator for dynamical systems that generalizes stability and inputoutput stability, known to be valid across various systems including robotics, biological systems, and molecular dynamics. By analytically proving the general solution to the nonlinear Kalman–Yakubovich–Popov (KYP) lemma, which is
the necessary and sufficient condition for dissipativity, we
propose a differentiable projection that transforms any dynamics represented by neural networks into dissipative ones
and a learning method for the transformed dynamics. Utilizing the generality of dissipativity, our method strictly guarantee stability, input-output stability, and energy conservation
of trained dynamical systems. Finally, we demonstrate the robustness of our method against out-of-domain input through
applications to robotic arms and fluid dynamics.

Storage energy change

Total supplied energy

Trajectory of
internal state

Code —
https://github.com/kojima-r/DeepDissipativeModel
Extended version —
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.11479

1

Figure 1: Sketch of the dissipativity: The red difference in
storage energy is less than the total energy supplied along
the blue line, which represents the trajectory of the internal
state x(s).

Introduction

y(t), and internal states x(t). The input-output system is dissipative if the following inequality is satisfies:
Z t1
V (x(t1 )) V (x(t0 )) 
w u(s), y(s) ds, (1)
|
{z
}
t0
|
{z
}
Storage Energy Changes

Dissipativity extends the concept of Lyapunov stability to
input-output dynamical systems by considering “energy”
(Brogliato et al. 2020). In input-output systems, the relationship between the externally supplied energy and the dissipated energy plays an important role. The theory of dissipativity has wide applications, including electrical circuits
(Ortega and Ortega 1998), mechanical systems (Hatanaka
et al. 2015), and biological systems (Goldbeter 2018). Considering the inflow, outflow, and storage of energy in a system provides crucial insights for applications such as stability analysis, controller design, and complex interconnected
systems.
Theoretically, dissipativity in input-output dynamical systems is defined by the time evolution of inputs u(t), outputs

Total Energy Supplies

where V (x(t)) is called the storage energy and w(u(t), y(t))
is called the supply rate. The left side represents the change
in storage energy from the initial state x(t0 ) to the final state
x(t1 ), while the right side signifies the total supplied energy from t0 to t1 (See Figure 1). In Newtonian mechanics,
if V (x) is defied as the mechanical energy and w(u, y) is
defined as the product of external force u and velocity y,
i.e., w(u, y) = uy, this case corresponds to the principle of
energy conservation (Stramigioli 2006). In this context, the
integral of the supply rate represents the “work” done by the
external force u.
In this study, we propose an innovative method for learning dynamical systems described by neural networks from

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19749

