The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimal and Efficient Binary Questioning for Accelerated Annotation
Franco Marchesoni-Acland1,3 , Jean-Michel Morel2 , Josselin Kherroubi1 , Gabriele Facciolo3
1
SLB, AI Lab, Paris
City University of Hong Kong
3
Université Paris-Saclay, ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Centre Borelli, France
marchesoniacland@gmail.com
2

Abstract

to data, even though it has been used in practice (see below). Table 1 shows a simplified comparison between different learning-related tasks. Tools that reduce the annotation
cost of one sample can speed up the whole process, as illustrated by interactive image/video segmentation (Liu et al.
2024; Ravi et al. 2024). But what if one bit is enough to
annotate one sample? Can we speed up annotation even in
that case? The present work theoretically shows that the answer is positive when a predictor is available. Although the
theoretically optimal solution is computationally intractable,
our proposed approximation is efficient and performs well.
Ultimately, we provide an algorithm that asks the best binary questions to the annotator. As exposed in Section , the
method is based on asking questions involving sets of samples, for example, “are these m samples positive?”. The
effectiveness of the method relies on the annotator’s ability to assess multiple samples simultaneously; therefore, it
may be less useful for tasks such as text classification, and
more useful for tasks such as audio classification. Rooted in
theory, our proposed method helps to better understand adhoc methods and think about their optimality. As shown in
Section , the algorithm significantly improves the annotation
efficiency in the oracle setting by up to 88% and in the most
realistic scenario by ≈ 70%.

Even though data annotation is extremely important for interpretability, research, and development of artificial intelligence solutions, annotating data remains costly. Research efforts such as active learning or few-shot learning alleviate the
cost by increasing sample efficiency, yet the problem of annotating data more quickly has received comparatively little
attention. Leveraging a predictor has been shown to reduce
annotation cost in practice but has not been theoretically considered. We ask the following question: to annotate a binary
classification dataset with N samples, can the annotator answer less than N yes/no questions? Framing this questionand-answer (Q&A) game as an optimal encoding problem,
we find a positive answer given by the Huffman encoding of
the possible labelings. Unfortunately, the algorithm is computationally intractable even for small dataset sizes. As a
practical method, we propose to minimize a cost function a
few steps ahead, similarly to lookahead minimization in optimal control. This solution is analyzed, compared with the
optimal one, and evaluated using several synthetic and realworld datasets. The method allows a significant improvement
(23−86%) in the annotation efficiency of real-world datasets.

Introduction
Deep supervised learning has been vital in advancing artificial intelligence (AI) and solving practical problems.
Even now, with more powerful self-supervised methods, human feedback is essential to ensure proper deployment and
correct downstream performance (Bai et al. 2022; Oquab
et al. 2023). Manual supervision allows engineers to finetune powerful models for downstream tasks. Even though
datasets are fundamental for AI research and development,
their quick annotation is still an open problem.
Much research focused on obtaining better predictors
given some annotated data (e.g. ImageNet (Beyer et al.
2020)). More recently, sampling efficiency considerations
have gained attention, as seen in active learning (AL), fewshot learning (FSL), or semi-supervised learning. Simultaneously, data availability has been considered in selfsupervised or weakly-supervised learning fields. All these
areas study the path from data to predictors. In contrast,
comparatively fewer works study the path from predictors

Related Work
Theory on Binary Questioning: There are two notable theoretical analyses of this problem. The first (Kulkarni, Mitter, and Tsitsiklis 1993) studies the learnability bounds of
an active learner that asks yes/no questions. This problem
is related to source coding in information theory (see below). However, their learner wants to minimize the maximum number of questions (length of the longest codeword),
whereas we care about the expected number of questions
(mean codeword length). The second relevant theoretical
work (Yang, Hanneke, and Carbonell 2010) also deals with
(active) learning bounds. Again, the authors point out the
equivalence between the problem and coding theory but
choose to consider lossy coding algorithms. The biggest
theoretical difference between our work and these papers
(Kulkarni, Mitter, and Tsitsiklis 1993; Yang, Hanneke, and
Carbonell 2010) is that they focus on lossy compression for
quick learning, while we focus on lossless compression for
quick annotation. The notation we later introduce is simpler

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14336

