The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffDVC: Accurate Event Detection for Dense Video Captioning via Diffusion
Models
Wei Chen1 , Jianwei Niu123 , Xuefeng Liu 12 * , Zhendong Wang1 , Shaojie Tang4 , Guogang Zhu1
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang
University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
Zhengzhou University Research Institute of Industrial Technology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
4
Department of Management Science and Systems, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United States
{chenweibuaa, niujianwei, liu xuefeng, zhendong.wang, buaa zgg}@buaa.edu.cn
shaojiet@buffalo.edu
GT

Abstract
Dense video captioning (DVC) aims to describe multiple
events within a video, and its performance is greatly affected
by the accuracy of video event detection. Video event detection involves predicting the proposal boundaries (start and
end times) and the classification score of each event in a
video. Recently, a few methods have applied diffusion models originally designed for image object detection to detect
events in DVC. These methods add noise to the ground-truth
event proposal boundaries, and subsequently learn the denoising process. However, these methods often overlook the
fundamental differences between videos and images. We observe that, whereas in images the important information for
object classification is normally around the boundaries of the
ground-truth boxes, in videos the key information for event
classification is typically centered in the middle of groundtruth event proposals. As a result, the classification module in
these existing diffusion models becomes insensitive to boundary changes introduced by the added noise, leading to suboptimal performance. This paper introduces DiffDVC, an innovative diffusion model for DVC. The core of DiffDVC is a
boundary-sensitive detector. The detector increases the sensitivity of the classification module to boundary changes by focusing on frames within a specific range around the start and
end times of noisy event proposals. Additionally, this range is
dynamically adjusted to suit different event proposals. Comprehensive experiments on ActivityNet-1.3, ActivityNet Captions, and YouCook2 datasets show DiffDVC achieving superior performance.

GT

Figure 1: An illustration of the comparative study. The red
arrows indicate the direction in which object boxes and event
proposals are scaled down. The blue dotted lines represent
the ground-truth box or proposal (GT), while dotted lines in
other colors indicate the scaled-down boxes and proposals.

video event detection in DVC are based on discriminative
learning, which relies on regressing anchor proposals (Zhou
et al. 2018), predicting the starting and ending probabilities
of each frame (Zhang, Wu, and Li 2022; Shi et al. 2023),
or learning proposal embedding by learned queries (Wang
et al. 2021; Tan et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022).
Recently, several methods have applied generative
learning-based models, such as diffusion models (Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020) to video event detection (Nag et al. 2023).
These models were originally designed for image object detection (Chen et al. 2023a). These methods add noise to the
ground-truth event proposal boundaries and subsequently
learn a denoising process to reconstruct them. Although the
above methods have shown promising results, they do not
fully address the differences between videos and images.
Specifically, in images, the crucial information for object
classification is generally concentrated in regions close to
the boundary of the ground-truth box. In contrast, for event
detection in videos, the crucial information for event classification is generally concentrated in a region located in the
middle of the event proposal.
To statistically demonstrate this observation, we conduct a
comparative study on image object detection and video event
detection shown in Figure 1. By gradually scaling down
ground-truth object boxes in the COCO validation dataset
(Lin et al. 2014) and ground-truth event proposals in the
THUMOS14 validation dataset (Idrees et al. 2017), we progressively remove boundary information. We then assess the
significance of the removed parts by applying the pre-trained
detection models, Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017) and TadTR

Introduction
Dense video captioning (DVC) focuses on generating descriptions for multiple events in a video, which has garnered
significant interest in recent years (Wang et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2023; Zhang, Song, and Jin 2022). DVC is typically
divided into two sub-tasks: video event detection and video
event captioning. Video event detection involves predicting
the temporal boundaries (i.e., start and end times) containing events in a video and generating the corresponding foreground classification confidence. Most existing methods for
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2221

