The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Traffic Scenario Logic: A Spatial-Temporal Logic for Modeling and Reasoning of
Urban Traffic Scenarios
Ruolin Wang1,2 * , Yuejiao Xu1,2 * , Jianmin Ji1,3†
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 230026, China
Suzhou Shuzhi Technology Group Co., Ltd., Suzhou 215000, Jiangsu, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, 230088, China
{rl wang, yuejiao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jianmin@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

versatile and robust formal logic framework capable of modeling a broad spectrum of urban traffic scenarios.
In response to this challenge, we introduce Traffic Scenario Logic (TSL), a novel spatial-temporal logic specifically tailored for modeling and reasoning about urban
pedestrian-free traffic scenarios. Unlike previous methods,
TSL is designed to provide a comprehensive formal representation of the urban road network without discretization approximations, enabling the modeling of various traffic
configurations encountered in complex urban environments.
One of the main benefits of TSL is its compatibility with
OpenDRIVE, which is the industry-standard format used for
high-definition (HD) maps in autonomous driving (Dupuis,
Strobl, and Grezlikowski 2010). By utilizing OpenDRIVE
data, TSL seamlessly translates real-world road networks
into logical representations, enabling the representation of
a wide range of urban traffic scenarios.
TSL also distinguishes itself with a unique spatial representation. Instead of using a simple discretized position
description, TSL captures a vehicle’s longitudinal position
based on its relationship with other vehicles. By merging
scenarios with the same vehicle relationships, TSL improves
efficiency without losing comprehensive coverage of scenarios.
We first give the syntax and semantics of TSL for unidirection multi-lane highway scenarios in Section 3, then
extend it to urban scenarios in Section 4. Finally, we implement the reasoning of TSL with Telingo (Cabalar et al.
2019), a solver for temporal programs based on Answer Set
Programming. Section 5 demonstrates several examples on
different urban road layouts, showing the effectiveness of
TSL in test scenario generation and potential applications
in decision-making and control verification of autonomous
driving.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:

Formal representations of traffic scenarios can be used to
generate test cases for the safety verification of autonomous
driving. However, most existing methods are limited to highway or highly simplified intersection scenarios due to the
intricacy and diversity of traffic scenarios. In response, we
propose Traffic Scenario Logic (TSL), which is a spatialtemporal logic designed for modeling and reasoning of urban pedestrian-free traffic scenarios. TSL provides a formal
representation of the urban road network that can be derived
from OpenDRIVE, i.e., the de facto industry standard of highdefinition maps for autonomous driving, enabling the representation of a broad range of traffic scenarios without discretization approximations. We implemented the reasoning of
TSL using Telingo, i.e., a solver for temporal programs based
on Answer Set Programming, and tested it on different urban
road layouts. Demonstrations show the effectiveness of TSL
in test scenario generation and its potential value in areas like
decision-making and control verification of autonomous driving. The code for TSL reasoning has been open-sourced.

Code — https://github.com/USTCAVSA/TSL

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving technology is promising to revolutionize transportation by enhancing safety, efficiency, and accessibility. The rigorous testing and verifying their safety
under various traffic scenarios is central to developing and
deploying autonomous vehicles. Formal representations of
these scenarios are crucial for generating comprehensive test
cases and ensuring the reliability of autonomous driving systems (Zhang et al. 2021).
Existing methods for formalizing traffic scenarios often
face limitations, particularly in modeling intricate urban environments with diverse traffic patterns. While some approaches excel in representing highway scenarios or simplified intersections, they struggle to capture the complexity inherent in urban driving environments (Hilscher and
Schwammberger 2016; Yao and Li 2023; Li, Tao, and
Wotawa 2020). Consequently, there is a pressing need for a

• Introduces Traffic Scenario Logic (TSL) for formal modeling and reasoning of urban pedestrian-free traffic scenarios.
• Provides a formal representation of an urban road network that is compatible with the OpenDRIVE HD map
format and an efficient and complete spatial representation.
• Implements the reasoning mechanism with Telingo

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15195

