The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Spectral Graph Anomaly Detection
Jianbo Zheng1,2 , Chao Yang1 * , Tairui Zhang1 , Longbing Cao2∗ , Bin Jiang1 , Xuhui Fan2 , Xiao-ming
Wu2,3 , Xianxun Zhu2,4
1

College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Austrilia
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
4
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University
zhengjianbo@hnu.edu.cn, yangchaoedu@hnu.edu.cn, zhangtairui@hnu.edu.cn, longbing.cao@mq.edu.au,
jiangbin@hnu.edu.cn, xuhui.fan@mq.edu.au, wuxm65@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhuxianxun@shu.edu.cn
Abstract

Predefined

Graph anomaly detection is crucial for identifying anomalous
nodes within graphs and addressing applications like financial fraud detection and social spam detection. Recent spectral graph neural networks advance graph anomaly detection
by focusing on anomalies that notably affect the distribution of graph spectral energy. Such spectrum-based methods
rely on two steps: graph wavelet extraction, and feature fusion. However, both steps are hand-designed, capturing incomprehensive anomaly information of wavelet-specific features and resulting in their inconsistent feature fusion. To address these problems, we propose a dynamic spectral graph
anomaly detection framework DSGAD to adaptively capture comprehensive anomaly information and perform consistent feature fusion. DSGAD introduces dynamic wavelets,
consisting of trainable wavelets to adaptively learn anomalous patterns and capture wavelet-specific features with comprehensive anomaly information. Furthermore, the consistent
fusion of wavelet-specific features achieves dynamic fusion
by combining wavelet-specific feature extraction with energy
difference and channel convolution fusion using location correlation. Experimental results on four datasets substantiate
the efficacy of our DSGAD method, surpassing state-of-theart methods on both homogeneous and heterogeneous graphs.

Hand-designed wavelets

Graph

Trainable

Dynamic wavelets

Wavelet-specific Channel convolution
fusion

feature extraction

Dynamic fusion

Figure 1: A framework comparison of our method with
existing methods. The bottom portion illustrates our proposed method, which initially employs dynamic wavelets,
followed by dynamic fusion. In contrast, the top portion depicts existing hand-designed methods, which first apply predefined wavelets, and followed by feature fusion through sequential concatenation.
known as graph wavelets/ filters, have garnered significant
research attention (Chen, Ma, and Wang 2022).
Many spectral GNN methods for GAD typically involve
two procedures: graph wavelet extraction and feature fusion.
In graph wavelet extraction, a mother wavelet, consisting
of multiple hand-designed graph wavelets, extracts waveletspecific features across different frequency bands (Hammond, Vandergheynst, and Gribonval 2011). Each wavelet
is hand-designed for a predefined frequency band, such as
Beta wavelets (Tang et al. 2022) and hybrid wavelets (Xu
et al. 2024). In the subsequent feature fusion step, waveletspecific features are sequentially concatenated in a handdesigned manner to form fusion features for downstream
anomaly classification (Dong, Zhang, and Wang 2023; Xu
et al. 2024; Dong et al. 2024).
However, the current spectral GNN methods with two
hand-designed steps exhibit several limitations. These include incomprehensive anomaly information and inconsistent feature fusion, which result in suboptimal performance.
(1) Incomprehensive anomaly information. Anomaly information spans multiple frequency bands and varies with
different datasets but does not adhere to fixed distributions like Beta or other predefined ones (De Oliveira and
De Araújo 2015). This limitation arises because handdesigned wavelets are unable to capture anomalous patterns
across varying datasets adaptively. (2) Inconsistent feature
fusion. Wavelet-specific features are projections of node

Code — https://github.com/IWantBe/Dynamic-SpectralGraph-Anomaly-Detection

1

Predefined

Sequential concatenation

Introduction

Graph anomaly detection (GAD) is crucial for identifying
anomalous nodes within graphs (Pang et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2023a; He et al. 2024; Kumagai, Iwata, and Fujiwara 2021) and finds applications in diverse fields such as
network security (Ten, Hong, and Liu 2011), social spam
detection (Yu, He, and Liu 2015), and financial fraud detection (Han et al. 2022; Chai et al. 2023). Recent studies
have revealed that, as the proportion of anomalous nodes
in a graph increases, there is an observable shift of spectral energy from low to high frequencies, which is termed
as a “right-shift” (Tang et al. 2022). In response to this
phenomenon, spectral graph neural networks (GNNs), also
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13410

