The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decomposed Quadratization:
Efficient QUBO Formulation for Learning Bayesian Network
Yuta Shikuri
Tokio Marine Holdings, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
shikuriyuta@gmail.com

Abstract

(Teyssier and Koller 2005) are also well known as competitive algorithms.
Quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) is
capable of modeling a wide range of combinatorial optimization problems, including image synthesis in the field of
computer vision (Kolmogorov and Rother 2007) and various machine learning tasks such as neural networks (Sasdelli and Chin 2021) and decision trees (Yawata et al. 2022).
QUBO can also be applied to score-based Bayesian network structure learning (O’Gorman et al. 2014). Note that
constraint-based algorithms do not appear to be suitable for
QUBO formulation. Recent developments in annealing machines have garnered significant attention for QUBO formulation. An annealing machine is a specialized hardware
architecture designed to heuristically solve QUBOs (Yamamoto 2020). In particular, annealing machines based on
semiconductor technology derived from simulated annealing have reportedly outperformed existing solvers in maximum cut problems (Matsubara et al. 2020).
The challenge of setting up a QUBO lies in reformulating the objective function into a quadratic polynomial using fewer binary variables. The greater the number of binary variables in a QUBO, the more difficult it generally becomes to solve. More practically, encoding a large number
of binary variables onto the hardware circuit of an annealing
machine is often infeasible. Quadratization is the common
method of QUBO formulation (Heck 2018; Anthony et al.
2016; Boros, Crama, and Heck 2019). Algorithms have been
developed to minimize the number of auxiliary variables for
quadratization (Verma and Lewis 2020). However, quadratization still requires too many auxiliary variables for certain
tasks, including Bayesian network structure learning. Consequently, there is a potential demand for a more efficient
QUBO formulation method as an alternative to conventional
quadratization.
In this study, we propose a QUBO formulation specifically designed to use fewer binary variables than quadratization. We demonstrate that this formulation offers significant
advantages for learning Bayesian networks in terms of bit
capacity. Figure 1 illustrates the overview of our approach.
Experimental results on 16 instances, ranging from 37 to 223
variables, show that our formulation dramatically reduces
the number of binary variables compared to (O’Gorman
et al. 2014). These instances can be encoded on the circuit of

Algorithms and hardware for solving quadratic unconstrained
binary optimization (QUBO) problems have made significant recent progress. This advancement has focused attention on formulating combinatorial optimization problems as
quadratic polynomials. To improve the performance of solving large QUBO problems, it is essential to minimize the
number of binary variables used in the objective function.
In this paper, we propose a QUBO formulation that offers a
bit capacity advantage over conventional quadratization techniques. As a key application, this formulation significantly
reduces the number of binary variables required for scorebased Bayesian network structure learning. Experimental results on 16 instances, ranging from 37 to 223 variables,
demonstrate that our approach requires fewer binary variables
than quadratization by orders of magnitude. Moreover, an annealing machine that implement our formulation have outperformed existing algorithms in score maximization.

1

Introduction

A Bayesian network is a probabilistic graphical model that
represents a joint probability distribution among random
variables in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Pearl 1988).
One class of associated computational problems is learning the graph structure of a Bayesian network from data.
There are two principal approaches to Bayesian network
structure learning: constraint-based and score-based (Kitson
et al. 2023). Constraint-based algorithms construct graphs
through conditional independence tests. Score-based approaches aim to find a DAG with the highest possible score.
In this study, we focus on score-based approaches.
Bayesian network structure learning is NP-hard (Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek 2003). Many approaches have
been proposed to improve accuracy and reduce execution
time. For a small number of variables, some algorithms such
as (Cussens 2011) are capable of identifying a DAG with
the maximum score. For high-dimensional data, the standard
methodology involves the use of approximate approaches.
The hill climbing search method over the space of DAGs
(Bouckaert 1994) remains competitive despite its simplicity.
Approximate searches over the space of topological ordering
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11345

