The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revisiting Tampered Scene Text Detection in the Era of Generative AI
Chenfan Qu1 , Yiwu Zhong2 , Fengjun Guo3, 4 , Lianwen Jin1, 4 *
1

South China University of Technology
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Intsig Information Co., Ltd
4
INTSIG-SCUT Joint Lab on Document Analysis and Recognition
202221012612@mail.scut.edu.cn, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The rapid advancements of generative AI have fueled the potential of generative text image editing, meanwhile escalating the threat of misinformation spreading. However, existing forensics methods struggle to detect unseen forgery types
that they have not been trained on, underscoring the need for
a model capable of generalized detection of tampered scene
text. To tackle this, we propose a novel task: open-set tampered scene text detection, which evaluates forensics models on their ability to identify both seen and previously unseen forgery types. We have curated a comprehensive, highquality dataset, featuring the texts tampered by eight text editing models, to thoroughly assess the open-set generalization
capabilities. Further, we introduce a novel and effective pretraining paradigm that subtly alters the texture of selected
texts within an image and trains the model to identify these
regions. This approach not only mitigates the scarcity of highquality training data but also enhances models’ fine-grained
perception and open-set generalization abilities. Additionally,
we present DAF, a novel framework that improves open-set
generalization by distinguishing between the features of authentic and tampered text, rather than focusing solely on the
tampered text’s features. Our extensive experiments validate
the remarkable efficacy of our methods. For example, our
zero-shot performance can even beat the previous state-ofthe-art full-shot model by a large margin.

Figure 1: Tampered scene text detection aims to simultaneously detect real text (green box) and tampered text (yellow box) in the given image. In this paper, we introduce a
novel task: open-set tampered scene text detection, where
models are tested on both seen and unseen types of forgery.
We also manually construct a comprehensive high-quality
benchmark for this task. Moreover, we propose a simple-yeteffective method for this task, which shows strong zero-shot
and open-set generalization ability.

Code — https://github.com/qcf-568/OSTF
Datasets — https://github.com/qcf-568/OSTF
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21422

Recently, the Tampered-IC13 dataset (Wang et al. 2022)
has been introduced to benchmark the detection methods for
tampered scene text. Several promising methods have been
proposed for this task, such as frequency domain feature extraction (Wang et al. 2022; Qu et al. 2023a) and masked
image modelling pre-training (Peng et al. 2023a,b). Despite
significant progress that has been achieved, the existing techniques are far from sufficient for real-world scenarios. We
summarize the limitations as follows:
First, the failure of the existing dataset to reflect model
performance in real-world scenarios. The generative AI revolution has led to the continuous emergence of new text
editing methods, producing increasingly realistic forgeries.
The tampered texts in the Tampered-IC13 dataset were all
forged using the outdated text editing model, SRNet (Wu
et al. 2019), which is unlikely to be the real-world preference due to its relatively worse performance. Moreover,

Introduction
The rapid development of deep models sparks a generative
AI revolution in computer vision, demonstrating remarkable progress in controllable editing (Sun et al. 2023b; Qu
et al. 2024b). However, the advancement of generative AI
also leads to the spread of malicious fake information on
text images, posing serious risks to social information security (Wang et al. 2022; Qu et al. 2023a). Consequently, the
detection of AI-tampered text has become a vital topic in recent years (Qu et al. 2024a). It is crucial to develop effective
methods for detecting AI-tampered text.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

694

