The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fast and Interpretable Mixed-Integer Linear Program Solving
by Learning Model Reduction
Yixuan Li1 , Can Chen1 , Jiajun Li1 , Jiahui Duan2 , Xiongwei Han2 , Tao Zhong2 , Vincent Chau1 ,
Weiwei Wu1 , Wanyuan Wang1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
{yixuanli,chencan0,jiajun li,vincentchau,weiweiwu,wywang}@seu.edu.cn, {jiahui.duan,xiongwei,zhongtao5}@huawei.com
Abstract

hundreds of thousands of decision variables and constraints
(Morales-España, Latorre, and Ramos 2013; Li et al. 2021).
Existing commercial solvers are based on exact solutions,
which are computationally expensive and cannot meet the
real-time demands of industrial applications.
In many scenarios, a large number of homogeneous
MILPs with similar combinatorial structures need to be
solved simultaneously. For example, online stochastic programming often involves solving similar MILP instances at
each stage, with slightly modified input parameters while the
structure remains unchanged (Lowalekar, Varakantham, and
Jaillet 2018; Bertsimas and Stellato 2022). Machine Learning (ML), with its powerful pattern recognition capability,
can exploit the correlation between the structure and the
solution of MILP, and has recently become a very promising research topic for solving large-scale MILP (Bengio,
Lodi, and Prouvost 2021; Zhang et al. 2023; Hentenryck
and Dalmeijer 2024). Existing ML-based MILP solvers can
be classified into two categories: 1) end-to-end solution prediction, i.e., directly learning the mapping between MILP
instances and solutions (Donti, Rolnick, and Kolter 2021;
Ding et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2023); and 2) learning to optimize, i.e., learning to improve the process of traditional
solvers (He, Daumé, and Eisner 2014; Khalil et al. 2017;
Song et al. 2020a; Chi et al. 2022; Ling, Wang, and Wang
2024; Han et al. 2023; Balcan et al. 2024). Due to the high
dimensionality of the solution space, existing ML methods
that learn the optimal solution as a function of the input parameters, suffer from the scalability issue. Furthermore, it is
currently not possible to interpret the predicted solution or
to understand it intuitively (Park and Hentenryck 2023).
Instead of directly learning the optimal solution, this paper takes a different method to learn a reduced and equivalent model of the original MILP as an intermediate step.
In Operations Research (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2014),
an equivalently reduced model of the MILP constitutes the
minimal information, including the set of active constraints
and the value of integer variables at the optimal solution,
required to recover the optimal solution. Model reduction
learning has the following three advantages (Misra, Roald,
and Ng 2022): 1) from the optimization perspective, the reduced model is much easier than the original MILP model,
which can be solved fast, 2) from the ML perspective, using the reduced models as labels can reduce the dimension

By exploiting the correlation between the structure and
the solution of Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP),
Machine Learning (ML) has become a promising method
for solving large-scale MILP problems. Existing ML-based
MILP solvers mainly focus on end-to-end solution learning,
which suffers from the scalability issue due to the high dimensionality of the solution space. Instead of directly learning the optimal solution, this paper aims to learn a reduced
and equivalent model of the original MILP as an intermediate
step. The reduced model often corresponds to interpretable
operations and is much simpler, enabling us to solve largescale MILP problems much faster than existing commercial
solvers. However, current approaches rely only on the optimal reduced model, overlooking the significant preference
information of all reduced models. To address this issue, this
paper proposes a preference-based model reduction learning
method, which considers the relative performance (i.e., objective cost and constraint feasibility) of all reduced models
on each MILP instance as preferences. We also introduce an
attention mechanism to capture and represent preference information, which helps improve the performance of model reduction learning tasks. Moreover, we propose a S ET C OVER
based pruning method to control the number of reduced models (i.e., labels), thereby simplifying the learning process.
Evaluation on real-world MILP problems shows that 1) compared to the state-of-the-art model reduction ML methods,
our method obtains nearly 20% improvement on solution accuracy, and 2) compared to the commercial solver Gurobi,
two to four orders of magnitude speedups are achieved.

Introduction
Due to its strong expressiveness, Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) has been widely used in various critical
domains, including supply chain and logistics (Chao, Jasin,
and Miao 2024), service scheduling (Rosemarin, Rosenfeld,
and Kraus 2019), energy management (Morales-España, Latorre, and Ramos 2013), transportation planning (Lowalekar,
Varakantham, and Jaillet 2021; Li et al. 2024), chip design
(Wang et al. 2024c,d), and chemistry research (Geng et al.
2023b). Commercial solvers, such as Gurobi, Cplex and
Matlab, are mainly used to solve MILP problems. In realworld industrial applications, MILP instances often involve
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27090

