The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Dataset Quantization
Muquan Li, Dongyang Zhang* , Qiang Dong, Xiurui Xie, Ke Qin
Institute of Intelligent Computing, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
muquanli2023@std.uestc.edu.cn, {dyzhang, dongq, xiexiurui, qinke}@uestc.edu.cn

(a) Dataset Distillation

Abstract
Contemporary deep learning, characterized by the training
of cumbersome neural networks on massive datasets, confronts substantial computational hurdles. To alleviate heavy
data storage burdens on limited hardware resources, numerous dataset compression methods such as dataset distillation
(DD) and coreset selection have emerged to obtain a compact
but informative dataset through synthesis or selection for efficient training. However, DD involves an expensive optimization procedure and exhibits limited generalization across unseen architectures, while coreset selection is limited by its
low data keep ratio and reliance on heuristics, hindering its
practicality and feasibility. To address these limitations, we
introduce a newly versatile framework for dataset compression, namely Adaptive Dataset Quantization (ADQ). Specifically, we first identify the sub-optimal performance of naive
Dataset Quantization (DQ), which relies on uniform sampling and overlooks the varying importance of each generated bin. Subsequently, we propose a novel adaptive sampling strategy through the evaluation of generated bins’ representativeness score, diversity score and importance score,
where the former two scores are quantified by the texture
level and contrastive learning-based techniques, respectively.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method not only
exhibits superior generalization capability across different architectures, but also attains state-of-the-art results.

(b) Coreset Selection

Test

Test
Synthesize
Train

Select
Train

Coreset

Model

Model

(c) Dataset Quantization
Bin

Sample
Coreset

Train

Model

Test

Figure 1: The paradigm of three types of dataset condensation methods. The primary difference between these methods lies in the subset generating process. (a) Dataset Distillation synthesizes unreal dataset, (b) coreset selection employs one-time selection, while (c) dataset quantization utilizes multi-time selection as well as sampling.
In order to improve the computational efficiency, two
types of techniques have made great contributions to the
dataset compression, namely Dataset Distillation (DD)
(Zhao, Mopuri, and Bilen 2021) and coreset selection (Feldman and Zhang 2020). DD has garnered attention for its
excellent performance. It aims to generate a compact but
informative synthetic dataset, so that models trained with
it can attain a similar or even higher level of accuracy.
However, the latest optimization-oriented DD methods (Kim
et al. 2022; Zhao and Bilen 2023) suffer from high computational costs and poor generalization capability. Specifically, these methods employ a nested loop that alternately
optimizes the distilled dataset and pre-trained model parameters(Cazenavette et al. 2022), as well as relying on
architecture-driven metrics to align the synthetic samples
with the original ones (Zhao, Mopuri, and Bilen 2021; Zhao
and Bilen 2023). Consequently, these limitations make it
difficult to deploy DD algorithms in real-world scenario
and generalize them to other model architectures. Unlike
the synthesis of samples for training in DD, coreset selection aims to identify a most important subset from the
training set, which has been shown to possess great cross-

Code — https://github.com/SLGSP/ADQ

Introduction
Deep learning has witnessed remarkable advancements recently, revolutionizing various tasks in the artificial intelligence community (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015). This progress
is primarily attributed to the abundance of datasets with precise labels, which serve as the foundation for training complex models. However, the expanding size of these datasets
leads to increased computational costs and resource requirements. This challenge underscores the critical need for efficient dataset compression techniques (Lei and Tao 2024),
with focus on reducing the volume of data while ensuring
the consistency of training results.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12093

