The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Less Is More: Token Context-Aware Learning for Object Tracking
Chenlong Xu1 , Bineng Zhong1 * , Qihua Liang1 , Yaozong Zheng1
Guorong Li2 , Shuxiang Song1
1

Key Laboratory of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education,
Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
2
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
xuchenlong@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, qhliang@gxnu.edu.cn, yaozongzheng@stu.gxnu.edu.cn,
liguorong@ucas.edu.cn, songshuxiang@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Recently, several studies have shown that utilizing contextual
information to perceive target states is crucial for object tracking. They typically capture context by incorporating multiple
video frames. However, these naive frame-context methods
fail to consider the importance of each patch within a reference frame, making them susceptible to noise and redundant tokens, which deteriorates tracking performance. To address this challenge, we propose a new token context-aware
tracking pipeline named LMTrack, designed to automatically learn high-quality reference tokens for efficient visual
tracking. Embracing the principle of Less is More, the core
idea of LMTrack is to analyze the importance distribution of
all reference tokens, where important tokens are collected,
continually attended to, and updated. Specifically, a novel Token Context Memory module is designed to dynamically collect high-quality spatio-temporal information of a target in
an autoregressive manner, eliminating redundant background
tokens from the reference frames. Furthermore, an effective
Unidirectional Token Attention mechanism is designed to establish dependencies between reference tokens and search
frame, enabling robust cross-frame association and target localization. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our tracker, achieving state-of-the-art results on tracking
benchmarks such as GOT-10K, TrackingNet, and LaSOT.

Target token

(a) Contribution of different patches to object tracking in template frame.

Decoder
Encoder

Collect & Update

…

Encoder

Decoder
Collect & Update

Encoder

…

(b) Our token context-aware tracking method.

Figure 1: (a) Contribution (number of referenced) of different tokens to object tracking in a template frame. It can be
observed that most background tokens are rarely referenced
during the tracking process, while the target tokens retained
as long-term reference cues. (b) Our token context-aware
tracking method based on the token context memory module
and the unidirectional token attention mechanism.

Introduction
Object tracking is a fundamental component of computer vision, designed to localize and track an arbitrary target within
a video sequence based on its initial location. To tackle
this challenging task, recent research (Yan et al. 2021a;
Fu et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023; Zheng
et al. 2024; Bai et al. 2024) constructs high-performance
tracking algorithms by exploring long-term contextual relationships. Typically, researchers achieve this within multiple
video frames to capture contextual information. However,
these naive methods have a significant drawback: they treat
frame as the smallest units of context, neglecting that the importance of each patch in a reference frame is different for
target localization in the search frame. This oversight makes
them susceptible to redundant noisy information of the reference frame, thereby deteriorating tracking performance.

What type of reference cues play a dominant role in object tracking? To answer this question, we design a simple
Transformer tracker, consisting of a Transformer network
(i.e., ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021)), a classification head,
and a regression head, to explore the impact of each patch
within the template frame on object tracking (localization)
throughout the entire video sequence. During inference, we
first obtain the attention map from the search frame to the
template frame and the classification score map. We then
perform element-wise multiplication of the two maps and
average along the template dimension to calculate the importance score of each token (patch) for target localization in
the search frame. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), this gives us a distribution of importance scores for all reference tokens. We
observe that most background tokens are rarely referenced

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8824

