The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adversity-aware Few-shot Named Entity Recognition via Augmentation Learning
Li Huang1,2 , Haowen Liu1 , Qiang Gao1,2 * , Jiajing Yu1 , Guisong Liu1,2,3 , Xueqin Chen3
1

School of Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
2
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Finance, Ministry of Education, Chengdu, China
3
Kash Institute of Electronics and Information Industry, Kashgar, China
lihuang@swufe.edu.cn, 223081200021@smail.swufe.edu.cn, qianggao@swufe.edu.cn, 223081200001@smail.swufe.edu.cn,
gliu@swufe.edu.cn, nedchen0728@gmail.com
Abstract
Few-shot Named Entity Recognition (NER) spotlights the
tag of novel entity types in data-limited scenarios or lowerresource settings. Advances with Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs), including BERT, GPT, and their variants, have
driven tremendous strategies to leverage context-dependent
representations and exploit predeﬁned relational cues, yielding signiﬁcant gains in witnessing unseen entities. Nevertheless, a fundamental issue exists in prior efforts regarding their
susceptibility to adversarial attacks in the intricate semantic environment. This vulnerability undermines the robustness of semantic representations, exacerbating the challenge
of accurate entity identiﬁcation, especially when transitioning across domains. To this end, we propose an Adversityaware Augment Learning (AAL) solution for the few-shot
NER task, dedicated to retrieving and reinforcing entity prototypes resilient to adversarial inference, thereby enhancing
cross-domain semantic coherence. In particular, AAL employs a two-stage paradigm consisting of training and ﬁnetuning. The process initiates with augmentation learning by
leveraging two kinds of prompt learning schemes, then identiﬁes prototypes under the guidance of a variational manner.
Furthermore, we devise a domain-oriented prototype reﬁnement to optimize prototype learning under conditions of uncertainty attack, facilitating the effective transfer of common
knowledge from source to target domains. The experimental
results, encompassing the few-shot NER datasets under both
certainty and uncertainty conditions, afﬁrm the superiority of
the proposed AAL over several representative baselines, particularly its capability against adversarial attacks.

1

Source Domain

Target Domain

The best way to control these
pets [animal] is to pick them
[animal] off the plants [plant]
by hand.

The battle for customer loyalty
is evident along the confedrate
parkway [fac] strip.

Training
Model

FT

Attack
The battle for customer loyalty
is evident along the confedrate
government [ORG] strip.

Figure 1: Exhibition of few-shot NER associated with uncertain attack condition. “[·]” refers to entity types.

and Nichols 2016; Devlin et al. 2018). This drawback has
inspired interest in the realm of few-shot learning (FSL),
which empowers NER models with the capacity to transfer knowledge from existing examples to scarcity like humans (Ding et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2022).
The dominant solutions with deep neural architectures,
e.g., convolutional networks, recurrent networks, and attention mechanisms, have emerged as the preferred alternatives
in handling few-shot NER tasks. In contrast to traditional
NER efforts, they adaptively seek the diverse dependencies
and interactive relations underlying knowledge correlations,
facilitating the discovery of potentially foundational but contextual collaborations across various domains.
To uncover knowledge correlations in a few-shot manner,
the majority of previous studies attempted to consider tokenlevel dependencies, predominantly striving to discover new
entities by measuring the distance between tokens in the target domain corresponding to the source. For example, (Lin
et al. 2021) used a pre-trained language model to replace the
target entity with other entities that have the same semantic
type. (Wang et al. 2022b) proposed two mutual informationbased training goals to prevent the model from over-relying
on entity-mention information. More recently, (Fang et al.
2023) acknowledged the strength of prototype representations in generalized effectiveness to the few-shot conditions.
Besides, (Wang et al. 2022a) utilized prototype classiﬁcation
to capture the semantic representation of each label. In a nutshell, the current few-shot NER solutions usually concentrate on similarity-based methods (Fritzler, Logacheva, and

Introduction

Named Entity Recognition (NER) constitutes a fundamental task in natural language processing (NLP), which aims
at identifying named entities, such as personal names, organizations, and geographical locations, from unstructured
texts (Lample et al. 2016; Ma and Hovy 2016). Despite
the signiﬁcant advances achieved by existing NER efforts,
their reliance on extensively annotated datasets poses a signiﬁcant constraint when encountering scenarios with scarce
manually tagged samples and the emergence of knowledge
from diverse domains, as well as new entity types (Chiu
* Corresponding author (Qiang Gao)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24132

