The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Who’s the (Multi-)Fairest of Them A LL: Rethinking Interpolation-Based Data
Augmentation Through the Lens of Multicalibration
Karina Halevy,1 2 Karly Hou,2 Charumathi Badrinath2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Harvard University
khalevy@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

its fairness-oriented counterpart Fair Mixup (Chuang and
Mroueh 2021), which linearly interpolate individuals with
features in between majority and minority group attributes.
However, existing augmentation literature measures fairness
through binary metrics like demographic parity and equalized odds (Chuang and Mroueh 2021), which accumulate
loss even when predictors lean toward correct labels. These
metrics can be misleading because data often does not include all predictive features, so some notion of uncertainty
is appropriate in a good predictor but would be penalized.
Furthermore, the methods in Chuang and Mroueh (2021)
only assess and optimize fairness for one minority group,
but a fair predictor should work well on multiple multidimensional intersecting groups.
The metric of multicalibration (MC) (Hebert-Johnson
et al. 2018) accounts for this uncertainty and for the presence of multiple groups by comparing predicted probabilities to true probabilities, averaging over groups of interest,
and considering subsets of a predictor’s support separately.
Hebert-Johnson et al. (2018) also introduce an algorithm,
with runtime inversely proportional to the size of the smallest group, to post-process a predictor using a holdout set
and guarantee a maximum MC violation. Barda et al. (2020)
then use this algorithm to learn prediction adjustments from
a holdout set and apply those adjustments to test predictions. However, such post-processing subtracts a substantial
amount of holdout data from available training data, resulting in even less representation of underrepresented groups
in initial training. Moreover, with runtime inversely proportional to group size, enforcing MC for very small groups
can be slow. The guarantees of MC enforcement and accuracy tradeoff limits proven in Hebert-Johnson et al. (2018)
also only apply to the holdout set, not to unseen test data.
This work examines whether we can combine the desirable properties of MC and data augmentation to supplement
the binary outcome insights that demographic parity and
equalized odds provide. We ask:

Data augmentation methods, especially SoTA interpolationbased methods such as Fair Mixup, have been widely shown
to increase model fairness. However, this fairness is evaluated on metrics that do not capture model uncertainty and on
datasets with only one, relatively large, minority group. As
a remedy, multicalibration has been introduced to measure
fairness while accommodating uncertainty and accounting for
multiple minority groups. However, existing methods of improving multicalibration involve reducing initial training data
to create a holdout set for post-processing, which is not ideal
when minority training data is already sparse. This paper uses
multicalibration to more rigorously examine data augmentation for classification fairness. We stress-test four versions
of Fair Mixup on two structured data classification problems
with up to 81 marginalized groups, evaluating multicalibration violations and balanced accuracy. We find that on nearly
every experiment, Fair Mixup worsens baseline performance
and fairness, but the simple vanilla Mixup outperforms both
Fair Mixup and the baseline, especially when calibrating on
small groups. Combining vanilla Mixup with multicalibration post-processing, which enforces multicalibration through
post-processing on a holdout set, further increases fairness.

Code — https://github.com/ENSCMA2/fairest-mixup
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10575

1

Introduction

Algorithmic fairness has become increasingly important
with the ubiquitous application of machine learning (ML).
Unfairness can arise from many sources (Huang et al. 2022),
including unequal representation of protected groups in data
(Guo et al. 2022). For example, people of color can be underrepresented in clinical trials due to access barriers, lack
of information, and discrimination (Allison, Patel, and Kaur
2022), leading ML models to have trouble predicting treatment outcomes for non-white patients. One way to mitigate underrepresentation is data augmentation, which creates synthetic individuals from the original data (Chuang
and Mroueh 2021; Iosifidis and Ntoutsi 2018; Chawla
et al. 2002; Sharma et al. 2020). A particularly promising
form of augmentation is Mixup (Zhang et al. 2017) and

1. RQ1: Under what conditions can Fair Mixup mitigate
MC violations of neural network predictors on minority
groups while preserving binary classification accuracy?
2. RQ2: When can (Fair) Mixup serve as an alternative to
and/or increase the efficiency of MC post-processing?

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. RQ3: What aspects of Fair Mixup contribute to its suc17014

