The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-View Graph Consistency Learning for Invariant Graph Representations
Jie Chen1, 4 , Hua Mao2 , Wai Lok Woo2 , Chuanbin Liu,3 * , Xi Peng1
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University
3
Center for Scientific Research and Development in Higher Education Institutes, Ministry of Education
4
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and Models for Engineering Numerical Simulation, Sichuan University
chenjie2010@scu.edu.cn, {hua.mao, wailok.woo}@northumbria.ac.uk, liuchuanbin@cutech.edu.cn, pengx.gm@gmail.com
2

Abstract

analysis (Li et al. 2022a) and recommendation systems (Wu
et al. 2021).
In recent years, many research efforts have been directed
toward investigating GNNs for GRL. For example, several
classic GNN models have been proposed to learn meaningful graph representations from graph-structured data,
such as graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and
Welling 2017), variational graph autoencoder (VGAE) (Kipf
and Welling 2016), graph attention network (Veličkovi’c
et al. 2018), graph sampling and aggregation (GraphSAGE)
(Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) and their variants (Tan
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022a). These methods have achieved
impressive link prediction results. However, the potential of
utilizing graph structures for the available graph-structured
data has not been fully exploited.
Self-supervised learning has recently emerged as a
promising representation learning paradigm for GNNs (Hou
et al. 2022; Tsai et al. 2020). It can learn latent graph representations from unlabeled graph-structured data by supervision, which is provided by the data itself with different auxiliary learning tasks. Most self-supervised learningbased algorithms fall into two categories: contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2022b; Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020; You et al. 2020) and generative learning (Tan
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022a; Hou et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2020).
For example, Hassani et al. (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020)
presented a contrastive multiview representation learning
(CMRL) method that learns graph representations by contrasting encodings derived from first-order neighbors and a
graph diffusion module. The feature pairs may have different
data distributions under the two different types of augmented
views. This may have a significant negative impact on measuring the similarity between positive pairs and the dissimilarity between negative pairs when conducting contrastive
learning. Li et al. (Li et al. 2022a) presented a masked graph
autoencoder (MGAE) method that reconstructs a complete
graph structure by masking a portion of the observed edges.
By randomly masking a portion of the edges, the MGAE
method somewhat reduces the redundancy of the graph autoencoder (GAE) in self-supervised graph learning tasks.
The randomness of edge masking causes a sampling information loss problem. Consequently, this is an increasing
concern regarding the capture of the complementary information between the augmented views of a graph.

Graph representation learning is fundamental for analyzing
graph-structured data. Exploring invariant graph representations remains a challenge for most existing graph representation learning methods. In this paper, we propose a cross-view
graph consistency learning (CGCL) method that learns invariant graph representations for link prediction. First, two complementary augmented views are derived from an incomplete
graph structure through a coupled graph structure augmentation scheme. This augmentation scheme mitigates the potential information loss that is commonly associated with various
data augmentation techniques involving raw graph data, such
as edge perturbation, node removal, and attribute masking.
Second, we propose a CGCL model that can learn invariant
graph representations. A cross-view training scheme is proposed to train the proposed CGCL model. This scheme attempts to maximize the consistency information between one
augmented view and the graph structure reconstructed from
the other augmented view. Furthermore, we offer a comprehensive theoretical CGCL analysis. This paper empirically
and experimentally demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed CGCL method, achieving competitive results on graph
datasets in comparisons with several state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs), inheriting the representation learning advantages of traditional deep neural networks
(Wang et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a; Chen et al. 2023a,c;
Peng et al. 2022), have become increasingly popular for
analyzing graph-structured data (Hassani and Khasahmadi
2020). Graph representation learning (GRL) aims to learn
meaningful node embeddings, referred to as graph representations, from both graph structures and node features via
GNNs (Kipf and Welling 2017). Graph representations have
been extensively applied in downstream tasks, e.g., link prediction. Link prediction seeks to predict the missing connections between node pairs from an incomplete graph structure. It shows the significant impact of developing applications with graph-structured data (Liu et al. 2023b), including
citation network analysis (Li et al. 2022a), social network
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15795

