The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Granularity Open Intent Classification via
Adaptive Granular-Ball Decision Boundary
Yanhua Li1,2 , Xiaocao Ouyang1,2 , Chaofan Pan1,2 , Jie Zhang1,2 , Sen Zhao3 ,
Shuyin Xia3 , Xin Yang1,2 * , Guoyin Wang4 , Tianrui Li5
1

School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu 611130,
China
2
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Finance, Ministry of Education, Chengdu 611130, China
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence, Chongqing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China
4
National Center for Applied Mathematics in Chongqing, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, China
5
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 611756, China
yyhhliyanhua@163.com, oyxiaocao@swufe.edu.cn, pan.chaofan@foxmail.com, jiezhanglx@gmail.com,
zhaosen@cqupt.edu.cn, xiasy@cqupt.edu.cn, yangxin@swufe.edu.cn, wanggy@cqnu.edu.cn, trli@swjtu.edu.cn
Known intent

Abstract

Open intent

Open space risk
Empirical risk

Open intent classification is critical for the development of dialogue systems, aiming to accurately classify known intents
into their corresponding classes while identifying unknown
intents. Prior boundary-based methods assumed known intents fit within compact spherical regions, focusing on coarsegrained representation and precise spherical decision boundaries. However, these assumptions are often violated in practical scenarios, making it difficult to distinguish known intent classes from unknowns using a single spherical boundary. To tackle these issues, we propose a Multi-granularity
Open intent classification method via adaptive Granular-Ball
decision boundary (MOGB). Our MOGB method consists of
two modules: representation learning and decision boundary
acquiring. To effectively represent the intent distribution, we
design a hierarchical representation learning method. This involves iteratively alternating between adaptive granular-ball
clustering and nearest sub-centroid classification to capture
fine-grained semantic structures within known intent classes.
Furthermore, multi-granularity decision boundaries are constructed for open intent classification by employing granularballs with varying centroids and radii. Extensive experiments
conducted on three public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Class 1

Inter-open intent
Intra-open intent
(a)

Centroids

Open space risk

Empirical risk

No risk
Sub-part 1-1
Sub-part 1-2

Sub-part 1-3
Muti-granularity boundaries
(b)

Figure 1: (a) Previous boundary-based methods struggle to
learn a boundary for open intent classification by balancing
open space risk and empirical risk. (b) Our proposed Multigranularity decision boundary can effectively eliminate both
two risks.

Recent researches endeavor to develop effective methods
to tackle the issue of open intent classification. Early methods (Jain, Scheirer, and Boult 2014; Hendrycks and Gimpel
2022) focused on establishing a K-class classifier and determining whether a sample belongs to unknowns by checking if its maximum probability exceeds a certain threshold.
Due to the overfitting of deep learning approaches (Guo
et al. 2017), K-class classifiers tend to overconfidence about
known intent classes and are prone to misclassifying unknown intents as known ones. To overcome this limitation, some studies train a K+1 classifier directly, leveraging
pseudo-unknown data to represent the open intents (Zheng,
Chen, and Huang 2020; Cheng et al. 2022).
In recent years, boundary-based methods (Zhang, Xu,
and Lin 2021; Zhang et al. 2023a; Yang et al. 2022) have
been proposed to learn specific decision boundaries between known intents and unknowns. These methods often
involve two stages, i.e. representation learning and boundary learning. They mainly focused on learning more accurate decision boundaries to balance open space risk (classify unknowns as known) and empirical risk (classify known

Code — https://github.com/Liyanhuaa/MOGB

Introduction
The identification of user intent is critical for dialogue systems, especially as individuals increasingly rely on these
systems to support both daily activities and professional
tasks. In real-world applications, dialogue systems often encounter intents from unknown (open) classes that they have
not seen during training, resulting in their inability to handle these intents effectively (Zheng, Chen, and Huang 2020).
To address this, open intent classification aims to classify
known intents while identifying unknown intents (Shu, Xu,
and Liu 2017).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24512

