The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learnability of Parameter-Bounded Bayes Nets
Arnab Bhattacharyya1 * , Davin Choo2 * , Sutanu Gayen3 * , Dimitrios Myrisiotis4 *
1

University of Warwick, United Kingdom
2
Harvard University, USA
3
IIT Kanpur, India
4
CNRS@CREATE LTD., Singapore

distributions of X1 and X5 , two for the conditional probability distributions of X2 and X4 , and four for that of X3 . In the
rest of this work, we refer to the numbers used in defining
the CPTs above as parameters.

Abstract
Bayes nets are extensively used in practice to efficiently represent joint probability distributions over a set of random
variables and capture dependency relations. Prior work has
shown that given a distribution P defined as the marginal distribution of a Bayes net, it is NP-hard to decide whether there
is a parameter-bounded Bayes net that represents P. They
called this problem LEARN. In this work, we extend the NPhardness result of LEARN and prove the NP-hardness of a
promise search variant of LEARN, whereby the Bayes net
in question is guaranteed to exist and one is asked to find
such a Bayes net. We complement our hardness result with a
positive result about the sample complexity that is sufficient
to recover a parameter-bounded Bayes net that is close (in
TV distance) to a given distribution P, represented by some
parameter-bounded Bayes net, thereby generalizing a degreebounded sample complexity literature result.

1

X5
X1

X2

X3
G

X5
X4

X1

X2

X4

H

Figure 1: Left: A Bayes net G such that the distribution P of
our example is represented by G. Right: A Bayes net H such
that the distribution that arises from the distribution P after
marginalizing out X3 is represented by H.

Introduction

Bayesian networks (Pearl 1988), or simply Bayes nets, are
directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), accompanied by a collection of conditional probability distributions (that is, one for
each vertex), that are used to represent joint probability distributions over dependent random variables in an elegant
and succinct manner. As an example, consider a distribution
P over five Boolean variables X = {X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 , X5 }.
Regardless of the dependencies between the variables, P can
always be represented by a lookup table that has 25 − 1 = 31
entries, with one entry for each possible Boolean outcome
except one. However, known dependencies between variables
may induce a sparser representation. If X2 depends on X1 ,
X3 depends on {X2 , X5 }, and X4 depends on X3 , then the
joint distribution P(x1 , . . . , x5 ) decomposes as
P(x1 ) · P(x2 | x1 ) · P(x3 | x2 , x5 ) · P(x4 | x3 ) · P(x5 ).

It is a standard result (Pearl 1988) that there exists a Bayes
net G of p parameters that represents a probability distribution
P if and only if P is Markov with respect to some Bayes net
H of p parameters that has the same underlying DAG as G.
(It could be that G = H, but this is not necessary.) Here,
the property of a distribution P being Markov with respect
to a Bayes net G means that a certain graphical separation
condition in the underlying DAG of G, known as d-separation,
implies conditional independence in P (see Section 2.2 for
formal definitions). We shall make use of this equivalence in
the sequel.
A series of works studied the problem of learning the
underlying DAG of a Bayes net from data, by focusing on
maximizing certain scoring criterion by the underlying DAG,
see, e.g., (Cooper and Herskovits 1992; Spiegelhalter et al.
1993; Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering 1995). This task
was later shown to be NP-hard by Chickering (1996), which
then raised the following natural fundamental question:

In fact, one can represent P with a relatively sparse Bayes net
G (see Figure 1) with conditional probability tables (CPTs)
associated with each vertex. Observe that 8 < 31 numbers
suffice to describe the CPTs: One for each of the Bernoulli

Given a succinct description of a distribution P (that
is not in terms of a Bayes net), how easy is it to find a
Bayes net G such that P is Markov with respect to G?

*Work done while the author was affiliated with the National
University of Singapore, Singapore.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Unfortunately, Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek (2004)
showed that deciding whether a given distribution P is
Markov with respect to some Bayes net of at most p ∈ N
parameters or not is NP-hard.
15559

