The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Macro-AUC Oriented Imbalanced Multi-Label Continual Learning
Yan Zhang, Guoqiang Wu* , Bingzheng Wang, Teng Pang, Haoliang Sun, Yilong Yin*
School of Software, Shandong University
yannzhang9@gmail.com, guoqiangwu90@gmail.com, binzhwang@gmail.com, silencept7@gmail.com,
haolsun@sdu.edu.cn, ylyin@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract

Traditional machine learning methods assume an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data pattern. However, in practice, humans continually learn new knowledge
and retain previous knowledge. This process, known as Continual Learning (CL) (Ring 1994), aims to adapt to new tasks
while mitigating Catastrophic Forgetting (French 1999).
Recently, CL has gained considerable attention (Wang
et al. 2023), where the replay-based approaches (Chaudhry
et al. 2019; Rebuffi et al. 2017) often show promising performance (Knoblauch, Husain, and Diethe 2020). Most of
these works concentrate on multi-class classification, where
an instance is associated with a single label. In some realworld scenarios, however, an instance is often associated

with multiple labels simultaneously. This raises the study
of Multi-Label Learning (MLL) (McCallum 1999). In this
paper, our focus lies on Multi-Label Continual Learning
(MLCL) (Kim, Jeong, and Kim 2020), an inherently more
challenging learning task that has not yet been extensively
explored. MLCL is increasingly relevant in real-world applications. This setting is common in areas such as healthcare,
finance, and autonomous systems, where the ability to handle multiple labels as new labels emerge is crucial (Kassim
2024; Dalle Pezze et al. 2023; Ceccon et al. 2024).
In MLCL (or MLL), there is a natural and inherent challenge - class imbalance, which is a special characteristic of
MLL, unlike the imbalance case of multi-class problem. The
imbalance issue in MLCL we considered is for each MLL
task in the continual setting, which mainly includes two aspects: imbalance within labels, and imbalance between labels. Specifically, imbalance within labels is that for each label, the numbers of negative instances are often higher than
the positive instances1 . In contrast, imbalance between labels is that the number of positive instances of each label
is not balanced. For the performance evaluation on imbalanced cases, various measures are developed, e.g., F1 score
and mAP, etc. Among them, Macro-AUC (Zhang and Zhou
2013) serves as a suitable and widely-used measure in practice, which is considered in this paper.
Optimizing Macro-AUC in MLL directly can lead to NPhard problems (Tarekegn, Giacobini, and Michalak 2021),
as it is discontinuous and non-convex. So it is common
to design a surrogate loss to solve this issue. Meanwhile,
it is crucial to address the imbalance problem to optimize Macro-AUC. However, commonly used losses such
as cross-entropy loss are ineffective in handling imbalance,
leading to relatively low Macro-AUC performance (see Table 1 in Section ). To tackle imbalance and maximize
Macro-AUC for multi-label batch learning, recent theory
work (Wu, Li, and Yin 2023) proposes a reweighted univariate (RU) loss with superior formal learning guarantees.
Both theory and experiments show that RU loss enjoys the
high performance of pairwise loss, without its high computational complexity, and the computational efficiency of univariate losses (e.g., cross-entropy), which suffer from lower

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Positive and negative instances refer to samples that either contain or lack the corresponding label.

In Continual Learning (CL), while existing work primarily
focuses on the multi-class classification task, there has been
limited research on Multi-Label Learning (MLL). In practice,
MLL datasets are often class-imbalanced, making it inherently challenging, a problem that is even more acute in CL.
Due to its sensitivity to imbalance, Macro-AUC is an appropriate and widely used measure in MLL. However, there is
no research to optimize Macro-AUC in MLCL specifically.
To fill this gap, in this paper, we propose a new memory
replay-based method to tackle the imbalance issue for MacroAUC-oriented MLCL. Specifically, inspired by recent theory work, we propose a new Reweighted Label-DistributionAware Margin (RLDAM) loss. Furthermore, to be compatible with the RLDAM loss, a new memory-updating strategy
named Weight Retain Updating (WRU) is proposed to maintain the numbers of positive and negative instances of the
original dataset in memory. Theoretically, we provide superior generalization analyses of the RLDAM-based algorithm
in terms of Macro-AUC, separately in batch MLL and MLCL
settings. This is the first work to offer theoretical generalization analyses in MLCL to our knowledge. Finally, a series of
experimental results illustrate the effectiveness of our method
over several baselines.

Code —
https://github.com/ML-Group-SDU/Macro-AUC-CL

Introduction

22614

