The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Logic-Q: Improving Deep Reinforcement Learning-based Quantitative Trading via
Program Sketch-based Tuning
Zhiming Li1 * , Junzhe Jiang2 * , Yushi Cao1 , Aixin Cui3 , Bozhi Wu4 , Bo Li2 ,
Yang Liu1 , Danny Dongning Sun5†
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4
Singapore Management University, Singapore
5
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
{zhiming001,yushi002}@e.ntu.edu.sg, junzhe.jiang@connect.polyu.hk, 1155209949@link.cuhk.edu.hk,
comp-bo.li@polyu.edu.hk, bozhiwu@smu.edu.sg, yangliu@ntu.edu.sg, sundn@pcl.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has revolutionized quantitative trading (Q-trading) by achieving decent performance
without significant human expert knowledge. Despite its
achievements, we observe that the current state-of-the-art DRL
models are still ineffective in identifying the market trends,
causing them to miss good trading opportunity or suffer from
large drawdowns when encountering market crashes. To address this limitation, a natural approach is to incorporate human expert knowledge in identifying market trends. Whereas,
such knowledge is abstract and hard to be quantified. In order
to effectively leverage abstract human expert knowledge, in
this paper, we propose a universal logic-guided deep reinforcement learning framework for Q-trading, called Logic-Q. In
particular, Logic-Q adopts the program synthesis by sketching
paradigm and introduces a logic-guided model design that
leverages a lightweight, plug-and-play market trend-aware
program sketch to determine the market trend and correspondingly adjusts the DRL policy in a post-hoc manner. Extensive
evaluations of two popular quantitative trading tasks demonstrate that Logic-Q can significantly improve the performance
of previous state-of-the-art DRL trading strategies.

Figure 1: Illustration of the cumulative return curves of two
state-of-the-art DRL stock trading strategies during two market crashes of the US stock market.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has revolutionized many
quantitative trading tasks, e.g., stock trading (Ee et al. 2020;
Nan, Perumal, and Zaiane 2022), portfolio allocation (Guan
and Liu 2021; Cui et al. 2023), order execution (Fang et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2023), etc. Unlike traditional analytical
solutions (Bertsimas and Lo 1998; Almgren and Chriss 2001),
the DRL strategies do not require significant human expert
knowledge to design and are able to capture the market’s
microstructure automatically (Fang et al. 2021).
Despite its great success, previous works present that the
DRL strategies are prone to overfitting to spurious noise
within the historical context sequence (i.e., training data),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18584

which results in their poor performance on testing context
sequence (Zhang et al. 2023) when encountering extreme
market conditions. To achieve more robust and profitable
DRL strategies, many recent efforts have been made. E.g., for
the order execution task, Fang et al. (Fang et al. 2021) propose
a novel policy distillation approach based on the teacherstudent learning paradigm, which presents better performance
on future trading (test) period, and for the stock trading task,
Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022) introduce
a novel ensemble reinforcement learning approach which
dynamically selects the best-performing agent policy among
three popular DRL policies. This approach has been shown to
achieve better risk-adjusted returns during the testing period.
However, even state-of-the-art DRL strategies struggle
to accurately identify market trends. This leads to missed
trading opportunities and large drawdowns when encountering market crashes. Figure 1 shows the cumulative return
curves of two state-of-the-art DRL stock trading strategies
(i.e., Sharpe-Ens (Liu et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2020) and
AlphaMix (Sun et al. 2023)) during two market crashes of
the US stock market. pt denotes the Dow Jones Industrial
Average (DJIA) market index. Specifically, for both cases,
we observe that as pt descends, both DRL strategies fail to
foresee the market crash, and the cumulative return drops

