The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Open-Set Heterogeneous Domain Adaptation: Theoretical Analysis and Algorithm
Thai-Hoang Pham1,2 , Yuanlong Wang1,2 , Changchang Yin1,2 , Xueru Zhang1 , Ping Zhang1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, USA
2
Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, USA
{pham.375,wang.16050,yin.731,zhang.12807,zhang.10631}@osu.edu

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) tackles the issue of distribution shift
by learning a model from a source domain that generalizes to
a target domain. However, most existing DA methods are designed for scenarios where the source and target domain data
lie within the same feature space, which limits their applicability in real-world situations. Recently, heterogeneous DA
(HeDA) methods have been introduced to address the challenges posed by heterogeneous feature space between source
and target domains. Despite their successes, current HeDA
techniques fall short when there is a mismatch in both feature
and label spaces. To address this, this paper explores a new
DA scenario called open-set HeDA (OSHeDA). In OSHeDA,
the model must not only handle heterogeneity in feature space
but also identify samples belonging to novel classes. To tackle
this challenge, we first develop a novel theoretical framework
that constructs learning bounds for prediction error on target
domain. Guided by this framework, we propose a new DA
method called Representation Learning for OSHeDA (RLOSHeDA). This method is designed to simultaneously transfer knowledge between heterogeneous data sources and identify novel classes. Experiments across text, image, and clinical data demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm.

1

Figure 1: A motivating example about OSHeDA in the context of screening diseases using electrocardiogram (ECG)
data. While digital ECGs comprise the majority of labeled
data for training ML models for disease screening, physical or paper ECGs remain prevalent worldwide. Thus, the
transfer of knowledge from digital ECG datasets is essential to support the training of ML models that analyze paper
ECGs. Moreover, ML systems must effectively manage rare
abnormalities (indicated with gray boxes), which may not be
available in training data, to prevent misdiagnosis.
the same feature and label spaces. Consequently, they may
fail when the source and target domain data lie in different
spaces. For example, heterogeneous feature space is common in biomedical domains in which medical terms undergoes continuous evolution, leading to the retirement of outdated terms (e.g., ICD-9 coding system) and the introduction of novel ones (e.g., ICD-10 coding system) (Grief et al.
2016). In such cases, acquiring training data that seamlessly
aligns with target domain’s feature space can be impractical or excessively costly. Heterogeneous domain adaptation
(HeDA) methods have emerged to handle the heterogeneity
observed in distinct feature spaces, which often vary significantly between domains (Li et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2022).
Despite the significant successes achieved by these HeDA
methods, they face a major limitation: current HeDA techniques can only address heterogeneity in feature space and
are inadequate when there is a mismatch in both feature and
label spaces. This limitation restricts the practical application of HeDA methods in many real-world scenarios because
neglecting label mismatch, such as new classes emerging in
the target domain, can lead to negative transfer effects from
the source to the target domains (Liu et al. 2019).

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) techniques have achieved unprecedented success over the past decades in numerous areas (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). However, ML systems are
often built on the assumption that training and testing data
are independent and identically distributed, which is commonly violated in real-world applications where the environment changes during model deployment. Existing works
have shown that the performance of ML models often deteriorates due to distribution shifts between training and testing data (Ben-David et al. 2010; Quiñonero-Candela et al.
2022). To learn a model robust under distribution shifts,
domain adaptation (DA) (Ben-David et al. 2010; Mansour,
Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2009) has been proposed to transfer knowledge from a source domain that possesses abundant labeled data to a different but relevant target domain.
Existing DA methods, however, typically assume a homogeneous scenario where the source and target domains have
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19895

