The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Forward KL Regularized Preference Optimization
for Aligning Diffusion Policies
Zhao Shan1,2 * , Chenyou Fan1,3 * , Shuang Qiu4 , Jiyuan Shi1 , Chenjia Bai1, 5†
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
2
Tsinghua University
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University Xi’an
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
ShenZhen Research Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University
Abstract

the diffusion policy exhibits strong capabilities in modeling
complex behaviors.
A central problem in learning a diffusion policy is aligning the policy output with human intents (Shin, Dragan, and
Brown 2023; Yuan et al. 2024b; Yu et al. 2024). Existing
methods can be roughly divided into three categories. (i)
Several methods collect expert trajectories and directly learn
a diffusion policy from the expert dataset (Reuss et al. 2023;
Ze et al. 2024), while they usually require a large number
of expert trajectories to model human behaviors. To ensure
the diffusion policy generates actions with desired properties, (ii) several methods adopt conditional generation by
employing the cumulative return as the condition in modeling the trajectory (Yuan et al. 2023; Ajay et al. 2023), and
actions with high returns can be generated via guided sampling (Ho and Salimans 2021; Nichol and Dhariwal 2021).
(iii) Other works consider diffusion policy as an actor in an
RL framework and perform policy improvement by maximizing cumulative rewards. Then actions can be sampled
with high Q-values (Wang, Hunt, and Zhou 2023; Kang
et al. 2023). Although the latter two methods can learn policies from an arbitrary dataset, they rely on manually defined
reward functions for each task, which can be difficult to obtain in embodied tasks (Dong et al. 2024; Gu et al. 2023).
Motivated by recent advances in Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al. 2022; Bai
et al. 2022) that align human preference with Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI 2023; Touvron et al. 2023),
we wonder whether the diffusion policy can be aligned with
human intent directly from a collection of preference data,
which removes the potentially incorrect assumption that the
reward function alone drives human preferences (Knox et al.
2024; Lambert et al. 2024) and aims to guide the diffusion
policy from preferences directly.
In this work, we propose a novel framework, named Forward KL regularized Preference optimization for aligning
Diffusion policies (FKPD), to align the diffusion policy with
preferences. To achieve this, FKPD learns a basic diffusion policy from the offline dataset, then aligns the policy
to preferences via policy optimization with a forward KL
regularization with respect to the offline dataset. In the first
stage, the basic policy recovers the complex action distribution in the dataset without considering the preference la-

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in sequential decision-making by leveraging the highly expressive model capabilities in policy learning. A central problem
for learning diffusion policies is to align the policy output
with human intents in various tasks. To achieve this, previous methods conduct return-conditioned policy generation
or Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based policy optimization,
while they both rely on pre-defined reward functions. In this
work, we propose a novel framework, Forward KL regularized Preference optimization for aligning Diffusion policies,
to align the diffusion policy with preferences directly. We
first train a diffusion policy from the offline dataset without considering the preference, and then align the policy to
the preference data via direct preference optimization. During
the alignment phase, we formulate direct preference learning
in a diffusion policy, where the forward KL regularization is
employed in preference optimization to avoid generating outof-distribution actions. We conduct extensive experiments for
MetaWorld manipulation and D4RL tasks. The results show
our method exhibits superior alignment with preferences and
outperforms previous state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
In solving sequential decision-making problems, Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms typically adopt Gaussian
or deterministic policy classes in policy optimization. Although such a policy class has successfully solved various challenging tasks (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019;
Lange, Gabel, and Riedmiller 2012), it can be limited in
learning multi-modal policies and lead to sub-optimal behaviors in complex environments (Janner et al. 2022). Recently, diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; He
et al. 2024) demonstrated superior performance compared to
previous policy classes, especially for offline RL where the
dataset is collected by a mixture of policies (Fu et al. 2020;
Qin et al. 2022; Yuan et al. 2024a; Fan et al. 2024), or the
embodied manipulation tasks where the policy should imitate diverse human behaviors (Chi et al. 2023; Pearce et al.
2023). Leveraging the highly expressive model capabilities,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14386

