The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning with Open-world Noisy Data via Class-independent Margin in Dual
Representation Space
Linchao Pan1 , Can Gao1, 2 * , Jie Zhou2, 3 , Jinbao Wang2, 3
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
linchaopan2022@163.com, 2005gaocan@163.com, jie jpu@163.com, wangjb@szu.edu.cn
2

Learning with Noisy Labels (LNL) aims to improve the
model generalization when facing data with noisy labels, and
existing methods generally assume that noisy labels come
from known classes, called closed-set noise. However, in realworld scenarios, noisy labels from similar unknown classes,
i.e., open-set noise, may occur during the training and inference stage. Such open-world noisy labels may significantly
impact the performance of LNL methods. In this study, we
propose a novel dual-space joint learning method to robustly
handle the open-world noise. To mitigate model overfitting on
closed-set and open-set noises, a dual representation space is
constructed by two networks. One is a projection network that
learns shared representations in the prototype space, while
the other is a One-Vs-All (OVA) network that makes predictions using unique semantic representations in the classindependent space. Then, bi-level contrastive learning and
consistency regularization are introduced in two spaces to enhance the detection capability for data with unknown classes.
To benefit from the memorization effects across different
types of samples, class-independent margin criteria are designed for sample identification, which selects clean samples, weights closed-set noise, and filters open-set noise effectively. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods and achieves an average accuracy improvement of 4.55% and an AUROC improvement of 6.17% on CIFAR80N.

Training

Testing

…

…

Clean
…

Closed-set

…

Known

…

…

Open-set

Unknown

Sym-80%

60
Accuracy (%)

Abstract

45
30

CIR+ Clean
CIR+ w/o Open
CIR+ w/ Open
Ours w/ Open

15
0

0

50

100 150
Epoch

200

Figure 1: Illustration of the LOND setup and the effect of
open-set noise. Left: In addition to closed-set noise, openset noise is also present in the training and testing stage.
Right: Open-set noise (w/ Open) significantly degrades performance on CIFAR80N with 80% symmetric noise.

thereby degrading model generalization and performance.
Therefore, it is crucial to develop effective methods for
DNNs to learn from data with noisy labels.
Learning with Noisy Labels (LNL) has emerged as an effective learning paradigm for data with noisy labels (Song
et al. 2023). Recently, a variety of methods have been proposed to train robust models directly on all data (Han et al.
2018a; Zhang and Sabuncu 2018; Yi et al. 2022), while others try to identify label noise and reduce its negative effects
with carefully designed strategies (Ortego et al. 2021; Karim
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022, 2024; Yi et al. 2023). Most previous works generally focus on closed-set noise, which assumes that noisy labels still belong to known classes.
In more realistic scenarios, open-set noise from similar
unknown classes may also occur in the training and inference stage (Wu et al. 2021), which poses significant challenges to LNL methods. This problem setup, called Learning with Open-world Noisy Data (LOND), is illustrated in
the left subplot of Figure 1. For instance, in a cat-dog classification problem, images of cats and dogs may be mislabeled
as each other, resulting in closed-set noise. Due to similar
features, open-set noise also occurs in the training and inference stage, where the similar unknown classes of lion and
wolf may be labeled as cat and dog. These open-set noises
significantly degrade the performance of the existing LNL
model (Yi et al. 2023), as shown in the orange lines of the
right subplot. Therefore, addressing the LOND problem re-

Code — https://github.com/iCAN-SZU/LOND-DRS

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in many fields, while their effectiveness heavily relies on
a large amount of data with accurate and complete labels.
Nevertheless, these high-quality labels are generally annotated by domain experts at the expense of high cost, thus
some less-costly techniques are used to collect large-scale
datasets, such as web crawling and crowdsourcing (Song
et al. 2023). As a result, these non-expert manners inevitably
introduce annotation errors and generate datasets with noisy
labels. It has been shown that the over-parameterized DNNs
can easily memorize the noisy labels (Zhang et al. 2017),
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6290

