The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prototype-Guided Multimodal Relation Extraction based on Entity Attributes
Zefan Zhang 1 , Weiqi Zhang 1 , Yanhui Li 1 , Tian Bai 1 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering,
Ministry of Education, Jilin University
zefan23@mails.jlu.edu.cn, zwq23@mails.jlu.edu.cn, yanhui23@mails.jlu.edu.cn, baitian@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

Query: Perrie (PER) for LMX (Unseen
Entity).

Multimodal Relation Extraction (MRE) aims to predict relations between head and tail entities based on the context
of sentence-image pairs. Most existing MRE methods progressively incorporate textual and visual inputs to dominate
the learning process, assuming both contribute significantly
to the task. However, the diverse visual appearances and text
with ambiguous semantics contain less-informative contexts
for the corresponding relation. To tackle these challenges,
we highlight the importance of semantically invariant entity
attributes that encompass fine-grained categories. Towards
this, we propose a novel Prototype-Guided Multimodal Relation Extraction (PG-MRE) framework based on Entity Attributes. Specifically, we first generate detailed entity explanations using Large Language Models (LLMs) to supplement
the attribute semantics. Then, the Attribute Prototype Module
(APM) refines attribute categories and condenses scattered
entity attribute features into cluster-level prototypes. Furthermore, prototype-aligned attribute features guide diverse visual appearance features to produce compact and distinctive
multimodal representations in the Relation Prototype Module
(RPM). Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
gains superior relation classification capability (especially in
scenarios involving various unseen entities), achieving new
state-of-the-art performances on MNRE dataset.

(a)

Explanation: LMX is a collaboration
featuring Perrie Edwards.
Relation → /per/org/member_of

(b) Emilia Clarke (PER)-Member_ofDolce and Gabbana (ORG)

(c) Harry (PER)-Peer-Liam
(PER)

Per/Org/Member_of
Per/Per/Peer

(d) Juan Pablo Montoya (PER)-PeerMichael Andretti (PER)

Figure 1: (a) shows the incomprehensible text (17.04%). (b),
(c) and (d) describe the high intra-class variation (12.08%)
and inter-class similarity (43.06%) in the diverse visual appearance. All ratios are the results we annotated on the
MNRE test dataset.

Introduction
Multimodal Relation Extraction (MRE) (Zheng et al.
2021a,b) aims to identify the relation between the given entities based on image and text. It is a fundamental task in
the interaction field of computer vision (Wu et al. 2024a,b;
Liu et al. 2022; Yao, Li, and Xiao 2024; Yao et al. 2024) and
natural language processing (Zhang, Ji, and Liu 2023; Zhang
et al. 2024). Multimodal relation extraction aims to enhance
computer understanding of textual relations by integrating
visual data.
Previous research has primarily focused on identifying
relations between entities from textual contexts (Hu et al.
2020b,a, 2021, 2022b). Other studies (Zheng et al. 2021a,b)
have emphasized multimodal entity alignment, which involves locating textual entities within visual features to better understand their relations. Despite their remarkable ef-

forts (Chen et al. 2022a; Wang et al. 2022b; Hu et al. 2023b),
current research still faces several challenges:
1. Less-informative input contexts. In textual contexts,
the semantics of input text is often too obscure. Entities may
incorporate novel vocabularies unseen in both the training
corpus and the pre-trained language model’s vocabulary, as
the “LMX” shown in Figure 1 (a). In visual contexts, entities exhibit diverse visual appearances. As the example
shown in Figure 1 (c), images depicting the “peer” relation
often feature two or more people. However, there is an interclass similarity in relations, as seen in Figure 1 (b), where
“member of” and “peer” relations have similar visual representations. Additionally, there is significant visual variation
within the same class, as demonstrated in Figure 1 (c) and
(d), which shows a racing scene that differs greatly from typical “peer” scenarios. Both diverse visual appearances and

* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26003

