The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Breaking Barriers in Physical-World Adversarial Examples: Improving
Robustness and Transferability via Robust Feature
Yichen Wang1,2,4,5,6 , Yuxuan Chou6 , Ziqi Zhou1,2,3,7 , Hangtao Zhang6 , Wei Wan1,2,4,5,6 ,
Shengshan Hu1,2,4,5,6 , Minghui Li8
1

National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
2
Services Computing Technology and System Lab
3
Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security
5
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
6
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
7
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
8
School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{wangyichen,yuxuanchou,zhouziqi, hangt zhang,wanwei 0303, hushengshan, minghuili}@hust.edu.cn
Abstract
As deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely applied in the
physical world, many researches are focusing on physicalworld adversarial examples (PAEs), which introduce perturbations to inputs and cause the model’s incorrect outputs.
However, existing PAEs face two challenges: unsatisfactory
attack performance (i.e., poor transferability and insufficient
robustness to environment conditions), and difficulty in balancing attack effectiveness with stealthiness, where better attack effectiveness often makes PAEs more perceptible.
In this paper, we explore a novel perturbation-based method
to overcome the challenges. For the first challenge, we introduce a strategy Deceptive RF injection based on robust features (RFs) that are predictive, robust to perturbations, and
consistent across different models. Specifically, it improves
the transferability and robustness of PAEs by covering RFs of
other classes onto the predictive features in clean images. For
the second challenge, we introduce another strategy Adversarial Semantic Pattern Minimization, which removes most
perturbations and retains only essential adversarial patterns
in AEs. Based on the two strategies, we design our method
Robust Feature Coverage Attack (RFCoA), comprising Robust Feature Disentanglement and Adversarial Feature Fusion. In the first stage, we extract target class RFs in feature space. In the second stage, we use attention-based feature fusion to overlay these RFs onto predictive features of
clean images and remove unnecessary perturbations. Experiments show our method’s superior transferability, robustness,
and stealthiness compared to existing state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, our method’s effectiveness can extend to
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs), indicating its potential applicability to more complex tasks.

Figure 1: Our strategies Deceptive RF Injection and Adversarial Semantic Pattern Minimization.
(Iandola et al. 2014), natural language processing (Achiam
et al. 2023), and speech recognition (Maas et al. 2017). However, their inherent security issues have become increasingly
prominent. One of the widely studied problems is the adversarial attack (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Zhou
et al. 2024a, 2023a; Song et al. 2025), where the adversary
manipulates the model to output incorrect results by adding
perturbations to the inputs. Previous works focus on adversarial examples (AEs) in the digital domain, which can be
categorized into two approaches: perturbation-based methods (Madry et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2024b), and patch-based
methods (Brown et al. 2017; Casper et al. 2022). The former involve adding perturbations usually constrained by a
specific norm, offering better stealthiness, while the latter
involve applying elaborate patches to specific regions of the
images, providing better attack performance but breaching
the stealthiness.
With the application of DNNs in the physical world, such
as autonomous driving (Zhang et al. 2024a) and facial recognition (Li et al. 2024), recent works pay more attention to
AEs in real-world scenarios, known as physical-world adversarial examples (PAEs). Due to environmental factors in

Code — https://github.com/CGCL-codes/RFCoA

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant
milestones in various domains such as image recognition
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8069

