The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SKI Models: Skeleton Induced Vision-Language Embeddings for Understanding
Activities of Daily Living
Arkaprava Sinha1 , Dominick Reilly1 , Francois Bremond2, 3 , Pu Wang1 , Srijan Das1
1

University of North Carolina at Charlotte
2
Université Côte d’Azur
3
Inria
{asinha13, sdas24}@charlotte.edu

Abstract

from multiple viewpoints. These characteristics limit the
“generalizability” of video models trained on web videos
to those containing ADL. Consequently, this distributional
shift in video representations causes the video models to
struggle in recognizing action categories not encountered
during training as illustrated in Figure 1. As a result, these
models lack robustness as zero-shot learners, a crucial characteristic necessary for monitoring systems to detect anomalous human gestures indicative of cognitive decline. This
motivates us to develop vision-language models (VLMs) capable of generalizing to unseen ADL scenarios. While the
aforementioned distribution shift can be mitigated by training VLMs (Rasheed et al. 2023; Ni et al. 2022; Huang et al.
2024) on ADL videos (Shahroudy et al. 2016; Liu et al.
2019), these models still struggle to effectively address the
inherent challenges in ADL due to the lack of specialized
operations within VLMs designed to tackle them.

The introduction of vision-language models like CLIP has
enabled the development of foundational video models capable of generalizing to unseen videos and human actions.
However, these models are typically trained on web videos,
which often fail to capture the challenges present in Activities of Daily Living (ADL) videos. Existing works address
ADL-specific challenges, such as similar appearances, subtle motion patterns, and multiple viewpoints, by combining
3D skeletons and RGB videos. However, these approaches
are not integrated with language, limiting their ability to generalize to unseen action classes. In this paper, we introduce
SKI models, which integrate 3D skeletons into the visionlanguage embedding space. SKI models leverage a skeletonlanguage model, SkeletonCLIP, to infuse skeleton information into Vision Language Models (VLMs) and Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) through collaborative training. Notably, SKI models do not require skeleton data during inference, enhancing their robustness for real-world applications. The effectiveness of SKI models is validated on
three popular ADL datasets for zero-shot action recognition
and video caption generation tasks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/thearkaprava/SKI-Models

1

Instead of relying on specialized architectural changes,
many works have explored the use of additional modalities
beyond vision for action recognition. For instance, optical
flow has been effective in web video datasets (Kay et al.
2017; Soomro, Zamir, and Shah 2012; Kuehne et al. 2011),
where actions are characterized by strong motion (Crasto
et al. 2019; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). However, it
is less effective on ADL datasets (Shahroudy et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2019; Das et al. 2019), where motion cues are
more subtle (Das et al. 2021). Conversely, 3D skeletons
have been established as a strong modality, being viewpointagnostic and providing crucial information for modeling
ADL (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Shi et al. 2019; Zhou
et al. 2022). Similar to VLMs, skeleton-language representations have been explored in (Gupta, Sharma, and Sarvadevabhatla 2021; Zhou et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024). Skeleton action recognition models, while excelling at capturing
motion cues and human motion, do not encode the appearance information crucial for distinguishing nuanced humanobject interactions. For instance, actions like Drinking from
Cup versus Drinking from Bottle rely on visual appearance
to differentiate objects, which motion alone cannot provide.
Thus, integrating appearance information enhances model’s
ability to classify ADLs accurately. This is demonstrated
in (Das et al. 2021), where appearance-based methods outperform approaches relying solely on skeleton information.
Additionally, combining RGB and skeletons has been inves-

Introduction

In recent years, the introduction of CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), has established the beneficial impact of language supervision in the training of vision-based discriminative models. In the video domain many works (Rasheed et al. 2023;
Huang et al. 2024; Ni et al. 2022) have extended the effectiveness of CLIP to video representation learning. These
approaches have made promising strides especially in zero
shot video action recognition where the target action labels
are unavailable during training. A majority of these models have been trained on web-based videos (Kay et al. 2017;
Soomro, Zamir, and Shah 2012; Kuehne et al. 2011) consisting of sports videos, movie clips, etc. These videos generally
contain actions with prominent motion and are typically appearance based, aligning actions closely to their scenes; for
instance, playing soccer on green grass or swimming in blue
water. In contrast, ADL videos often involve actions with
similar appearances, subtle motions, and may be captured
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6931

