The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training-Free Image Manipulation Localization Using Diffusion Models
Zhenfei Zhang, Ming-Ching Chang, Xin Li
Department of Computer Science, University at Albany, State University of New York, New York, USA, 12222
zzhang45@albany.edu, mchang2@albany.edu, xli48@albany.edu

Abstract
Image manipulation localization (IML) is a critical technique
in media forensics, focusing on identifying tampered regions
within manipulated images. Most existing IML methods require extensive training on labeled datasets with both imagelevel and pixel-level annotations. These methods often struggle with new manipulation types and exhibit low generalizability. In this work, we propose a training-free IML approach using diffusion models. Our method adaptively selects an appropriate number of diffusion timesteps for each
input image in the forward process and performs both conditional and unconditional reconstructions in the backward
process without relying on external conditions. By comparing
these reconstructions, we generate a localization map highlighting regions of manipulation based on inconsistencies.
Extensive experiments were conducted using sixteen stateof-the-art (SoTA) methods across six IML datasets. The results demonstrate that our training-free method outperforms
SoTA unsupervised and weakly-supervised techniques. Furthermore, our method competes effectively against fullysupervised methods on novel (unseen) manipulation types.

Figure 1: (a) SSIM scores at various timesteps are shown
for forward and backward diffusion processes. For the forward process, results with a high-pass filter are indicated
by a green line, and without a high-pass filter by an orange line. The backward diffusion process is depicted with a
blue line. These scores are averaged across CASIAv1 (Dong,
Wang, and Tan 2010), Coverage (Wen et al. 2016), and
Columbia (Hsu and Chang 2006) datasets. (b) From left to
right: the tampered image, ground-truth mask, and three error masks (unconditional reconstruction vs. input, unconditional vs. conditional reconstruction, and unconditional vs.
conditional reconstruction with self-attention guidance).

Introduction
Image manipulation localization (IML) aims to locate tampered regions within an image. This technology has become
increasingly important due to the advancements in media
editing and generation methods, such as Photoshop and Generative AI techniques (Qiao et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2018;
Zhang and Chang 2023; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021a), to ensure media authentication. Traditional image manipulation
types fall into three categories: removal, where media content is removed and synthesized; splicing, which involves
inserting content from a different source into an image;
and copy-move, which involves relocating content within the
same image.
Even though fully-supervised IML methods have
achieved satisfactory localization performance on some
common IML datasets, they still have several drawbacks.
First, they require extensive training with datasets including
image and pixel-level annotations, which are costly. Second,
these methods perform poorly when localizing manipulation
types different from those in the training datasets, resulting

in low generalizability and unsatisfactory performance in
real-world scenarios. Given the numerous and ever-growing
types of tampering, it is impractical to create datasets that
fully encompasses all tampering types for model training.
To address the aforementioned issues as well as improve
the generalizability of IML methods for real-world scenarios, this work explores the possibility of a training-free
method for IML that does not require any training datasets
for learning. Our initial experiment is inspired by diffusion
purification methods (Nie et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022),
which have demonstrated that diffusion models (DM), having learned the clean data distribution, can effectively re-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10376

