The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Cost Perspective of Liquid Democracy: Feasibility and Control
Shiri Alouf-Heffetz1 , Łukasz Janeczko2 , Grzegorz Lisowski2 , Georgios Papasotiropoulos3
1

Ben Gurion University, Beersheba, Israel
2
AGH University, Krakow, Poland
3
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
shirihe@post.bgu.ac.il, ljaneczk@agh.edu.pl, glisowski@agh.edu.pl, gpapasotiropoulos@gmail.com

Abstract

recognize that some must for the collective good. Costs may
also stem from the voters’ expertise based on voting history
or their profile and interests. Depending on the context, they
can be specified by voters or inferred by the system.
Selecting trusted representatives under budget constraints
extends beyond Liquid Democracy. The following examples
demonstrate how our model and questions apply to
other domains where being or trusting a representative
incurs costs, aiming to minimize these expenses while
meeting explicit trust requirements. In a sensor network,
a subset of sensors may be designated as cluster heads
to aggregate and transmit data to a central hub (Mishra,
Gupta, and Gui 2019). These could be chosen to optimize
communication and data-driven decision-making, while
minimizing costs related to head designation, such as
energy consumption and security concerns. In autonomous
vehicle fleets, leadership roles in decision-making, like
route planning and traffic management, incur costs due
to the advanced processing and communication required
in control vehicles. Trust from other vehicles is essential
for seamless, reliable operation and safety (Awan et al.
2020). In decentralized blockchain networks, validators or
miners validate transactions, ensuring network integrity
and reducing computational costs for non-validator nodes
(Gersbach, Mamageishvili, and Schneider 2022). Various
implementations in cryptocurrency systems (see, e.g.,
Project Catalyst and Optimism) allow stakeholders to vote
on protocol changes through representatives, rewarding
the latter for their expertise and time spent understanding
protocol details.
In Liquid Democracy literature, cost is often assumed
to exist for differentiating voters’ options, though not in a
quantifiable manner. For instance, in the works of Escoffier,
Gilbert, and Pass-Lanneau (2019, 2020) and Markakis and
Papasotiropoulos (2021) voters prefer options that are less
costly, but this preference is not numerically captured. In
contrast, Armstrong and Larson (2021) and Bloembergen,
Grossi, and Lackner (2019) explicitly consider costs albeit in
a decentralized scenario. A centralized approach is explored
by Birmpas et al. (2024), which involves rewarding voters to
become representatives. While this work, like ours, focuses
on selecting a budget-feasible solution, their objective is
to maximize the probability of identifying a ground truth,
whereas ours emphasizes voter representation.

We examine an approval-based model of Liquid Democracy
with a budget constraint on voting and delegating costs,
aiming to centrally select casting voters ensuring complete
representation of the electorate. From a computational
complexity perspective, we focus on minimizing overall
costs, maintaining short delegation paths, and preventing
excessive concentration of voting power. Furthermore,
we explore computational aspects of strategic control,
specifically, whether external agents can change election
components to influence the voting power of certain voters.

1

Introduction

In a perfect democracy, every citizen would ideally have
the time, knowledge, and means to actively participate in
every political decision impacting the society. This ideal
is hindered by various costs, such as the effort required
to understand complex issues or the financial burden of
frequent decision-making processes. Liquid Democracy
addresses these challenges by allowing well-informed
individuals to vote directly, while others (transitively)
delegate their voting rights to trusted representatives. By
requiring only a subset of the electorate to form opinions
and vote, it reduces overall cognitive and operational costs.
Originating in the 20th century (Tullock 1967; Miller III
1969; Green-Armytage 2015; Blum and Zuber 2016),
Liquid Democracy has seen widespread implementation
in recent years (Paulin 2020) and has since become
a prominent research area within Computational Social
Choice (Grossi et al. 2024). Despite its focus on reducing
election-related costs, their explicit consideration remains
unexplored. We address this by analyzing a natural Liquid
Democracy framework operating within a budget constraint.
In a Liquid Democracy system costs can arise from
various factors, such as the time or effort needed to
understand the election topic or to identify participants
aligned with their views for vote delegation. These costs
broadly reflect preferences between delegation and direct
voting. Alternatively, they could correspond to monetary
incentives to encourage participation in decisions on
complex issues, e.g., when voters prefer not to engage but
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13538

