The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reputation-aware Revenue Allocation for Auction-based Federated Learning
Xiaoli Tang, Han Yu
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{xiaoli001, han.yu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Auction-based federated learning (AFL) has emerged as
a pivotal area within FL incentive mechanism research, primarily due to its ability to achieve both efficiency and fairness. AFL research revolves around three main areas based
on the primary stakeholders involved: (Tang and Yu 2023d):

Auction-based Federated Learning (AFL) has gained significant research interest due to its ability to incentivize data
owners (DOs) to participate in FL model training tasks of data
consumers (DCs) through economic mechanisms via the auctioneer. One of the critical research issues in AFL is decision
support for the auctioneer. Existing approaches are based on
the simplified assumption of a single, monopolistic AFL marketplace, which is unrealistic in real-world scenarios where
multiple AFL marketplaces can co-exist and compete for the
same pool of DOs. In this paper, we relax this assumption
and frame the AFL auctioneer decision support problem from
the perspective of helping them attract participants in a competitive AFL marketplace environment while safeguarding
profit. To achieve this objective, we propose the Auctioneer
Revenue Allocation Strategy for AFL (ARAS-AFL). We design the concepts of the attractiveness and competitiveness
from the perspective of autioneer reputation. Based on the
Lyapunov optimization, ARAS-AFL helps individual AFL
auctioneer achieve the dual objective of balancing the reputation management costs and its own profit by designing a dynamic revenue allocation strategy. It takes into account both
the auctioneer’s revenue and the changes in the number of
participants on the AFL marketplace. Through extensive experiments on widely used benchmark datasets, ARAS-AFL
demonstrates superior performance compared to state-of-theart approaches. It outperforms the best baseline by 49.06%,
98.69%, 10.32%, and 4.77% in terms of total revenue, number of data owners, public reputation and accuracy of federated learning models, respectively.

• DC-Centric Approaches: These methods assist DCs from
two main perspectives: 1) Selecting appropriate DOs in
monopolistic market scenarios, and 2) Strategically placing bids to acquire data from DOs in competitive market
environments, with the aim of optimizing specific key
performance indicators (KPIs) while adhering to budgetary constraints.
• Auctioneer-Centric Approaches: These approaches have
two key focuses: 1) Internally, optimizing the DCDO matching process, pricing mechanisms, and auction
mechanism designs to achieve desired outcomes, such
as maximizing social welfare or minimizing costs for
the entire AFL ecosystem. 2) Externally, enhancing the
competitiveness and attractiveness of the AFL ecosystem
to retain existing participants, especially DOs who own
valuable data resources while attracting new participants
while optimizing its own profit.
• DO-Centric Approaches: These methodologies concentrate on determining the optimal allocation of local resources for federated learning tasks and customizing reserve prices to maximize the profitability of DOs.
In this paper, we focus on auctioneer-centric approaches
in AFL. However, existing methods addressing auctioneercentric challenges primarily concentrate on internal aspects,
i.e., assisting the auctioneer in optimizing the matching between DCs and DOs, designing pricing mechanisms and
auction mechanisms to achieve desired outcomes. To the
best of our knowledge, no work has addressed external aspects, i.e., attracting more participants, especially DOs. Existing works for the internal aspect are based on the simplified assumption of a single, monopolistic AFL marketplace.
However, this assumption does not hold true in practice.
Due to the self-interested nature of both the AFL marketplaces and DOs, data trading processes under AFL settings
are a two-way interactive dynamic between them. On the
one hand, the AFL marketplace, represented by the auctioneer, has the ability to selectively admit participants and determine the rewards for DOs. These strategies are designed

Introduction
With growing concerns over data privacy and user confidentiality, federated learning (FL) (Yang et al. 2019; Hu et al.
2024; Guo et al. 2021; Tang et al. 2024c; Li et al. 2021) has
gained significant interest in recent years due to its versatile
applications (Sun et al. 2024). In FL settings, self-interested
data owners (DOs) meticulously evaluate various factors,
including costs, potential gains, and utility, when deciding
which FL data consumer (DC) to collaborate with. This necessity has spurred the development of FL incentive mechanisms (Tang 2024; Khan et al. 2020), designed to incentivize
DO participation through strategic reward systems.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20832

