The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A (1 + ϵ)-Approximation for Ultrametric Embedding in Subquadratic Time
Gabriel Bathie1, 2 , Guillaume Lagarde1
1

2

LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, France
DI ENS, PSL Research University, Paris, France

Abstract

specific distance thresholds, which may not capture the true
nature of the data. Consequently, they can struggle to reveal
the intricate relationships between data points.
Hierarchical clustering addresses these limitations by
building a multi-level hierarchy of clusters. This approach
does not require specifying the number of clusters a priori
and can reveal the nested structure of the data at all levels of granularity. Hierarchical clustering iteratively splits or
merges data points based on similarity, forming a tree-like
representation known as a dendrogram. This tree structure
provides a comprehensive view of the data’s organization,
allowing for more nuanced interpretations and insights.
Dendrograms and hierarchical clusterings are formalized
and quantified using the mathematical concept of ultrametric1 . Ultrametrics provides a rigorous foundation for hierarchical clustering and allows the development and analysis of
efficient algorithms to compute and analyze the hierarchical
structure of data, see for example (Jain and Dubes 1988) or
(Carlsson and Mémoli 2010).
The most popular methods for constructing an ultrametric are the agglomerative algorithms, such as single linkage, complete linkage, average linkage, and Ward’s method.
These algorithms work bottom-up and build an ultrametric
by iteratively merging the closest clusters based on a distance metric. While widely used and successful in many applications, they suffer from two major limitations: first, it is
not clear what objective functions these methods aim to optimize, making them difficult to analyze and lacking approximation guarantees; second, they have at least quadratic time
and space complexity, making them impractical for handling
large datasets.
In this paper, we consider the problem of computing the
best ultrametric fit (BUF∞ ), which is quantified by how well
an ultrametric preserves the distances of the original metric using the notion of maximum distortion. Formally, given
a set X of points in Euclidean space, our goal is to find
an ultrametric ∆ such that for all x, y ∈ X, ∥x − y∥2 ≤
∆(x, y) ≤ c · ∥x − y∥2 , where c is as small as possible.
This problem was first introduced by Farach, Kannan, and
Warnow (1995), who proved that it cannot be solved in sub-

Efficiently computing accurate representations of highdimensional data is essential for data analysis and unsupervised learning. Dendrograms, also known as ultrametrics,
are widely used representations that preserve hierarchical relationships within the data. However, popular methods for
computing them, such as linkage algorithms, suffer from
quadratic time and space complexity, making them impractical for large datasets. The “best ultrametric embedding”
(a.k.a. “best ultrametric fit”) problem, which aims to find the
ultrametric that best preserves the distances between points
in the original data, is known to require at least quadratic
time for an exact solution. Recent work has focused on improving scalability by approximating
√ optimal solutions in
subquadratic time, resulting in a ( 2 + ϵ)-approximation
(Cohen-Addad, de Joannis de Verclos and Lagarde, 2021).
In this paper, we present the first subquadratic algorithm that
achieves arbitrarily precise approximations of the optimal ultrametric embedding. Specifically, we provide an algorithm
that, for any c ≥ 1, outputs a c-approximation of the best
ultrametric in time Õ(n1+1/c ). In particular, for any fixed
ϵ > 0, the algorithm computes a (1 + ϵ)-approximation in
2
time Õ(n2−ϵ+o(ϵ ) ).
Experimental results show that our algorithm improves upon
previous methods in terms of approximation quality while
maintaining comparable running times.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental technique in data analysis that
is used to group similar data points. It helps in uncovering
underlying patterns, segmenting data into meaningful categories, and simplifying data representation. Applications
of clustering span various domains, including for example
bioinformatics, market segmentation, social network analysis, image processing, feature learning, spatial and geoscience, and many others; we refer to (Murtagh and Contreras 2017) for a comprehensive list of references.
While ’flat’ clustering methods, such as k-means, can effectively partition data into distinct groups, they often fall
short when dealing with complex data structures, in particular data points that exhibit multiscale structures. These methods typically assume a fixed number of clusters or rely on

1
An ultrametric is a metric that satisfies a stronger triangle inequality: for any three points, the distance between any two points
is at most the maximum of the distances between the other two
pairs.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15516

