The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Identifying Query-Relevant Neurons in Large Language Models
for Long-Form Texts
Lihu Chen, Adam Dejl, Francesca Toni
Imperial College, London, UK
firstname.surname@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Methods

Large Language Models (LLMs) possess vast amounts of
knowledge within their parameters, prompting research into
methods for locating and editing this knowledge. Previous
work has largely focused on locating entity-related (often
single-token) facts in smaller models. However, several key
questions remain unanswered: (1) How can we effectively locate query-relevant neurons in decoder-only LLMs, such as
Llama and Mistral? (2) How can we address the challenge
of long-form (or free-form) text generation? (3) Are there localized knowledge regions in LLMs? In this study, we introduce Query-Relevant Neuron Cluster Attribution (QRNCA),
a novel architecture-agnostic framework capable of identifying query-relevant neurons in LLMs. QRNCA allows for
the examination of long-form answers beyond triplet facts by
employing the proxy task of multi-choice question answering. To evaluate the effectiveness of our detected neurons,
we build two multi-choice QA datasets spanning diverse domains and languages. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that
our method outperforms baseline methods significantly. More
importantly, analysis of neuron distributions reveals the presence of visible localized regions, particularly within different
subject domains. Finally, we show potential applications of
our detected neurons in knowledge editing and neuron-based
prediction.

Knowledge Neuron (2022)
ROME (2022a)
Knowledge Subnetwork (2023)
QRNCA (Ours)

✗
✗
✗
✓

✓
✗
✓
✓

✗
✓
✓
✓

✗
✗
✗
✓

Table 1: Comparison of general-domain knowledge locating
methods. Here, we do not consider task-specific approaches
like Language Neuron (Chen et al. 2024b) and Privacy Neuron (Wu et al. 2023).

the effective identification of neurons relevant to particular queries. However, these methods typically employ fillin-the-blank tasks, such as “Paris is the capital
of
”, to localise components representing triplet facts.
Causality-based methods (Meng et al. 2022a) take a different approach by employing causal mediation analysis to
pinpoint layers within LLMs that store factual associations.
Another branch of pioneering research attempts to locate
functional regions in small-size language models such as
BERT (Kenton and Toutanova 2019) and GPT-small (Radford et al. 2019), including linguistic regions (Zhang et al.
2024b), factual subnetworks (Ren and Zhu 2022; Bayazit
et al. 2023), and modular structures (Zhang et al. 2023;
Conmy et al. 2023).
While these studies successfully identify knowledge associations stored within LLMs, three significant questions
remain underexplored: (1) How can we effectively locate query-relevant neurons in contemporary decoder-only
LLMs, such as Llama (Touvron et al. 2023) and Mistral (Jiang et al. 2023), given their large model size and
different architectures? (2) How can we address the challenge of long-form text generation, as previous methods
have been limited to triplet facts? (3) Are there localized
knowledge regions in LLMs analogous to the localized functional regions observed in human brains (Brett, Johnsrude,
and Owen 2002)?
To address the first two questions, we introduce a novel
framework named Query-Relevant Neuron Cluster Attribution (QRNCA) designed to identify query-relevant neurons
in LLMs. The principal advantages of our framework are its
architecture-agnostic nature and its capability of handling

Code — https://github.com/tigerchen52/qrneuron

1

Long-Form Neuron-Level Decoder ⩾ 7B
Texts
Location
Models LLMs

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) contain substantial
amounts of knowledge within their neurons (or parameters).
Recent research has focused on identifying and localizing
these knowledge neurons to gain insights into the information processing mechanisms of LLMs. Activation-based
methods (Voita, Ferrando, and Nalmpantis 2023) examine
activation patterns to elucidate the role of neurons in the
reasoning process. However, these methods often struggle
to directly attribute specific outputs to corresponding inputs,
thereby limiting their effectiveness in accurately identifying relevant knowledge. Gradient-based methods (Dai et al.
2022) measure the sensitivity of model outputs to internal
components in response to specific inputs, which enables
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23595

