The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LightPROF: A Lightweight Reasoning Framework for Large Language Model on
Knowledge Graph
Tu Ao1 * , Yanhua Yu1† * , Yuling Wang2‡ , Yang Deng3 , Zirui Guo1 , Liang Pang5 , Pinghui Wang6 ,
Tat-Seng Chua4 , Xiao Zhang1 , Zhen Cai1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
3
Singapore Management University, Singapore
4
National University of Singapore, Singapore
5
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
6
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
{aotu bupt, yuyanhua, zrguo, xiao20010420, caizhen}@bupt.edu.cn,
wangyl0612@hdu.edu.cn, pangliang@ict.ac.cn, phwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, dcscts@nus.edu.sg
Abstract

brought substantial innovations to the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Zhao et al. 2023; Touvron et al.
2023; Achiam et al. 2023; Team et al. 2023; GLM et al.
2024). The “emergent abilities” displayed under extensive
training data and vast parameters allow LLMs to excel in
complex zero-shot tasks (Wei et al. 2022a). Despite their effectiveness, LLMs often struggle with knowledge-intensive
tasks due to limited task-specific prior knowledge and understanding capabilities (Sun et al. 2024). Additionally,
the costly and time-consuming training process of LLMs
presents considerable challenges in continuously updating
and maintaining their knowledge bases.
To address the aforementioned challenges, it is crucial
to enable LLMs to access a reliable and continuously updated knowledge base to support more accurate and interpretable reasoning (Pan et al. 2024). Knowledge Graphs
(KGs) are ideally suited for this purpose, as they offer a
structured semantic framework that delivers both accessible and timely information. Knowledge Graph Question Answering (KGQA), as a common knowledge-intensive task,
existing work has explored methods for integrating LLMs
with KGs to conduct KGQA reasoning (Jiang et al. 2023;
Wu et al. 2023; Baek, Aji, and Saffari 2023; Wen, Wang,
and Sun 2023; Sun et al. 2024; Guo et al. 2024). Broadly
speaking, current KG-empowered LLM reasoning primarily
involves retrieving information from KGs and incorporating
the results into LLM input prompts, leveraging the LLMs’
reasoning capabilities to address questions.
While LLMs reasoning on KGs holds great promise, several challenges remain: Firstly, the content of KGs is often
represented directly as extensive textual content, which fails
to effectively convey the rich logical relationships within
their graph structure that are crucial for reasoning. In previous work, the content of KGs was presented in input prompts
as multidimensional lists or in natural language form, making it difficult to clearly express the complex relationships
and hierarchical structures within them. Secondly, retrieval
and reasoning on KGs demand a high number of LLM calls
and substantial LLM reasoning power. Previous work used

Large Language Models (LLMs) have impressive capabilities in text understanding and zero-shot reasoning. However, delays in knowledge updates may cause them to reason
incorrectly or produce harmful results. Knowledge Graphs
(KGs) provide rich and reliable contextual information for
the reasoning process of LLMs by structurally organizing
and connecting a wide range of entities and relations. Existing KG-based LLM reasoning methods only inject KGs’
knowledge into prompts in a textual form, ignoring its structural information. Moreover, they mostly rely on close-source
models or open-source models with large parameters, which
poses challenges to high resource consumption. To address
this, we propose a novel Lightweight and efficient Prompt
learning-ReasOning Framework for KGQA (LightPROF),
which leverages the full potential of LLMs to tackle complex reasoning tasks in a parameter-efficient manner. Specifically, LightPROF follows a “Retrieve-Embed-Reason” process, first accurately, and stably retrieving the corresponding
reasoning graph from the KG through retrieval module. Next,
through a Transformer-based Knowledge Adapter, it finely
extracts and integrates factual and structural information from
the KG, then maps this information to the LLM’s token embedding space, creating an LLM-friendly prompt to be used
by the LLM for the final reasoning. Additionally, LightPROF
only requires training Knowledge Adapter and can be compatible with any open-source LLM. Extensive experiments on
two public KGQA benchmarks demonstrate that LightPROF
achieves superior performance with small-scale LLMs. Furthermore, LightPROF shows significant advantages in terms
of input token count and reasoning time.

Introduction
With the emergence of more Large Language Models
(LLMs), their continuously improving performance has
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

23424

