The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ViG: Linear-complexity Visual Sequence Learning with Gated Linear Attention
Bencheng Liao1, 2 , Xinggang Wang2, * , Lianghui Zhu2 , Qian Zhang3 , Chang Huang3
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
3
Horizon Robotics
{bcliao, xgwang, lhzh}@hust.edu.cn, {qian01.zhang, chang.huang}@horizon.ai

Abstract

of both worlds—Transformers and CNNs—offering global
receptive field and linear complexity?
The recent development of linear-time sequence modeling methods (Gu and Dao 2023; Peng et al. 2023; Yang
et al. 2024b) from NLP provides a promising solution to the
question. These methods operate similarly to RNNs by compressing all historical inputs into a fixed-size state and then
attending to the current input based on this compressed state,
unlike Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) which attend to
all historical states. To further address the wall-time efficiency limitations of explicit recurrent forms, Mamba (Gu
and Dao 2023), RWKV (Peng et al. 2023), and GLA (Yang
et al. 2024b) introduce hardware-aware implementations,
demonstrating superior accuracy and efficiency compared to
highly-optimized Transformers. Mamba, in particular, has
been widely adopted and adapted for vision tasks. While
these methods achieve superior classification accuracy at a
resolution of 224 and exhibit impressive efficiency in terms
of FLOPs and memory at high resolutions (e.g., 1248 resolution in Vision Mamba), their wall-time efficiency at lower
and more common resolutions is often comparable to or
even less than that of ViT/DeiT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020;
Touvron et al. 2021).
This limitation inspires us to explore the application of the
superior hardware-efficient GLA (Yang et al. 2024b; Yang
and Zhang 2024) to push the efficiency and accuracy envelope of linear-complexity visual sequence learning, making
it more practical and competitive with the well-established
and highly-optimized Transformers and CNNs. Different
from Mamba based on SISO (single-input-single-output)
state space model (Gu, Goel, and Ré 2022), GLA originates
from linear attention (Katharopoulos et al. 2020), which has
a simple and hardware-friendly matrix-multiply form by approximating softmax in standard attention with a linear kernel. To further enhance the expressiveness, GLA introduces
a novel data-dependent gating mechanism to adaptively control the forget rate of compressed state.
However, the vanilla GLA model is designed for unidirectional modeling, which has temporal dependence. This
makes its ability for global perception in NLP not truly
global when applied to vision tasks. Despite some followup works (Hu et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024) on Mamba
in vision that explore additional scanning directions beyond
bidirectional modeling of 1D visual sequences to approx-

Recently, linear complexity sequence modeling networks
have achieved modeling capabilities similar to Vision Transformers on a variety of computer vision tasks, while using
fewer FLOPs and less memory. However, their advantage
in terms of actual runtime speed is not significant. To address this issue, we introduce Gated Linear Attention (GLA)
for vision, leveraging its superior hardware-awareness and
efficiency. We propose direction-wise gating to capture 1D
global context through bidirectional modeling and a 2D gating locality injection to adaptively inject 2D local details into
1D global context. Our hardware-aware implementation further merges forward and backward scanning into a single kernel, enhancing parallelism and reducing memory cost and latency. The proposed model, ViG, offers a favorable trade-off
in accuracy, parameters, and FLOPs on ImageNet and downstream tasks, outperforming popular Transformer and CNNbased models.

Code — https://github.com/hustvl/ViG
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18425

Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) has revolutionized computer vision by introducing an advanced sequence modeling layer Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
from natural language processing (NLP) to perform visual representation learning. It has proven highly successful across various vision tasks (Liu et al. 2021b; Fang et al.
2023; Radford et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021; Song et al. 2024;
Fang et al. 2024), serving as a versatile backbone. However,
the quadratic complexity inherent in the Transformer’s softmax attention presents significant challenges for its applications on high-resolution images. Numerous efforts (Liu et al.
2021b; Yang et al. 2021) have sought to address this limitation by drawing inspiration from the success of convolutional networks, such as constraining attention computations
within local windows. While this approach achieves linear
complexity similar to conventional CNNs, it falls short in
capturing the global context. This raises a critical question:
can we design a fundamental block that combines the best
* Correspondence to: Xinggang Wang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5182

