The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

From 2D CAD Drawings to 3D Parametric Models: A Vision-Language Approach
Xilin Wang1 * , Jia Zheng2 * , Yuanchao Hu2 , Hao Zhu2 , Qian Yu1† , Zihan Zhou2†
1

Beihang University
Manycore Tech Inc.
{wang xilin, qianyu}@buaa.edu.cn, {jiajia, tiancai, hunyuan, shuer}@qunhemail.com
2

Abstract
In this paper, we present CAD2P ROGRAM, a new method for
reconstructing 3D parametric models from 2D CAD drawings. Our proposed method is inspired by recent successes
in vision-language models (VLMs), and departs from traditional methods which rely on task-specific data representations and/or algorithms. Specifically, on the input side, we
simply treat the 2D CAD drawing as a raster image, regardless of its original format, and encode the image with a standard ViT model. We show that such an encoding scheme
achieves competitive performance against existing methods
that operate on vector-graphics inputs, while imposing substantially fewer restrictions on the 2D drawings. On the output side, our method auto-regressively predicts a generalpurpose language describing 3D parametric models in text
form. Compared to other sequence modeling methods for
CAD which use domain-specific sequence representations
with fixed-size slots, our text-based representation is more
flexible, and can be easily extended to arbitrary geometric
entities and semantic or functional properties. Experimental
results on a large-scale dataset of cabinet models demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

annotation: dimension
lines and text
geometry: visible edges

annotation:
adjustable shelf

Figure 1: Illustration of the geometry and annotation layers
of a CAD drawing. See text for details.

that is perpendicular to one of the three principal axes. A
line of work related to the automatic reconstruction of 3D
solid models from orthographic views has existed since the
1970s (Idesawa 1973). However, in the current design and
manufacturing industry, human labor is still extensively used
to manually realize these 3D object models, which is a timeconsuming, error-prone, and unproductive process. We are
yet to see the successful application of automatic techniques
in commercial CAD software.
To understand the challenges faced by existing automatic
techniques, we must take a close look at (i) the engineering
drawings and (ii) the 3D models.
Understanding the 2D drawings. An engineering drawing
poses a unique challenge as it is a mixture of two types of
representations (layers):

Webpage —
https://manycore-research.github.io/CAD2Program

1

annotation: door,
right-handed

Introduction

In computer-aided design (CAD), 2D engineering drawings
have been employed as a standard means for describing
product designs. With the wide adoption of 2D CAD software (e.g., Autodesk AutoCAD), a significant amount of
existing products are presented in the form of engineering
drawings today. To manufacture these products, the corresponding 3D objects have to be reconstructed from the 2D
drawings.
As shown in Figure 2(a), an engineering drawing typically
includes multiple orthographic views of the object.1 Each
orthographic view is a projection of the object onto the plane

• the geometry layer, which is the actual object described
by its orthographic projections, and
• the annotation layer, which includes dimensioning and
functional symbols, such as surface types, manufacturing
instructions, etc.

* These authors contributed equally.
†
Correspondence authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Depending on the complexity of the object, a varying number
of views may be provided, including a top view, a front view, a side
view, and one or more section views.

Figure 1 illustrates the two layers. Some lines constitute the
geometry layer of the drawing, as they correspond to the visible edges of the object in the orthographic projection. The
other entities, including both text and graphics, form the an7961

