The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fast Computing of Dung Semantics in
Acyclic Probabilistic Argumentation Frameworks
Stefano Bistarelli1 , Victor David2 * , Pierre Monnin2 , Francesco Santini1 , Carlo Taticchi1
1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science University of Perugia, Italy
2
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, Sophia-Antipolis, France
firstname.lastname@{unipg.it,inria.fr}

Abstract

possible worlds induced by a PrAF and then aggregate these
values. However, the number of induced AFs is generally exponential (Li, Oren, and Norman 2011), which undermines
possible large-scale applications.
The motivations for our work originate from (Fazzinga,
Flesca, and Parisi 2015; Fazzinga, Flesca, and Furfaro
2018), where the complexity of computing the acceptance
probability of an argument using grounded semantics, which
is also the focus of our paper, has been proven to be FP #P complete. To overcome such a high complexity, the work
in (Sun and Liao 2015) suggests some restrictions: if the
probability of each argument is 0 or 1, then computing the
acceptance probability is polynomial in time in the case of
grounded semantics. If the probability is ternary, that is, 0,
0.5, or 1, then the same acceptance probability is P-hard.
The authors of (Nofal, Atkinson, and Dunne 2021) propose
a fast algorithm to compute the grounded extension for classic AFs, showing recent interest in a strictly related field.
This paper focuses on AFs in the shape of trees and, in
general, on acyclic graphs, which have traditionally been
significant in Argumentation. For example, several important debate platforms such as Kialo.com organize the discussion as a tree. A tree is well suited to represent specific
forms of argumentation: multiparty debates can be modeled
through debate trees in which agents reply to previously presented arguments (Bolton et al. 2020). Trees can support
the fundamental turn-based mechanism in human dialogues
(Amgoud, Parsons, and Maudet 2000). Such trees can be associated with probabilities automatically obtained from the
classification of the relations (Schindler 2020).
Moreover, AFs have also recently been used to explain
(acyclic) neural networks (Potyka 2021). The works in
(Toni, Rago, and Čyras 2023; Toni et al. 2023) merge probabilities and Assumption-Based Argumentation, the relationships between assumptions, claims, and counterarguments
are naturally represented as trees.
The main goal of this work is to fastly compute the acceptance probability of an argument in the grounded extension
of a PrAF by using local propagation, i.e., according to the
acceptance probability of its direct attackers and the probability of incoming attacks. First, we do it very efficiently
for directed graphs that follow the topology of SinglyConnected Graphs (SCGs), or Singly-Connected Networks,
or “polytrees” (Chow and Liu 1968; Kim and Pearl 1983;

This paper presents fast and exact methods for computing
the probability of an argument’s acceptance using Dung’s semantics in the Constellation paradigm of Abstract Argumentation. For (directed) Singly-Connected Graphs (SCGs), the
problem can now be solved in linearithmic time instead of
being exponential in the number of attacks, as reported in
the literature. Moreover, in the more general case of Directed
Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), we provide an algorithm whose time
complexity is linearithmic in the product of the out-degree
of dependent arguments, i.e., arguments reaching the argument considered for acceptance through multiple paths in the
graph. We theoretically show that this complexity is lower
than the lower bound of the (exact) Constellation method,
which is also supported by empirical results. Our approach to
DAGs is also compared with the (approximate) Monte-Carlo
method, which is stopped when exact results are obtained.
Within this time constraint, Monte-Carlo still outputs significant errors, underlying the fast computation of our approach.

1

Introduction

The pioneering article in the field of Abstract Argumentation comes from P.M. Dung (Dung 1995), who defined the
notion of an Abstract Argumentation Framework (AF). AFs
can be seen as directed graphs where the nodes are arguments and the edges represent conflict relations (called attacks) between two arguments. Since Dung, many extensions have been proposed, e.g., the addition of a support
relation (Cohen et al. 2014), the addition of a similarity relation (Amgoud and David 2018, 2021), or the addition of
weights (Bistarelli, Rossi, and Santini 2018).
In this paper, we consider Probabilistic AFs (or PrAFs)
and specifically the Constellation paradigm (Li, Oren, and
Norman 2011): probability values determine the likelihood
of both arguments and attacks to be part of an AF, thus generating different possible AFs (i.e., “worlds”) with a different existence probability each. Hence, the uncertainty lies
in the topology of PrAFs.1 To study an argument’s acceptance probability, we need to compute this value in all the
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
On the other hand, the epistemic paradigm (Hunter 2013) uses
probability theory to represent degrees of belief in arguments.

14798

