The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multimodal Hypothetical Summary for Retrieval-based
Multi-image Question Answering
Peize Li1, 2 * , Qingyi Si3 , Peng Fu2, 4† , Zheng Lin2, 4 , Yan Wang5, 1†
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Beijing, China
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Key Laboratory of Symbol Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Computer
Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
lipz21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, siqingyi@huawei.com, {fupeng, linzheng}@iie.ac.cn, wy6868@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Retrieval-based multi-image question answering (QA) task
involves retrieving multiple question-related images and synthesizing these images to generate an answer. Conventional
“retrieve-then-answer” pipelines often suffer from cascading
errors because the training objective of QA fails to optimize
the retrieval stage. To address this issue, we propose a novel
method to effectively introduce and reference retrieved information into the QA. Given the image set to be retrieved, we
employ a multimodal large language model (visual perspective) and a large language model (textual perspective) to obtain multimodal hypothetical summary in question-form and
description-form. By combining visual and textual perspectives, MHyS captures image content more specifically and replaces real images in retrieval, which eliminates the modality
gap by transforming into text-to-text retrieval and helps improve retrieval. To more advantageously introduce retrieval
with QA, we employ contrastive learning to align queries
(questions) with MHyS. Moreover, we propose a coarse-tofine strategy for calculating both sentence-level and wordlevel similarity scores, to further enhance retrieval and filter
out irrelevant details. Our approach achieves a 3.7% absolute improvement over state-of-the-art methods on RETVQA
and a 14.5% improvement over CLIP. Comprehensive experiments and detailed ablation studies demonstrate the superiority of our method.

Figure 1: An illustration of our motivation. Compared to
the “retrieve-then-answer” pipeline, our approach leverages
multimodal hypothetical summary (MHyS) to transform
cross-modality retrieval into text-to-text retrieval, effectively
introducing and referencing retrieval into QA.

Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is an engaging multimodal task that involves analyzing both images and natural
language. Unlike conventional VQA tasks, retrieval-based
multi-image QA (Penamakuri et al. 2023) is a newly proposed and more challenging VQA task. It requires retrieving and integrating multiple question-related images to generate an answer. Existing vision-language models often rely
on extensive pre-training (Li et al. 2022a; Cho et al. 2021;
Si et al. 2023) or sophisticated attention mechanisms (Kim,

Jun, and Zhang 2018; Anderson et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020)
to tackle multimodal tasks. However, they face difficulties
with retrieval-based multi-image QA due to the limited exposure to multi-image question-answering pairs during pretraining and the added complexity of the retrieval process.
To advance research in this area, recent work has proposed several solutions. For example, REALM (Guu et al.
2020), RAG (Lewis et al. 2020) and RETRO (Borgeaud
et al. 2022) utilize extensive world knowledge from language models to improve QA performance, though they are
limited to textual data. To broaden the scope of knowledge,
MuRAG (Chen et al. 2022) extends these approaches to mul-

* Work done during an internship at Institute of Information En-

gineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
†
Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4851

