The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Privacy-Preserving Low-Rank Adaptation Against Membership
Inference Attacks for Latent Diffusion Models
Zihao Luo1 * , Xilie Xu2 * , Feng Liu3 , Yun Sing Koh1 ,
Di Wang4 , Jingfeng Zhang1 4†
1
The University of Auckland
The National University of Singapore
3
The University of Melbourne
4
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2

Abstract

in latent space, enhancing computational efficiency without compromising image quality. Thus, LDMs can be efficiently adapted to generate previously unseen contents or
styles (Meng et al. 2022; Gal et al. 2023; Ruiz et al. 2023;
Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023), thereby catalyzing a surge
across multiple fields, such as facial generation (Huang et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2024) and medicine (Kazerouni et al. 2022;
Shavlokhova et al. 2023).
Among various adaptation methods, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al. 2022) is the superior strategy
for adapting LDMs by significantly reducing computational
resources while ensuring commendable performance with
great flexibility. Compared to the full fine-tuning method
which fine-tunes all parameters, LoRA optimizes the much
smaller low-rank matrices, making the training more efficient and lowering the hardware requirements for adapting
LDMs (Hu et al. 2022). By performing the low-rank decomposition of the transformer structure within the LDM, LoRA
offers performance comparable to fine-tuning all LDM parameters (Cuenca and Paul 2023). Moreover, LoRA allows
flexible sharing of a pre-trained LDM to build numerous
small LoRA modules for various tasks.
However, recent studies (Pang and Wang 2023; Pang et al.
2023; Dubiński et al. 2024) have pointed out that adapted
LDMs are facing the severe risk of privacy leakage. The
leakage primarily manifests in the vulnerability to Membership Inference (MI) attacks (Shokri et al. 2017), which utilize the model’s loss of a data point to differentiate whether
it is a member of the training dataset or not. As shown in Figure 1d, the LoRA-adapted LDM (red circle marker) exhibits
an incredibly high Attack Success Rate (ASR) of 82.27%.
To mitigate the issue of privacy leakage, we make the first
effort to propose a Membership-Privacy-preserving LoRA
(MP-LoRA) method, which is formulated as a min-max optimization problem. Specifically, in the inner maximization
step, a proxy attack model is trained to maximize its effectiveness in inferring membership privacy which is quantitatively referred to as MI gain. In the outer minimization step,
the LDM is adapted by minimizing the sum of the adaptation
loss and the MI gain of the proxy attack model to enhance
the preservation of membership privacy.
However, the vanilla MP-LoRA encounters an issue of

Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) is an efficient strategy for
adapting latent diffusion models (LDMs) on a private dataset
to generate specific images by minimizing the adaptation
loss. However, the LoRA-adapted LDMs are vulnerable to
membership inference (MI) attacks that can judge whether
a particular data point belongs to the private dataset, thus
leading to the privacy leakage. To defend against MI attacks,
we first propose a straightforward solution: MembershipPrivacy-preserving LoRA (MP-LoRA). MP-LoRA is formulated as a min-max optimization problem where a proxy attack model is trained by maximizing its MI gain while the
LDM is adapted by minimizing the sum of the adaptation
loss and the MI gain of the proxy attack model. However,
we empirically find that MP-LoRA has the issue of unstable
optimization, and theoretically analyze that the potential reason is the unconstrained local smoothness, which impedes the
privacy-preserving adaptation. To mitigate this issue, we further propose a Stable Membership-Privacy-preserving LoRA
(SMP-LoRA) that adapts the LDM by minimizing the ratio
of the adaptation loss to the MI gain. Besides, we theoretically prove that the local smoothness of SMP-LoRA can be
constrained by the gradient norm, leading to improved convergence. Our experimental results corroborate that SMPLoRA can indeed defend against MI attacks and generate
high-quality images.

Code —
https://github.com/WilliamLUO0/StablePrivateLoRA

1

Introduction

Generative diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020;
Song et al. 2021) are leading a revolution in AI-generated
content, renowned for their unique generation process and
fine-grained image synthesis capabilities. Notably, the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) (Rombach et al. 2022; Podell
et al. 2024) stands out by executing the diffusion process
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Correspondence to: Jingfeng Zhang <jingfeng.zhang@
auckland.ac.nz>.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5883

