The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decentralized and Uncoordinated Learning of Stable Matchings: A
Game-Theoretic Approach*
S. Rasoul Etesami, R. Srikant
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
(etesami1, rsrikant)@illinois.edu

Abstract

matches in a polynomial number of iterations. However,
when preferences are unknown, developing such an algorithm faces major challenges due to the lack of coordination.
While the DA algorithm provides a satisfactory solution for
many practical applications, there are scenarios where the
information structure of the problem hinders the implementation of the DA algorithm. For instance, as argued in Maheshwari, Sastry, and Mazumdar (2022), there has been a
recent emergence of online matching markets, such as online labor markets (e.g., TaskRabbit, Upwork), online dating
markets (e.g., Tinder, Match.com), and online crowdsourcing platforms (e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turk), where users
do not know their preferences a priori and can repeatedly
interact with the market to improve their matching quality.
The more a pair on both sides of the market gets matched,
the more certain they become about their preferences. Thus,
an important question is how agents should interact with the
market so that, in the absence of any coordination, they can
learn their preferences quickly and achieve a stable matching. The mathematical model in this work is an abstraction
of such interactions and serves as a starting point for understanding these markets. Our main contribution is to show
that such markets can be studied using a game-theoretic
framework, which yields stronger results than prior work.

We consider the problem of learning stable matchings with
unknown preferences in a decentralized and uncoordinated
manner, where “decentralized” means that players make decisions individually without the influence of a central platform, and “uncoordinated” means that players do not need
to synchronize their decisions using pre-specified rules. First,
we provide a game formulation for this problem with known
preferences, where the set of pure Nash equilibria (NE) coincides with the set of stable matchings, and mixed NE can be
rounded to a stable matching. Then, we show that for hierarchical markets, applying the exponential weight (EXP) learning algorithm to the stable matching game achieves logarithmic regret in a fully decentralized and uncoordinated fashion.
Moreover, we show that EXP converges locally and exponentially fast to a stable matching in general matching markets.
We complement our results by introducing another decentralized and uncoordinated learning algorithm that globally converges to a stable matching with arbitrarily high probability.

Introduction
Learning stable matchings is one of the fundamental problems in computer science, economics, and engineering that
has received considerable attention over the past decades.
Stable matchings provide a desirable notion of stability in
two-sided matching markets where agents on each side of
the market have preferences over the other side. A matching is called stable if no two agents prefer each other over
their current matches. For instance, in college admissions,
applicants have different preferences for colleges and vice
versa. The goal is to match applicants to colleges in such
a way that no applicant-college pair would prefer to break
their current matches and instead be matched to each other.
Similar situations arise in other applications, such as kidney
exchange programs, job assignment to workers, matching in
online dating platforms, and scheduling jobs on machines.
It is known that when all preferences are known, stable
matchings always exist, and a simple decentralized and uncoordinated Deferred-Acceptance (DA) algorithm, first proposed by Gale and Shapley (1962), can find such stable

In this work, we consider a two-sided matching market
framed as a marriage problem, where the agents on one side
are referred to as men and the agents on the other side as
women. We assume that both men and women have preferences regarding the other side, and that women are aware
of their ordinal preferences for men. However, men do not
know their preferences for women and only learn them if
they propose and get matched. In this case, the matched men
receive a noisy estimate of their preferences. We assume that
agents cannot observe any other information (e.g., who is
rejected or accepted) and cannot coordinate in any way. The
goal for men is to follow a decentralized and uncoordinated
proposal strategy such that the entire market converges to a
stable matching over time. One of the major challenges in
learning a stable matching in such markets is handling collisions. More precisely, when multiple men propose to the
same woman, only one of them gets matched and receives
useful information, while all others are rejected and receive
no information about their preferences. Therefore, resolving
such collisions without coordination is a significant issue.

* An extended version of this work can be found in Etesami and
Srikant (2024).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23160

