The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MPTSNet: Integrating Multiscale Periodic Local Patterns and Global
Dependencies for Multivariate Time Series Classification
Yang Mu1 , Muhammad Shahzad1 , Xiao Xiang Zhu1, 2 *
1

Technical University of Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Germany
{yang.mu, muhammad.shahzad, xiaoxiang.zhu}@tum.de

2

Abstract
Multivariate Time Series Classification (MTSC) is crucial in
extensive practical applications, such as environmental monitoring, medical EEG analysis, and action recognition. Realworld time series datasets typically exhibit complex dynamics. To capture this complexity, RNN-based, CNN-based,
Transformer-based, and hybrid models have been proposed.
Unfortunately, current deep learning-based methods often
neglect the simultaneous construction of local features and
global dependencies at different time scales, lacking sufficient feature extraction capabilities to achieve satisfactory
classification accuracy. To address these challenges, we propose a novel Multiscale Periodic Time Series Network (MPTSNet), which integrates multiscale local patterns and global
correlations to fully exploit the inherent information in time
series. Recognizing the multi-periodicity and complex variable correlations in time series, we use the Fourier transform to extract primary periods, enabling us to decompose
data into multiscale periodic segments. Leveraging the inherent strengths of CNN and attention mechanism, we introduce the PeriodicBlock, which adaptively captures local patterns and global dependencies while offering enhanced interpretability through attention integration across different periodic scales. The experiments on UEA benchmark datasets
demonstrate that the proposed MPTSNet outperforms 21 existing advanced baselines in the MTSC tasks.

Figure 1: Varying correlations between the subsequences of
two variables across different periodic scales in MTS data.

The challenges in solving MTSC tasks stem from two primary factors. Firstly, time series data inherently possesses
periodic characteristics, presenting similar trends across different periods, which leads to data redundancy. Simultaneously, hidden information overlaps and interacts across
multiple periods (Wu et al. 2023), complicating the exploration of time series data. Secondly, time series subsequences among different variables exhibit varying degrees
of correlation or even opposite correlations at different periodic scales (Cai et al. 2024) in MTS data, as shown in Fig. 1.
Thus, the extraction of local intra-period features and the
capture of global inter-period dependencies at multiple periodic scales become paramount for effective MTSC.
Traditional approaches to time series classification, such
as bag-of-patterns (Baydogan, Runger, and Tuv 2013) or
shapelet-based methods (Lines et al. 2012), typically require a preprocessing step to transform time series into a
wide range of subsequences or patterns as candidate features. Subsequently, discriminative subsequences are selected from these candidates for classification purposes.
However, this approach often results in an expansive feature
space, which not only complicates the feature selection process but may also lead to decreased accuracy (Schäfer and
Leser 2017), particularly in multivariate settings where the
complexity of data is inherently higher.
Recently, deep neural networks have demonstrated re-

Code — https://github.com/MUYang99/MPTSNet
Datasets — https://timeseriesclassification.com/dataset.php

Introduction
Multivariate time series classification (MTSC) has garnered significant attention due to its widespread applications
across various domains. This classification technique plays a
crucial role in analyzing complex, multi-dimensional temporal data, offering insights that are invaluable in fields ranging
from healthcare (Wang et al. 2022; An et al. 2023), human
activity recognition (Yang et al. 2015; Li et al. 2023a), traffic (Zhao et al. 2024) to environmental monitoring (Ienco
and Gaetano 2007; Rußwurm et al. 2023) and industrial processes (Farahani et al. 2023).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19572

