The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Language-instructed Skill Acquisition via Reward-Policy Co-Evolution
Changxin Huang1 , Yanbin Chang1 , Junfan Lin2 * , Junyang Liang1 , Runhao Zeng3 , Jianqiang Li1 *
1

National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, Shenzhen, China
huangchx@szu.edu.cn, changyanbin2023@email.szu.edu.cn, linjf@pcl.ac.cn,
liangjunyang2018@email.szu.edu.cn, zengrh@smbu.edu.cn, lijq@szu.edu.cn
Abstract

ROSKA

Eureka
Score

The ability to autonomously explore and resolve tasks with
minimal human guidance is crucial for the self-development
of embodied intelligence. Although reinforcement learning
methods can largely ease human effort, it’s challenging to
design reward functions for real-world tasks, especially for
high-dimensional robotic control, due to complex relationships among joints and tasks. Recent advancements large language models (LLMs) enable automatic reward function design. However, approaches evaluate reward functions by retraining policies from scratch placing an undue burden on
the reward function, expecting it to be effective throughout the whole policy improvement process. We argue for a
more practical strategy in robotic autonomy, focusing on refining existing policies with policy-dependent reward functions rather than a universal one. To this end, we propose
a novel reward-policy co-evolution framework where the reward function and the learned policy benefit from each other’s
progressive on-the-fly improvements, resulting in more efficient and higher-performing skill acquisition. Specifically,
the reward evolution process translates the robot’s previous
best reward function, descriptions of tasks and environment
into text inputs. These inputs are used to query LLMs to generate a dynamic amount of reward function candidates, ensuring continuous improvement at each round of evolution. For
policy evolution, our method generates new policy populations by hybridizing historically optimal and random policies.
Through an improved Bayesian optimization, our approach
efficiently and robustly identifies the most capable and plastic
reward-policy combination, which then proceeds to the next
round of co-evolution. Despite using less data, our approach
demonstrates an average normalized improvement of 95.3%
across various high-dimensional robotic skill learning tasks.

𝑷𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕

𝑹𝟑
𝑹𝟐

𝑹𝟒

𝑹𝟓

𝑹𝟏

𝑷𝟓
𝑷𝟒
𝑷𝟐
𝑷𝟏

From Scratch

Round

𝑹𝟓

Score

𝑹𝟒
𝑹𝟐

𝑹𝟑

𝑷best

𝑷𝟒

𝑷𝟑

𝑷𝟐
𝑹𝟏

𝑷𝟏

CO-Evolution

Round

Figure 1: Comparison of main differences between our
method and Eureka.

game of chess (Silver et al. 2018). Yet, when we shift our
focus to the intricate realm of high-dimensional robot locomotion (Radosavovic et al. 2024), the task of formulating
a reward function for fundamental movement becomes notably complex. It’s not just a matter of technical know-how;
it’s about navigating the unique intricacies of each robot’s
form and joint configuration (Andrychowicz et al. 2020).
In recent years, with the rapid growth of large language
models (LLMs) (Minaee et al. 2024), numerous approaches
have been proposed to enhance robots’ ability to execute
tasks based on human instructions. For instance, Google’s
SayCan approach integrates LLMs with robotic affordances,
allowing robots to generate feasible task plans grounded in
real-world actions (Brohan et al. 2023). Similarly, the Code
as Policies method leverages LLMs to autonomously generate robot policy code from natural language commands,
enabling robots to generalize to new instructions and environments without additional training (Liang et al. 2023).
Among these, Euraka is a standout initiative, marking a pioneering step in the self-design of reward functions tailored
to task instructions with the help of LLMs (Ma et al. 2024).
They aim to develop a universally applicable reward function that can guide a policy with randomly initialized parameters to learn and perform tasks directed by language instructions.
Despite its success, Eureka is still confined by the traditional RL framework, which relies on one reward function to provide feedback throughout the policy improvement
process. This can lead to inefficient and ineffective policy
optimization. Firstly, each intermediate reward function necessitates learning a policy from scratch, as shown on the
left of Fig.1. Secondly, finding a universal reward function is

Introduction
As affordable robots are increasingly common, it becomes
more and more crucial to develop algorithms that enable
robots to understand commands, solve problems, and selfevolve, reducing the need for constant human supervision.
Reinforcement learning (RL), which employs reward functions to decrease reliance on human supervision (Haarnoja
et al. 2024), has been a triumph across various domains, including video games (Alonso et al. 2020) and the strategic
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14576

