The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AdaSkip: Adaptive Sublayer Skipping for Accelerating Long-Context LLM
Inference
Zhuomin He1 * † , Yizhen Yao1 * † , Pengfei Zuo2 * , Bin Gao3† , Qinya Li1‡ , Zhenzhe Zheng1 , Fan Wu1
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Scalable Computing and Systems, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Cloud
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{dean_hzm, 1975275148}@sjtu.edu.cn, pengfei.zuo@huawei.com, bingao@comp.nus.edu.sg
{qinyali, zhengzhenzhe}@sjtu.edu.cn, fwu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Long-context large language models (LLMs) inference is increasingly critical, motivating a number of studies devoted to
alleviating the substantial storage and computational costs in
such scenarios. Layer-wise skipping methods are promising
optimizations but rarely explored in long-context inference.
We observe that existing layer-wise skipping strategies have
several limitations when applied in long-context inference,
including the inability to adapt to model and context variability, disregard for sublayer significance, and inapplicability for
the prefilling phase. This paper proposes AdaSkip, an adaptive sublayer skipping method specifically designed for longcontext inference. AdaSkip adaptively identifies less important
layers by leveraging on-the-fly similarity information, enables
sublayer-wise skipping, and accelerates both the prefilling
and decoding phases. The effectiveness of AdaSkip is demonstrated through extensive experiments on various long-context
benchmarks and models, showcasing its superior inference
performance over existing baselines.

Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) evolve to support
long-context inference (Xiao et al. 2024; Srivatsa et al. 2024;
DeepSeek-AI et al. 2024) up to 1M (Liu et al. 2024; AI
et al. 2024), unlocking more complex real-world applications
such as personal agent (Park et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024),
document summarization (Wu et al. 2023), and coding assistance (Liu, Xu, and McAuley 2023; Bairi et al. 2023; Jimenez
et al. 2024). Long-context inference introduces more computational and storage demands. It is crucial to reduce the
inference cost for long sequences.
Layer-wise skipping strategies, as an emerging technology,
show great promise to reduce the LLM inference cost and
latency by omitting the execution of transformer layers at
specific positions, e.g., early skipping (Del Corro et al. 2023;
Zhu et al. 2024), periodic skipping (Liu, Meng, and Zhou
2024), and early exit (Varshney et al. 2023; Fan et al. 2024;
Chen et al. 2024).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during their internship at Huawei Cloud.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

24050

However, we observe that these layer-wise skipping strategies all have their limitations in taking effect in long-context
inference due to the following reasons. First, existing layerwise skipping strategies lead to a significant degradation in
the generation quality due to predetermined fixed layers being
skipped regardless of model and context variance. We observe that the importance distributions of transformer layers
are different across models and contexts, and none of these
strategies can perform consistently best across all models
and contexts. Second, existing skipping strategies perform
skipping at monolithic transformer layers which leads to
suboptimal performance. We observe that the importance distributions of sublayers, i.e., attention and FFN modules, are
independent. Moreover, in long-context inference, attention
sublayers contribute significantly to inference latency (Tang
et al. 2024; Jiang et al. 2024), highlighting the importance of
prioritizing the skipping of more attention sublayers. Third,
existing layer-wise skipping strategies are limited to the decoding phase, neglecting optimization of the prefilling phase
in long-context inference, where the latency of the prefilling
phase, i.e., time to first token (TTFT), imposes a significant
burden on long-context inference latency.
To address the above limitations, we propose AdaSkip, an
auto-adaptive, sublayer-wise skipping strategy tailored for
long-context inference, which can benefit both the prefilling
and decoding phases. Firstly, AdaSkip exploits on-the-fly
similarity information during execution to adaptively identify the least important layers in different models, thereby
improving the generation quality. Secondly, AdaSkip independently determines the importance distribution residing
within sublayer modules like attention and FFN, enabling
the sublayer-wise skipping. Finally, AdaSkip identifies the
least important sublayers during both prefilling and decoding
phases, significantly reducing the time and memory overhead
of long-context scenarios.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
1. We perform a comprehensive analysis of the importance
distributions of various components including layer and
sublayer modules across a range of different models.
Based on the analysis, we present the limitations of the existing layer-wise skipping strategies in accelerating longcontext inference.

