The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DG-Mamba: Robust and Efficient Dynamic Graph Structure Learning with
Selective State Space Models
Haonan Yuan1 , Qingyun Sun1 , Zhaonan Wang2 , Xingcheng Fu3 , Cheng Ji1 ,
Yongjian Wang4 , Bo Jin4 , Jianxin Li1 *
1

1

Link Prediction

…

Dynamic Graph Neural Networks

…

Spatio-Temporal Structure Learner

Dynamic graphs exhibit intertwined spatio-temporal evolutionary patterns, widely existing in the real world. Nevertheless, the structure incompleteness, noise, and redundancy result in poor robustness for Dynamic Graph Neural Networks
(DGNNs). Dynamic Graph Structure Learning (DGSL) offers a promising way to optimize graph structures. However,
aside from encountering unacceptable quadratic complexity,
it overly relies on heuristic priors, making it hard to discover underlying predictive patterns. How to efficiently refine the dynamic structures, capture intrinsic dependencies,
and learn robust representations, remains under-explored. In
this work, we propose the novel DG-Mamba, a robust and
efficient Dynamic Graph structure learning framework with
the Selective State Space Models (Mamba). To accelerate the
spatio-temporal structure learning, we propose a kernelized
dynamic message-passing operator that reduces the quadratic
time complexity to linear. To capture global intrinsic dynamics, we establish the dynamic graph as a self-contained system with State Space Model. By discretizing the system states
with the cross-snapshot graph adjacency, we enable the longdistance dependencies capturing with the selective snapshot
scan. To endow learned dynamic structures more expressive
with informativeness, we propose the self-supervised Principle of Relevant Information for DGSL to regularize the most
relevant yet least redundant information, enhancing global robustness. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of the robustness and efficiency of our DG-Mamba compared
with the state-of-the-art baselines against adversarial attacks.

1:T
Original G 1:T

Abstract

1:T
Refined Ĝ 1:T

SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
2
National Superior College for Engineers, Beihang University, China
3
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, China
4
The Third Research Institute of Ministry of Public Security, China
{yuanhn, sunqy, wangzn, jicheng, lijx}@buaa.edu.cn, fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn, wangyongjian@mcst.org.cn, jinbo@gass.ac.cn
?

G T +1

Ltask

+
Lreg

Figure 1: A general paradigm of DGSL.

Recently, there has been a growing research trend on enhancing the efficacy of DGNNs, including focus on improving their ability to capture the intricate spatio-temporal
correlations that surpass the 1-WL graph isomorphism test.
Most of the DGNNs perform spatio-temporal messagepassing over potentially flawed graph structures, assuming
the observed graph structures can reflect the ground-truth
relationships between nodes. However, this fundamental assumption often leads to suboptimal robustness and generalization performance due to the inherent incompleteness,
noise, and redundancy in graph structures, which also make
the learned representations susceptible to noise and adversarial attacks (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018).
Graph Structure Learning (GSL) has emerged as a crucial
graph learning paradigm for iteratively optimizing structures
and representations (Sun et al. 2022b,c; Wei et al. 2024; Fu
et al. 2023). Similarly, the GSL for dynamic graphs (DGSL)
aims to refine spatial- and temporal-wise structures (Figure 1). Despite its potential, DGSL faces several challenges.
On one hand, the intricate coupling of spatial and temporal dimensions makes it particularly vulnerable to noise and
adversarial attacks in open data environments, which significantly hampers its performance and robustness. Moreover, the predictive patterns indicate the causal behind realworld decision-making. However, current approaches often
emphasize the optimization of local structures, overlooking
latent long-range dependencies. This oversight results in a
notable decline in performance on long-sequence dynamic
graph prediction tasks as the sequence length increases.

Introduction

Dynamic graphs are ubiquitous in real world, spanning domains such as social media (Sun et al. 2022a), traffic networks (Guo et al. 2021), financial transactions (Pareja et al.
2020), and human mobility (Zhou et al. 2023), etc. Their
complex spatial and temporal correlation patterns present
significant challenges across various downstream deployments. Leveraging exceptional expressive capabilities, Dynamic Graph Neural Networks (DGNNs) intrinsically excel at dynamic graph representation learning by modeling
both spatial and temporal predictive patterns, which enjoy
the combined merits of both GNNs and sequential models.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22272

