The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neighborhood-Aware Negative Sampling for Student Knowledge and Behavior
Modeling
Siqian Zhao, Sherry Sahebi
Department of Computer Science, University at Albany - SUNY
szhao2@albany.edu, ssahebi@albany.edu

Abstract

samples for complex sequences, using their coarse-grained
patterns, to help predict the fine-grained ones. NANS builds
an item graph to discover the shared coarse-grained sequential similarities for weeding out the potentially trivial and
non-informative samples and selecting a more representative negative set, thereby improving both training efficiency
and prediction accuracy.
We propose NANS in the context of student knowledge
modeling (KM) and behavior modeling (BM) tasks that
present complex interrelations and sequential patterns. KM
aims to quantify student knowledge to predict their future
performance, and BM focuses on student behavior, such as
predicting the questions they choose to work with. Consider
an online education system, where numerous questions are
presented, and the students can choose any topic and question to attempt at a time. Specifically, while the students
are free to choose the questions in any order, research has
shown that student sequences follow a coarse-grained pattern driven by latent topic structures and question similarities (Zhao, Wang, and Sahebi 2020). On the other hand, finegrained analyses of student sequences show that the specific
question they choose to attempt at each step is more personalized and depends on both student knowledge and behavioral traits (Guerra et al. 2014; Mirzaei 2020). These results
indicate that such sequences share coarse-grained similarities with fine-grained differences: the consecutive questions
are usually related, with a high variance in the order they
are tried. As a result, predicting the next question a student
chooses to attempt can significantly benefit from NANS.
Furthermore, the above research results highlight the importance of modeling the interrelations between KM and
BM, which is under-investigated in the literature. To model
these interrelations, we further propose KoBeM, a deep sequential model that includes two interconnected MANNbased components: one focused on student knowledge acquisition and the other on learning student preferences, with
mechanisms for information transfer between them. We formulate this problem as a multi-objective multi-task learning
challenge, to predict: (1) the next question that the student
chooses to engage with, and (2) the student’s performance
in it. Finally, we apply Pareto Multi-Task Learning (MTL)
optimization to balance the two objectives of KM and BM.
Our extensive experiments on two real-world datasets indicate the significant improvement of NANS-KoBeM over

Simple random negative sampling is a technique used to
enhance decision-making in sequential models with numerous potential negative instances, like recommender systems.
However, it ignores the patterns that can be discovered in
complex sequences to select the most informative negative
samples. In this paper, we address this challenge by introducing a Neighborhood-Aware Negative Sampling (NANS) technique in the context of student knowledge modeling (KM)
and behavior modeling (BM). In the education domain, KM
quantifies student knowledge based on past performance,
while BM focuses on behaviors like student preferences of
questions. With the vast number of problems to choose from
and the intricate relationship between student knowledge and
behavior, selecting the proper negative samples becomes a
notable challenge in this problem. NANS, along with our proposed multi-objective, multi-task sequential model for KM
and BM, NANS-KoBeM frames the simultaneous modeling
of student knowledge and question selection as a multi-task
learning problem with dual objectives: predicting students’
performance and their question selections.

1

Introduction

Negative sampling is used in decision-making tasks with
a large sample space to select a small subset of potentially negative samples to contrast with one or a few observed positive ones. Traditionally, a simple uniform random negative sampling technique is employed, where items
that users have not interacted with are randomly selected as
negative samples at each time step for sequential decisionmaking (Chae et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2013; Rendle
and Freudenthaler 2014). However, even with this technique, predicting the next sequence item is difficult, as
uniform sampling does not distinguish informative versus
non-informative samples. Recently, more advanced negative sampling techniques, such as distribution-aware sampling (Gillick et al. 2019; Xiong et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2023),
have been proposed to alleviate these problems. However,
these techniques mostly ignore the signals of more complex
sequences with rich patterns and interrelations to select the
most informative negative samples.
In this work, we present Neighborhood-Aware Negative
Sampling (NANS) to select the most informative negative
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13374

