The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Bandits with Parsimonious Hints
Amirmahdi Mirfakhar1 , Xuchuang Wang1 , Jinhang Zuo2 , Yair Zick1 , Mohammad Hajiesmaili1
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2 City University of Hong Kong
smirfakhar@umass.edu, xuchuangw@gmail.com, jinhang.zuo@cityu.edu.hk, yzick@umass.edu, hajiesmaili@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We study a hinted heterogeneous multi-agent multi-armed
bandits problem (HMA2B), where agents can query low-cost
observations (hints) in addition to pulling arms. In this framework, each of the M agents has a unique reward distribution
over K arms, and in T rounds, they can observe the reward of
the arm they pull only if no other agent pulls that arm. The goal
is to maximize the total utility by querying the minimal necessary hints without pulling arms, achieving time-independent
regret. We study HMA2B in both centralized and decentralized
setups. Our main centralized algorithm, GP-HCLA, which
is an extension of HCLA, uses a central decision-maker for
arm-pulling and hint queries, achieving O(M 4 K) regret with
O(M K log T ) adaptive hints. In decentralized setups, we
propose two algorithms, HD-ETC and EBHD-ETC, that allow agents to choose actions independently through collisionbased communication and query hints uniformly until stopping, yielding O(M 3 K 2 ) regret with O(M 3 K log T ) hints,
where the former requires knowledge of the minimum gap
and the latter does not. Finally, we establish lower bounds to
prove the optimality of our results and verify them through
numerical simulations.

1

Introduction

The multi-agent multi-armed bandit (MA2B) problem (Liu
and Zhao 2010; Anandkumar et al. 2011) is a sequential decision making task consisting of K ∈ N+ arms and M ∈ N+
agents. In each of the total T ∈ N+ decision rounds, each
agent selects one arm to pull and observes its reward if no
other agent pulls the same arm (called no collision). This
model has applications in wireless communication (Jouini
et al. 2009, 2010), caching (Xu, Tao, and Shen 2020; Xu and
Tao 2020), and edge computing (Wu et al. 2021). Among various models in MA2B, the heterogeneous multi-agent multiarmed bandit (Bistritz and Leshem 2018; Shi et al. 2021) is
a more realistic variant for these applications where agents
have different reward distributions over the arms, e.g., in a
wireless communication scenario where agents have different
channel qualities due to different geographical locations. In
this heterogeneous MA2B model, the optimal action of all
agents is a bipartite matching (between agents and arms) that
maximizes the total reward, called the optimal matching. An
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19467

algorithm’s performance is evaluated by regret, the difference
between the accumulative reward of keeping to choose the
optimal matching in all decision rounds and the total reward
of the bandit algorithm. A smaller expected regret implies a
better algorithm.
Recently, learning-augmented approaches are emerging,
e.g., Lykouris and Vassilvitskii (2021); Bamas, Maggiori,
and Svensson (2020); Bhaskara et al. (2023). This stream of
research studies how to assist an algorithm with hints (a.k.a.,
predictions) queried from existing ML models, e.g., large
language model (Achiam et al. 2023), deep convolutional
neural network (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2017),
and deep reinforcement learning (François-Lavet et al. 2018).
In this paper, we study the utilization of hint information
in heterogeneous multi-agent multi-armed bandits. In addition to receiving feedback from pulling arms, agents can
sequentially query hints about the potential rewards of other
arms, assisting in their decision-making process. We call
the model Hinted Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Multi-Armed
Bandits (HMA2B). Specifically, we consider a simple and accurate hint mechanism where agents can query the reward
of an arm without pulling it, with no regret incurred from
the queried hint. Despite assuming accurate hints, this model
poses challenges, such as balancing hint queries and armpullings while accounting for agent heterogeneity and potential future collisions. In addition to minimizing regret, we
aim to reduce hint complexity, the total number of queried
hints, as querying hints, such as via the GPT-4 API (Achiam
et al. 2023), can be costly. Efficiently leveraging hints is
crucial in scenarios where hint costs are significantly lower
than the costs of taking actions. For instance, in labor markets, structured, low-cost interviews provide hints to improve
applicant-role matching, reducing the risk of human resource
misallocation. Similarly, in radio channel assignments, test
signals serve as hints to allocate high-bandwidth channels
effectively, preventing delays and disruptions in critical applications like disaster recovery, where drones depend on
reliable communication channels.
We study two scenarios of HMA2B: centralized and decentralized setups. In the centralized setup, an omniscient
decision-maker determines which arm each agent should pull
or query hints from, similar to decision-making in hiring
processes where the employer has access to the applicants’
information to decide which of them to interview and which

