The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Data Augmentation for Instruction Following Policies via Trajectory Segmentation
Niklas Hoepner1 , Ilaria Tiddi2 , Herke van Hoof1
1

University of Amsterdam
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
n.r.hopner@uva.nl, i.tiddi@vu.nl, h.c.vanhoof@uva.nl
2

Abstract

of data is to develop training algorithms that learn from data
sources that, although abundant, deviate from the conventional framework of instruction-trajectory pairs (Ma et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023b). One such source of less conventional data are large collections of videos of agent behaviour.
For example, consider gameplay videos on YouTube (Baker
et al. 2022) or play data in robotics (Lynch et al. 2019;
Mees et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023b), where long unsegmented trajectories are generated by humans teleoperating
a robotic agent with the instruction to play. We will refer
to trajectories that contain sequences of diverse agent behaviour as play trajectories. Our goal is to generate training
data for an instruction following policy from them. This task
requires segmenting the play trajectories and labelling the
resulting segments with the corresponding instructions. We
tackle this problem in a semi-supervised setting, in which
a small amount of subsegments of the play trajectories are
labelled with the corresponding instructions (see Figure 1).
Previous work on trajectory segmentation has focused on
unsupervised methods, aiming to discover skills that maximise the likelihood of the unsegmented trajectories (Kipf
et al. 2019; Rao et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2022). However,
these approaches do not guarantee that the identified skills
align with any natural language instructions. Research on labelling trajectory segments with corresponding instructions
have generally assumed that labelled and unlabelled segments are drawn from the same distribution (Xiao et al.
2023; Ge et al. 2023). Fewer studies have explored the
segmentation of trajectories with multiple behaviours into
segments corresponding to individual instructions (Shiarlis
et al. 2018; Sharma, Torralba, and Andreas 2022). The annotations in those works assume entire trajectories are labelled
with natural language plans which describe the sequence of
instructions followed by the agent.
Extracting labelled segments from play trajectories poses
the challenge of identifying segments that align with specific
instructions. Adding non-representative or wrongly labelled
segments, potentially harms the performance of a policy
trained downstream. We adapt existing segmentation methods from the video segmentation literature and show that
they struggle to generalise from the labelled dataset to the
longer play trajectories. To address this, we introduce play
segmentation (PS), a probabilistic model of segmentations
of play trajectories, that can be trained from single instruc-

The scalability of instructable agents in robotics or gaming
is often hindered by limited data that pairs instructions with
agent trajectories. However, large datasets of unannotated trajectories containing sequences of various agent behaviour
(play trajectories) are often available. In a semi-supervised
setup, we explore methods to extract labelled segments from
play trajectories. The goal is to augment a small annotated
dataset of instruction-trajectory pairs to improve the performance of an instruction-following policy trained downstream
via imitation learning. Assuming little variation in segment
length, recent video segmentation methods can effectively extract labelled segments. To address the constraint of segment
length, we propose Play Segmentation (PS), a probabilistic
model that finds maximum likely segmentations of extended
subsegments, while only being trained on individual instruction segments. Our results in a game environment and a simulated robotic gripper setting underscore the importance of
segmentation; randomly sampled segments diminish performance, while incorporating labelled segments from PS improves policy performance to the level of a policy trained on
twice the amount of labelled data.

Code — https://github.com/NikeHop/PlaySegmentationAAAI2025

Introduction
Advances in natural language conditioned generative models led to breakthrough results on text-to-image (Saharia
et al. 2022), text-to-text (Ouyang et al. 2022) and text-toaudio generation (Le et al. 2023) forming the backbone of
many recent AI applications (OpenAI 2023). A similarly capable model that learns to map natural language instructions
to the corresponding trajectories of a game or robotic agent
is an ongoing research challenge (Brohan et al. 2023). The
main obstacle towards that goal is the lack of data, i.e. annotated trajectories containing diverse behaviours in different
environments (Walke et al. 2023). To address this data limitation, recent work focuses on enhancing the sample efficiency of training algorithms (Yu and Mooney 2023), transforming foundation models into policies (Brohan et al. 2023)
or performing data augmentation via simulation-based approaches (Wang et al. 2024). Another remedy for the lack
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17214

