The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual Manifold Regularization Steered Robust Representation Learning for Point
Cloud Analysis
Jian Bi, Qianliang Wu, Jianjun Qian, Lei Luo* , Jian Yang*
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{jianbi, wuqianliang, csjqian, cslluo, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
With the rapid advancement of 3D scanning technology, point
clouds have become a crucial data type in computer vision and machine learning. However, learning robust representations for point clouds remains a significant challenge
due to their irregularity and sparsity. In this paper, we propose a novel Dual Manifold Regularization (DMR) framework that makes full use of the properties of positive and
negative curvature in manifolds to improve the representation of point clouds. Specifically, we leverage DMR based
on hyperbolic and hyperspherical manifolds to address the
limitations of traditional single-manifold regularization techniques, including inadequate generalization ability and adaptability to data diversity, as well as the difficulty of capturing complex relationships between data. To begin, we utilize
the tree-like structure of the hyperbolic manifold to model
the part-whole hierarchical relationships within point clouds.
This allows for a more comprehensive representation of the
data, improving the model’s capability to understand complex
shapes. Additionally, we construct positive samples through
topological consistency augmentation and employ contrastive
learning techniques in the hyperspherical manifold to capture more discriminative features within the data. Our experimental results show that our method outperforms traditional
supervised learning and single-manifold regularization techniques in point cloud analysis. Specifically, for shape classification, DMR achieves a new State-Of-The-Art (SOTA)
performance with 94.8% Overall Accuracy (OA) on ModelNet40 and 90.7% OA on ScanObjectNN, surpassing the recent SOTA model without increasing the baseline parameters.

Figure 1: Illustration of regularization on the hyperspherical and hyperbolic manifolds. On the left, red arrows denote
positive pairs tending to attract each other, while the green
arrow denotes negative pairs tending to repel each other. On
the right, parts of different sizes are located at various levels,
and parts from distinct objects have different directions.

2021; Guo et al. 2021) to enhance the model’s representation
capability. However, unlike images (Hu et al. 2023b), despite these innovations significantly enhancing the model’s
processing ability, they often fail to consider the intrinsic
hierarchical structure and overall topological relationships
within point clouds. Understanding these aspects is beneficial for grasping the spatial distribution and geometric properties of 3D point clouds. It is well-known that regularization
not only encourages the model to focus more on the intrinsic structure and features in the data but also helps prevent
model overfitting. Therefore, it becomes crucial to incorporate regularization methods (Montanaro, Valsesia, and Magli
2022) to address the above-mentioned shortcomings.
HyCoRe (Montanaro, Valsesia, and Magli 2022) proposes a hyperbolic regularization to attempt to improve the
model’s representation capabilities for point cloud. However, there are some critical theoretical issues in this method
that limit the model’s performance. These issues mainly include (1) an incorrect assumption of a common ancestor

Introduction
Currently, research in point cloud analysis primarily focuses
on model innovation which explores various ways to improve performance. For instance, increasing network depth,
employing more complex multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
structures (Ma et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023a; Zhang et al.
2023; Lu et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2025,
2023), or incorporating convolutional networks (Wang et al.
2019; Li et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2018; Lin, Huang, and Wang
2020, 2021; Wu, Qi, and Fuxin 2019; Thomas et al. 2019,
2024; Chen et al. 2023) and transformer models (Zhao et al.
* corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1844

