The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Natural Language Understanding for LLMs via Large-Scale
Instruction Synthesis
Lin Yuan* , Jun Xu* , Honghao Gui* , Mengshu Sun, Zhiqiang Zhang, Lei Liang, Jun Zhou†
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
{huiwai.yl, xujun.xj, zhongjin.ghh, mengshu.sms, lingyao.zzq, leywar.liang, jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com

Abstract
High-quality, large-scale instructions are crucial for aligning
large language models (LLMs), however, there is a severe
shortage of instruction in the field of natural language understanding (NLU). Previous works on constructing NLU instructions mainly focus on information extraction (IE), neglecting tasks such as machine reading comprehension, question answering, and text classification. Furthermore, the lack
of diversity in the data has led to a decreased generalization
ability of trained LLMs in other NLU tasks and a noticeable decline in the fundamental model’s general capabilities.
To address this issue, we propose Hum, a large-scale, highquality synthetic instruction corpus for NLU tasks, designed
to enhance the NLU capabilities of LLMs. Specifically, Hum
includes IE (either close IE or open IE), machine reading
comprehension, text classification, and instruction generalist
tasks, thereby enriching task diversity. Additionally, we introduce a human-LLMs collaborative mechanism to synthesize
instructions, which enriches instruction diversity by incorporating guidelines, preference rules, and format variants. We
conduct extensive experiments on 5 NLU tasks and 28 general capability evaluation datasets for LLMs. Experimental
results show that Hum enhances the NLU capabilities of six
LLMs by an average of 3.1%, with no significant decline observed in other general capabilities.

Figure 1: The existing information extraction instructions
significantly reduce the performance of LLMs in NLU tasks.

Recently, there have been some works on high-quality instruction synthesis. Xu et al. (2024b) generates numerous
queries through various templates, allowing current LLMs to
produce responses. Cheng et al. (2024) has developed an instruction synthesis framework that converts raw pre-training
text into instructional formats, substantially improving the
performance of pre-trained models. Additionally, Zeng et al.
(2024) has introduced an end-to-end framework that utilizes LLMs to create evolving synthesis instruction datasets.
However, the instructions synthesized by these methods
are domain-independent. Currently, there is a significant
scarcity of instruction synthesis specifically for NLU tasks.
Recently, LLMs have achieved impressive performance in
unified information extraction tasks by synthesizing information extraction instructions (Xu et al. 2024a; Wang et al.
2023a; Gui et al. 2024). However, these synthesized instructions have several limitations. As illustrated in Figure 1, the
language understanding performance of YAYI-UIE (Xiao
et al. 2023), train on the Baichuan2-13B-Chat (Yang et al.
2023) and YAYI datasets, and Llama3-iepile (Gui et al.
2024), train on Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al. 2024)
and IEPILE, has noticeably decreased compared to their respective LLMs, with OneKE experiencing a 14.5% decline.
An analysis reveals two main issues with the natural language understanding instructions developed in these cases:
first, they primarily concentrate on information extraction
tasks while overlooking machine reading comprehension,
text classification, and question answering. Second, the instruction formats are too simplistic and fixed to make LLMs

Introduction
NLU is a subset of natural language processing in artificial
intelligence, encompassing key tasks such as machine reading comprehension, text classification, question answering,
and information extraction. Recently, LLMs (Dubey et al.
2024; Yang et al. 2023) have shown impressive performance
in general chat, but their language understanding ability still
has shortcomings (Xu et al. 2024a; Li et al. 2023a; Cheng,
Huang, and Wei 2023). Supervised instruction fine-tuning
is an effective method for enhancing specific capabilities of
LLMs (Sainz et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2024). Technical reports
from Llama3.1 (Dubey et al. 2024) and Qwen2 (Yang et al.
2024) emphasize that high-quality instruction data is essential for effectively aligning LLMs, and producing such data
is crucial for improving model performance significantly.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25787

