The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Generalization in Offline Reinforcement Learning via
Latent Distribution Representation Learning
Da Wang1 , Lin Li1 , Wei Wei1 * , Qixian Yu1 , Jianye Hao2 , Jiye Liang1
1

Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of
Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{sxu wd, yy17835438310}@163.com, {lilynn1116, weiwei, ljy}@sxu.edu.cn, jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn
2023; Li et al. 2023), the adoption of conservative Q values (Kumar et al. 2020; Kostrikov et al. 2021; Ma, Jayaraman, and Bastani 2021; Wang, Hunt, and Zhou 2022; Lyu
et al. 2022), and the utilization of uncertainty estimation
techniques (An et al. 2021; Bai et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2021).
Unlike the aforementioned methods that employ pessimism or conservatism, the alternative research (Qi et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2024) introduces a new way of thinking,
conceptualizing offline data-driven decision-making as domain adaptation (Ben-David et al. 2010; Zhao et al. 2019).
The primary goal is to ensure accurate predictions for the
value of optimized decisions − the “target domain” − when
training only on the provided dataset − the “source domain”.
IOM (Qi et al. 2022) addresses distribution shift by enforcing invariance between the learned representations of the
training dataset and optimized decisions. Coincidentally, the
recent ADS (Wang et al. 2024) framework employs dataset
splitting to create simulations of distribution shifts, an endeavor grounded in the concept of domain adaptation. This
framework is modeled as a min-max optimization challenge,
which takes inspiration from meta-learning, and it enforces
the model to achieve generalization over the distribution
shifts simulated from the train/validation subsets splitting of
the dataset. This novel approach, added to the line of offline
RL algorithms, brings a fresh perspective to the field. However, the existing techniques still rely on heuristic designs
for simulating distribution shifts. The diversity inherent in
the distribution gaps they produce and the potential to extract richer information from the original offline datasets are
issues deserving of deeper investigation.
With the goal of building models that can generalize
across unknown distributions, this paper steers a different course from prior studies by introducing an innovative
perspective: offline datasets inherently contain multiple latent distributions, with behavior data from diverse policies
potentially following different distributions and data from
the same policy across various time phases also exhibiting distribution variance (Figure 1). The former scenario
emerges in particular cases, such as situations where the offline dataset arises from sampling various policies. On the
other hand, the latter corresponds to the dynamically changing scenarios within time series, where such dynamic distributions exhibit diversity (Lu et al. 2023). We start by examining the connection between latent distributions and OOD

Abstract
Dealing with the distribution shift is a significant challenge
when building offline reinforcement learning (RL) models
that can generalize from a static dataset to out-of-distribution
(OOD) scenarios. Previous approaches have employed pessimism or conservatism strategies. More recently, data-driven
work has taken a distributional perspective, treating offline
data as a domain adaptation problem. However, these methods use heuristic techniques to simulate distribution shifts,
resulting in a limited diversity of artificially created distribution gaps. In this paper, we propose a novel perspective:
offline datasets inherently contain multiple latent distributions, with behavior data from diverse policies potentially following different distributions and data from the same policy
across various time phases also exhibiting distribution variance. We introduce the Latent Distribution Representation
Learning (LAD) framework, which aims to characterize the
multiple latent distributions within offline data and reduce
the distribution gaps between any pair of them. LAD consists of a min-max adversarial process: it first identifies the
“worst-case” distributions to enlarge the diversity of distribution gaps and then reduces these gaps to learn invariant representations for generalization. We derive a generalization error
bound to support LAD theoretically and verify its effectiveness through extensive experiments.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Levine et al. 2020) enables the execution of safe and efficient learning utilizing
pre-collected static datasets without the need for further interaction with the environment. Compared with its online
counterpart (Sutton and Barto 2018), offline RL offers an attractive potential for saving resources and mitigating risks.
The distribution shift represents one of the core challenges
in offline RL, with out-of-distribution (OOD) (Fujimoto,
Meger, and Precup 2019) data being not only grossly overestimated but also exacerbated through bootstrapping (Kumar
et al. 2019), which can precipitate a catastrophic decline in
performance. Rich experience has been accumulated in addressing the distribution shift issue, with strategies containing the implementation of policy constraints (Fakoor et al.
2021; Fujimoto and Gu 2021; Wu et al. 2022; Ran et al.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21053

