The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UniDemoiré: Towards Universal Image Demoiréing with Data Generation and
Synthesis
Zemin Yang1, * , Yujing Sun2, * , Xidong Peng1 , Siu Ming Yiu2 , Yuexin Ma1,†
1

ShanghaiTech University
The University of Hong Kong
{csyangzm, mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, {yjsun, smyiu}@cs.hku.uk
2

Abstract

Wang et al. 2023; Yue et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022). Nevertheless, the effectiveness of such supervised methods heavily depends on the volume of training data, consisting of
pairs of moiré images and their clean counterparts. As we
know, collecting such data is a daunting task and it requires
precise calibration between natural images and moiré patterns. The limitations of the data lead to the limitations of
the methods, resulting in poor generalization of the network
model, which performs poorly on the data containing new
moiré patterns or new natural images. In order to expand the
quantity and diversity of the training data in a convenient
way, some methods have started to explore the synthesis of
moiré patterns. LCDMoiré (Yuan et al. 2019) deigns handcraft mathematical models. However, it could not represent
complex features of moiré patterns and leads to a substantial discrepancy between the synthetic data and actual moiré
images. To enhance realism, recent studies (Park et al. 2022;
Zhong et al. 2024) extract moiré patterns from existing real
images and combine them with clean images for data synthesis. Nevertheless, these methods do not escape from the
moiré domains of the existing training data, bringing limited
performance improvement on new moiré domains. To develop a universal model for image demoiréing with greater
generalization capability and practicality, two critical challenges emerge: how to generate a vast amount of diverse
data, and how to ensure the authenticity of the data?

Image demoiréing poses one of the most formidable challenges in image restoration, primarily due to the unpredictable and anisotropic nature of moiré patterns. Limited by
the quantity and diversity of training data, current methods
tend to overfit to a single moiré domain, resulting in performance degradation for new domains and restricting their robustness in real-world applications. In this paper, we propose
a universal image demoiréing solution, UniDemoiré, which
has superior generalization capability. Notably, we propose
innovative and effective data generation and synthesis methods that can automatically provide vast high-quality moiré
images to train a universal demoiréing model. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the cutting-edge performance
and broad potential of our approach for generalized image
demoiréing.

Code — https://github.com/4DVLab/UniDemoire

Introduction
Digital screens have become essential devices for displaying information in our daily work and life. However, images captured from screens frequently suffer from frustrating moiré patterns, significantly degrading image quality
and hindering content extraction. Therefore, it becomes crucial to effectively remove such moiré artifacts to help users
obtain high-quality images from their digital imaging devices and to support industries in maintaining high-standard
product visual presentation and digital archiving. However,
moiré patterns are characterized as anisotropic and multiscale, as well as involving considerable shape variations
and color distortions (Amidror 2009). Such traits are seldom seen in other types of artifacts, like noise, rain streaks,
fog, blurring, etc., posing a significant challenge for even the
most advanced image restoration methods (Luo et al. 2023;
Zhu et al. 2023; Fei et al. 2023).
Hence, many methods have been proposed to tackle the
problem of demoiréing in recent years (Sun, Yu, and Wang
2018; Liu et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2020; He et al. 2019, 2020;

To address the above challenges, we propose a universal image demoiréing solution, UniDemoiré, capable of
generating a vast amount of realistic-looking training data
to enhance the generalization capabilities of the image
demoiréing model, as Figure 1 shows. First, inspired by
the fact that the moiré pattern is unrelated to the content
of the image, we introduce a novel, large-scale Moiré Pattern Dataset by capturing moiré patterns against a plain
white background. Unlike previous moiré datasets that capture nature images with moiré, our pure moiré patterns can
be applied to arbitrary nature images to scale up the data
domain automatically. Moreover, our dataset does not need
calibrations between the moiré image and the clean image,
which can avoid the effect of calibration errors and facilitate the learning process of the model. In particular, our
dataset introduces more pattern diversity by considering various previously overlooked factors (Yang et al. 2023), including zooming rate, CMOS technology, pixel size, and

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9354

