The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Market Making with Inventory Constraints via Online Learning
Shan Xue1 , Ye Du2 * , Liang Xu3
1

School of Economics and Management, Leshan Normal University, Leshan, China
2
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
3
School of Business Administration, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
xueshanads123@gmail.com, henry,duye@gmail.com, arecxuliang1112@gmail.com

Abstract

prices, the market maker may accumulate a large number of
short positions. If these positions are liquidated at the peak
of the trend, significant losses may be incurred. This risk is
referred to as inventory risk (Avellaneda and Stoikov 2008;
Guilbaud and Pham 2013). Thus, the objective of a market
maker is to maximize the profit and loss (PnL) of the trading
while keeping her inventory low to minimize inventory risk.
To determine the optimal market-making strategy, there
are three primary approaches in the existing literature. The
first approach models the problem as a stochastic optimal control problem, which is then solved using the wellknown Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation (Avellaneda and
Stoikov 2008; Guéant, Lehalle, and Fernandez-Tapia 2013;
Obizhaeva and Wang 2013; Cartea, Jaimungal, and Penalva
2015). This method often involves making assumptions on
the dynamics of the limit order book (LOB) and asset price,
such as Brownian motion. The second approach frames it as
a reinforcement learning (RL) problem (Patel 2018; Spooner
et al. 2018; Zhang and Chen 2020), whose recent progress
is comprehensively reviewed by (Hambly, Xu, and Yang
2021). Spooner and Savani (2020) develop adversarial RL
based on the model of (Avellaneda and Stoikov 2008), and
produce market-marking agents that are robust to adversarial and adaptively-chosen market conditions. Although their
strategies are more robust to misspecification, they still rely
on assumptions on the dynamics of the asset price and LOB.
In contrast to the first two approaches, the third approach
explores a model-free or robust version of market making,
without imposing any assumptions on the dynamics of the
LOB and asset price. The online learning or no-regret learning framework is well-suited to this scenario. Abernethy
and Kale (2013) are the pioneer in this line of work. They
develop a class of spread-based market-making strategies
parametrized by a minimum quoted spread. Online learning
algorithms are then designed for these strategies to achieve
no-regret. However, rather than on inventory risk, their primary focus is on the PnL of these algorithms. Their algorithms will be exposed to significant inventory risk if the
asset price rises or falls consecutively.
To address the above limitations, we focus on both PnL
and inventory risk for the market maker within the framework of online learning. We extend the work of (Abernethy
and Kale 2013) and provide model-free market-making
strategies by incorporating inventory risk control. To man-

A market maker is a specialist who provides liquidity by continuously offering bid and ask quotes for a financial asset.
The market maker’s objective is to maximize profit while
avoiding the accumulation of a large position in the asset to
control inventory risk. To achieve model-free results, online
learning has been applied to design market-making strategies
that make no assumptions on the dynamics of the limit order book and asset price. However, existing work primarily
focuses on profit rather than inventory risk. To address this
limitation, this paper develops market-making strategies with
inventory constraints within the online learning framework.
To manage inventory risk, we propose two classes of marketmaking strategies with fixed bid-ask spreads that serve as
reference strategies. Each reference strategy can ensure that
the inventory remains under control, which enables the online learning algorithms designed for each class of reference
strategies to satisfy inventory constraints. Different from the
standard online learning model where the gain in each period
is assumed to lie within a fixed bounded interval, the gain
in our model depends on a state variable (i.e., the inventory
size). Thus, a key challenge in analyzing the regret bounds
is to bound the difference between the gains of any two reference strategies, which becomes significantly more complicated compared with scenarios without inventory constraints.
By tackling these difficulties, we show that these algorithms
achieve low regrets. Experimental results illustrate the superior performance of our algorithms in inventory risk control.

Extended version — https://papers.ssrn.com/abs=5110826

1

Introduction

Market making is a financial activity where an individual or
firm, known as a market maker, provides liquidity by continuously offering bid and ask quotes for a financial asset.
The market maker stands ready to buy the asset at the bid
price and sell it at the ask price, with the difference between
the two prices known as the bid-ask spread. By doing so,
the market maker provides liquidity for other traders while
profiting from the simple principle of buying low and selling high. However, this profit does not come without risk. In
the presence of a strong price trend, such as rapidly rising
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21859

