The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Few-shot Prompting for Machine Translation with Pre-trained
Language Models
Lei Tang1 , Jinghui Qin1 * , Wenxuan Ye2 , Hao Tan1 , Zhijing Yang1
1

Guangdong University of Technology
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
tangtang302958@163.com, scape1989@gmail.com, nbvincentelite@gmail.com,
tanhao4869@gmail.com, yzhj@gdut.edu.cn
2

Source
Text

Abstract
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) with in-context
learning have demonstrated remarkable potential in handling neural machine translation. However, existing evidence
shows that LLMs are prompt-sensitive and it is sub-optimal
to apply the fixed prompt to any input for downstream machine translation tasks. To address this issue, we propose an
adaptive few-shot prompting (AFSP) framework to automatically select suitable translation demonstrations for various
source input sentences to further elicit the translation capability of an LLM for better machine translation. First, we
build a translation demonstration retrieval module based on
LLM’s embedding to retrieve top-k semantic-similar translation demonstrations from aligned parallel translation corpus. Rather than using other embedding models for semantic demonstration retrieval, we build a hybrid demonstration
retrieval module based on the embedding layer of the deployed LLM to build better input representation for retrieving more semantic-related translation demonstrations. Then,
to ensure better semantic consistency between source inputs
and target outputs, we force the deployed LLM itself to generate multiple output candidates in the target language with
the help of translation demonstrations and rerank these candidates. Besides, to better evaluate the effectiveness of our
AFSP framework on the latest language and extend the research boundary of neural machine translation, we construct a
high-quality diplomatic Chinese-English parallel dataset that
consists of 5,528 parallel Chinese-English sentences. Finally,
extensive experiments on the proposed diplomatic ChineseEnglish parallel dataset and the United Nations Parallel Corpus (Chinese-English part) show the effectiveness and superiority of our proposed AFSP.

链博会是“链”通世界的盛会，也是“链”接未来的盛举，展现了
各方构建稳定和富有韧性的产业链供应链的共同心声。

You are a professional translator. ...
These sentences will be displayed
below.
Chinese text: ... 倡导共同构筑安
全稳定、畅通高效、开放包容、
互利共赢...
Translation... called for joint efforts
to build a global industrial and
supply chain system that is secure,
stable, smooth, efficient, open,
inclusive and mutually beneficial ...
After the example pairs, ...
Translate the text from Chinese to
English.

Prompt1

You are a professional translator. ...
These sentences will be displayed
below.
Chinese text: ...各方秉持“发展为
先、平等协商、务实高效、开放
包容”的澜湄精神...
Translation: ... relevant parties have
acted in the Lancang-Mekong spirit
of development first, equal
consultation, practicality and high
efficiency, and openness and
inclusiveness, ...
After the example pairs, ...
Translate the text from Chinese to
English.
Prompt2

Our Adaptive Prompting Framework
Output1

Blue-4: 0.2840
Comet: 0.8097

√

Frozen Pre-trained LLM

The CIIE is a grand event
connecting the world through
supply chains and connecting
the future, showcasing the
common aspiration of all parties
to build a stable and resilient
industrial and supply chain.

Output2

Blue-4: 0.2302
Comet: 0.7535

The fair is a grand gathering to
connect the world
with ”chain“ and a grand
display to connect the future
with ”chain“, showcasing the
common aspiration of all parties
to build a stable and resilient
industrial chain supply chain.

×

Figure 1: Illustration of translation results from different
prompts using Llama3-8B. Our adaptive prompting framework can adaptively select the suitable prompt for an input
text, yielding a better translation.

years, especially with the emergence of large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT & GPT-4 (Ouyang et al. 2022),
GLM (Du et al. 2022), Llama (Touvron et al. 2023; Dubey
et al. 2024), etc. Benefiting from the increasing scale of parameters and training corpus, these LLMs have gained a universal ability to handle various NLP tasks via in-context
learning (ICL) (Brown et al. 2020) or prompt engineering (Chen et al. 2023), which is the process of structuring
input text with exemplars and human-written instructions
for LLMs, rather than conducting costly task-specific finetuning. Unsurprisingly, LLMs with ICL or prompting techniques have shown outstanding potential in machine translation (Zhang, Haddow, and Birch 2023a; Zhu et al. 2024;
Zhang et al. 2023) by constructing elaborate instruction or

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015), the core of which lies in the encoder-decoder
architecture, aims to translate texts in the source language
into the target language automatically. NMT is a challenging task since it involves translating text among different
languages and requires semantic alignment between languages (Fan et al. 2021; Costa-jussà et al. 2022; Yuan et al.
2023). Even so, it has made remarkable progress in recent
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25255

