The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SSL-STMFormer: Self-Supervised Learning Spatio-Temporal Entanglement
Transformer for Traffic Flow Prediction
Zetao Li1 , Zheng Hu1 , Peng Han1 * , Yu Gu1 * , Shimin Cai1 *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China
{zetaoli99,huzheng}@std.uestc.edu.cn,{penghan,guyu,shimincai}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

For traffic flow prediction, the fundamental challenge lies
in effectively capturing and modeling the spatio-temporal
correlations within traffic data(Yin et al. 2021; Jiang and
Luo 2022; Bui, Cho, and Yi 2022; Jin et al. 2023). Previous
studies have employed various methods to address this challenge. Initially, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were
combined with recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to leverage CNNs’ efficacy in handling spatial data and RNNs’ proficiency in processing time series data, enabling the learning
of spatio-temporal correlations(Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017;
Yao et al. 2018; Vinayakumar, Soman, and Poornachandran
2017; Qiu et al. 2018). With the advent of graph neural networks (GNNs), the research focus shifted, as numerous studies demonstrated the superior capability of GNNs in modeling the graph structure of traffic data(Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018;
Wu et al. 2019, 2020; Song et al. 2020; Li and Zhu 2021;
Fang et al. 2021; Choi et al. 2022). Recently, the trend has
been towards developing generalized traffic flow prediction
models that utilize pre-training strategies and unsupervised
learning methods to enhance model performance and generalizability across diverse traffic scenarios(Ji et al. 2023;
Zhang et al. 2023; Gao et al. 2024; Yuan et al. 2024).

Traffic flow prediction remains a critical issue in intelligent transport systems. Despite significant efforts in traffic flow modeling, existing approaches exhibit several notable limitations: (i) Most models fail to capture traffic flow
similarities over long distances and extended periods; (ii)
They struggle to account for spatio-temporal heterogeneity
induced by varying traffic flow patterns; (iii) Due to their
static modeling approach, they struggle to effectively capture
the intricate spatio-temporal entanglement. To address these
challenges, we propose a traffic flow prediction framework
based on self-supervised learning spatio-temporal entanglement transformer(SSL-STMFormer). This framework adopts
a self-supervised learning paradigm, leveraging a transformer
architecture that captures richer spatio-temporal information
to better represent traffic flow patterns. Specifically, a temporal attention module and a spatial attention module are employed to capture the spatio-temporal dependencies of traffic
dynamics, respectively, and spatio-temporal entanglementaware methods are introduced to allow the model to perceive spatio-temporal entanglement and thus better modelling
of real traffic environments. Furthermore, to achieve adaptive spatio-temporal self-supervised learning, adaptive data
augmentation is applied to the input traffic flow data, and
the traffic flow prediction task is enhanced with temporal
heterogeneity module and spatial heterogeneity module. Extensive experimental evaluations conducted on six publicly
available real-world transportation datasets demonstrate that
our method achieves substantial improvements across these
datasets.

Despite the promising outcomes of previous studies, these
methods still present certain limitations. First, traffic systems exhibit spatiotemporal entanglement, where both spatiotemporal dependencies and heterogeneities dynamically
evolve over time due to varying travel patterns. As illustrated
in Figure 1, we selected the traffic flow data from three locations to elucidate this spatiotemporal entanglement: San
Francisco International Airport (Node A), Oakland International Airport in the San Francisco Bay Area (Node B),
and Bernal Heights (Node C). In Figure 1(b), we observe
the traffic flow of these three locations from 2020/7/10 to
2020/7/17. From 7/10 to 7/13, the traffic flow trends of these
locations exhibit strong similarities. However, this similarity sharply diminishes during the remaining period. Existing
methods, which model this phenomenon in a static manner (pre-defined), fail to effectively capture these dynamics. Second, due to the functional segmentation of urban areas, even two distant locations may exhibit similar traffic
patterns, though this similarity is also subject to dynamic
changes. Furthermore, the inherent over-smoothing problem
in GNNs hampers their ability to capture such dynamic longterm dependencies.

Code — https://github.com/ZetaoLiPhD/SSL-STMFomer

Introduction
The rapid urbanization and continuous growth of urban populations have led to significant challenges in urban traffic
management. Traffic congestion, increased travel time, and
air pollution are among the most pressing issues faced by
modern cities(Djahel et al. 2014). Effective traffic flow prediction is crucial for mitigating these problems, enabling
better traffic management, efficient route planning, and improved urban mobility(Wang et al. 2021).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12130

