The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pinwheel-shaped Convolution and Scale-based Dynamic Loss for
Infrared Small Target Detection
Jiangnan Yang1 , Shuangli Liu1 * , Jingjun Wu2 , Xinyu Su1 , Nan Hai1 , Xueli Huang1
1

2

School of Information and Engineering, Southwest University of Science and Technology
School of Electronic and Optical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
slliu@swust.edu.cn

Abstract
These recent years have witnessed that convolutional neural
network (CNN)-based methods for detecting infrared small
targets have achieved outstanding performance. However,
these methods typically employ standard convolutions, neglecting to consider the spatial characteristics of the pixel
distribution of infrared small targets. Therefore, we propose a
novel pinwheel-shaped convolution (PConv) as a replacement
for standard convolutions in the lower layers of the backbone
network. PConv better aligns with the Gaussian-like spatial
distribution of infrared small target, improves feature extraction, significantly expands the receptive field, and introduces
only a minimal increase in parameters. Additionally, while
recent loss functions combine scale and location losses, they
do not adequately account for the varying sensitivity of these
losses across different target scales, limiting detection performance on dim-small targets. To overcome this, we propose a
scale-based dynamic (SD) Loss that dynamically adjusts the
influence of scale and location losses based on target size,
improving the network’s ability to detect targets of varying
scales. We construct a new benchmark, SIRST-UAVB, which
is the largest and most challenging dataset to date for realshot single-frame infrared small target detection. Lastly, by
integrating PConv and SD Loss into the latest small target detection algorithms, we achieved significant performance improvements on IRSTD-1K and our SIRST-UAVB dataset, validating the effectiveness and generalizability of our approach.

Figure 1: Grayscale 3D view of infrared small target.

appear dim with low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and signalto-clutter ratio (SCR), and lack texture information. Additionally, varying distances alter target size and shape. Complex backgrounds, such as buildings, clouds, or vegetation,
further obscure targets (Kou et al. 2023).
IRSTDS techniques can be broadly divided into modeldriven traditional methods and data-driven deep learning
(DL)-based methods. Traditional model-driven approaches
(Rivest and Fortin 1996; Dai et al. 2021b; Du and Hamdulla 2019; Zhou et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b) require manual parameter adjustment based on prior knowledge, making them less adaptable to the diverse and complex scenarios encountered in IRSTDS, resulting in poor robustness
(Li et al. 2016). In contrast, data-driven DL-based methods
leverage extensive and varied IRSTDS data, allowing for autonomous parameter updates through gradient descent on the
loss function, leading to more robust performance. CNNbased IRSTDS methods are primarily divided into detectionbased methods (Li and Shen 2023; Ciocarlan et al. 2024; Dai
et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024) and segmentation-based methods (Dai et al. 2021a; Zhang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2024). While most research improves IRSTDS through
novel network architectures, we enhance performance by revisiting the convolutional module itself. As shown in Fig.

Introduction
Infrared small target detection and segmentation (IRSTDS)
is widely used in both military and civilian fields due to
its advantages, such as thermal sensitivity, nighttime operability, passive radiation, and strong anti-interference capabilities (Zhao et al. 2022; Karim and Andersson 2013).
These applications include aircraft and bird warning systems (Ma et al. 2022), missile guidance systems (Sun, Yang,
and An 2020), and sea rescue operations (Liu et al. 2023a;
Kou et al. 2022). Typically, these tasks require mid-to-longrange target observation, resulting in small target imaging
(Karim and Andersson 2013). As the infrared radiation received by the camera decreases with distance, targets often
* Corresponding author: Shuangli Liu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9202

