The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Look Before You Leap: Enhancing Attention and Vigilance Regarding Harmful
Content with GuidelineLLM
Shaoqing Zhang1 * , Zhuosheng Zhang2 , Kehai Chen1† , Rongxiang Weng3 ,
Muyun Yang1 , Tiejun Zhao1 , Min Zhang1
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Meituan, China
Sure, I can do some
harmful behavior …

Abstract
Despite being empowered with alignment mechanisms, large
language models (LLMs) are increasingly vulnerable to
emerging jailbreak attacks that can compromise their alignment mechanisms. This vulnerability poses significant risks
to real-world applications. Existing work faces challenges in
both training efficiency and generalization capabilities (i.e.,
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback and RedTeaming). Developing effective strategies to enable LLMs to
resist continuously evolving jailbreak attempts represents a
significant challenge. To address this challenge, we propose
a novel defensive paradigm called GuidelineLLM, which assists LLMs in recognizing queries that may have harmful content. Before LLMs respond to a query, GuidelineLLM first
identifies potential risks associated with the query, summarizes these risks into guideline suggestions, and then feeds
these guidelines to the responding LLMs. Importantly, our
approach eliminates the necessity for additional safety finetuning of the LLMs themselves; only the GuidelineLLM requires fine-tuning. This characteristic enhances the general
applicability of GuidelineLLM across various LLMs. Experimental results demonstrate that GuidelineLLM can significantly reduce the attack success rate (ASR) against LLM
(an average reduction of 34.17% ASR) while maintaining the
usefulness of LLM in handling benign queries.

Sorry, I can’t assist
with that …

Full-Param Train

Unseen Jailbreak
Attack

Alignment

Time Cost
GuidelineLLM
Only Prompt

Guideline
LLM

Guideline:
1. Be mindful of the content: …
2. Avoid promoting harmful content: …
3. Prioritize well-being: …
…

Figure 1: The comparison of the defensive policies between
GuidelineLLM and typical alignment mechanisms. Alignment mechanisms require large-scale data and substantial
computational resources to train responding LLMs. However, our GuidelineLLM does not require additional safety
training for the responding LLMs.

content. Although LLMs have demonstrated a capability for
recognizing harmful content, methods to attack LLMs have
continuously evolved, particularly jailbreak attacks (Yuan
et al. 2023; Deng et al. 2023b; Zeng et al. 2024a; Zou et al.
2023). Jailbreak attacks can efficiently induce models to produce harmful responses during the inference phase, posing
significant risks to the practical application of LLMs.
To enhance the safety of LLMs, common approaches involve reinforcing their alignment mechanisms. Techniques
such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Ouyang et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2022a; Jiang et al.
2024b) and Red-Teaming (Ganguli et al. 2022; Perez et al.
2022; Touvron et al. 2023) have proven effective in improving the ability of LLMs to detect harmful content. However,
these methods demand extensive training data and significant computational resources, which can limit the speed of
iterative improvements. Furthermore, additional retraining
might degrade the performance of established safety alignment mechanisms (Qi et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2024). Therefore, it is critical to investigate methodologies that can mitigate the production of harmful content without requiring
modifications to the model parameters.

Code — https://github.com/sqzhang-lazy/GuidelineLLM
Datasets —
https://github.com/sqzhang-lazy/GuidelineLLM
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.10423

Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al.
2023; Achiam et al. 2023; Anil et al. 2023) have become increasingly prominent in daily activities, exemplified by applications such as ChatGPT and Intelligent Assistants. The
utilization of these models for various tasks is an expanding
trend (Qin et al. 2023; Zhong et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2022),
necessitating a reduction in responses containing harmful
* This work was done during Shaoqing’s internship at Meituan

LLM Team.
†
Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25904

