The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On Local Overfitting and Forgetting in Deep Neural Networks
Uri Stern, Tomer Yaacoby and Daphna Weinshall
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel
ustern@gmail.com, tomer.yaacoby@mail.huji.ac.il, daphna@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
The infrequent occurrence of overfitting in deep neural networks is perplexing: contrary to theoretical expectations, increasing model size often enhances performance in practice.
But what if overfitting does occur, though restricted to specific sub-regions of the data space? In this work, we propose a
novel score that captures the forgetting rate of deep models on
validation data. We posit that this score quantifies local overfitting: a decline in performance confined to certain regions of
the data space. We then show empirically that local overfitting
occurs regardless of the presence of traditional overfitting.
Using the framework of deep over-parametrized linear models, we offer a certain theoretical characterization of forgotten
knowledge, and show that it correlates with knowledge forgotten by real deep models. Finally, we devise a new ensemble method that aims to recover forgotten knowledge, relying
solely on the training history of a single network. When combined with knowledge distillation, this method will enhance
the performance of a trained model without adding inference
costs. Extensive empirical evaluations demonstrate the efficacy of our method across multiple datasets, contemporary
neural network architectures, and training protocols.

1

Figure 1: Local overfitting and forgetting in a binary problem, where blue and orange denote the different classes,
and circles mark the validation set. The initial (left) and final (right) separators of a hypothetical learning method are
shown, where ⊗ marks prediction errors. Clearly the final
classifier has a smaller generalization error, but now one
point at the top is ’forgotten’.
To bridge this gap, we present a fresh perspective on overfitting. Instead of solely assessing it through a decline in validation accuracy, we propose to monitor what we term the
model’s forget fraction. This metric quantifies the portion of
test data (or validation set) that the model initially classifies
correctly but misclassifies as training proceeds (see illustration in Fig. 1). Throughout this paper we term the decline in
test accuracy as ”forgetting”, to emphasize that the model’s
ability to correctly classify portions of the data is reduced.
In Section 3, we investigate various benchmark datasets, observing this phenomenon even in the absence of overfitting
as conventionally defined, i.e., when test accuracy increases
throughout. Notably, this occurs in competitive networks despite the implementation of modern techniques to mitigate
overfitting, such as data augmentation and dropout. Our empirical investigation also reveals that forgetting of patterns
occurs alongside the learning of new patterns in the training
set, explaining why the traditional definition of overfitting
fails to capture this phenomenon.
Formal investigation of the phenomenon of forgotten
knowledge is challenging, particularly in the context of deep
neural networks which are not easily amenable to formal
analysis. Instead, in Section 4 we adopt the framework
of over-parameterized deep linear networks. This framework involves non-linear optimization and has previously
offered valuable insights into the learning processes of practical deep networks (Fukumizu 1998; Saxe, McClelland, and

Introduction

Overfitting a training set is considered a fundamental challenge in machine learning. Theoretical analyses predict that
as a model gains additional degrees of freedom, its capacity
to fit a given training dataset increases. Consequently, there
is a point where the model becomes too specialized for a
particular training set, leading to an increase in its generalization error. In deep learning, one would expect to see
increased generalization error as the number of parameters and/or training epochs increases. Surprisingly, even vast
deep neural networks with billions of parameters seldom
adhere to this expectation, and overfitting as a function of
epochs is almost never observed (Liu et al. 2022). Typically,
a significant increase in the number of parameters still results in enhanced performance, or occasionally in peculiar
phenomena like the double descent in test error (Annavarapu
2021), see Section 3. Clearly, there exists a gap between our
classical understanding of overfitting and the empirical results observed when training modern neural networks.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20592

