The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Photometric-Consistent Depth Estimation from Endoscopic
Monocular Video
Shijie Li1 * , Weijun Lin1 * , Qingyuan Xiang1 , Yunbin Tu2 , Shitan Asu1 , Zheng Li 1†
1

2

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China
lizheng@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

Huang 2018; Mahjourian, Wicke, and Angelova 2018a; Bian
et al. 2019) leverage CNN-based depth and ego-motion networks, eliminating the need for ground-truth data. The core
idea of these methods is to warp the source frame to target frame for generating view synthesis using the predicted
depth and camera pose. Subsequently, the appearance discrepancy between the target frame and the synthesized frame
serves as a supervisory signal throughout the training phase.
Unfortunately, these methods are not suitable for endoscopic scenarios because they fail to satisfy a critical assumption: Photometric consistency across adjacent frames
(Horn and Schunck 1981). This inconsistency stems from
two major sources: (1) Local photometric inconsistency:
Specular reflections create highlights, which cause the depth
network to mistakenly treat these highlights as distinct objects, and lead to incorrect depth estimations. (2) Global
photometric inconsistency: The joint movement of the
light source and the camera alters the photometric of same
target in different frames, thereby undermining the accuracy
of the loss calculation. Consequently, fluctuations in photometric values impede the utilization of appearance differences as a supervisory signal, resulting in ambiguous supervision in endoscopic scenes.
In this paper, we propose Unsupervised PhotometricConsistent Depth Estimation Network (PC-Depth) to tackle
these challenges. Our key insight is that, by leveraging a fundamental property of endoscopic imagery, we can establish
appropriate and reliable constraints to achieve photometricconsistent depth prediction. Architecture-wise, given two
frames (source frame and target frame), we estimate the target frame’s depth map and their relative camera pose using
depth and pose networks. According to the reflection model,
highlights occur when the reflected light coincides with the
observation direction (the light source position can be approximated as coinciding with the camera position in endoscopes (Arnold et al. 2010)). To exploit this property and
achieve local photometric consistency, we propose a Highlight Loss to constrain the depth estimation within the depth
network for highlighted regions. Specifically, the angle between the reflected light and the observation direction is
twice the angle between the normal vector and the observation direction. We first derive the normal vectors of the
highlight regions from the depth map. Then, we minimize
the angle between the normal vector and the observation di-

Recent advancements in unsupervised monocular depth estimation typically rely on an assumption that image photometry remains consistent across consecutive frames. However,
this assumption often fails in endoscopic scenes due to: 1)
local photometric inconsistency caused by specular reflections creating highlights; and 2) global photometric inconsistency resulting from the simultaneous movement of the
light source and the camera. Since unsupervised depth estimation methods rely on appearance discrepancies between
frames as a supervisory signal, these photometric inconsistencies inevitably deteriorate loss function calculation. In this
paper, our goal is to obtain a strong and reliable supervisory signal for achieving photometric-consistent depth estimation. To this end, for local photometric inconsistency, we
utilize the specular reflection model to introduce a Highlight Loss for handling the estimation of highlight regions.
For global photometric inconsistency, we design a Photometric Match module, which utilizes the spotlight illumination model to derive an analytical expression, achieving photometric alignment across different frames. Unlike previous
works that introduce additional optical flow or networks, our
method is simpler and more efficient. Extensive experiments
demonstrate our method achieves the state-of-the-art results
on C3VD, SCARED and SERV-CT datasets.

Code — https://github.com/DpEstimation/PC-Depth

Introduction
Accurate depth estimation is essential for reconstructing 3D
structures from monocular endoscopic videos, which significantly advances minimally invasive surgical navigation
(Fitzpatrick 2010; Edwards et al. 2021; Taylor et al. 2016).
However, compared to conventional images, the depth prediction in endoscopic scenes often have more complex lighting environments.
Recently, deep learning-based methods (Eigen, Puhrsch,
and Fergus 2014; Liu et al. 2015) have made significant strides, which employ Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) to predict depth maps from conventional monocular
video. In particular, unsupervised methods (Zou, Luo, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4923

