The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-Silo Feature Space Alignment for Federated Learning on Clients with
Imbalanced Data
Zhuang Qi1 , Lei Meng1,2 * , Zhaochuan Li3 , Han Hu4 , Xiangxu Meng1
1
School of Software, Shandong University, China
Shandong Research Institute of Industrial Technology, China
3
Inspur, China
4
School of information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
z qi@mail.sdu.edu.cn, lmeng@sdu.edu.cn, lizhaoch@inspur.com, hhu@bit.edu.cn, mxx@sdu.edu.cn

…

Local Prototypes

…

Cross-Silo Feature Space Alignment
Multi-Source
Relearned Common
Prototypical Spaces
Feature Space

…

Data imbalance across clients in federated learning often
leads to different local feature space partitions, harming the
global model’s generalization ability. Existing methods either
employ knowledge distillation to guide consistent local training or performs procedures to calibrate local models before
aggregation. However, they overlook the ill-posed model aggregation caused by imbalanced representation learning. To
address this issue, this paper presents a cross-silo feature
space alignment method (FedFSA), which learns a unified
feature space for clients to bridge inconsistency. Specifically,
FedFSA consists of two modules, where the in-silo prototypical space learning (ISPSL) module uses predefined text embeddings to regularize representation learning, which can improve the distinguishability of representations on imbalanced
data. Subsequently, it introduces a variance transfer approach
to construct the prototypical space, which aids in calibrating
minority classes feature distribution and provides necessary
information for the cross-silo feature space alignment (CSFSA) module. Moreover, the CSFSA module utilizes augmented features learned from the ISPSL module to learn a
generalized mapping and align these features from different
sources into a common space, which mitigates the negative
impact caused by imbalanced factors. Experimental results
verified that FedFSA improves the consistency between diverse spaces on imbalanced data, which results in superior
performance compared to existing methods.

In-Silo Prototypical Space Learning
Client
Prototypical
Prototypes
Space

Heterologous
Space Alignment

Abstract

Majority to Minority
Variance Transfer

2

Augmented Features

Predicts

Shared Decision
Boundaries
Variance

Figure 1: FedFSA leverages the variance transfer approach
at the client side to learn the prototypical space, which calibrates the feature distribution of minority classes. Moreover,
FedFSA aligns feature spaces from different sources at the
server side to learn shared decision boundaries.

space becomes challenging when dealing with data that is
imbalanced within clients and has inconsistent distribution
across clients, which makes it difficult to integrate learners
with inconsistent objectives into a remarkable model.
To alleviate issues of class imbalance, existing methods
can roughly be categorized into two types. The former approach typically employs knowledge distillation to guide local model learning on the client-side, which aims to transfer
global knowledge to client models and leverage regularization techniques to guide them in learning consistent representations of data (MOON (Li, He, and Song 2021), Fedproc
(Mu et al. 2023), FedNTD (Lee et al. 2022) and FPL (Huang
et al. 2023)). For instance, Fedproc and FPL construct prototypical representation for each class of samples and employ
it to facilitate the feature space alignment across clients. The
latter method usually involves model calibration, including
global classifier fine-tuning and projection head retraining,
which is aimed at mitigating bias issues introduced by the
weighted averaging of local models (CReFF (Shang et al.
2022), CLIP2FL (Shi et al. 2024) and FedCSPC (Qi et al.
2023)), where CReFF and CLIP2FL focus on refining the
global classifier to enhance its robustness with varied feature
environments. Notably, these strategies have shown promising results in classes with a majority of samples. However,
data imbalance typically results in poor representation learning for minority classes in clients. Additionally, they directly
use the intermediate features output by clients to retrain the

Introduction
Federated learning enables collaborative modeling with imbalanced data from various sources, which shares model parameters instead of raw data between data sources and the
server (Hu et al. 2024b; Liu et al. 2023; Cai et al. 2024b; Qi
et al. 2022; Kairouz et al. 2021). This significantly improves
the effective utilization of isolated data, enabling them to
contribute to cooperative decision-making and learn a generalized model (Cai et al. 2024a; Wang et al. 2023a; Meng
et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024a). However, existing studies
show that the data heterogeneity between clients could lead
to a decrease in the effectiveness of collaborative modeling
(Qi et al. 2024a; Shi et al. 2023; Wen et al. 2023; Qi et al.
2024b). This is mainly because learning a consistent feature
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19986

