The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deconfound Semantic Shift and Incompleteness in Incremental Few-shot Semantic
Segmentation
Yirui Wu1, 5 , Yuhang Xia1 , Hao Li1 , Lixin Yuan1 , Junyang Chen2 * , Jun Liu3 , Tong Lu4 ,
Shaohua Wan5
1

Key Laboratory of Water Big Data Technology of Ministry of Water Resources, Hohai University, Nanjing, China
2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computing and Communication, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
4
National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
5
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China
{wuyirui, xiayuhang, lihao, yuanlixin}@hhu.edu.cn, junyangchen@szu.edu.cn, j.liu81@lancaster.ac.uk, lutong@nju.edu.cn,
shaohua.wan@ieee.org
Abstract
Incremental few-shot semantic segmentation (IFSS) expands
segmentation capacity of the trained model to segment newclass images with few samples. However, semantic meanings
may shift from background to object class or vice versa during incremental learning. Moreover, new-class samples often lack representative attribute features when the new class
greatly differs from the pre-learned old class. In this paper, we
propose a causal framework to discuss the cause of semantic
shift and incompleteness in IFSS, and we deconfound the revealed causal effects from two aspects. First, we propose a
Causal Intervention Module (CIM) to resist semantic shift.
CIM progressively and adaptively updates prototypes of old
class, and removes the confounder in an intervention manner.
Second, a Prototype Refinement Module (PRM) is proposed
to complete the missing semantics. In PRM, knowledge
gained from the episode learning scheme assists in fusing features of new-class and old-class prototypes. Experiments on
both PASCAL-VOC 2012 and ADE20k benchmarks demonstrate the outstanding performance of our method.

Figure 1: (a) In IFSS, old classes Ct may shift to background class Bt+1 at current step or vice versa. (b) Newclass samples might be far from the ground-truth center, due
to semantic incompleteness caused by small and imbalanced
new-class dataset. (c) We remove the confounding effect of
semantic shift through intervention, obtaining unbiased distribution estimation of old classes. (d) To complete semantics, we fuse features of old and new classes with guidance
of knowledge extracted from episode learning scheme.

Introduction
The rise of pixel-level annotations in semantic segmentation
has spurred the need for methods to incrementally expand
model’s capacity to learn new classes without retraining the
model. Incremental few-shot semantic segmentation (IFSS)
can continuously segment new classes with scarce incremental data while retaining to segment previously learned
classes. (Cermelli et al. 2020b, 2021; Shi et al. 2022).
The main challenges of IFSS emerge with two aspects:
semantic shift and semantic incompleteness. As shown in
Fig. 1(a), the semantic shift is inherited from incremental semantic segmentation (ISS), where background classes from
previous learning steps may shift to object classes at the current step or vice versa (Cermelli et al. 2020a; Douillard et al.
2021). Scarcity of new information and non-access to old information exacerbate shifts in IFSS, causing cognitive confusion about the model of old knowledge and exacerbating

catastrophic forgetting. In Fig. 1(b), samples deviating from
their ground-truth often lack some representative attribute
features, especially when new classes with several samples
are far away from compact clusters of old classes trained in
previous steps, resulting in semantic incompleteness.
Most previous incremental methods address semantic
shift and representative features of new classes by using
feature/label distillation with knowledge updating schemes
(Cermelli et al. 2020a; Zhang et al. 2022; Phan et al. 2022),
thus regulating new models to be predicable for either old
or new classes. However, they do not always behave consistently in IFSS because they couple causal factors, i.e., data,

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8478

