The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A No Free Lunch Theorem for Human-AI Collaboration
Kenny Peng1 , Nikhil Garg1 , Jon Kleinberg2
1

Cornell Tech
Cornell University
klp98@cornell.edu, ngarg@cornell.edu, kleinberg@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

each agent’s calibrated predictions to produce binary classifications that are guaranteed to be at least as accurate, and
sometimes more accurate, than every individual agent? In
other words, if agents are calibrated, can we achieve complementarity “for free”?
Our main result answers this question, mostly in the negative. In fact, Theorem 1 shows that it is difficult to ensure
a much lower bar: producing binary classifications that are
always at least as accurate as the worst individual agent. As
we will show—except under very narrow circumstances—
the only way to guarantee that a collaboration does not perform worse than the worst agent is to always defer to a single
agent (in which case the standard is trivially met). In other
words, substantive collaboration in our setup must at times
come at a significant cost. There is no “free lunch.”
Let us be more concrete, if still somewhat informal. Consider n agents, who, given an input x, produce calibrated
probabilistic predictions P1 (x), P2 (x), · · · , Pn (x) ∈ [0, 1].
By calibrated, we mean that among inputs for which an
agent predicts a positive label with probability p, the true
proportion of positive labels is in fact p. For agent k, given
their calibrated prediction Pk (x), the optimal 0-1 classification to maximize accuracy is obtained by a threshold
rule: predict 1 if Pk (x) > 0.5 and 0 if Pk (x) < 0.5. Using ⌊·⌉ to denote the rounding operator, the optimal classification is ⌊Pk (x)⌉ . In this way, each individual agent
can achieve some level of accuracy on their own. A collaboration strategy is a way to combine the calibrated predictions P1 (x), P2 (x), · · · , Pn (x) into a 0-1 classification.
Therefore, a collaboration strategy is defined as a function
C : [0, 1]n → {0, 1}. There are a number of intuitive collaboration strategies: one approach is to round the average
of predicted probabilities; another is to take a majority vote
of each agent’s classifications; yet another is to defer to
the classification of the most confident agent (i.e., the agent
whose probabilistic prediction is furthest from 21 ). Any given
collaboration strategy also achieves an accuracy, which can
be compared to the accuracy of individual agents.
We call a collaboration strategy C reliable if it is always
at least as accurate as the least accurate agent. We call C
non-collaborative if there exists k ∈ [n] such that for all
(p1 , p2 , · · · , pn ) ∈ (0, 1)n , C(p1 , p2 , · · · , pn ) = ⌊pk ⌉ . In
other words, C is non-collaborative if and only if it always
defers to the same agent, except in the special case when an-

The gold standard in human-AI collaboration is complementarity—when combined performance exceeds both the human
and algorithm alone. We investigate this challenge in binary
classification settings where the goal is to maximize 0-1 accuracy. Given two or more agents who can make calibrated
probabilistic predictions, we show a “No Free Lunch”-style
result. Any deterministic collaboration strategy (a function
mapping calibrated probabilities into binary classifications)
that does not essentially always defer to the same agent will
sometimes perform worse than the least accurate agent. In
other words, complementarity cannot be achieved “for free.”
The result does suggest one model of collaboration with guarantees, where one agent identifies “obvious” errors of the
other agent. We also use the result to understand the necessary conditions enabling the success of other collaboration
techniques, providing guidance to human-AI collaboration.

1

Introduction

Many important decisions depend—in large part—on prediction. Doctors decide if a patient should undergo a procedure by predicting if the operation will succeed. Judges
decide whether or not to grant bail by predicting if the defendant will reoffend. Loan officials decide whether or not to
offer a loan by predicting if the loan will be repaid. In all of
these tasks, algorithmic predictions are now commonly incorporated into the decision-making process. Still, humans
remain a central part of each of these settings, and often have
the final say. The hope of human-AI collaboration is that a
human and an algorithm can leverage their unique strengths
to make predictions that are more accurate than either alone.
This standard has been called complementarity.
The present work investigates the conditions under which
complementarity can be guaranteed when making binary
classifications, where the goal is to maximize 0-1 accuracy
(minimize the number of misclassifications). We consider a
setup in which two or more agents can make calibrated probabilistic predictions on a shared task. These predictions may
differ—for example, due to differences in the information
available to each agent. Each agent can use their probabilistic predictions to make binary classifications, each achieving
some level of accuracy. We ask: Is there a way to combine
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14369

