The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Domain-Level Disentanglement Framework Based on Information
Enhancement for Cross-Domain Cold-Start Recommendation
Nian Rong* 1 , Fei Xiong* 1† , Shirui Pan2 , Guixun Luo3 , Jia Wu4 , Liang Wang5
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Griffith University
3
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
4
Macquarie University
5
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{nianrong, xiongf}@bjtu.edu.cn, s.pan@griffith.edu.au,
gxluo@bjtu.edu.cn, jia.wu@mq.edu.au, liangwang0123@gmail.com
Abstract

between different domains has become a subject of extensive contemplation. Cross-Domain Recommendation (CDR)
(Zang et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2021; Kamani, Kumar, and
Kagita 2023)has gained significant attention in recent years.
For instance, in movie-book cross-domain scenario, there is
typically an overlapping user named Alice. Leveraging Alice’s information to establish inter-domain relationships, we
utilize a combination of book and movie domain data to enhance recommendation performance in both domains. However, in the cold-start scenario, when dealing with a new user
like Bob who lacks interactive information from one domain
(e.g. movie-domain), only the interactive information from
the other domain (e.g. book-domain) is available(Wei et al.
2021).
We differentiate between cold-start cross-domain recommendation and regular cross-domain recommendation models in this study because many existing cross-domain recommendation(Zhu et al. 2020b; Cao et al. 2023; Zhu et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2023) methods require overlapping entities to integrate information from different domains, with a
focus on enhancing the recommendation performance of the
target domain. However, these models are not capable of effectively addressing the zero-interaction cold-start scenario
as outlined in this paper, i.e., providing recommendations to
cold-start users in the absence of historical interaction data
within the target domain. On the other hand, among the existing approaches applicable to cold-start cross-domain recommendation, the embedding mapping-based methods(Man
et al. 2017) severely hampers recommendation efficiency
and lacks an end-to-end framework. Similarly, multi-domain
co-training methods(Hu, Zhang, and Yang 2018; Jiang et al.
2016; Li and Tuzhilin 2021) encounter the challenge of ineffective information filtration and the introduction of unnecessary negative transfer knowledge during cross-domain
processing. Although some methods have acknowledged
the bias in user preferences across different domains(Zhao
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022), such as individuals who enjoy suspense novels may not necessarily appreciate suspense
movies, no effective and adaptive solution has been proposed to address this issue.
Considering the potential correlation between different

Recommender systems in various applications often encounter the challenge of cold-start, which refers to how to
provide recommendations for completely new users. Crossdomain recommendation offers a solution to address this
cold-start issue by leveraging user interaction information
from other domains and providing recommendations for users
in the target domain. However, applying the classic twotower model in cross-domain scenarios for zero interaction cold-start users proves challenging, and most existing
cross-domain cold-start recommendation models adopt an
embedding-mapping framework that lacks end-to-end efficiency. In this paper, we propose a generalized framework
that Domain-level Disentanglement framework based on information enhancement for Cross-domain Cold-start Recommendation. On one hand, we achieve deep utilization of
domain-level information through independent extraction of
domain knowledge and fusion using heuristic strategies. On
the other hand, our model is incorporated with an information enhancement network based on user attention and a user
personalized adaptor. We introduce measures to assess user
variability and immutability in cross-domain recommendation, aiming to eliminate inter-domain bias and highlight individual user preferences. Experimental results on widely used
cross-domain recommendation datasets demonstrate that our
proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art methods, validating its effectiveness.

1 Introduction
Recommender systems(Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009;
Mnih and Salakhutdinov 2007; Rendle et al. 2012) are extensively employed in various real-world applications, such
as e-commerce, audio and video software, and social media platforms, to enable users to independently discover relevant contents and products, thereby enhancing user experience and generating substantial economic and practical
value. With the increasing number of user interactions across
diverse domains, the exploration of leveraging information
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12488

