The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PDBs Go Numeric: Pattern-Database Heuristics for Simple Numeric Planning
Daniel Gnad1 , Lee-or Alon2 , Eyal Weiss2,3 , Alexander Shleyfman2
1

Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
2
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
3
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
daniel.gnad@liu.se, {alonlee1, eyal.weiss, alexash}@biu.ac.il

Abstract

2005; Holte et al. 2006; Anderson, Holte, and Schaeffer
2007; Haslum et al. 2007; Katz and Domshlak 2009). A
PDB heuristic considers only a subset of the state variables,
called the pattern, and captures this sub-task exactly. Other
variables are projected away in the heuristic calculation.
While showing state-of-the-art performance in classical
planning, to the best of our knowledge, PDB heuristics have
never been used in the numeric planning setting. Addressing this gap may be desirable for two reasons: (1) multiple other heuristics known from classical planning, such as
hmax (Bonet and Geffner 2001), or LM-cut (Helmert and
Domshlak 2009), have been adopted successfully in numeric
planning, and (2) as PDB heuristics perform very well in
classical planning, it is reasonable to assume that their success may be brought to the numeric realm.
Unlike in classical planning, the transition systems induced by a projection of a task onto a set of variables that
include numeric fluents have infinitely many states. Thus,
to adopt approaches used in classical planning to generate informative PDBs, we need to bound the numeric transition system. We introduce several strategies that can be
employed to that end, bounding numeric transition systems effectively. One approach is to restrict the numeric fluents within the transition system, reducing the infinite state
space to an incomplete finite one. Another approach defines
structure-specific constraints or rules that limit the possible values of numeric fluents during the transition, thereby
constraining the state space. Additionally, abstraction techniques can be utilized to represent the numeric transition
system at a higher level of granularity, focusing only on relevant aspects while abstracting away unnecessary details. By
implementing these strategies, it becomes feasible to generate informative PDBs for tasks involving numeric fluents in
planning domains. We discuss these approaches and provide
them with a theoretical background.
We evaluate our numeric PDBs by adapting established
pattern generation methods and using the canonical heuristic
to combine multiple PDBs admissibly. We compare against
state-of-the-art optimal planners for simple numeric tasks.

Despite the widespread success of pattern database (PDB)
heuristics in classical planning, to date there has been no
application of PDBs to planning with numeric variables. In
this paper we attempt to close this gap. We address optimal
numeric planning involving conditions characterized by linear expressions and actions that modify numeric variables by
constant quantities. Building upon prior research, we present
an adaptation of PDB heuristics to numeric planning, introducing several approaches to deal with the unbounded nature of numeric variable projections. These approaches aim
to restrict the initially infinite projections, thereby bounding
the number of states and ultimately constraining the resulting
PDBs. We show that the PDB heuristics obtained with our
approach can provide strong guidance for the search.

Code — https://github.com/dgnad/numeric-fast-downward
Datasets — https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14502394

Introduction
In this work, we concentrate on simple numeric planning
(SNP) with instantaneous actions. Numeric state fluents introduce a degree of complexity over classical planning,
making the plan existence problem undecidable in general (Helmert 2002). Nevertheless, since the introduction of
numeric variables in PDDL2.1 (Fox and Long 2003), several
methods have been proposed to solve satisficing and optimal
variants of numeric planning problems (Hoffmann 2003b;
Shin and Davis 2005; Gerevini, Saetti, and Serina 2008; Eyerich, Mattmüller, and Röger 2009; Coles et al. 2013; Scala
et al. 2016; Illanes and McIlraith 2017; Li et al. 2018; Scala,
Haslum, and Thiébaux 2016; Scala et al. 2017; Aldinger and
Nebel 2017; Piacentini et al. 2018a,b; Kuroiwa et al. 2022;
Kuroiwa, Shleyfman, and Beck 2022). We consider here optimal planning in simple numeric planning, where numeric
variables can be increased or decreased by constant quantities and preconditions and goals are linear inequalities.
Previous works have utilized heuristics based on pattern
databases (PDBs) (Culberson and Schaeffer 1996, 1998) in
classical planning (Edelkamp 2002; Holte et al. 2004; Felner, Korf, and Hanan 2004; Haslum, Bonet, and Geffner

Preliminaries
We work over a fragment of numeric planning based on the
finite-domain representation (FDR) formalism (Bäckström
and Nebel 1995; Helmert 2009) extended with numeric flu-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26507

