The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cluster-Based Heterogeneous Federated Foundation Model
Adaptation and Fine-Tuning
Xianda Wang1,2, * , Yaqi Qiao1, * , Duo Wu3, * , Chenrui Wu4,5 , Fangxin Wang2,1,†
1

Future Network of Intelligence Institute (FNii), The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
School of Science and Engineering (SSE), The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
5
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
{xiandawang@link., yaqiqiao@link., wangfangxin@}cuhk.edu.cn, wu-d24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chenrui wu@sfu.ca

solve this problem, federated learning (FL) is a feasible solution, enabling decentralized clients to collaboratively train
models without sharing raw data (Chen et al. 2023; McMahan et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024).
While federated learning has seen successful applications,
fine-tuning FMs through cloud-edge collaborative training
still faces the following challenges due to the deployment
and training demands of FMs: a) Deploying appropriate
FMs to heterogeneous clients with varying resource capacities is challenging. Popular FMs often contain hundreds of billions of parameters that require training (Brown
et al. 2020). However, the computational resources of edge
devices are limited, such as those with 2-4 GB of RAM (Li
et al. 2020). Therefore, edge clients are unable to support local FM training. Thus, traditional federated algorithms, such
as FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) and its variants (Karimireddy et al. 2020), are unsuitable, as they require that all
client models share the same structure as the server model.
b) Collaborative FMs training entails large computation
and communication overhead. Exchanging FM parameters or gradients frequently in federated learning can result
in significant communication and computation overhead, especially with limited bandwidth (Mao et al. 2022). c) Heterogeneous data and resource distribution lead to imbalanced training, slow convergence, and poor performance. FMs raise much higher demand for the quality of
training data so that practical data and resource heterogeneity can have a serious impact (Sun et al. 2024).
To address these challenges, adopting different model architectures across clients is a common approach. This involves transferring knowledge from various clients or aggregating different structured models into the server without leaking private data (Ye et al. 2023). In previous works,
knowledge distillation (KD) and partial training (PT) are two
solutions to model heterogeneous scenarios. The goal of KD
is to use the client model (teacher model) to guide the server
model (student model) to achieve comparable performance
(Li et al. 2024). Integrating KD into FL improves model performance across heterogeneous client devices (Cheng et al.
2021; Cho et al. 2022; Deng et al. 2023; Fan et al. 2024).
However, directly using KD to train the FM on the server is

Abstract
In recent years, the distributed training of foundation models
(FMs) has seen a surge in popularity. In particular, federated
learning enables collaborative model training among edge
clients while safeguarding the privacy of their data. However,
federated training of FMs across resource-constrained and
highly heterogeneous edge devices encounter several challenges. These include the difficulty of deploying FMs on
clients with limited computational resources and the high
computation and communication costs associated with finetuning and collaborative training. To address these challenges, we propose FedCKMS, a Cluster-Aware Framework with Knowledge-Aware Model Search. Specifically,
FedCKMS incorporates three key components. The first component is multi-factor heterogeneity-aware clustering, which
groups clients based on both data distribution and resource
limitations and selects an appropriate model for each cluster.
The second component is knowledge-aware model architecture search, which enables each client to identify the optimal
sub-model from the cluster model, facilitating adaptive deployment that accommodates highly heterogeneous computational resources across clients. The final component is clusteraware knowledge transfer, which facilitates knowledge sharing between clusters and the server, addressing model heterogeneity, and reducing communication overhead. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that FedCKMS outperforms stateof-the-art baselines by 3-10% in accuracy.

Introduction
Recent advances in foundation models (FMs), driven by
transformers, increased computational power, and largescale training data, have enabled exceptional performance
across various tasks and diverse applications when finetuned on specific datasets (Chernyavskiy et al. 2021; Naveed
et al. 2023; Le Scao et al. 2023). However, their development
faces challenges in some real-world scenarios owing to the
imperative of maintaining private data privacy. In order to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
21269

