The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DeMo: Decoupled Feature-Based Mixture of Experts for Multi-Modal Object
Re-Identification
Yuhao Wang1 , Yang Liu1,3 , Aihua Zheng2,3 , Pingping Zhang1,3 *
1

School of Future Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University
3
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, Anhui University
924973292@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {ly, zhpp}@dlut.edu.cn, ahzheng214@foxmail.com
RGB
Input

Abstract
Inter Modality

Multi-modal object Re-IDentification (ReID) aims to retrieve
specific objects by combining complementary information
from multiple modalities. Existing multi-modal object ReID
methods primarily focus on the fusion of heterogeneous features. However, they often overlook the dynamic quality
changes in multi-modal imaging. In addition, the shared information between different modalities can weaken modalityspecific information. To address these issues, we propose a
novel feature learning framework called DeMo for multimodal object ReID, which adaptively balances decoupled features using a mixture of experts. To be specific, we first deploy a Patch-Integrated Feature Extractor (PIFE) to extract
multi-granularity and multi-modal features. Then, we introduce a Hierarchical Decoupling Module (HDM) to decouple
multi-modal features into non-overlapping forms, preserving the modality uniqueness and increasing the feature diversity. Finally, we propose an Attention-Triggered Mixture
of Experts (ATMoE), which replaces traditional gating with
dynamic attention weights derived from decoupled features.
With these modules, our DeMo can generate more robust
multi-modal features. Extensive experiments on three object
ReID benchmarks verify the effectiveness of our methods.

NIR
Input

TIR
Input

Dynamic Changes
in Imaging Quality

Patch-Integrated
Feature Extractor

Modality
Weighting

Hierarchical
Decoupling Module

Decoupled Features
Weighting

Intra Modality (a)
Unimodal-specific

RGB

Decoupled Features
Attention-Triggered
Mixture of Experts

Bimodal-shared

NIR

TIR

Trimodal-shared

(b)

Dynamic Features

(c)

Figure 1: (a) The prevalent dynamic quality changes in
multi-modal imaging. (b) Hierarchical feature decoupling.
(c) The proposed modules and the framework of our DeMo.
performance. However, they often overlook dynamic quality changes inherent in multi-modal imaging. As shown in
Fig. 1 (a), images from RGB, Near Infrared (NIR) and Thermal Infrared (TIR) modalities are presented, respectively.
Horizontally, environmental and imaging interferences lead
to content fluctuations within the same modality. Vertically,
the relevance of each modality varies under identical imaging conditions. For example, in the second column, the
RGB image provides limited information due to darkness,
whereas the NIR and TIR images clearly show details such
as glasses and bags. Consequently, the model should prioritize the NIR and TIR modalities in such scenarios. This
highlights the need for adaptive modality weighting to address the dynamic changes in multi-modal imaging quality.
Recently, Mixture of Experts (MoE) (Cai et al. 2024) have
gained attention for their effectiveness in adaptively weighting expert features. Inspired by this, we treat each modality as an expert and dynamically adjust the weights of the
experts based on the importance of each modality. However, directly weighting multi-modal features risks modality information confusion (Zhang et al. 2024b). As depicted

Introduction
Object Re-IDentification (ReID) aims to retrieve the same
object across different camera views. Over the past decade,
single-modal object ReID (Liu et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2024a; Liu et al. 2024b, 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2024a), primarily based on RGB images, has made significant progress. However, RGB imaging is highly susceptible to adverse conditions such as darkness and glare, leading to poor generalization in complex environments. Fortunately, multi-modal imaging, which introduces diverse information from different modalities (Chen et al. 2024; Shi
et al. 2024a, 2023, 2024b; Zheng et al. 2021; Lu, Zou, and
Zhang 2023), has emerged as a promising solution to enhance the feature robustness in challenging scenarios. By integrating complementary information from different modalities, existing multi-modal object ReID methods (Zhang et al.
2024a; Yang, Chen, and Ye 2024, 2023) achieve remarkable
* Corresponding author (zhpp@dlut.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8141

