The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Set Functions with Implicit Differentiation
Gözde Özcan, Chengzhi Shi, Stratis Ioannidis
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
{gozcan, cshi, ioannidis}@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
A recent work introduces the problem of learning set functions
from data generated by a so-called optimal subset oracle. Their
approach approximates the underlying utility function with
an energy-based model, whose parameters are estimated via
mean-field variational inference. This approximation reduces
to fixed point iterations; however, as the number of iterations
increases, automatic differentiation quickly becomes computationally prohibitive due to the size of the Jacobians that are
stacked during backpropagation. We address this challenge
with implicit differentiation and examine the convergence conditions for the fixed-point iterations. We empirically demonstrate the efficiency of our method on synthetic and real-world
subset selection applications including product recommendation, set anomaly detection and compound selection tasks.

1

Introduction

Many interesting applications operate with set-valued outputs and/or inputs. Examples include product recommendation (Bonab et al. 2021; Schafer, Konstan, and Riedl 1999),
compound selection (Ning, Walters, and Karypis 2011), set
matching (Saito et al. 2020), set retrieval (Feng, Zhou, and
Lan 2016), point cloud processing (Zhao et al. 2019; Gionis, Gunopulos, and Koudas 2001), set prediction (Zhang,
Hare, and Prugel-Bennett 2019), and set anomaly detection
(Mašková et al. 2024), to name a few. Several recent works
(Zaheer et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2019) apply neural networks to
learn set functions from input/function value pairs, assuming
access to a dataset generated by a function value oracle. In
other words, they assume having access to a dataset generated
by an oracle that evaluates the value of the set function for
any given input set.
Recently, Ou et al. (2022) proposed an approximate maximum likelihood estimation framework under the supervision
of a so-called optimal subset oracle. In contrast to traditional
function value oracles, a label produced by an optimal subset oracle is the subset that maximizes an (implicit) utility
set function, in the face of several alternatives. The goal of
inference is to learn, in a parametric form, this utility function, under which observed oracle selections are optimal. As
MLE is intractable in this setting, Ou et al. (2022) propose
performing variational inference instead. In turn, they show
that approximating the distribution of oracle selections requires solving a fixed-point equation per sample. However,
19777

these fixed-point iterations may diverge in practice. In addition, Ou et al. (2022) implement these iterations via loop
unrolling, i.e., by stacking up neural network layers across
iterations, and calculating the gradient using automatic differentiation; this makes backpropagation expensive, limiting
their experiments to only a handful of iterations.
In this work, we establish a condition under which the
fixed-point iterations proposed by Ou et al. (2022) are guaranteed to converge. We also propose a more effective gradient
computation utilizing the recent advances in implicit differentiation (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2019; Kolter, Duvenaud,
and Johnson 2020; Huang, Bai, and Kolter 2021), instead of
unrolling the fixed-point iterations via automatic differentiation (Paszke et al. 2017). This corresponds to differentiating
after infinite fixed point iterations, while remaining tractable;
we experimentally show that this improves the predictive
performance of the inferred models.
We make the following contributions:
• We prove that, as long as the multilinear relaxation (Calinescu et al. 2011) of the objective function is bounded,
and this bound is inversely proportional to the size of the
ground set, the fixed-point iterations arising during the
MLE framework introduced by Ou et al. (2022) converge
to a unique solution, regardless of the starting point.
• We propose a more effective gradient computation by using implicit differentiation instead of unrolling the fixedpoint iterations via automatic differentiation. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the first ones to propose utilizing implicit differentiation in the context of learning set
functions.
• We conduct experiments to show the advantage of our
approach on multiple subset selection applications including set anomaly detection, product recommendation, and
compound selection tasks. We also show, in practice, that
the fixed-point iterations converge by normalizing the
gradient of the multilinear relaxation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
present related literature in Sec. 2. We summarize the learning
set functions with optimal subset oracle setting introduced
by Ou et al. (2022) in Sec. 3. We state our main contributions
in Sec. 4. We present our experimental results in Sec. 5 and
we conclude in Sec. 6.

