The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Risk Controlled Image Retrieval
Kaiwen Cai1 , Chris Xiaoxuan Lu2 , Xingyu Zhao3 , Wei Huang4 , Xiaowei Huang1 *
1
University of Liverpool
University College London
3
University of Warwick
4
Purple Mountain Laboratories
2

Abstract

Conventional Uncertainty-aware Image Retrieval
Heuristic uncertainty:
uncertainty=0.682
Set size does not
affect uncertainty

Most image retrieval research prioritizes improving predictive performance, often overlooking situations where the reliability of predictions is equally important. The gap between
model performance and reliability requirements highlights
the need for a systematic approach to analyze and address the
risks associated with image retrieval. Uncertainty quantification technique can be applied to mitigate this issue by assessing uncertainty for retrieval sets, but it provides only a heuristic estimate of uncertainty rather than a guarantee. To address
these limitations, we present Risk Controlled Image Retrieval
(RCIR), which generates retrieval sets with coverage guarantee, i.e., retrieval sets that are guaranteed to contain the true
nearest neighbors with a predefined probability. RCIR can be
easily integrated with existing uncertainty-aware image retrieval systems, agnostic to data distribution and model selection. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
provides coverage guarantees to image retrieval. The validity
and efficiency of RCIR are demonstrated on four real-world
datasets: CAR-196, CUB-200, Pittsburgh, and ChestX-Det.

1

Retrieval set
Database

Query

Coverage guarantee: the
probability of containing a true
nearest neighbor>90.0%
(with failure rate <1.0%)
Set size adapts to
uncertainty

Introduction

Retrieval set

Ours: RCIR

Figure 1: Ilustration of our risk-controlled image retrieval
RCIR and conventional uncertainty-aware image retrieval
systems (e.g., (Warburg et al. 2021)): An uncertainty-aware
image retrieval provides a heuristic uncertainty, and has a
fixed retrieval set size. In contrast, RCIR provides a retrieval
set that is guaranteed to cover a true nearest neighbor with
a user-specified risk requirement (probability of containing,
and failure rate), and moreover the retrieval size adapts to the
uncertainty of the query sample and the risk requirement.

Given a query image and a database, an image retrieval system selects the best matching candidates from the database.
Image retrieval serves as the foundation for many computer
vision applications, including face recognition (Cheng and
Wang 2019), large-scale image classification (Warburg et al.
2021), and person re-identification (Yao et al. 2019).
An image retrieval system typically works by first representing each query image as a vector in a high-dimensional
space and then finding the nearest neighbors of the query
image in a database. It is not surprising that building discriminative image representations is crucial, and for this
reason massive research has been devoted to improving
the representations of image features, spanning from early
hand-crafted features to nowadays deep learning-based ones
(Dubey 2022). Nevertheless, like other deep learning-based
applications, current image retrieval systems are black-box
and data-driven, which renders them potentially unreliable
due to limited training data and high model complexity.

Meanwhile, reliability is essential for safety-critical applications ranging from autonomous driving to medical diagnosis, where it is vital to be aware of potential risks associated with the predictions. In the field of medical diagnosis,
for instance, the user needs more than just a list of the bestmatching candidates from disease databases. Instead, what
they prefer or require is a cluster of retrieval results (or a
retrieval set) with a specific level of risk, before concluding a diagnosis. The risk is defined as the probability of the
retrieval set missing all true nearest neighbors of the query
sample. See Sec. 3.3 for a formal definition. Conventional
image retrieval systems are inadequate for these tasks as they

* corresponding author: xiaowei.huang@liverpool.ac.uk
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27224

