The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Conditional Diffusion Models Based Conditional Independence Testing
Yanfeng Yang1∗ , Shuai Li1∗ , Yingjie Zhang1∗ , Zhuoran Sun1 , Hai Shu2 , Ziqi Chen1† , Renming
Zhang3
1

2

School of Statistics, KLATASDS-MOE, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Department of Biostatistics, School of Global Public Health, New York University, New York, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston, USA

Abstract

2024) and personalized therapies (Khera and Kathiresan
2017; Zhu et al. 2018). We consider testing whether two
random variables, X and Y , are independent given a random vector Z, based on observations of the joint density
pX,Y,Z (x, y, z). Specifically, we test the following hypotheses:
H0 : X ⊥⊥ Y |Z versus H1 : X 6⊥⊥ Y |Z,

Conditional independence (CI) testing is a fundamental task
in modern statistics and machine learning. The conditional randomization test (CRT) was recently introduced to test
whether two random variables, X and Y , are conditionally independent given a potentially high-dimensional set of random
variables, Z. The CRT operates exceptionally well under the
assumption that the conditional distribution X|Z is known.
However, since this distribution is typically unknown in practice, accurately approximating it becomes crucial. In this paper, we propose using conditional diffusion models (CDMs)
to learn the distribution of X|Z. Theoretically and empirically, it is shown that CDMs closely approximate the true conditional distribution. Furthermore, CDMs offer a more accurate approximation of X|Z compared to GANs, potentially
leading to a CRT that performs better than those based on
GANs. To accommodate complex dependency structures, we
utilize a computationally efficient classifier-based conditional mutual information (CMI) estimator as our test statistic.
The proposed testing procedure performs effectively without requiring assumptions about specific distribution forms or
feature dependencies, and is capable of handling mixed-type
conditioning sets that include both continuous and discrete
variables. Theoretical analysis shows that our proposed test
achieves a valid control of the type I error. A series of experiments on synthetic data demonstrates that our new test effectively controls both type-I and type-II errors, even in high
dimensional scenarios.

where ⊥⊥ denotes the independence. In practical genomewide association studies, X represents a specific genetic
variant, Y denotes disease status, and Z accounts for the
rest of the genome. By conditioning on Z, we can evaluate
whether the genetic variant X has an effect on the disease
status Y (Liu et al. 2022) by CI testing. CI testing becomes
particularly challenging due to the high-dimensionality of
the conditioning vector Z (Bellot and van der Schaar 2019;
Shi et al. 2021). Moerever, the presence of mixed discrete
and continuous variables in Z as in many real-world applications presents further challenges for the testing (Mesner
and Shalizi 2020; Zan et al. 2022).
Recently, there has been a large and growing literature on
CI testing, and for a more comprehensive review, we refer
readers to Li and Fan (2020). The metric-based tests (e.g., Su
and White (2008), Su and White (2014), Wang et al. (2015))
employ some kernel smoothers to estimate the conditional
characteristic function or the distribution function of Y given X and Z. However, due to the curse of dimensionality,
these tests are usually not suitable when the conditioning
vector Z is high-dimensional. The kernel-based tests, such
as Fukumizu et al. (2007), Zhang et al. (2011), and Scetbon,
Meunier, and Romano (2022), represent probability distributions as elements of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS), which enables us to understand properties of these
distributions using Hilbert space operations. However, these
tests based on asymptotic distributions may exhibit inflated
type-I errors or inadequate power when dealing with highdimensional Z (Doran et al. 2014; Runge 2018; Shi et al.
2021). The most relevant work to ours is the conditional
randomization test (CRT) proposed by Candès et al. (2018),
which assumes the true conditional distribution of X given
Z, denoted by P (·|Z), is known. It is theoretically proven
that the CRT maintains validity by ensuring that the type I
error does not exceed the significance level α (Berrett et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2022).
However, the true conditional distribution P (·|Z) is rarely

Code — https://github.com/Yanfeng-Yang-0316/CDCIT

Introduction
Conditional independence (CI) is an important concept in
statistics and machine learning. Testing conditional independence plays a central role in classical problems such
as causal inference (Pearl 1988; Spirtes, Glymour, and
Scheines 2000), graphical models (Lauritzen 1996; Koller
and Friedman 2009), and variable selection (Dai, Shen, and
Pan 2022). It is widely used in various scientific problems, including gene regulatory network inference (Dai et al.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author: Ziqi Chen (zqchen@fem.ecnu.edu.cn,
chenzq453@163.com).
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

22020

