The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

P UBLIC S PEAK : Hearing the Public with a Probabilistic Framework
Tianliang Xu1 , Eva Maxfield Brown2 , Dustin Dwyer3 , Sabina Tomkins1
1

University of Michigan School of Information
University of Washington Information School
3
Michigan Public
tianlix@umich.edu, evamxb@uw.edu, dustin@michiganpublic.org, stomkins@umich.edu
2

Abstract

This work is a joint effort by a reporting team and data
scientists to use artificial intelligence (AI) to support existing news architecture. We leverage the fact that local governments are increasingly publishing video recordings of their
meetings online (Piotrowski and Borry 2010). The ability
to convert video recordings of local government meetings
to reliable text-data presents an opportunity to assist local
journalists as well as citizens. A number of researchers and
organizations have begun to generate text from local government meetings.1 Yet, so far, none of these organizations have
extracted the remarks made by the public, a crucial need for
local reporters. To address this gap, we propose P UBLIC S PEAK, a probabilistic framework for extracting public remarks. Here, we evaluate our approach on 30,000 remarks
across seven cities in the United States.

Local governments around the world are making consequential decisions on behalf of their constituents, and these constituents are responding with requests, advice, and assessments of their officials at public meetings. So many small
meetings cannot be covered by traditional newsrooms at
scale. We propose P UBLIC S PEAK, a probabilistic framework
which can utilize meeting structure, domain knowledge, and
linguistic information to discover public remarks in local government meetings. We then use our approach to inspect the issues raised by constituents in 7 cities across the United States.
We evaluate our approach on a novel dataset of local government meetings and find that P UBLIC S PEAK improves over
state-of-the-art by 10% on average, and by up to 40%.

Code — https://github.com/politechlab/publicspeak

Hearing From the Public, a Data-Driven
Opportunity

Introduction
Communities across the United States are grappling with
complex and even existential issues, such as housing, policing, pollution, and the (under)provision of public services
(Anzia 2022). Many of the policies that address these issues
are formed at the local level. To effectively participate in
local governance, community members need political information to have knowledge of current issues and policies, as
well as about political procedures, norms and institutions.
The role of informing communities about local politics,
especially those outside of major metropolitan areas, has traditionally fallen to local news (Powe 1992; Hanitzsch and
Vos 2018). However, local news has been in decline (Sullivan 2020) and scholars have questioned whether the information provided by traditional outlets is truly relevant for local contexts and political participation (Usher 2017; Wilner,
Montiel Valle, and Masullo 2021). A contemporary model
of local information infrastructure will likely depart from
printed media (George 2008; Newman et al. 2020; Parasie
and Dagiral 2013). Content curated for particular communities may enable more profound action, accountability, and
inclusivity (Velazquez 2014). In the face of declining budgets and shifting interests, there is a need for innovative approaches to local news.

Public digital postings of city council meetings offer a rich
opportunity to understand the concerns of the public. As of
2022, more than 2,800 local government units had broadcast
meeting videos on YouTube alone (Barari and Simko 2023)
and a plenitude of meetings have been mined from other
channels (Brown and Weber 2022). The increase in recordings of public meetings has co-occurred with improved
performance of automatic speech recognition (ASR) algorithms. We address the critical gap in existing approaches
for mining this data.
Public remarks at local government meetings provide a
unique window into the priorities of community members.
While cities, townships and school boards are required to
post agendas of meetings beforehand, signifying the board
members’ priorities, public comments can offer residents an
open forum. The comments represent the priorities of the
public, rather than the priorities of elected officials. Community members’ public remarks frequently guide news coverage of local government. As local news outlets have cut staff,
fewer journalists are able to monitor these comments, and
no equivalent source of information on community priorities has emerged. Our work addresses that need by making
the following contributions:

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

28520

The Council Data Project, Local Lens, and Search Minutes

