The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Eliciting Causal Abilities in Large Language Models for Reasoning Tasks
Yajing Wang1,2 , Zongwei Luo3,4 * , Jingzhe Wang1 , Zhanke Zhou2 , Yongqiang Chen5 , Bo Han2
1

Department of Computer Science, BNU-HKBU United International College
2
TMLR Group, Hong Kong Baptist University
3
Artificial Intelligence and Future Networks IAIFN, Beijing Normal University at Zhuhai
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of IRADS
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{wangyajing,wangjingzhe}@uic.edu.cn, lzwqhk@outlook.com,
{cszkzhou,bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, yqchen@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

Base Instructions

(OR)-SCIE

Zero-Shot CoT

Prompt optimization automatically refines prompting expressions, unlocking the full potential of LLMs in downstream
tasks. However, current prompt optimization methods are
costly to train and lack sufficient interpretability. This paper
proposes enhancing LLMs’ reasoning performance by eliciting their causal inference ability from prompting instructions to correct answers. Specifically, we introduce the SelfCausal Instruction Enhancement (SCIE) method, which enables LLMs to generate high-quality, low-quantity observational data, then estimates the causal effect based on these
data, and ultimately generates instructions with the optimized
causal effect. In SCIE, the instructions are treated as the treatment, and textual features are used to process natural language, establishing causal relationships through treatments
between instructions and downstream tasks. Additionally, we
propose applying Object-Relational (OR) principles, where
the uncovered causal relationships are treated as the inheritable class across task objects, ensuring low-cost reusability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method effectively generates instructions that enhance reasoning performance with reduced training cost of prompts, leveraging
interpretable textual features to provide actionable insights.

Let’s think step by step.

Plan-and-Solve

Let’s first understand the problem,
extract relevant variables ...... (pay
attention to correct numerical
calculation and commonsense),
solve the problem step by step, and
show the answer.

AgentInstruct

1.Understand the structure of the
dataset: The GSM8K dataset
contains grade school math word
problems. Each instance in the
dataset contains a string for the
math question and a string for
the ...... So, think like a student and
use your knowledge of basic
arithmetic to solve the problems.

Enhanced Instructions

Ensure clarity and maintain a
positive, engaging tone. Proceed
methodically ...... step by step with
clear, precise language.
Let's decompose the problem,
identify the key variables, and draft
a strategy. Following that, we ......
(ensuring accuracy and logic),
progressively solve the problem, and
present the final solution.
1. Structure of the Dataset: The
GSM8K dataset comprises grade
school math word problems. Each
instance consists of a string for the
math question and a string for the
corresponding answer, with step-bystep ...... Abide by these guidelines
to tackle each problem in the
GSM8K dataset effectively.

Figure 1: Illustrative examples demonstrating the purpose
of our proposed (Object-Relational) Self-Causal Instruction
Enhancement method.
for the development of more generalized solutions using the
original pre-trained model (Li et al. 2023).
Many exciting prompting methods have emerged, such as
Chain of Thought (CoT) (Wei et al. 2022), Zero-Shot CoT
(Kojima et al. 2022), among others. The prompting instructions in these methods are typically designed by humans,
even introducing some noise (Zhou et al. 2024). This leads
us to question: are these language expressions of the prompts
the best to trigger LLMs? Prompt optimization methods
(Chang et al. 2024) refine and enhance prompts for LLMs,
to improve LLMs’ performance on downstream tasks. However, current prompt optimization methods face challenges
related to training costs and interpretability. Gradient-based
approaches, such as APE (Zhou et al. 2022), APO (Pryzant
et al. 2023), and OPRO (Yang et al. 2023), require substantial training costs to obtain gradient information. While
gradient-free methods like GPS (Xu et al. 2022) and GrIPS
(Prasad et al. 2023), which rely on editing and searching,
also lack the interpretability to be understood from a human
intuitive perspective during the process.
Causal abilities represent higher-level cognition that transitions from System 1 to System 2 (Bengio et al. 2019),

Code — https://github.com/dsubuntu/SCIE

Introduction
One major remaining challenge for Large Language Models (LLMs) is their insufficient reasoning capabilities (Dziri
et al. 2024; Cao et al. 2024). Current LLMs perform well
on System-1 tasks but face limitations in handling System2 problems (Bengio et al. 2019). Prompting-based methods (Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021; Liu et al. 2023)
aim to enable LLMs to understand input prompts and adapt
to the downstream tasks through the design and crafting
of prompts, becoming a focal point of interest among researchers in recent years. Compared to fine-tuning methods
(Howard and Ruder 2018; Dong et al. 2019; Lewis et al.
2019), prompting methods do not require substantial computational resources and time to retrain the model, allowing
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15212

