The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Parallel Greedy Best-First Search with a Bound on Expansions Relative to
Sequential Search
Takumi Shimoda, Alex Fukunaga
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
takumi35shimoda@yahoo.co.jp, fukunaga@idea.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

(1) the relationship between the states expanded by parallel
vs. sequential GBFS is nontrivial to analyze theoretically,
and it is difficult to answer basic questions such as: “what
is the worst-case performance of this parallel GBFS relative
to sequential GBFS?” (2) For some problems, the empirical
performance of parallel GBFS is much worse than sequential GBFS, resulting in orders of magnitude of slowdown
on some IPC benchmarks (Kuroiwa and Fukunaga 2019),
and in general, the number of states expanded by simple approaches to parallel GBFS with shared Open and/or Closed
lists is not bounded by a constant factor relative to sequential
GBFS (Kuroiwa and Fukunaga 2020).

Parallelization of non-admissible search algorithms such as
GBFS poses a challenge because straightforward parallelization can result in search behavior which significantly deviates
from sequential search. Previous work proposed PUHF, a parallel search algorithm which is constrained to only expand
states that can be expanded by some tie-breaking strategy for
GBFS. We show that despite this constraint, the number of
states expanded by PUHF is not bounded by a constant multiple of the number of states expanded by sequential GBFS
with the worst-case tie-breaking strategy. We propose and experimentally evaluate One Bench At a Time (OBAT), a parallel greedy search which guarantees that the number of states
expanded is within a constant factor of the number of states
expanded by sequential GBFS with some tie-breaking policy.

1

Previous work proposed PUHF (Kuroiwa and Fukunaga
2020), a parallel GBFS algorithm which is constrained to
only expand states in the Bench Transition System (BTS),
the set of states that can be expanded by some tie-breaking
strategy for GBFS (Heusner, Keller, and Helmert 2017).
The BTS provides a natural theoretical constraint on the
states expanded by an algorithm which “behaves similarly
to sequential GBFS”, somewhat analogous to the (much
stronger) constraint that a parallel A∗ must expand all states
with evaluation value less than the optimal. However, although PUHF guarantees that only states in the BTS are
expanded, it does not guarantee a bound on the number of
states expanded compared to sequential GBFS, i.e., PUHF
provides a qualitative guarantee about search behavior, but
it does not provide any performance guarantee.

Introduction

Best-first search (BFS) algorithms such as A∗ (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968) and GBFS (Doran and Michie 1966)
are a key component of planning and scheduling systems.
In order to fully exploit the increasing number of cores on
modern CPUs, it is necessary to parallelize these BFS algorithms. Successful approaches to parallelization have been
developed for admissible BFS algorithms such as A∗ (Burns
et al. 2010; Kishimoto, Fukunaga, and Botea 2013; Phillips,
Likhachev, and Koenig 2014; Fukunaga et al. 2017).
Parallelization of GBFS has turned out to be more challenging. Parallel portfolios which execute completely independent instances of GBFS (with a different tie-breaking on
each thread), e.g., (Kuroiwa and Fukunaga 2020) are a simple approach. However, this approach does not exploit the
potential for explicit cooperation among threads.
A natural approach to implement a more “cooperative”
multi-threaded search is to use shared data structures (Open,
Closed ), similar to parallel A∗ . It is easy to implement a
state expansion policy which seems similar to sequential
GBFS, e.g., “expand a state with the best heuristic value in
the (shared) Open list”. However the resulting state expansion behavior of such a parallel GBFS can deviate drastically from that of sequential GBFS. This poses two issues:

Thus, previous parallel GBFS algorithms with shared
Open/Closed lists pose an unbounded risk – on any given
instance, parallel GBFS may outperform sequential GBFS,
or it may perform much worse, with no known general
bound on how badly search performance can degrade. In
this paper, we directly address the problem of establishing
a bound on the number of states expanded by parallel GBFS
relative to sequential GBFS. While PUHF constrained expansion to only states which could be expanded by sequential GBFS with some tie-breaking strategy, we propose a
new algorithm which further constrains the search so that
it explores only one bench at a time. This allows us to bound
the number of state expansions by parallel search to be no
worse than the number of states expanded by sequential
search with some tie-breaking policy plus a small constant.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26668

