The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MSV-PCT: Multi-Sparse-View Enhanced Transformer Framework for Salient
Object Detection in Point Clouds
Zihao Wang1 , Yiming Huang1 , Gengyu Lyu1 , Yucheng Zhao1 ,
Ziyu Zhou1 , Bochen Xie2 , Zhen Yang1 , Yongjian Deng1 *
1
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong
rex.wangzihao@gmail.com,huangyiming2002@126.com,
lyugengyu@bjut.edu.cn,yzhao836@gatech.com, zzhou651@connect.hkustgz.edu.cn,
boxie4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk,yangzhen@bjut.edu.cn, yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Previous
works

Salient object detection (SOD) methods for 2D images have
great significance in the field of human-computer interaction
(HCI). However, as a common data format in HCI, the SOD
research in the form of 3D point cloud data remains limited.
Previous works commonly treat this task as point cloud segmentation, which perceives all points in the scene for prediction. However, these methods neglect that SOD is designed
to simulate human visual perception where human can only
see the surfaces rather than occluded point clouds. Thereby,
these methods may fail when meet such situations. This paper aims to solve this problem by approximately simulating the perception paradigm of humans towards 3D scenes.
Thus, we propose a framework based on the 3D visual point
cloud backbone and its multi-view projection named MSVPCT. Specifically, instead of relying solely on general point
cloud learning frameworks, we additionally introduce multisparse-view learning branches to supplement the SOD perception. Furthermore, we propose a novel point cloud edge
detection loss function to effectively address artifacts, enabling the accurate segmentation of the edges of salient objects from the background. Finally, to evaluate the generalization of point cloud SOD methods, we introduce a new approach to generate simulated PC-SOD datasets from RGBDSOD data. Experiments on the simulated datasets show that
MSV-PCT achieves better accuracy and robustness.

3D Model
Ours

+
+ Branch
False Shadow

Real Saliency

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation.

equipped with LiDAR have led to a significant improvement
in the availability of point cloud data. These 3D capture sensors not only replicate the geometric perception similar to
the human binocular vision system but also maintain reliable semantic accuracy in both high and low light conditions. Unlike image-based methods, point clouds record the
precise 3D structure of objects without interference from
external conditions such as lighting. Although the sparsity
of point clouds makes semantics discontinuous, the original 3D information contained avoids the computational resource loss and feature errors associated with dense rendering and extensive post-processing in image-based methods. This provides more accurate semantic information for
point cloud salient detection. Unlike objective factual judgments, SOD emphasizes human subjectivity, simulating human visual perception and attention to a scene to better
fit practical application scenarios. However, existing point
cloud SOD methods generally follow the design principles
of point cloud deep learning networks, assuming that observers have an unidirectional perspective, enabling them
to see all points within the scene simultaneously and make
salient judgments. This assumption overlooks the limitations
of human binocular vision in actual observation, leading to
shifts and artifacts in the model’s prediction results.
To overcome these drawbacks, we designed a multisparse-view (MSV) feature fusion approach inspired by hu-

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to precisely identify
and segment visually distinctive regions (Borji et al. 2019).
These regions typically attract human attention due to their
contrast with the rest of the image or scene. As an important
image preprocessing step, salient object detection is widely
used in various computer vision tasks, such as action recognition (Abdulmunem, Lai, and Sun 2016), semantic segmentation (Ghariba, Shehata, and McGuire 2022), and image retrieval (Ma et al. 2021). Most of the existing SOD methods are applied to salient objects on conventional images or
RGBD images, with relatively less work on point cloud data.
The powerful spatial modeling capability of LiDAR devices and the rapid growth in the deployment of devices
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8268

