The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

First-Order Federated Bilevel Learning
Yifan Yang1 , Peiyao Xiao1 , Shiqian Ma2 , Kaiyi Ji1
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo
Department of Computational Applied Math and Operations Research, Rice University
yyang99@buffalo.edu, peiyaoxi@buffalo.edu, sqma@rice.edu, kaiyiji@buffalo.edu

where n is the total number of clients; p and q are the di
∗
∗
mension of x and y;
 fi (x, y (x))
 = Eξ fi x, y (x); ξi
and gi (x, y) = Eζ gi (x, y; ζi ) represent the expectation
of the ith upper- and lower-level function w.r.t. the random variables ξi , ζi , respectively. Various FBO algorithms
have been developed recently (Tarzanagh et al. 2022; Xiao
and Ji 2023; Yang, Xiao, and Ji 2023b) and applied to important applications such as federated meta-learning (Fallah, Mokhtari, and Ozdaglar 2020; Xiao and Ji 2023), and
graph-aided federated learning (Xing et al. 2022). However, existing algorithms often suffer from some computational and memory issues due to a complex implementation and the computation of high-order model information, induced by the nested optimization structure in FBO.
For example, (Huang et al. 2022; Tarzanagh et al. 2022;
Huang, Zhang, and Ji 2023) and (Xiao and Ji 2023) proposed two types of FBO algorithms based on approximate
implicit differentiation (AID) and iterative differentiation
(ITD), which involves multiple sub-loops to approximate the
global federated hypergradient (i.e., gradient of the upperlevel objective function). Most recently, (Yang, Xiao, and Ji
2023b) proposed a more efficient single-loop FBO algorithm
called SimFBO without any sub-loop. However, the local
aggregation in each client of SimFBO needs to store multiple second-order Hessian or Jacobian-vector products. This
could cause practical challenges related to computing and
memory, as edge devices like smartphones typically have
relatively low memory availability and computational capacity. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a computationally and memory-efficient FBO algorithm named
MemFBO, and further applies MemFBO to a novel application of FBO in robust federated learning with potentially
noisy data. Our specific contributions are summarized as follows.

Abstract
Federated bilevel optimization (FBO) has garnered significant attention lately, driven by its promising applications in
meta-learning and hyperparameter optimization. Existing algorithms generally aim to approximate the gradient of the
upper-level objective function (hypergradient) in the federated setting. However, because of the nonlinearity of the
hypergradient and client drift, they often involve complicated computations. These computations, like multiple optimization sub-loops and second-order derivative evaluations,
end up with significant memory consumption and high computational costs. In this paper, we propose a computationally and memory-efficient FBO algorithm named MemFBO.
MemFBO features a fully single-loop structure with all involved variables updated simultaneously, and uses only firstorder gradient information for all local updates. We show that
MemFBO exhibits a linear convergence speedup with milder
assumptions in both partial and full client participation scenarios. We further implement MemFBO in a novel FBO application for federated data cleaning. Our experiments, conducted on this application and federated hyper-representation,
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization has received significant attention recently in a wide range of applications including few-shot
meta-learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Rajeswaran
et al. 2019), hyperparameter search (Franceschi et al. 2018;
Feurer and Hutter 2019), fairness-aware machine learning
(Roh et al. 2021), lifelong learning (Hao, Ji, and Liu 2023),
etc. Due to the significant increase in the demand for efficient computing and growing concerns about user privacy,
recent studies have shifted their attention to efficiently solving the following federated bilevel optimization (FBO) problem:

• Inspired by the Lagrangian approximation of bilevel optimization, we use simpler single-level minimax problems as effective substitutes for the original local and
global bilevel problems, making them easier to manage.
We then propose a simple and efficient FBO algorithm
named MemFBO. As illustrated in Figure 1, MemFBO
features a fully single-loop optimization structure and
computes only gradient information at each local step for
all participating clients.

n

1X
fi (x, y ∗ (x))
minp Φ(x) = F x, y ∗ (x) :=
x∈R
n i=1
n

s.t. y ∗ (x) = arg min G(x, y) :=
y∈Rq

1X
gi (x, y),
n i=1

(1)

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22029

