The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attributive Reasoning for Hallucination Diagnosis of Large Language Models
Yuyan Chen1 , Zehao Li2 , Shuangjie You3 , Zhengyu Chen4 , Jingwen Chang1 , Yi Zhang5 , Weinan
Dai4 , Qingpei Guo6 , Yanghua Xiao1 *
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University
3
Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Zhejiang University
5
Southern University of Science and Technology
6
Ant Group
{chenyuyan21@m., jwchang24@m., shawyh@}fudan.edu.cn, {leepaul.private,wnd17460,youshuangjie}@gmail.com,
zhangyi2021@mail.sustech.edu.cn, chenzhengyu@zju.edu.cn, qingpei.gqp@antgroup.com
Abstract
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated outstanding capabilities in various tasks. However,
LLMs also have various drawbacks, especially hallucination.
Hallucination refers to the generation of content that does not
align with the user input, contradicts previously generated
content or world knowledge. Current research on hallucination mainly include knowledge retrieval, prompt engineering, training data improvement, reinforcement learning, etc.
However, these methods do not involve different categories
of hallucinations which is important on hallucination analysis, and make detailed investigation for the internal state of
LLMs which indicates the direction on hallucination occurrence. Therefore, in our research, we introduce an attribution
framework to trace the origins of hallucinations based on the
internal signals of LLMs. To support this framework, we develop a new benchmark named RelQA-Cate, which includes
eight categories of hallucinations for the answers generated
by LLMs. After that, we present a novel Differential Penalty
Decoding (DPD) strategy for reducing hallucinations through
adjusting post-probabilities of each answer. We conduct a series of experiments and the performance on answer reliability has significant improvement, achieving 28.25% at most,
which demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed DPD
and its generalization in mitigating hallucination in LLMs.

Figure 1: The predicted answer without and with hallucination category for a given question.

was the first president of the United States?”, an incorrect
answer is “Aaron Burr”. Another category is conceptual confusion which indicates LLMs mix up different concepts in
responses, such as considering the solar cell as a type of
“electronic device” instead of “electrical device” 1 . There
are also more categories of hallucinations which are not fully
investigated and the underlying reasons for each category related to LLMs’ internal state are even largely uncharted.
Understanding the reasons behind each category of hallucination in LLMs is crucial. Hallucination categories can be
likened to symptoms in medicine, while the reasons of these
hallucinations can be compared to the etiology in medical diagnoses. In the case of hallucinations, these causes are typically linked to LLMs’ internal states (i.e. representations
of the input). For instance, as shown in Fig. 1, if we not
only identify hallucination occurs based on wrong prediction “River Lagan” (see Fig. 1 (a)), but also recognize this is
a “Factual error,” which is possibly due to the LLMs overly
focusing on a certain attention head of a particular layer (see
Fig. 1 (b)), we can address the issue by adjusting the attention distribution of that layer or retraining the relevant head.
However, current research mainly focus on other methods except investigating the internal state of LLMs in reducing hallucinations, including knowledge retrieval (Chen,
Xiao, and Liu 2022; Shi et al. 2023; Peng et al. 2023; Chen
et al. 2024b,f), prompt engineering (Zhang et al. 2023; Tou-

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have a wide range of
applications in various downstream tasks (Chen et al.
2024c,g,d,a). However, it is important to recognize that
while LLMs bring about revolutionary technological advances, they also bring a series of security and privacy issues
that deserve our attention, especially hallucinations (Ji et al.
2023). Hallucinations refer to the circumstances where the
content generated by LLMs is incorrect to the given question, unrelated or even conflicting to the input prompt. They
have various categories (Huang et al. 2023), such as factual
error, representing the generated text contains obvious factual errors. For instance, in response to the question, “Who

1
Solar cell is more commonly considered electrical devices,
as its primary function is the generation and supply of electrical power. Electronic devices generally contain computers, mobile
phones, and radio receivers, etc.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23660

