The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contrasting Adversarial Perturbations: The Space of Harmless Perturbations
Lu Chen1, 2 Shaofeng Li* 3 , Benhao Huang1 , Fan Yang1 , Zheng Li1 , Jie Li1, 2 , Yuan Luo* 1, 2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University (Wuxi) Blockchain Advanced Research Center, China
3
Southeast University, China
lu.chen@sjtu.edu.cn, shaofengli@seu.edu.cn, hbh001098hbh@sjtu.edu.cn, fan-yang@sjtu.edu.cn,
zli89@lsu.edu, lijiecs@sjtu.edu.cn, luoyuan@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Unlike vulnerability against adversarial examples, in this
paper, we reveal the robustness of DNNs to specific perturbations that render the network output mathematically strictly
invariant. We demonstrate the existence of such harmless
perturbations that, when introduced onto natural images or
embeddings, regardless of their magnitude, will not affect the
discrimination of the DNN. Such harmless perturbations arising from the linear layers are universal, as they are instanceindependent and solely determined by the parameter space
of the DNN. These harmless perturbations span a continuous
harmless subspace, embedded within the high-dimensional
feature space. The surprising existence of harmless perturbations reveals a distinctive view of DNN robustness.
For the linear layers of DNNs, we find that when its input
dimension n exceeds the output dimension m, the harmless perturbation subspace of this layer can be derived by
computing the nullspace of its parameter matrix A, i.e.,
N (A) = {v ∈ Rn |Av = 0}. To this end, the harmless
subspace exhibits a dimension of (n − m) and is embedded within an n-dimensional feature space. Furthermore, the
harmless perturbation space may expand when involving nonlinear layers, depending on the specific non-linear functions
and input samples. Inspired by the harmless subspace of linear layers, we further investigate the robustness of DNNs
against more general perturbations, i.e., random noises or
adversarial perturbations. We find that a family of those general perturbations, irrespective of their magnitude, identically
influence the DNN’s output. This phenomenon stems from
the decomposition of arbitrary perturbations into the sum of
any harmless and harmful components. Consequently, the
network output for general perturbations becomes equivalent
to that of harmful perturbations, particularly aligning with
that of components orthogonal to the harmless perturbation
subspace (Figure 1(b)).
The existence of harmless perturbations and their space
promotes several potential benefits. First, capitalizing on the
disparity between DNNs and human perception, i.e., significant perturbations perceivable by the human eye may not
affect the recognition of DNNs, we delve into the application of harmless perturbations to privacy-preserving data
and model fingerprints. Additionally, as demonstrated in Figure 1(a), there exist equivalent adversarial spaces, ensuring
equal attacking capabilities for adversarial perturbations regardless of their magnitude. In other words, the perturbation

Existing works have extensively studied adversarial examples,
which are minimal perturbations that can mislead the output of
deep neural networks (DNNs) while remaining imperceptible
to humans. However, in this work, we reveal the existence of
a harmless perturbation space, in which perturbations drawn
from this space, regardless of their magnitudes, leave the network output unchanged when applied to inputs. Essentially, the
harmless perturbation space emerges from the usage of noninjective functions (linear or non-linear layers) within DNNs,
enabling multiple distinct inputs to be mapped to the same output. For linear layers with input dimensions exceeding output
dimensions, any linear combination of the orthogonal bases of
the nullspace of the parameter consistently yields no change
in their output. For non-linear layers, the harmless perturbation space may expand, depending on the properties of the
layers and input samples. Inspired by this property of DNNs,
we solve for a family of general perturbation spaces that are
redundant for the DNN’s decision, and can be used to hide
sensitive data and serve as a means of model identification.
Our work highlights the distinctive robustness of DNNs (i.e.,
consistency under large magnitude perturbations) in contrast
to adversarial examples (vulnerability for small noises).

Code — https://github.com/csluchen/harmless-perturbations
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.02095

Introduction
The robustness of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) against
structured and unstructured perturbations has attracted significant attention in recent years (Szegedy et al. 2014; Nguyen,
Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Fawzi, Moosavi-Dezfooli, and
Frossard 2016; Salman et al. 2021). In particular, deep learning models are shown highly vulnerable to adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al. 2014). These well-crafted perturbations, which are imperceptibly small to the human eye,
cause DNNs to misclassify with high confidence (Carlini
and Wagner 2017; Madry et al. 2018; Croce and Hein 2020).
Naturally, an inquiry arises:
Are there perturbations within the input space capable
of preserving network output invariance?
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2114

