The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Support Vector-based Estimation of Multilinear Games for Feature Selection and
Explanation
Majid Mohammadi, Ilaria Tiddi, Annette Ten Teije
Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
De Boelelaan 1111, 1081 HV Amsterdam
majid.mohammadi690@gmail.com, i.tiddi@vu.nl, annette.ten.teije@vu.nl

Abstract
In recent years, employing Shapley values to compute feature importance has gained considerable attention. Calculating
these values inherently necessitates managing an exponential number of parameters—a challenge commonly mitigated
through an additivity assumption coupled with linear regression. This paper proposes a novel approach by modeling supervised learning as a multilinear game, incorporating both
direct and interaction effects to establish the requisite values
for Shapley value computation. To efficiently handle the exponentially increasing parameters intrinsic to multilinear games,
we introduce a support vector machine (SVM)-based method
for parameter estimation, its complexity is predominantly contingent on the number of samples due to the implementation
of a dual SVM formulation. Additionally, we unveil an optimized dynamic programming algorithm capable of directly
computing the Shapley value and interaction index from the
dual SVM. Our proposed methodology is versatile, and we
demonstrate that it can be applied to local explanation and
feature selection. Experiments underscore the competitive efficacy of our proposed methods in terms of feature selection
and explanation.

1

Introduction

Shapley value-based feature importance is a prominent
model-agnostic interpretability method, utilizing an additive
feature attribution approach to clarify the predictions of any
machine learning model (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Covert
and Lee 2021). However, the current explainable methods
are limited to providing the importance of individual features
and fall short of providing information about feature interaction (i.e., the synergistic influence of a set of features on
model prediction), or have exponential complexity for such
computations (Tsai, Yeh, and Ravikumar 2023; Sundararajan, Dhamdhere, and Agarwal 2020; von Luxburg and Bordt
2023). In addition, while these explainable methods offer
significant insights, they are not readily applicable to feature
selection due to their reliance on sampling various feature
subsets and calculating their contributions based on a trained
model. One approach for using the Shapley value for feature
selection involves training a separate model for each subset
of features and using a performance metric (e.g., R2 for regression) as the game value for computing the Shapley values
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19520

(Lipovetsky and Conklin 2001; Tripathi, Hemachandra, and
Trivedi 2020). However, such methods are impractical as they
require training an exponential number of models to accurately requisite game values for the Shapley value, becoming
readily impractical for even a mediocre number of samples.
In this paper, we put forward an approach based on the
multilinear extension of cooperative games, allowing supervised learning tasks to be modeled as multilinear games. This
extension holds the current explainable methods as a special
case and, additionally, provides insights into the interactions
that exist among features. Besides, we show that such an
extended formulation can be applied to feature selection problems, where we proved that the parameters of the multilinear
model can be used to compute the Shapley value as an importance indicator for feature selection. A significant challenge
with this approach is the exponential growth in main and
interaction effects as the number of features increases. To address this, we employ a support vector machine (SVM)-based
estimation whose dual formulation significantly simplifies
the problem and derives a data-driven representation of the
Shapley value and interaction index based on the dual SVM
solution. We also unveil an efficient dynamic programming
algorithm that computes the Shapley values based on the
data-driven Shapely value representation.
In summary, the paper has the following contributions:
(i) We formulate the supervised learning task as multilinear
games, employing direct and interaction effects as the characteristic function of a game; such a formulation can provide
more insights when used as local explainer, and its extension
is guaranteed to compute the Shapley value as the feature importance for feature selection; (ii) We effectively handle the
exponential parameters in multilinear games by employing
SVM, focusing the complexity of the problem on the number
of samples rather than the myriad of features and their interactions; (iii) We put forward a data-driven representation of
the Shapley value based on the dual SVM solution and devise
a dynamic programming algorithm to efficiently compute the
Shapley value or interaction index.
Notation. We show the matrices with upper-case (unboldfaced) letters, the vectors with bold-faced lower-case, scalars
with lower-case (unbold-faced) letters, and the sets with curly
upper-case letters. The training set containing n samples is
denoted by {x i , yi }ni=1 , where x i ∈ Rd and y ∈ {−1, 1}.
The set of all data points x i ’s is denoted by X ∈ Rn×d , and

