The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Novelty-Guided Data Reuse for Efficient and Diversified Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning
Yangkun Chen* , Kai Yang* , Jian Tao, Jiafei Lyu†
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
{chen-yk21, yk22, tj22, lvjf20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

the simultaneous control of multiple agents. The algorithm
must account for the complexity of coordinating behaviors
among these agents, making the task more challenging in
terms of difficulty, training duration, and convergence (Yang
et al. 2020).
In MARL, each interaction with the environment incurs
higher costs and time, making strategies more challenging
to learn and converge. For most MARL algorithms, data is
stored in a buffer following an interaction with the environment. A batch of data is then sampled from the buffer for
updates before continuing with the environment interaction.
Due to the task’s inherent complexity, immediately interacting with the environment after learning from a batch of data
results in the strategy not fully utilizing the historical experience dataset. This leads to underfitting strategies during
each interaction, resulting in no significant improvement in
the quality of the sampled data and wasting interaction time
and cost. To reduce the number of interactions with the environment and achieve desirable results, algorithms need to
fully utilize historical data, train adequately, and then interact with the environment to obtain new, high-quality data.
Another critical aspect of MARL is the diversity among
agents (Li et al. 2021; Bettini, Kortvelesy, and Prorok 2024).
Unlike single-agent RL, which only needs to maximize its
reward, some tasks require agents to play sacrificial roles,
sacrificing individual gains for the best overall benefit. As
seen in human societies, diverse skills, division of labor, and
perspectives contribute to more effective collaboration. Similarly, in MARL, diverse agents can bring about a broader
range of strategies and behaviors, ultimately leading to improved overall performance. Some recent work assigns specific roles to agents, executing certain actions to achieve
diversity in agent strategies (Wang et al. 2020b; Hu et al.
2022). Others encourage exploration by maximizing the
state entropy (Kim and Sung 2023; Tao et al. 2024) or other
methods to diversify strategies among agents (Li et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2024a). However, these methods require additional improvements to the algorithm’s structure and do not
perform well in complex environments.
To address these two key issues, we designed a method
that improves the efficiency of sample utilization and improves diversity among agents. We have observed that the
behavior exhibited by agents depends on the frequency of
their policy updates. This phenomenon suggests that the up-

Recently, deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) has demonstrated its potential to tackle complex cooperative tasks, pushing the boundaries of AI in
collaborative environments. However, the efficiency of
these systems is often compromised by inadequate sample
utilization and a lack of diversity in learning strategies. To
enhance MARL performance, we introduce a novel sample
reuse approach that dynamically adjusts policy updates
based on observation novelty. Specifically, we employ a
Random Network Distillation (RND) network to gauge the
novelty of each agent’s current state, assigning additional
sample update opportunities based on the uniqueness of the
data. We name our method Multi-Agent Novelty-GuidEd
sample Reuse (MANGER). This method increases sample
efficiency while promoting exploration and diverse agent
behaviors. Our evaluations confirm substantial improvements
in MARL effectiveness in complex cooperative scenarios
such as Google Research Football and super-hard StarCraft
II micromanagement tasks.

Code — https://github.com/kkane99/MANGER code

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton, Barto et al. 1998) has
emerged as a powerful paradigm in artificial intelligence,
enabling agents to learn optimal behaviors through interactions with their environment. In recent years, Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) (Canese et al. 2021) has
attracted significant attention due to its applicability across
various fields, including robotics (Wang et al. 2023; Guo
et al. 2022; Duan et al. 2024), autonomous vehicles (Han
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Peng et al. 2021) and strategic games (Jia et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019; Vinyals et al.
2019; Yang et al. 2023).
MARL expands the principles of RL to scenarios involving multiple agents interacting with each other and the
environment simultaneously. While traditional RL concentrates on a single agent that optimizes its behavior based
on changes in the external environment, MARL necessitates
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15930

