The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

END2 : Robust Dual-Decoder Watermarking Framework Against
Non-Differentiable Distortions
Nan Sun1 , Han Fang2 , Yuxing Lu3 , Chengxin Zhao1 , Hefei Ling1 *
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
National University of Singapore
3
Peking University
{sunnan, chengxinzhao, lhfei}@hust.edu.cn, fanghan@nus.edu.sg, yxlu0613@gmail.com
Abstract

Encoder

DNN-based watermarking methods have rapidly advanced,
with the “Encoder-Noise Layer-Decoder” (END) framework
being the most widely used. To ensure end-to-end training,
the noise layer in the framework must be differentiable. However, real-world distortions are often non-differentiable, leading to challenges in end-to-end training. Existing solutions
only treat the distortion perturbation as additive noise, which
does not fully integrate the effect of distortion in training.
To better incorporate non-differentiable distortions into training, we propose a novel dual-decoder architecture (END2 ).
Unlike conventional END architecture, our method employs
two structurally identical decoders: the Teacher Decoder,
processing pure watermarked images, and the Student Decoder, handling distortion-perturbed images. The gradient is
backpropagated only through the Teacher Decoder branch
to optimize the encoder thus bypassing the problem of nondifferentiability. To ensure resistance to arbitrary distortions,
we enforce alignment of the two decoders’ feature representations by maximizing the cosine similarity between their intermediate vectors on a hypersphere. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our scheme outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms under various non-differentiable distortions. Moreover, even without the differentiability constraint, our method
surpasses baselines with a differentiable noise layer. Our approach is effective and easily implementable across all END
architectures, enhancing practicality and generalizability.

Differentiable
Noise Layer

Decoder

01011

Teacher
Decoder

01011

01011

(a) Standard Pipline
Encoder

data flow
gradient-free
data flow
gradient flow

NonDifferentiable
Noise Layer

Student
Decoder

Projector

Momentum
Update & Swap

01011

01011

(b) Proposed Pipline

Figure 1: The structures for different methods. (a) The standard END structure, which requires a differentiable noise
layer to maintain the joint optimization of the model. (b)
Our proposed END2 structure. Green arrows represent the
direction of propagation of the gradient in backpropagation
and the red arrow represents that the process is gradient-free.

2018; Tancik, Mildenhall, and Ng 2020) has developed
rapidly, with a series of models based on the “Encoder-Noise
Layer-Decoder” (END) framework being the most widely
used. The END framework employs an autoencoder-like architecture which contains an encoder, a noise layer, and a decoder, as shown in Figure 1 (a). The encoder embeds the watermark information into the cover image, while the decoder
extracts the hidden information from the image. The noise
layer enhances the model’s robustness by applying various
distortions. To enable end-to-end joint training, the noise
layer must be differentiable. However, real-world distortions
are typically non-differentiable (such as JPEG compression
and photo filters in third party apps). This limitation significantly reduces the realistic effectiveness of existing models.
Therefore, addressing the training for non-differentiable distortions is a crucial step toward developing a practical watermarking framework.
Current methods addressing non-differentiable distortions
typically use mathematical modeling to create differentiable
approximations (Zhu et al. 2018; Tancik, Mildenhall, and Ng
2020; Li, Liao, and Wu 2024), which fail to accurately replicate real-world distortions and are ineffective against black-

Introduction
With the rapid growth of the Internet, accessing vast digital media resources has become easy, but this also increases
the risk of unauthorized use, making protection and ownership verification crucial. In order to verify ownership, digital
watermarking technology was first introduced (van Schyndel, Tirkel, and Osborne 1994). Such techniques have been
widely studied in image (Hsu and Wu 1999; Hernandez,
Amado, and Perez-Gonzalez 2000; Bi et al. 2007), video
(Cox et al. 1997; Langelaar, Setyawan, and Lagendijk 2000;
Wang and Pearmain 2006) and audio (Swanson et al. 1998;
Haitsma et al. 2000; Bassia, Pitas, and Nikolaidis 2001).
In recent years, DNN-based image watermarking (Kandi,
Mishra, and Gorthi 2017; Ahmadi et al. 2020; Zhu et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

773

