The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dung’s Argumentation Framework: Unveiling the Expressive Power with
Inconsistent Databases
Yasir Mahmood1 , Markus Hecher2,3 , Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo1
1

2

DICE group, Department of Computer Science, Paderborn University, Germany
Univ. Artois, CNRS, UMR 8188, Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Lens (CRIL), F-62300 Lens, France
3
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States
{yasir.mahmood, axel.ngonga}@uni-paderborn.de, hecher@mit.edu
Abstract

(KB) that satisfies the imposed constraints. The current research on repairs and the theory of argumentation exhibit
some overlaps. Indeed, both (CQA for inconsistent KBs and
instantiated argumentation theory) address reasoning under
inconsistent information (Croitoru and Vesic 2013).
While the connection between AFs and inconsistent
databases has gained significant attention, no prior work has
investigated the precise expressive power of Dung’s theory
of argumentation in terms of integrity constraints (ICs). In
this paper, we take on this challenge and resolve the exact
expressive power of Dung’s AFs. This is achieved by expressing AFs in terms of inconsistent databases where ICs
include functional (FDs) and inclusion dependencies (IDs).
As extensions in an AF are subsets of arguments satisfying
a semantics, the association with relational databases is clarified through subset-repairs (Chomicki and Marcinkowski
2005). Precisely, arguments are seen as database tuples,
which together with ICs model the arguments interaction.
We complete the mutual relationship between inconsistent databases and argumentation frameworks in Dung’s setting, thereby strengthening the connection between the two
formalisms as anticipated earlier (Mahmood et al. 2024).
Then, the conflict relationship between arguments closely
resembles the semantics of functional dependencies, while
the defense/support relation mirrors that of inclusion dependencies. We establish that AFs can be seen as inconsistent
databases, as so far only the converse has already been established (Bienvenu and Bourgaux 2020; Mahmood et al.
2024). This strong connection offers a tabular representation of the graphical AFs and demonstrates that FDs and
IDs alone suffice to encode argument interactions in an AF.
In relational databases, the prominent notions of repairs
include set-based repairs (Arenas, Bertossi, and Chomicki
1999b; Chomicki and Marcinkowski 2005; ten Cate,
Fontaine, and Kolaitis 2012), attribute-based repairs (Wijsen 2002), and cardinality-based repairs (Lopatenko and
Bertossi 2007). Here, we focus on subset-repairs. A subsetrepair of an inconsistent database is obtained by removing
tuples from the original database such that integrity constraints are no longer violated. It is known (Chomicki and
Marcinkowski 2005) that for large classes of constraints
(FDs and denial constraints), the restriction to deletions suffices to remove integrity violations. Subset-maximality is
employed in this setting to assure minimal tuple removals.

The connection between inconsistent databases and Dung’s
abstract argumentation framework has recently drawn growing interest. Specifically, an inconsistent database, involving
certain types of integrity constraints such as functional and
inclusion dependencies, can be viewed as an argumentation
framework in Dung’s setting. Nevertheless, no prior work has
explored the exact expressive power of Dung’s theory of argumentation when compared to inconsistent databases and
integrity constraints. In this paper, we close this gap by arguing that an argumentation framework can also be viewed
as an inconsistent database. We first establish a connection
between subset-repairs for databases and extensions for AFs
considering conflict-free, naive, admissible and preferred semantics. Further, we define a new family of attribute-based
repairs based on the principle of maximal content preservation. The effectiveness of these repairs is then highlighted
by connecting them to stable, semi-stable, and stage semantics. Our main contributions include translating an argumentation framework into a database together with integrity constraints. Moreover, this translation can be achieved in polynomial time, which is essential in transferring complexity results between the two formalisms.

Introduction
Formal argumentation serves as a widely applied framework
for modeling and evaluating arguments and their reasoning,
finding application in various contexts. In particular, Dung’s
abstract argumentation framework (Dung 1995) has been
specifically designed to model conflict relationships among
arguments. An abstract argumentation framework (AF) represents arguments and their conflicts through directed graphs
and allows for a convenient exploration of the conflicts at an
abstract level. The semantics for AFs is described in terms
of sets of arguments (called extensions) that can be simultaneously accepted in a given framework.
A related yet distinct domain, with its primary focus on addressing inconsistent information, involves repairing knowledge bases and consistent query answering
(CQA) (Arenas, Bertossi, and Chomicki 1999a; Chomicki
2007; Leopoldo and Bertossi 2011; Bienvenu and Rosati
2013). The goal there is to identify and repair inconsistencies in the data and obtain a consistent knowledge base
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15058

