The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CA-MLIF: Cross-Attention and Multimodal Low-Rank Interaction Fusion
Framework for Tumor Prognostic Prediction
Yajun An1, 2 * , Jiale Chen1 * , Huan Lin3 * , Zhenbing Liu1 , Siyang Feng1 , Hualong Zhang1 ,
Rushi Lan1, 4† , Zaiyi Liu1, 3, 5† , Xipeng Pan1, 4†
1

School of Computer Science and Information Security, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
School of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data, Chongqing College of Finance and Economics, Chongqing 402160, China
3
Department of Radiology, Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital (Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences),
Southern Medical University; Guangzhou 510080, China
4
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Image and Graphic Intelligent Processing, Guilin University of Electronic Technology,
Guilin 541004, China
5
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence in Medical Image Analysis and Application,
Guangzhou 510080, China
rslan@guet.edu.cn, liuzaiyi@gdph.org.cn, pxp201@guet.edu.cn

2

Abstract

The diagnosis and prognosis of tumors involve diverse data, including histopathological images, radiographic
imaging, gene expression profiles, and clinical information,
each with unique tumor characteristics. Pathology explores
diseases from a morphological perspective (Yang et al.
2022), providing critical cellular features related to tumor
invasion and ensuring effective treatment, making pathological evaluation the ‘gold standard’ for cancer diagnosis (Hoda
and Cheng 2017). Genetic data, such as gene mutations and
expression profiles, are also crucial for cancer diagnosis and
prognosis (Cui et al. 2023). Additionally, radiographic images offer comprehensive anatomical details, aiding in precise lesion assessment and patient evaluation. However, relying on a single modality can miss important features. To
address these limitations and fully utilize diverse information, multimodal medical image fusion has emerged.
In the field of image fusion, the most common fusion
methods are splicing, tensor fusion, and attention mechanisms. Among them, a multimodal fusion framework based
on multi-task correlation learning (MultiCoFusion) was proposed (Tan et al. 2022), which skillfully utilized the ResNet152 deep neural network to mine the subtle features of
pathology images and adopted a sparse graph convolutional
network (SGCN) to extract the information of mRNA expression data. The multimodal low-rank interaction fusion
framework integrating pathological images and genomic
data (PG-MLIF) (Pan et al. 2024), addressed the two bottlenecks in the fusion process, i.e., insufficient fusion and
inefficient fusion, by adopting a staged processing strategy,
which significantly improves the accuracy of survival prognosis prediction. However, although this approach can effectively improve the performance of the model, it becomes
challenging to realize end-to-end training because it involves
the extraction of different modal features.
In addition, a multi-modal memory transformer network
(MMTN) was proposed by (Cao et al. 2023), based on the
attention mechanism, which exploited the cross-modal complementarity of medical vision and language for word pre-

Cancer is a leading cause of death worldwide due to its aggressive nature and complex variability. Accurate prognosis
is therefore challenging but essential for guiding personalized treatment and follow-up. Previous research often relied
on single data sources, missing the opportunity to combine
various types of patient information for more comprehensive
survival predictions. To address these challenges, we propose a two-stage fusion method named Cross-Attention and
Multimodal Low-Rank Interaction Fusion Framework (CAMLIF). In the first stage, we propose a CA mechanism for
real-time feature updates and cross-modal mutual learning to
capture rich semantic information. In the second stage, we design a novel multimodal low-rank interaction fusion method
for survival prediction. Specifically, we present modal attention mechanism (MAM) for feature filtration, low-rank multimodal fusion (LMF) for model complexity reduction, and
optimal weight concatenation (OWC) for maximizing feature
integration. Extensive experiments on two public datasets
TCGA-GBMLGG and TCGA-KIRC, as well as a multicenter in-house lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) dataset validate the effectiveness of CA-MLIF, which demonstrate that
our method outperforms existing approaches in survival prediction under both pathology-gene fusion and CT-pathology
fusion scenarios.

Introduction
Cancer is one of the most severe and deadly diseases worldwide. According to the 2022 global cancer statistics from
the International Agency for Research on Cancer, there were
approximately 20 million new cancer cases and 9.7 million
cancer-related deaths globally (Bray et al. 2024). This underscores the urgent need for effective methods to accurately
predict cancer survival rates and assist physicians in making
informed treatment decisions.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1764

