The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhance Vision-Language Alignment with Noise
Sida Huang1,2 , Hongyuan Zhang2, 3 * , Xuelong Li2 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P. R. China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom, P. R. China
3
The University of Hong Kong
{sidahuang2001, hyzhang98}@gmail.com, xuelong li@ieee.org
Abstract

fine-tuning on limited downstream data also carries a risk
of overfitting and forgetting the knowledge acquired during
pre-training stage. Consequently, it is crucial to effectively
and efficiently fine-tune VL models to achieve better alignment.
To address this challenge, existing methods such as
prompt tuning (Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021) and
adapter tuning (Houlsby et al. 2019) are proposed. Prompt
tuning sets the word embeddings of prompts as learnable
parameters and adapter tuning inserts a learnable shallow
neural network to models. Different from these fine-tuning
methods that add extra modules or concatenate extra tokens,
we focus on an interesting question: Can a frozen model be
tuned with customized noise?
It is motivated by Positive-incentive Noise (Pi-noise or πnoise) (Li 2022; Zhang, Huang, and Li 2023), which quantitatively analyzes the impact of noise and investigates how to
generate beneficial noise for a specific task. Different from
traditional concepts that treat the randomness of noise as a
harmful factor, the noise E can decrease the uncertainty of
predictions and simplify the task if it satisfies

With the advancement of pre-trained vision-language (VL)
models, enhancing the alignment between visual and linguistic modalities in downstream tasks has emerged as a critical
challenge. Different from existing fine-tuning methods that
add extra modules to these two modalities, we investigate
whether the frozen model can be fine-tuned by customized
noise. Our approach is motivated by the scientific study of
beneficial noise, namely Positive-incentive Noise (Pi-noise)
, which quantitatively analyzes the impact of noise. It therefore implies a new scheme to learn beneficial noise distribution that can be employed to fine-tune VL models. Focusing on few-shot classification tasks based on CLIP, we reformulate the inference process of CLIP and apply variational
inference, demonstrating how to generate Pi-noise towards
visual and linguistic modalities. Then, we propose Positiveincentive Noise Injector (PiNI), which can fine-tune CLIP
via injecting noise into both visual and text encoders. Since
the proposed method can learn the distribution of beneficial noise, we can obtain more diverse embeddings of vision
and language to better align these two modalities for specific
downstream tasks within limited computational resources.
We evaluate different noise incorporation approaches and network architectures of PiNI. The evaluation across 11 datasets
demonstrates its effectiveness.

I(T , E) > 0 ⇔ H(T ) > H(T |E),

where T is the definition of a specific task from a probabilistic perspective, I(·, ·) denotes mutual information and
H represents entropy. It should be clarified that our method
is distinct from noise addition in data augmentation, as discussed in Section 2.2.
The advantages of noise to enhance alignment can be discussed from both vision and language perspectives. From
the perspective of vision, the biases in different visual
datasets (Liu and He 2024) can lead to performance degeneration in VL models. We hypothesize that the bias associated with each image follows a certain distribution, which
can be mitigated by adding noise also from a specific distribution. As shown in Figure 4, the images with added noise
exhibit more universal visual features. Additionally, the limited number of images makes it difficult to adequately sample from the continuous space of image embeddings. This
dilemma can be alleviated by adding randomly sampled beneficial noise into the visual level, for which more diverse visual embeddings can be obtained. From the perspective of
language, the templates of hand-crafted prompts and learnable prompts may be not effective enough, which limit the

Code — https://github.com/hyzhang98/PiNI

1

(1)

Introduction

Vision and language are two crucial modalities in the real
world. To build association and enable collaboration between these two modalities, vision-language (VL) models
have emerged in recent years. Based on the classical dualstream VL model CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), LLaVA (Liu
et al. 2024b,a) has recently achieved remarkable performance. In these models, the embeddings of these two modalities are aligned during the pre-training phase. When applying CLIP models to downstream unseen data, inherent
dataset bias can lead to misalignment between visual and
linguistic representations. To realign these two modalities,
fine-tuning all parameters requires extensive computational
resources. Even with sufficient computational resources, full
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17449

