The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Prompt Compression with Context-Aware Sentence Encoding for Fast and
Improved LLM Inference
Barys Liskavets1 * , Maxim Ushakov1 , Shuvendu Roy2 ,
Mark Klibanov3 , Ali Etemad2 , Shane K. Luke3

Original
Long
Context
.
.
.
.

Large language models (LLMs) have triggered a new stream
of research focusing on compressing the context length to reduce the computational cost while ensuring the retention of
helpful information for LLMs to answer the given question.
Token-based removal methods are one of the most prominent
approaches in this direction, but risk losing the semantics of
the context caused by intermediate token removal, especially
under high compression ratios, while also facing challenges
in computational efficiency. In this work, we propose contextaware prompt compression (CPC), a sentence-level prompt
compression technique where its key innovation is a novel
context-aware sentence encoder that provides a relevance
score for each sentence for a given question. To train this
encoder, we generate a new dataset consisting of questions,
positives, and negative pairs where positives are sentences
relevant to the question, while negatives are irrelevant context
sentences. We train the encoder in a contrastive setup to learn
context-aware sentence representations. Our method considerably outperforms prior works on prompt compression on
benchmark datasets and is up to 10.93× faster at inference
compared to the best token-level compression method. We
also find better improvement for shorter length constraints
in most benchmarks, showing the effectiveness of our proposed solution in the compression of relevant information in
a shorter context. Finally, we release the code and the dataset
for quick reproducibility and further development.

Question

.
.
.
.
Cosine
Similarity

Sorted
relevance

Figure 1: Overview of CPC. We first train a novel contextaware sentence encoder contrastively on a newly generated dataset of questions, positives, and negative pairs. Our
model then uses this context-aware encoder to generate embeddings of the question and context sentences, and uses the
similarity between them to select relevant sentences.
Method
LLMLingua
LLMLingua-2
LongLLMLingua
CPC

Performance

Latency

37.4
42.2
48.8
50.0

9.8×
0.67×
10.93×
1×

Table 1: Overall comparison of our method on performance
and latency on LongBench. CPC outperforms LongLLMLingua (SOTA) on both performance and latency.

Code — https://github.com/Workday/cpc

1

Sentence 1
Sentence 2
.
.
.
.
.
Sentence n

Selected

Abstract

Context-aware
Sentence Encoder

Alterra AI, Palo Alto, United States
2
Queen’s University, Canada
3
Workday Inc.

Split

1

Introduction

the quality and the length of the prompt is a timely area of
research in order to optimize inference performance vs. cost.
Recently, prompt compression has shown promise as a solution to the context length problem. The basic idea of such a
method is to reduce the size of the prompt by removing less
informative content. For instance, LLMLingua (Jiang et al.
2023b) proposed to utilize a well-trained language model to
identify and remove non-essential tokens from the prompt.
LongLLMLingua (Jiang et al. 2023c) enhanced LLMLingua
for longer context by enabling question-aware compression.
Later, LLMLingua-2 (Pan et al. 2024) proposed to formulate
prompt compression as a token-level binary classification
task that learns a task-agnostic prompt compression model
by removing less important tokens. However, such token removal methods may result in non-coherent sentences, often

The advent of large language models (LLMs) has triggered a surge of research into prompting techniques, including chain-of-thought (Wei et al. 2022), in-context learning (Dong et al. 2022), and retrieval augmented generation
(Lewis et al. 2020), aimed at leveraging their generalization
and reasoning capabilities for various downstream applications. In practice, providing suitable and descriptive (often
long) prompts is essential for LLMs to generate useful responses for domain-specific tasks. However, longer prompts
come at a significant inference expense for LLMs in terms
of both time and cost. Therefore, striking a balance between
* Corresponding Author. Email: liskovets.borets@gmail.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24595

