The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Weak Strategyproofness in Randomized Social Choice
Felix Brandt1 , Patrick Lederer2
1

Technical University of Munich
2
UNSW Sydney
brandtf@in.tum.de, p.lederer@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
An important—but very demanding—property in collective
decision-making is strategyproofness, which requires that voters cannot benefit from submitting insincere preferences. Gibbard (1977) has shown that only rather unattractive rules are
strategyproof, even when allowing for randomization. However, Gibbard’s theorem is based on a rather strong interpretation of strategyproofness, which deems a manipulation successful if it increases the voter’s expected utility for at least one
utility function consistent with his ordinal preferences. In this
paper, we study weak strategyproofness, which deems a manipulation successful if it increases the voter’s expected utility
for all utility functions consistent with his ordinal preferences.
We show how to systematically design attractive, weakly strategyproof social decision schemes (SDSs) and explore their
limitations for both strict and weak preferences. In particular,
for strict preferences, we show that there are weakly strategyproof SDSs that are either ex post efficient or Condorcetconsistent, while neither even-chance SDSs nor pairwise SDSs
satisfy both properties and weak strategyproofness at the same
time. By contrast, for the case of weak preferences, we discuss
two sweeping impossibility results that preclude the existence
of appealing weakly strategyproof SDSs.

1

Introduction

Any mechanism that relies on the private information of
agents should incentivize agents to report their private information truthfully. However, designing mechanisms that
satisfy this property—known as strategyproofness—is a challenging task in many domains of economic interest. This is
particularly true for the field of social choice, which studies voting rules that aggregate the voters’ preferences into a
collective decision: a seminal result by Gibbard (1973) and
Satterthwaite (1975) shows that voters can benefit by lying
about their true preferences in any reasonable deterministic voting rule. Early hopes that more positive results can
be achieved for randomized voting rules were shattered by
Gibbard (1977). Gibbard considered social decision schemes
(SDSs), which return a probability distribution for each profile of individual preferences, and the final winner will be
chosen by chance according to this distribution.
In particular, Gibbard (1977) has shown that the only strategyproof and ex post efficient SDSs are random dictatorships,

which choose each voter with a fixed probability and implement this voter’s favorite alternative as the winner of the
election. While this result allows for more rules than the
Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem, random dictatorships suffer
from a large variance and fail to identify good compromise
alternatives. The latter observation is related to the fact that
random dictatorships violate Condorcet-consistency, i.e., they
may fail to select an alternative that beats all other alternatives
in a pairwise majority comparison.
Like all results on strategyproof SDSs, Gibbard’s random
dictatorship theorem crucially hinges on the exact definition
of strategyproofness, which, in turn, depends on the assumptions of the voters’ preferences over lotteries. Gibbard (1977)
postulates that a voter prefers one lottery to another if the
former yields at least as much expected utility as the latter for
every utility function that is consistent with his true preferences. Then, an SDS is called strategyproof if voters always
prefer the outcome when voting truthfully to every outcome
they could obtain by lying about their true preferences. This
strategyproofness notion, which we will call strong strategyproofness, is predominant in the literature (e.g., Barberà
1979; Procaccia 2010; Brandt, Lederer, and Romen 2024) because it guarantees that voters cannot manipulate regardless
of their exact utility functions. However, as demonstrated by
the random dictatorship theorem, strong strategyproofness
mainly leads to negative results.
In this paper, we will thus study a weaker notion of strategyproofness, first considered by Postlewaite and Schmeidler
(1986) and later popularized by Bogomolnaia and Moulin
(2001) in the context of random assignment. To this end, we
observe that the preferences over lotteries defined by Gibbard (1977) are incomplete, i.e., there are lotteries such that
a voter prefers neither of them to the other. Hence, there are
two ways to define strategyproofness, depending on how we
interpret incomparable lotteries. Strong strategyproofness, as
defined by Gibbard (1977), views a deviation to an incomparable lottery as a successful manipulation. By contrast, we
only consider deviations to comparable lotteries as successful.
The resulting strategyproofness notion is called weak strategyproofness and requires that voters cannot obtain a strictly
preferred lottery by lying about their true preferences.
Our contribution. We improve our understanding of weak
strategyproofness by contributing various positive and nega-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13667

