The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3CAD: A Large-Scale Real-World 3C Product Dataset for Unsupervised Anomaly
Detection
Enquan Yang1 * , Peng Xing2 * , Hanyang Sun1 , Wenbo Guo1 , Yuanwei Ma3 , Zechao Li2 , Dan Zeng1†
1

School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University
2
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
Changzhou Microintelligence Corporation
{enquanyang,sunhanyang,guowenbo,dzeng}@shu.edu.cn, {xingp ng,zechao.li}@njust.edu.cn, yuanweima@gmail.com
Abstract

xnormal

Industrial anomaly detection achieves progress thanks to
datasets such as MVTec-AD and VisA. However, they suffer from limitations in terms of the number of defect samples, types of defects, and availability of real-world scenes.
These constraints inhibit researchers from further exploring
the performance of industrial detection with higher accuracy.
To this end, we propose a new large-scale anomaly detection
dataset called 3CAD, which is derived from real 3C production lines. Specifically, the proposed 3CAD includes eight
different types of manufactured parts, totaling 27,039 highresolution images labeled with pixel-level anomalies. The key
features of 3CAD are that it covers anomalous regions of
different sizes, multiple anomaly types, and the possibility
of multiple anomalous regions and multiple anomaly types
per anomaly image. This is the largest and first anomaly detection dataset dedicated to 3C product quality control for
community exploration and development. Meanwhile, we introduce a simple yet effective framework for unsupervised
anomaly detection: a Coarse-to-Fine detection paradigm with
Recovery Guidance (CFRG). To detect small defect anomalies, the proposed CFRG utilizes a coarse-to-fine detection
paradigm. Specifically, we utilize a heterogeneous distillation model for coarse localization and then fine localization
through a segmentation model. In addition, to better capture
normal patterns, we introduce recovery features as guidance.
Finally, we report the results of our CFRG framework and
popular anomaly detection methods on the 3CAD dataset,
demonstrating strong competitiveness and providing a highly
challenging benchmark to promote the development of the
anomaly detection field. Data and code are available:

Homogeneous

xnormal
RD

Input

xabnormal

Teacher
Network
Fusion

Teacher
Network

Heterogeneous

xabnormal

Student
Network

CFRC(Ours)

GT

Student
Network

Ours

Recovery
Network

Coarse
positionin
g features

High

Cues

Segmentation

RD

Low

Figure 1: Comparison of previous anomaly detection distillation paradigm with our paradigm. First row: Left: reverse
distillation; Right: our proposed paradigm.
images, enhancing both detection accuracy and robustness
(Cao et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2023a; Gu et al. 2024).
Typically, supervised methods are employed when the
types of defects are known and a sufficient amount of labeled
data is available. These methods are based on classification
(Nagata et al. 2019), detection (Zhang, Chang, and Jamshidi
2020), and segmentation models (Zou et al. 2018). However,
obtaining defective samples and enough labeled data can be
challenging in practice. As a result, unsupervised deep learning methods, which only require normal samples for training, have gained increasing attention (Roth et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024a).
The introduction of widely-used industrial datasets such
as MVTec-AD (Bergmann et al. 2019), VisA (Zou et al.
2022), and MPDD (Jezek et al. 2021a), has spurred significant academic interest in anomaly detection and led
to numerous innovative approaches (Xing et al. 2023,
2024a). However, as research advances, several limitations
of these datasets have become apparent. Firstly, the number of anomaly data poses a challenge. For instance, some
categories of anomaly images in MVTec-AD consist of
fewer than 60 samples, which may not adequately represent the performance of algorithms in practical applications.
Secondly, there is a concern regarding the authenticity of
anomalies. The defects in MVTec-AD, VisA, and Real-IAD
(Wang et al. 2024) are primarily artificially created, such
as scratches or deletions, despite being derived from real

Code — https://github.com/EnquanYang2022/3CAD.

Introduction
The rapid expansion of 3C product manufacturing has surpassed the capabilities of traditional manual quality inspection, underscoring the need for advanced algorithms like
Image Anomaly Detection (IAD) (Liu et al. 2024b). Deep
learning approaches have demonstrated significant effectiveness in identifying complex and subtle defects in industrial
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9175

