The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

From Pairwise to Ranking: Climbing the Ladder to Ideal Collaborative Filtering
with Pseudo-Ranking
Yuhan Zhao1, 2 , Rui Chen1 * , Li Chen2 , Shuang Zhang1 , Qilong Han1 , Hongtao Song1 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{csyhzhao,lichen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, {ruichen, zhangshuang, hanqilong, songhongtao}@hrbeu.edu.cn

Abstract

proximate full rankings. We refer to these as pairwise CF.
Its core idea is to make positive item ip (i.e., an item interacted by a user) more similar to user u than negative item in .
For example, Bayesian personalized ranking (BPR) (Rendle
et al. 2009) pairs each positive item with a negative item to
form a pairwise relationship for training. Formally, a pairwise
loss function forms a pairwise relationship ip >u in (i.e., u
prefers item ip to in ) as the ground truth. In this context, the
optimization
objective is to maximize the posterior probabilQ
ity (u,ip ,in )∈D p(Θ | ip >u in ) based on a set of pairwise
relationships, where D is the training dataset. Despite the
strong performance of pairwise CF models, approximating
full rankings with pairwise relationships introduces a significant gap compared to the ideal CF model. In this paper, we
provide a novel analysis using the concept of multiple ordinal
classification to reveal the inherent gap between the pairwise
approximation and the ideal case. However, bridging the gap
in practice encounters two formidable challenges:

Intuitively, an ideal collaborative filtering (CF) model should
learn from users’ full rankings over all items to make optimal
top-K recommendations. Due to the absence of such full rankings in practice, most CF models rely on pairwise loss functions to approximate full rankings, resulting in an immense
performance gap. In this paper, we provide a novel analysis
using the multiple ordinal classification concept to reveal the
inevitable gap between a pairwise approximation and the ideal
case. However, bridging the gap in practice encounters two
formidable challenges: (1) none of the real-world datasets contains full ranking information; (2) there does not exist a loss
function that is capable of consuming ranking information.
To overcome these challenges, we propose a pseudo-ranking
paradigm (PRP) that addresses the lack of ranking information by introducing pseudo-rankings supervised by an original
noise injection mechanism. Additionally, we put forward a new
ranking loss function designed to handle ranking information
effectively. To ensure our method’s robustness against potential inaccuracies in pseudo-rankings, we equip the ranking
loss function with a gradient-based confidence mechanism to
detect and mitigate abnormal gradients. Extensive experiments
on four real-world datasets demonstrate that PRP significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Collaborative filtering (CF) has been one of the most fundamental techniques in recommender systems due to its simplicity and effectiveness (Mao et al. 2021). It leverages user-item
interactions to learn user preferences and make top-K recommendations (He et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019; He et al.
2020). To find the top-K items, a CF model normally needs
to generate a full ranking over the entire item universe. To
fulfill this task, ideally, given a set of users U , one should
derive
a CF model that maximizes the posterior probability
Q
u∈U p(Θ | Ψu ), where Θ denotes the set of the model’s
parameters that need to learn, and Ψu is user u ∈ U ’s full
ranking of all items. However, this ideal optimization goal is
unattainable in real-world scenarios, as it is impractical for
users to fully rank a vast number of items.
In practice, most CF methods (He et al. 2020; Wu et al.
2021; Yu et al. 2022) rely on pairwise loss functions to ap* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13392

• None of the real-world datasets contains full ranking
information: Obtaining full rankings requires extensive
user participation, a feat that is unachievable in most practical scenarios.
• Lack of a loss function that is capable of handling
ranking information: Current CF loss functions focus
on non-ranking relationships, such as pairwise or listwise (Xia et al. 2008), and are not designed to effectively
and efficiently process ranking data.
To overcome the aforementioned challenges, we introduce a
novel pseudo-ranking paradigm (PRP). For the first challenge,
we propose a ranker module to generate a pseudo-ranking
of given items. However, training the ranker demands supervised signal (i.e. ranking information), presenting a classic
chicken-and-egg dilemma. We innovatively propose a noise
injection mechanism to add different levels of noise to positive samples to construct a ranking in line with user preferences. The intuition is that when the injection noise is very
small, the semantics of the constructed i2p will not change significantly. When the injection noise is large, the semantics of
the positive item i3p will be seriously broken (He et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2023a), and users are difficult to love the item.
Accordingly, ip >u i2p >u i3p is constructed as a supervision.
For the second challenge, inspired by the multiple ordinal
classification concept, we then put forward a ranking loss

