The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-Corrected Flow Distillation for Consistent One-Step and Few-Step
Text-to-Image Generation
Quan Dao* 1,2† , Hao Phung* 1,3† , Trung Tuan Dao1 , Dimitris N. Metaxas2 , Anh Tran1
1

VinAI Research
Rutgers University
3
Cornell University
quan.dao@rutgers.edu, htp26@cornell.edu, v.trungdt21@vinai.io, dnm@cs.rutgers.edu, v.anhtt152@vinai.io
2

RectifiedFlow
1 step

Abstract

Ours
1 step

Ours
2 steps

Ours
8 steps

Flow matching has emerged as a promising framework for
training generative models, demonstrating impressive empirical performance while offering relative ease of training
compared to diffusion-based models. However, this method
still requires numerous function evaluations in the sampling
process. To address these limitations, we introduce a selfcorrected flow distillation method that effectively integrates
consistency models and adversarial training within the flowmatching framework. This work is a pioneer in achieving
consistent generation quality in both few-step and one-step
sampling. Our extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our method, yielding superior results both quantitatively and qualitatively on CelebA-HQ and zero-shot benchmarks on the COCO dataset.

Code — https://github.com/VinAIResearch/SCFlow
Figure 1: Illustration of consistent one-step and few-step image generation. Our method consistently delivers superior
visual quality across different sampling steps, significantly
surpassing the performance of the RectifiedFlow counterpart.

Introduction
The field of generative modeling has witnessed remarkable progress over the past decade. The modern generative models could create diverse and realistic content across
various modalities. Previously, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Karras, Laine, and
Aila 2019) was dominant in this field by their ability to
create realistic images. However, training GAN models is
costly in both time and resources due to training instability and mode collapse. The emergence of diffusion models
(Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song and Ermon 2019; Song
et al. 2020) marked a significant focus shift in generative
AI. These models, exemplified by groundbreaking works
such as DALL-E (Ramesh et al. 2021) and Stable Diffusion
(Rombach et al. 2022) have surpassed GANs to become the
current state-of-the-art in image synthesis. Diffusion models
define a fix forward process which gradually perturbs image to noise and learn a model to perform the reverse process from noise to image. Their success lies in the ability
to capture complex distribution of data and produce fidelity
and diverse images. This approach has effectively addressed
many of the limitations faced by GANs, offering improved

stability, diversity, and scalability. However, diffusion training takes long time to converge and requires many NFEs to
produce high-quality samples. Recent works (Lipman et al.
2023; Liu 2022; Albergo and Vanden-Eijnden 2022) have
introduced a flow matching framework, which is motivated
by the continuous normalizing flow. By learning probability flow between noise and data distributions, flow matching
models provide a novel perspective on generative modeling.
Recent advancements have demonstrated that flow matching
can achieve competitive results with diffusion models (Ma
et al. 2024) while potentially offering faster sampling.
While flow matching can generate high-quality images
with fewer NFEs compared to diffusion models, it still
shares the challenge of prolonged sampling times due to its
inherently iterative denoising process. This limitation poses
a significant barrier to the practical application of both flow
matching and diffusion models in real-world scenarios. To
address this challenge in diffusion models, recent works
(Meng et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023; Gu et al. 2023; Nguyen
and Tran 2024; Dao et al. 2024; Sauer et al. 2023b; Xu et al.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Work done while at VinAI.

2654

