The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Collaborative Semantic Consistency Alignment for
Blended-Target Domain Adaptation
Yuwu Lu1, 2 , Xue Hu1 , Waikeung Wong2 * , Haoyu Huang1
1

South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
{luyuwu2008, hx1430940232, hyhuang99}@163.com, calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

et al. 2019; Xu, Wang, and Ling 2023; Peng et al. 2019) has
received significant attention.
As a special case of multi-target domain adaptation
(MTDA) (Nguyen-Meidine et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2023;
Kiran et al. 2022), BTDA adapts from a source domain
to a blended-target domain, where all target domains are
mixed together without any domain labels. Thus, it is difficult to distinguish which target domain these samples come
from. In other MTDA methods (Isobe et al. 2021; Roy et al.
2021; Tian et al. 2022), target domains are independent
with distinct identity IDs known as domain labels. Compared with MTDA methods with domain labels, BTDA has
the following advantages: (1) mixed targets are beneficial
for simultaneously capturing semantic information among
all domains without the limitations of domain isolation. (2)
MTDA methods are susceptible to experiencing catastrophic
forgetting of previously-trained target domains, which rely
on the sequence of target adaptations (Ngo et al. 2023).
However, there is no such problem in BTDA methods because all target samples from distinct domains are mixed together and trained simultaneously.
Although BTDA has some merits, there are relatively few
studies on it at present because the BTDA scenario is complicated and challenging for the following reasons. Primarily, domain shifts exist not only between the source and target domains but also among all implicit sub-target domains.
In addition, the hybrid data distribution leads to a serious
category mismatching phenomenon where the clusters of
different classes from different domains may overlap in the
hybrid feature space (Xu, Wang, and Ling 2023). To address
these challenges, Chen et al. (2019) employed an unsupervised meta-learner to partition the combined target into multiple clusters, termed as meta-sub-targets. The model automatically devises the multi-target adaptation losses for each
meta-sub-target to mitigate domain shifts. Although Chen
et al. solved the category mismatching problem, they failed
to leverage the advantage (1) of the blended-target domain
adaptation, but instead employed a meta-learner to separate the mixed target domain into multiple independent subtarget domains, making it difficult to explore correlation information among target domains. Xu et al. (2023) used a category domain discriminator, guided by uncertainty estimation, to align categorical distributions. And they augmented
the source data with target styles to facilitate semantic trans-

Blended-target domain adaptation (BTDA) leverages learned
source knowledge to adapt the model to a blended-target domain that is composed of multiple unlabeled sub-target domains with distinct statistical characteristics. The existing
BTDA methods usually overlook semantic correlation information across multiple domains and domain shifts among
sub-target domains, resulting in sub-optimal adaptation performance. To fully harness semantic knowledge and alleviate
domain shifts in hybrid data distribution, we propose a collaborative semantic consistency alignment (CSCA) method
for BTDA. Specifically, we achieve distribution alignment
by minimizing the sliced Wasserstein distance between the
source and target feature distributions. To alleviate complex
domain shifts among all sub-target domains in the hybrid feature space, we design graph networks to propagate and share
semantic knowledge across domains, which reduce semantic
discrepancies among multiple domains. Additionally, we propose a double consistency regularization method to reduce the
susceptibility of the model to domain-specific information,
further facilitating semantic alignment and alleviating domain shifts. Extensive experiments on several datasets show
that CSCA achieves promising classification performance.

Code — https://github.com/xuehu365/CSCA

Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Long et al. 2015)
aims to improve the generalization on the unlabeled target
domain by transferring knowledge from the labeled source
domain. Most UDA methods are usually confined to adapting from a single source to a single target (STDA) (Bai
et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2022; Han, Sun, and Yin 2022). However, in real-world applications, the target data may originate from various environments with significant distribution
disparities. For example, in remote sensing image classification, the images in a dataset are collected under diverse conditions, including geographical positions, atmospheric interference, and different satellite sensor configurations. To
adapt to real-life situations, a more challenging DA task
known as blended-target domain adaptation (BTDA) (Chen
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19170

