The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Automatic Selection of Macro-Events for Heuristic-Search Temporal Planning
Alessandro La Farciola, Alessandro Valentini, Andrea Micheli
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
alafarciola@fbk.eu, alvalentini@fbk.eu, amicheli@fbk.eu

Abstract

instantaneous) they usually are sequences of actions that can
be exploited to reduce the distance to the goal. In temporal
planning, actions instances are intervals that can overlap in
time, and sequencing durative actions is insufficient to capture many interesting temporal plans (Cushing et al. 2007).
In this paper, we tackle the problem of automatically
learning structures similar to macro-actions for heuristicsearch temporal planning. By assuming that the planner we specialize uses heuristic-search with time represented symbolically (like e.g. POPF (Coles et al. 2010),
TAMER (Valentini, Micheli, and Cimatti 2020) and many
others), we define a simple, yet effective, model of macros
for temporal planning as sequences of actions with a semantics allowing for the representation of any concurrent temporal plan. The basic idea is to represent a totally-ordered
sequence of events by only indicating the ID of the action
to progress. We call these “macro-events” and in this paper
we provide a formal, context-dependent semantics: for example, a sequence a; b; a; b could mean “start a, then start
b, then end a, then end b” in a state where not a nor b are
running, but the same macro-action could mean “end a, then
start b, then start a new instance of a, then end b” in a state
where a was started, but not ended, and b is not running.
In general, macro-events cannot be encoded as normal durative actions, but they can be easily exploited by a heuristic search planner as additional domain knowledge provided
in input. After formalizing this concept, we describe four
different ways in which the same set of macro-events can
be exploited by a temporal planner and then we discuss a
novel statistics-based algorithm focused on extracting a suitable set of macro-events from a database of valid plans.
Our selection approach estimates (under some simplifying
assumptions) the search states expanded in the worst case
by a blind-search planner equipped with a certain set of
macro-events for each of the four exploitation schemata we
propose. We then use this estimation to automatically select the most promising set of macro actions to be used at
planning time. Finally, we experimentally show that our approach yields very good results on the two case-study problems used in (Micheli and Valentini 2021).

One of the major techniques to tackle temporal planning
problems is heuristic search augmented with a symbolic representation of time in the states. Adding composite actions
(macro-actions) to the problem is a simple and powerful approach to create “shortcuts” in the search space, at the cost of
increasing the branching factor of the problem and thus the
execution time of a heuristic search planner. Hence, it is of
paramount importance to select the right macro-actions and
minimize their number to optimize the planner performance.
In this paper, we introduce “macro-events”: a simple, yet
powerful, “shortcut” model similar to macro-actions for the
case of temporal planning. Then, we present a novel ranking
function to extract and select a suitable set of macro-events
from a dataset of valid plans. In our ranking approach, we
consider an estimation of the hypothetical search space for a
blind search under four different exploitation schemata. Finally, we experimentally demonstrate that the proposed approach yields a substantial performance improvement for a
state-of-the-art temporal planner.

Introduction
Automated temporal planning is the problem of synthesizing a course of actions to achieve a desired goal, given a
formal model of the system to be controlled when time and
temporal constraints are relevant. Despite a long history of
research, scalability is still a major limiting factor for the applicability of domain-independent temporal planners: realworld scenarios are often out of reach for current systems.
One possibility to attack this problem is to specialize temporal planners for a domain of interest: if domain knowledge
is provided to planners, the synthesis process can be accelerated. Among the proposed methods to automatically achieve
this specialization (which nowadays is mostly focused on the
synthesis of search heuristics using machine learning, e.g.,
(Chen, Thiébaux, and Trevizan 2024)), learning small portions of plans that the planner can use together with basic
actions to form a complete plan is a simple and effective
approach that is well-studied for the case of classical planning. These “shortcuts” in the search space are usually called
“macro-actions” (or sometimes just “macro”) and in classical and numeric planning (where actions are assumed to be

Background
Temporal Planning with ICE We start by formalizing
the temporal planning problems we tackle by adapting the

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26579

