The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cognitive Fluctuations Enhanced Attention Network for Knowledge Tracing
Mingliang Hou1, 2 , Xueyi Li1 , Teng Guo* 1 , Zitao Liu1 , Mi Tian2 , Renqiang Luo3 , Weiqi Luo1
1

Guangdong Institute of Smart Education, Jinan University, Guangdong, 510632, China
2
TAL Education Group, Beijing, 102206, China
3
School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Liaoning, 116622, China
teemohold@outlook.com, lixueyi@stu2021.jnu.edu.cn, {guoteng, liuzitao}@jun.edu.cn, tinami@tal.com,
lrenqiang@outlook.com, lwq@jnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Knowledge tracing (KT) involves using the historical records
of student-learning interactions to anticipate their performance on forthcoming questions. Central to this process is the
modeling of human cognition to gain deeper insights into how
knowledge is acquired and retained. Human cognition is characterized by two key features: long-term cognitive trends, reflecting the gradual accumulation and stabilization of knowledge over time, and short-term cognitive fluctuations, which
arise from transient factors such as forgetting or momentary lapses in attention. Although existing attention-based KT
models effectively capture long-term cognitive trends, they
often fail to adequately address short-term cognitive fluctuations. These limitations lead to overly smoothed cognitive
features and reduced model performance, especially when
the test data length exceeds the training data length. To address these problems, we propose FlucKT, a novel shortterm cognitive fluctuations enhanced attention network for
KT tasks. FlucKT improves the attention mechanism in two
ways: First, by using a decomposition-based layer with causal
convolution to separate and dynamically reweight long-term
and short-term cognitive features. Second, by introducing a
kernelized bias attention score penalty to enhance focus on
short-term fluctuations, improving length generalization capabilities. Our contributions are validated through extensive
experiments on three real-world datasets, demonstrating significant improvements in length generalization and prediction
performance.

Figure 1: The purple dashed box highlights their dynamic
interaction within a student’s learning sequence, while the
blue dashed box showcases how repeated attention layers
aggregate these features across multiple students, blurring
the distinction between the two types of cognition. Different colored solid circles represent distinct KCs. The black
and blue solid boxes indicate long-term cognitive trends and
short-term cognitive fluctuations, respectively. The red solid
box represents the frequency domain of sequence embedding. Solid square blocks denote features.

advancing next-generation intelligent and personalized education. To accurately capture the dynamic information of
students, significant efforts in recent years have employed
either Markov chains (Yudelson, Koedinger, and Gordon
2013) or recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Piech et al.
2015; Liu et al. 2023). Meanwhile, the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) has gained prominence for surpassing RNN-based models in KT tasks due to its ability
to model long-range dependencies. As a result, various KT
models (Ghosh, Heffernan, and Lan 2020; Liu et al. 2022a;
Im et al. 2023; Yin et al. 2023) have adopted the Transformer
as the sequence encoder to capture correlations in knowledge states by assigning attention weights to different positions, thereby achieving high-quality sequence representations.
Although attention mechanisms excel in capturing longterm cognitive trends in KT sequence data, they often do not
adequately address short-term cognitive fluctuations. This

Code — https://pykt.org/
Extended version — https://pykt.org/

Introduction
Knowledge tracing (KT) is a sequential prediction task that
leverages students’ historical learning interaction data to
forecast their performance on future questions. The essence
of KT lies in modeling human cognitive behaviors to deepen
understanding of cognitive processes. Consequently, addressing the KT task enables teachers to more effectively
guide students who need additional support and to recommend personalized learning materials, which is crucial for
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14265

