The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-shot Video Moment Retrieval via Off-the-shelf
Multimodal Large Language Models
Yifang Xu1 , Yunzhuo Sun2 , Benxiang Zhai1 , Ming Li1 , Wenxin Liang2 , Yang Li1 , Sidan Du1
1

Nanjing University
Dalian University of Technology
{xyf, zbx, liming}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {sunyunzhuo, wxliang}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {yogo, coff128}@nju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The target of video moment retrieval (VMR) is predicting
temporal spans within a video that semantically match a given
linguistic query. Existing VMR methods based on multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) overly rely on expensive
high-quality datasets and time-consuming fine-tuning. Although some recent studies introduce a zero-shot setting to
avoid fine-tuning, they overlook inherent language bias in the
query, leading to erroneous localization. To tackle the aforementioned challenges, this paper proposes Moment-GPT,
a tuning-free pipeline for zero-shot VMR utilizing frozen
MLLMs. Specifically, we first employ LLaMA-3 to correct
and rephrase the query to mitigate language bias. Subsequently,
we design a span generator combined with MiniGPT-v2 to
produce candidate spans adaptively. Finally, to leverage the
video comprehension capabilities of MLLMs, we apply VideoChatGPT and span scorer to select the most appropriate spans.
Our proposed method substantially outperforms the state-ofthe-art MLLM-based and zero-shot models on several public
datasets, including QVHighlights, ActivityNet-Captions, and
Charades-STA.

1

Figure 1: (a) The query containing language bias results in
erroneous localization. (b) MLLM-based method demand
fine-tuning using large amounts of data. (c) Zero-shot method
cannot avoid performance degradation caused by language
bias. (d) Our proposed Moment-GPT harnesses MLLMs
without further fine-tuning. It also utilizes LLM to reduce
bias, enhancing overall accuracy.

Introduction

Video moment retrieval (VMR) is a crucial task in the field
of video understanding, attracting widespread attention in
the last few years owing to its potential applications in video
surveillance (Lyu and Zhang 2023) , human-computer interaction (Yan et al. 2024), etc. It aims to locate temporal
spans (segments) that are semantically related to a specified
sentence query from an untrimmed video, with each span
comprising a beginning and an ending moment. Fig. 1 (a)
presents an instance of VMR.
Recently, large language models (LLMs), like GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023) and LLaMA-3 (AI@Meta 2024), have attained
noteworthy success in the natural language processing (NLP)
domain. This advancement facilitates the development of
multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) (Chen et al. 2023; Maaz et al.
2023) in visual and multimodal domains. Most recent studies
(Huang et al. 2023a; Ren et al. 2023) demonstrate that training
only LoRA (Adapter) (Hu et al. 2021) can empower MLLMs
to seize spans, as depicted in Fig. 1 (b). However, these
MLLM-based methods necessitate intricate multi-stage finetuning strategies tailored for VMR. Moreover, they depend

on large video datasets annotated with high-quality spans and
queries, which are time-consuming and costly to collect.
To alleviate the burden of manual annotations, some previous works (Luo et al. 2023; Wattasseril et al. 2023) propose a
zero-shot setting for VMR, which simply reuses off-the-shelf
MLLMs trained on other tasks, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). Nevertheless, these zero-shot methods neglect language biases
(Linell 2004; Liang et al. 2020) in human-annotated queries,
including (1) rare words (2) spelling and grammatical errors.
As exemplified in query2 of Fig. 1 (a), ”kleenex” is a rare
word compared to ”tissues”, which causes the model (Luo
et al. 2023) to favor common words (”person”, ”put”, ”box”),
resulting in inaccurate localization. Additionally, grammatical
errors (”Person they”) can misguide the model because only
one person appears in the video. Therefore, it is necessary to
eliminate the above biases to improve accuracy.
To tackle the above challenges, this paper proposes a
zero-shot VMR framework, Moment-GPT, employs frozen

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8978

