The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MGDA: Model-based Goal Data Augmentation for Offline Goal-conditioned
Weighted Supervised Learning
Xing Lei1 , Xuetao Zhang 1 * , Donglin Wang2
1

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for
Visual Information and Applications, and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Enginneering, Westlake University
leixing@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, xuetaozhang@xjtu.edu.cn, wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn
Abstract

that can reach a variety of goals. Offline GCRL is especially promising because it allows for the learning of goalconditioned policies from purely offline datasets without
requiring any interaction with the environment during the
learning process (Levine et al. 2020). We note that some
goal-conditioned weighted supervised learning (GCWSL)
methods (Yang et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2022b; Hejna, Gao,
and Sadigh 2023; Sikchi et al. 2024) were proposed to tackle
the offline GCRL challenges. Compared with other goalconditioned RL or self-supervised (SL) methods (Yang et al.
2019; Srivastava et al. 2019; Chen, Paleja, and Gombolay
2020; Ding et al. 2019; Lynch et al. 2020; Paster, McIlraith,
and Ba 2020; Eysenbach, Salakhutdinov, and Levine 2020;
Ghosh et al. 2021; Eysenbach et al. 2022), GCWSL has
demonstrated outstanding performance across various goalreaching tasks in a simple, effective, and stable manner.
Although GCWSL has been successfully applied to effectively learn from sparse rewards in certain goal-reaching
tasks within offline GCRL, some studies (Brandfonbrener
et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Ghugare et al. 2024) indicate
that GCWSL may leads to sub-optimal policies when applied to the corresponding sub-trajectories of (state, goal)
pairs across different trajectories and identify this issue as
lacking of the ability to stitch trajectories. To tackle this
problem, (Yang et al. 2023) and (Ghugare et al. 2024) adopt
goal data augmentation to sample more (state, goal) pairs
during training phase. Goal data augmentation is an effective
data-driven approach that can generate diverse (state, goal)
pairs. Therefore, it can enable GCWSL methods to exhibit
stitching property, highlighting the strengths of supervised
learning (SL).
However, our analysis indicates that they often fail to select appropriate goals as augmented goals. This paper investigates this issue and proposes a more advanced goal
data augmentation method. Specifically, we establish three
goal data augmentation unified principles, grounded in both
the properties of data augmentation and the inherent characteristics of GCWSL : Goal Diversity, Action Optimality,
and Goal Reachability. Goal Diversity implies that a single initial state can correspond to multiple goals. Action
Optimality implies that the action corresponding to a initial state should remain optimal for reaching the augmented
goals. Goal Reachability ensures that the augmented goals
are reachable. Building on these principles, we propose

Recently, a state-of-the-art series of algorithms—GoalConditioned Weighted Supervised Learning (GCWSL) methods—has been introduced to address the challenges inherent in offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL).
GCWSL optimizes a lower bound on the goal-conditioned
RL objective and has demonstrated exceptional performance
across a range of goal-reaching tasks, offering a simple, effective, and stable solution. Nonetheless, researches has revealed a critical limitation in GCWSL: the absence of trajectory stitching capabilities. In response, goal data augmentation strategies have been proposed to enhance these methods.
However, existing techniques often fail to effectively sample
appropriate augmented goals for GCWSL. In this paper, we
establish unified principles for goal data augmentation, emphasizing goal diversity, action optimality, and goal reachability. Building on these principles, we propose a Modelbased Goal Data Augmentation (MGDA) approach, which
leverages a dynamics model to sample more appropriate augmented goals. MGDA uniquely incorporates the local Lipschitz continuity assumption within the learned model to mitigate the effects of compounding errors. Empirical results
demonstrate that MGDA significantly improves the performance of GCWSL methods on both state-based and visionbased maze datasets, outperforming previous goal data augmentation techniques in their ability to enhancing stitching
capabilities.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) empowers agents to attain
sophisticated objectives in complex and uncertain environments, such as computer games (Oroojlooyjadid et al. 2022;
Sestini, Bagdanov et al. 2023), robot control (Dargazany
2021; Quiroga et al. 2022; Plasencia-Salgueiro 2023), and
language processing (Akakzia et al. 2020; Sharifani and
Amini 2023). One of the central challenges in deep RL
is facilitating efficient learning in environments characterized by sparse rewards. This issue is particularly acute in
goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) (Kaelbling 1993; Schaul et al.
2015; Andrychowicz et al. 2017; Liu, Zhu, and Zhang 2022),
where the agent is tasked with learning generalized policies
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18172

