The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mesoscopic Insights: Orchestrating Multi-Scale & Hybrid Architecture for Image
Manipulation Localization
Xuekang Zhu1,2 * , Xiaochen Ma1,2 * , Lei Su1,2 , Zhuohang Jiang3 , Bo Du1,2 , Xiwen Wang1,2 , Zeyu
Lei1,2 , Wentao Feng1,2 , Chi-Man Pun4 , Ji-Zhe Zhou1,2†
2

1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education of China
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
4
Computer and Information Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau
Authentic

Ground Truth

Manipulated Magnified Artifacts

Splicing

Abstract

Inpainting

Copy-move

The mesoscopic level serves as a bridge between the macroscopic and microscopic worlds, addressing gaps overlooked
by both. Image manipulation localization (IML), a crucial
technique to pursue truth from fake images, has long relied
on low-level (microscopic-level) traces. However, in practice,
most tampering aims to deceive the audience by altering image semantics. As a result, manipulation commonly occurs
at the object level (macroscopic level), which is equally important as microscopic traces. Therefore, integrating these
two levels into the mesoscopic level presents a new perspective for IML research. Inspired by this, our paper explores how to simultaneously construct mesoscopic representations of micro and macro information for IML and introduces the Mesorch architecture to orchestrate both. Specifically, this architecture i) combines Transformers and CNNs
in parallel, with Transformers extracting macro information
and CNNs capturing micro details, and ii) explores across different scales, assessing micro and macro information seamlessly. Additionally, based on the Mesorch architecture, the
paper introduces two baseline models aimed at solving IML
tasks through mesoscopic representation. Extensive experiments across four datasets have demonstrated that our models
surpass the current state-of-the-art in terms of performance,
computational complexity, and robustness.

Figure 1: Example of artifacts in three types of tampering.
The red dashed box in the third column represents the range
of the magnified area in the fourth column. Red arrows in
the fourth column point to artifacts that are considered tampering traces.
has fueled tampering incidents and misinformation, highlighting the need for effective forensic methods.
In this context, as illustrated in Figure 1, existing tampering techniques can be broadly categorized into three
types (Pun, Yuan, and Bi 2015; Bi, Pun, and Yuan 2016;
Wu et al. 2019; Verdoliva 2020; Wei et al. 2023): Splicing
(combining parts of different images to create a new one),
Copy-move (copying and pasting regions within the same
image), and Inpainting (removing and then filling an area
with plausible content). Although intricate manual tampering can be imperceptible to the human eye, each type of
manipulation still leaves detectable traces at the low level
(microscopic level). Therefore, most current techniques in
image manipulation localization (IML) consider it a microscopic level task aimed at capturing these tampering traces
(artifacts) by extracting microscopic features such as image RGB noise (Zhou et al. 2018; Bayar and Stamm 2018),
edge signals (Zhou et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021), or highfrequency features (Li and Huang 2019; Wang et al. 2022a).
These microscopic features are generally effective in revealing artifacts and localizing tampered areas.
However, as depicted in Figure 2, the majority of tampering is typically aimed at deceiving the audience by altering

Code — https://github.com/scu-zjz/Mesorch
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13753

Introduction
The mesoscopic system exists between macroscopic and microscopic scales. Objects at the mesoscopic scale are large
enough to exhibit macroscopic properties, yet they also display interference phenomena related to quantum mechanical
phases, similar to microscopic systems. This duality is why
it is termed “mesoscopic”—Yoseph lmry.
The rapid advancement of multimedia tampering techniques has made detecting and localizing image manipulation more challenging. The ease of creating realistic fakes
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Ji-Zhe Zhou, jzzhou@scu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11022

