The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Does GPT Really Get It? A Hierarchical Scale to Quantify Human and AI’s
Understanding of Algorithms
Mirabel Reid and Santosh S. Vempala
Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Computer Science
mreid48@gatech.edu, vempala@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract

age of the term ‘understanding’ in philosophy and psychology, and (c) it can be used to evaluate AI’s progress toward
understanding algorithms.

As Large Language Models (LLMs) are used for increasingly complex cognitive tasks, a natural question is whether
AI really understands. The study of understanding in LLMs
is in its infancy, and the community has yet to incorporate
research and insights from philosophy, psychology, and education. Here we focus on understanding algorithms, and propose a hierarchy of levels of understanding. We validate the
hierarchy using a study with human subjects (undergraduate
and graduate students). Following this, we apply the hierarchy to large language models (generations of GPT), revealing interesting similarities and differences with humans. We
expect that our rigorous criteria for algorithm understanding
will help monitor and quantify AI’s progress in such cognitive
domains.

Motivation: Why Study Algorithm Understanding?
Large language models are increasingly trusted for coding assistance. Code generation tools such as GitHub Copilot (GitHub 2024) and Meta’s Code Llama (Roziere et al.
2023) are currently used in practice to improve developer
productivity (Vaithilingam, Zhang, and Glassman 2022;
Mozannar et al. 2024) and assist novice programmers in
learning (Kazemitabaar et al. 2023; Becker et al. 2023). It
is likely that the degree of AI involvement in software development will only grow as these tools improve. However,
reliance on imperfect systems comes with risk. Tools such
as Copilot are known to generate code that is subject to license (Becker et al. 2023) or contains security vulnerabilities (Pearce et al. 2022). The question of whether LLMs
demonstrate meaningful understanding of algorithms is relevant if we are relying on them for teaching and production.
Algorithm understanding is distinct from language understanding and deserves its own line of study. Those who
argue that LLMs do not understand language draw a distinction between linguistic form and meaning (Bender and
Koller 2020; Mitchell and Krakauer 2023; Pavlick 2023).
When humans understand language, their understanding is
informed by their communicative intent and the real-life
properties of the objects described. Thus, a system trained
only to replicate statistical correlations between words cannot understand language in the way that humans do. Algorithms, however, can be precisely represented using formal
programming languages. One might argue that a computer
can meaningfully observe an algorithm in full through code
implementations and examples.

Supplementary Material —
https://github.com/mirabelreid/AlgorithmUnderstanding/
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14722

Introduction
Since the release of GPT-4, mainstream users have begun
to experiment with Large Language Models (LLMs) on increasingly complex tasks. However, the degree to which it
is safe, legal, and ethical to rely on LLMs has been under
fierce debate. Across many studies, researchers have identified apparent shortcomings of LLMs including hallucinations, inability to plan, and lack of understanding (Rawte,
Sheth, and Das 2023; Mahowald et al. 2024; Valmeekam
et al. 2023). However, the literature notably lacks rigorous
criteria to measure the progress toward solving these issues.
A particular problem lies in claims surrounding understanding; AI understanding is frequently compared to human understanding, and it is folklore among AI researchers that the
reasoning processes of LLMs differ from those of humans.
While the concept of understanding is widely discussed, it
remains ill-defined.
In this paper, we propose an precise definition of understanding an algorithm with the following properties: (a) it
provides a scale by which to evaluate any entity’s understanding of an algorithm, (b) it aligns with the standard us-

Related Work
Cognitive Abilities of LLMs. The past few years have
seen an explosion of studies exploring the ability of LLMs to
answer complex mathematical questions. Researchers have
developed prompting strategies to enable multi-step reasoning (Wei et al. 2022; Fu et al. 2022). Still others fine-tune
models to improve mathematical problem-solving (Yu et al.
2023; Luo et al. 2023). The benchmarks for these methods
typically include large datasets such as GSM8k (Cobbe et al.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1492

