The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HGSFusion: Radar-Camera Fusion with Hybrid Generation and
Synchronization for 3D Object Detection
Zijian Gu1 * , Jianwei Ma1 * , Yan Huang1† , Honghao Wei2† , Zhanye Chen1 , Hui Zhang1† , Wei Hong1
1

Southeast University
Washington State University
{zijian gu, jianwei ma, yan huang, chenzhanye, huizhang, weihong}@seu.edu.cn, honghao.wei@wsu.edu,
2

Abstract
Millimeter-wave radar plays a vital role in 3D object detection for autonomous driving due to its all-weather and alllighting-condition capabilities for perception. However, radar
point clouds suffer from pronounced sparsity and unavoidable
angle estimation errors. To address these limitations, incorporating a camera may partially help mitigate the shortcomings.
Nevertheless, the direct fusion of radar and camera data can
lead to negative or even opposite effects due to the lack of
depth information in images and low-quality image features
under adverse lighting conditions. Hence, in this paper, we
present the radar-camera fusion network with Hybrid Generation and Synchronization (HGSFusion), designed to better
fuse radar potentials and image features for 3D object detection. Specifically, we propose the Radar Hybrid Generation Module (RHGM), which fully considers the DirectionOf-Arrival (DOA) estimation errors in radar signal processing. This module generates denser radar points through different Probability Density Functions (PDFs) with the assistance
of semantic information. Meanwhile, we introduce the Dual
Sync Module (DSM), comprising spatial sync and modality
sync, to enhance image features with radar positional information and facilitate the fusion of distinct characteristics in
different modalities. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach, outperforming the state-of-theart methods in the VoD and TJ4DRadSet datasets by 6.53%
and 2.03% in RoI AP and BEV AP, respectively.

(a) Radar points on the image
True Point Cloud
Est. Point Cloud
(b) DOA estimation results

Angle Est. Error

Figure 1: Illustration of angle estimation errors in obtaining
radar point clouds. (a) True points and estimated points are
shown in the image. (b) True points and estimated points are
shown in the radar DOA estimation. The estimated points
fall on the beamforming peaks, deviating from the true
points.
Initially, camera-based methods were used for object detection, and they are still a hot topic in recent years (Reading
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2021; Philion and Fidler 2020). The semantic information in images facilitates
the differentiation of object categories and the identification
of small targets (Alaba and Ball 2022; Li and Qu 2024).
However, the lack of depth information in images makes it
challenging to accurately localize objects with images alone
(Hu et al. 2023). Moreover, adverse weather conditions can
easily affect the performance of cameras (Bhadoriya, Vegamoor, and Rathinam 2021), reducing the robustness of the
detection system. Hence, how to leverage the rich semantic
information in images while compensating for the deficiencies in depth and robustness has become an urgent issue.
Positional information can be provided by either radar (Tan
et al. 2022a; Yan and Wang 2023) or LiDAR (Zhang et al.
2022; Huang et al. 2024). Radar systems, in particular, offer additional velocity and enhanced robustness in adverse
weather conditions at a lower cost (Kim et al. 2023b). However, compared with LiDAR, radar point clouds exhibit more
pronounced sparsity degrading the detection performance,
yet potential solutions for this issue are quite limited. Meth-

Code — https://github.com/garfield-cpp/HGSFusion

Introduction
3D object detection is a critical task in autonomous driving, focusing on accurately determining the location, dimensions, and orientation of surrounding objects (Mao et al.
2023; Ma et al. 2023; Ghasemieh and Kashef 2022; Aung
et al. 2024). Multiple sensors, such as camera, radar, and LiDAR, have been widely used for object detection with distinct data structures and properties. To achieve accurate and
effective object detection, both semantic information, provided by the camera, and positional information, offered by
radar or LiDAR, are crucial (Wu et al. 2024).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3185

