The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MP: Endowing Large Language Models with Lateral Thinking
Tian Bai 1 , Yongwang Cao 1 , Yan Ge 2 , Haitao Yu 3 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering,
Ministry of Education, Jilin University
2
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba
3
Institute of Library, Information and Media Science, University of Tsukuba
baitian@jlu.edu.cn, caoyw23@mails.jlu.edu.cn, s2330539@u.tsukuba.ac.jp, yuhaitao@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp
Abstract

is the capital in London?”, a highly probable mistake is to
think about what the capital of London is. Yet, the key is
being able to think with an eye to the different meanings of
capital, the puzzle can be readily solved.
The recent advancements in large language models
(LLMs) (Devlin et al. 2018; Brown et al. 2020) have revolutionized prior artificial intelligence (AI) paradigms and
shown remarkable performance in various fields (Min et al.
2023; Wang, Zhao, and Petzold 2023; Zhang, Ji, and Liu
2023; Zhang et al. 2024). For example, unlike earlier chatbots, ChatGPT (Achiam et al. 2023) can engage in coherent
and contextually relevant conversations over multiple turns.
Sora (OpenAI 2024), known as a text-to-video model, is
capable of generating vivid and imaginative scenes based
on textual descriptions. The aforementioned successes have
heightened people’s expectations regarding AI systems’ capabilities towards human-like thinking. A group of representative studies are the prompting techniques detailed in
the section of related work. For instance, chain of thought
(CoT) prompting (Wei et al. 2022) enables models to solve
problems by methodically breaking them down into sequential steps. Alternatively, Self-consistency (Wang et al. 2023)
enhances performance by generating diverse reasoning paths
and selecting the most coherent one. Despite the remarkable
advancements, the recent studies (Jiang et al. 2023) show
that most of the aforementioned efforts towards human-like
thinking have significantly improved LLMs’ vertical thinking ability, leaving how to enhance LLMs’ lateral thinking
ability unexplored. To cope with this problem, the BRAINTEASER benchmark (Jiang et al. 2023) was introduced to
evaluate LLMs’ lateral thinking ability. Benefiting from advanced capabilities of GPT-4 (Achiam et al. 2023), some
methods (Li et al. 2024; Monazzah and Feghhi 2024) based
on GPT-4 have achieved state-of-the-art performance. Unfortunately, their effectiveness diminishes a lot when switching to other base LLMs such as the relatively smaller or
weaker GPT-3.5. A key shortcoming is that these methods
lack the ability to recognize errors that occur during the
reasoning process when compared with human intelligence,
preventing them from solving more complex problems.
When confronted with complex problems requiring lateral thinking, humans tend to reflect on their thinking processes, continuously adjusting and optimizing their strategies. This ability is directly aligned with metacognition

The recent studies show that Large Language Models (LLMs)
often fall short in tasks demanding creative, lateral thinking
due to lacking a clear awareness of their own reasoning processes. To cope with this issue, we propose a novel metacognitive prompting method (titled as MP) by mimicking human
metacognition. Through integrating metacognitive principles,
MP endows LLMs with lateral thinking ability, thereby enhancing their abilities to strategize, monitor, and reflect on
their responses when dealing with creative tasks. The experimental results with five base LLMs across three lateral thinking datasets demonstrate that: All LLMs armed with MP consistently outperform the representative baseline methods. For
example, MP demonstrates superior performance over CoT
prompting across Sentence Puzzle (+5.00%), Word Puzzle
(+10.07%), BiRdQA (+6.48%), and RiddleSense (+2.65%)
with GPT-3.5-turbo model. In particular, the deployment of
MP with GPT-4 achieves significant performance improvements that even surpass human performance on BRAINTEASER benchmark, demonstrating the transformative potential of MP in enhancing the creative problem-solving abilities of LLMs.

Introduction
According to the study by Waks (1997), human reasoning
processes comprise two types of thinking: vertical thinking and lateral thinking. Vertical thinking (also known as
logical thinking) is a hierarchically ordered process based
on rationality, logic, and rules, in which every single step
has to be correct and justified before moving to subsequent
stages, typically associated with the left-brain hemisphere.
Take the question from the widely used dataset CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al. 2019) on commonsense reasoning
for example, “Where would I not want a fox”, through the
predatory relationship between foxes and hens, the answer
hen-house can be derived. Lateral thinking (also known as
thinking outside the box) uses an indirect and creative approach via reasoning that is not immediately obvious. It involves ideas that may not be obtainable using only traditional step-by-step logic. For example, given the question
from the task of BRAINTEASER (Jiang et al. 2023), “What
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23460

