The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Uncertainty-Aware Self-Training for CTC-Based Automatic Speech Recognition
Eungbeom Kim1 , Kyogu Lee1,2,3
1

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
2
Artificial Intelligence Institute, Seoul National University
3
Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University
{eb.kim, kglee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

2024), sequence-to-sequence models (Kahn, Lee, and Hannun 2020; Park et al. 2020; Radford et al. 2023), and RNNTransducer models (Zhang et al. 2022; Hwang et al. 2022).
Since pseudo-labels are estimated by the teacher model
at self-training, the student model is easily misguided under
the erroneous teacher model. For this reason, Kahn, Lee, and
Hannun (2020); Park et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2022) filter
out unreliable pseudo-labels for self-training of ASR models and observe that this prevents performance degradation
from the erroneous pseudo-labels and contributes to performance enhancement. Likewise, due to the lack of reliability
of the pseudo-labels, pseudo-label filtering for self-training
has been widely explored for ASR, including uncertaintybased pseudo-label filtering (Khurana et al. 2021; Khurana,
Laurent, and Glass 2022; Dawalatabad et al. 2023).
Uncertainty estimation aims to quantify the reliability of
the output prediction. Given this purpose, employing uncertainty estimation is intuitive for measuring the quality of
pseudo-labels and filtering pseudo-labels for self-training.
Nevertheless, most of the uncertainty estimation methods
focus on restricted tasks such as classification or regression
and are not directly applicable to a sequence prediction such
as ASR (Patel, Allebach, and Qiu 2023). Although Dey et al.
(2019); Jiao et al. (2021); Patel, Allebach, and Qiu (2023)
employ entropy-based uncertainty during a self-training process on various sequence prediction tasks, they are limited to
sequence-to-sequence models.
For Encoder-only ASR models using a CTC mechanism,
Vyas et al. (2019) presents an uncertainty estimation method
using Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD) (Gal and Ghahramani
2016). In this method, the textual edit distance of the decoded MCD predictions is utilized for uncertainty estimation
and Khurana et al. (2021) successfully adopts this method to
the self-training process. However, this approach abandons
flourishing output probability information and only utilizes
the decoded transcriptions for uncertainty estimation. Although the output probability-based uncertainty estimation
and its utilization for semi-supervised learning are recently
proposed for CTC-based ASR models (Rumberg et al. 2023;
Zhu et al. 2023), they focus on token-level uncertainty estimation, not sequence-level uncertainty estimation. In addition, the previous sequence-level uncertainty estimation
methods for CTC-based ASR models have mainly focused
on model uncertainty, and data uncertainty has hardly been

Uncertainty estimation has been widely applied for trustworthy automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems across
training and inference stages. In the training stage, previous
studies show that uncertainty can facilitate self-training by
filtering out unlabeled data samples with high uncertainty.
However, the current sequence-level uncertainty estimation
method for connectionist temporal classification (CTC) based
ASR models drops the output probability information and depends only on the textual distance of decoded predictions. In
this study, we argue that this results in limited performance
improvement and propose a novel output probability-based
sequence-level uncertainty estimation method. We also categorize uncertainty as pseudo-label uncertainty and in-training
uncertainty for the self-training process. Finally, we present
uncertainty-aware self-training for CTC-based ASR models
and experimentally show the effectiveness of the proposed
method compared to the baselines.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models have been successfully adopted
in various domains such as language, vision, and audio (Vaswani et al. 2017; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Gong,
Chung, and Glass 2021). Based on this progress, Transformer has also been popularized in end-to-end automatic
speech recognition (ASR) by allowing scalable architectures (Dong, Xu, and Xu 2018; Baevski et al. 2020; Radford
et al. 2023). However, training large ASR models requires a
large amount of data samples. Moreover, to fully utilize the
generalization ability of Transformer models, simultaneous
scaling of the dataset and the architecture is regarded as a
key element (Zhai et al. 2022).
Semi-supervised learning leverages unlabeled data to alleviate the limited scalability of labeled data. For instance,
self-training aims to train the potent student model by
pseudo-labeling unlabeled data using the teacher model at
the fine-tuning stage. Due to its simplicity, self-training
has been widely applied to various ASR architectures such
as connectionist temporal classification (CTC) based models (Chen, Wang, and Wang 2020; Xu et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2022; Singh, Hou, and Wang 2023; Peng et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24330

