The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CALF: Aligning LLMs for Time Series Forecasting via Cross-modal Fine-Tuning
†

†

Peiyuan Liu1, * , Hang Guo1, * , Tao Dai2, , Naiqi Li1, , Jigang Bao1 ,
Xudong Ren1 , Yong Jiang1 , Shu-Tao Xia1,3
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
2
Shenzhen University
3
Pengcheng Laboratory
{lpy23, guo-h23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {daitao.edu, linaiqi.thu}@gmail.com
Abstract

years (Wu et al. 2023; Zhang and Yan 2023; Nie et al. 2023;
Zeng et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2022; Wen et al. 2022; Dai et al.
2024; Qiu et al. 2024b) and have gained great success.
However, previous single-modal MTSF methods may suffer from overfitting problems, due to the limited training
data, thus limiting their real applications. To relieve such issues, some pioneering works attempt to introduce the powerful Large Language Models (LLMs) models in time series
forecasting by employing the strong context modeling ability of LLMs. For example, Zhou et al. (Zhou et al. 2023)
proposed a unified time series analysis framework by adapting and fine-tuning LLMs. Building upon this, other works
have introduced additional enhancements to further expand
the capabilities of LLMs in time series forecasting, including refining fine-tuning methods (Chang, Peng, and Chen
2023), sequence decomposition (Cao et al. 2024), and the
incorporation of textual prompts (Jin et al. 2024). Benefiting
from the large-scale pre-training, LLM-based methods not
only exhibit strong context modeling capabilities but also
help mitigate the problem of overfitting.
Despite the great success of LLM-based MTSF methods, existing methods suffer unfavorable results on common
MTSF benchmarks, as well as pool performance on fewshot or zero-shot tasks. As shown in Fig. 1, we visualize
the distribution of the textual and temporal tokens of existing LLM-based MTSF methods, and it can be seen that
the temporal tokens in existing LLM-based methods cannot align well with the original textual tokens from LLMs
(Zhou et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024; Jin et al. 2024; Chang,
Peng, and Chen 2023). As a result, this distribution discrepancy contributes in part to the sub-optimal performance of
the current approaches. We argue that the main reason for
the above misalignment is due to the fact that existing methods only investigate the input side to match the feature dimensions between time series and LLM, and this simple solution hinders the manipulation of LLM’s powerful generalization capabilities. The above observations motivate us to
develop a multi-level cross-modal aligning framework to alleviate the distribution discrepancy between temporal modal
input and textural modal weights.
Inspired by the above observations, we propose a CrossModAl LLM Fine-Tuning (CALF) framework, which employs cross-modal fine-tuning to allow more comprehensive alignment between temporal target modalities and tex-

Deep learning (e.g., Transformer) has been widely and successfully used in multivariate time series forecasting (MTSF).
Unlike existing methods that focus on training models from
a single modal of time series input, large language models (LLMs) based MTSF methods with cross-modal text and
time series input have recently shown great superiority, especially with limited temporal data. However, current LLMbased MTSF methods usually focus on adapting and finetuning LLMs, while neglecting the distribution discrepancy
between textual and temporal input tokens, thus leading to
sub-optimal performance. To address this issue, we propose
a novel Cross-ModAl LLM Fine-Tuning (CALF) framework
for MTSF by reducing the distribution discrepancy between
textual and temporal data, which mainly consists of the temporal target branch with temporal input and the textual source
branch with aligned textual input. To reduce the distribution discrepancy, we develop the cross-modal match module to first align cross-modal input distributions. Additionally, to minimize the modality distribution gap in both feature
and output spaces, feature regularization loss is developed to
align the intermediate features between the two branches for
better weight updates, while output consistency loss is introduced to allow the output representations of both branches
to correspond effectively. Thanks to the modality alignment,
CALF establishes state-of-the-art performance for both longterm and short-term forecasting tasks with low computational
complexity, and exhibits favorable few-shot and zero-shot
abilities similar to that in LLMs.

Code — https://github.com/Hank0626/CALF

Introduction
Multivariate time series forecasting (MTSF) plays a crucial
role in the domain of time series analysis and has further
boasted a wide range of real-world applications including
weather forecasting (Angryk et al. 2020), energy prediction (Demirel et al. 2012), financial modeling (Patton 2013).
To achieve more accurate forecasting performance, numerous deep learning-based MTSF methods trained on a single
modal of time series input have been developed in recent
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Tao Dai and Naiqi Li.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18915

