The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Representing Sounds as Neural Amplitude Fields: A Benchmark of
Coordinate-MLPs and A Fourier Kolmogorov-Arnold Framework
Linfei Li1 , Lin Zhang1 * , Zhong Wang2 , Fengyi Zhang3 , Zelin Li4 , Ying Shen1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
2
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The University of Queensland
4
McCormick School of Engineering, Northwestern University
cslinfeili@tongji.edu.cn, cslinzhang@tongji.edu.cn, cszhongwang@sjtu.edu.cn,
fengyi.zhang@uq.edu.au, zelinli2025@u.northwestern.edu, yingshen@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

since current neural networks are primarily constructed using multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), these types of INRs are
referred to as Coordinate-MLPs.
Compared to traditional discrete signal representation
schemes, INRs offer continuous implicit representation that
decouples from spatial resolution and allows for infinite resolution. Therefore, the storage required for parameterized
signals is independent of spatial resolution, allowing these
signals to be sampled at any desired resolution. Owing to
these advantages, Coordinate-MLPs have been successfully
applied to various modalities of data, including neural radiance fields (Mildenhall et al. 2020), 3D occupancy grids
(Mescheder et al. 2019), Signed Distance Functions (Park
et al. 2019), images (Sitzmann et al. 2020), 2D computed
tomography, and 3D magnetic resonance imaging (Tancik
et al. 2020; Saragadam et al. 2023; Kazerouni et al. 2024).
Regarding audio signals, continuous representations offer
the advantages of infinite resolution, enabling natural generation, efficient compression, and smooth processing. However, the representation of continuous audio signals using
Coordinate-MLPs poses profound challenges due to the high
noise, high frequency, nonlinearity, and local periodicity inherent in audio signals. According to the Weber-Fechner
law, even relatively small reconstruction errors in audio signals can become perceptible due to the logarithmic nature of
human auditory perception, thereby imposing high demands
on the quality of audio reconstruction. Moreover, the simple
combination of linear transformations and nonlinear activation functions in MLP networks makes it difficult to capture
the periodicity and high-frequency components of audio signals. Through a comprehensive review, we find that till now
only SIREN (Sitzmann et al. 2020) has attempted to represent audio signals using sinusoidal activation functions and
provided a simple comparison with ReLU-MLPs, yet no further investigations have been conducted.
To fill the gap, we establish, to our knowledge, the first
open-source benchmarking framework to fully explore the
potential and limitations of Coordinate-MLPs in continuous
audio signal representations. Specifically, since the performance of a Coordinate-MLP is primarily determined by the
choice of the activation function and optional positional encoding, we identify 3 types of positional encoding mappings
and 16 commonly used activation functions from existing

Although Coordinate-MLP-based implicit neural representations have excelled in representing radiance fields, 3D
shapes, and images, their application to audio signals remains underexplored. To fill this gap, we investigate existing implicit neural representations, from which we extract 3 types of positional encoding and 16 commonly
used activation functions. Through combinatorial design,
we establish the first benchmark for Coordinate-MLPs in
audio signal representations. Our benchmark reveals that
Coordinate-MLPs require complex hyperparameter tuning
and frequency-dependent initialization, limiting their robustness. To address these issues, we propose Fourier-ASR, a
novel framework based on the Fourier series theorem and the
Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem. Fourier-ASR
introduces Fourier Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (FourierKAN), which leverage periodicity and strong nonlinearity to represent audio signals, eliminating the need for
additional positional encoding. Furthermore, a Frequencyadaptive Learning Strategy (FaLS) is proposed to enhance the
convergence of Fourier-KAN by capturing high-frequency
components and preventing overfitting of low-frequency signals. Extensive experiments conducted on natural speech
and music datasets reveal that: (1) well-designed positional
encoding and activation functions in Coordinate-MLPs can
effectively improve audio representation quality; and (2)
Fourier-ASR can robustly represent complex audio signals
without extensive hyperparameter tuning. Looking ahead, the
continuity and infinite resolution of implicit audio representations make our research highly promising for tasks such as
audio compression, synthesis, and generation.

Code and Appendix — https://github.com/lif314/NeAF

Introduction
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) provide an innovative approach to signal parameterization by representing arbitrary discrete signals as continuous functions. These functions map the domain of the signal (coordinates, e.g., timestamps in audio) to the corresponding content at those coordinates (such as the amplitude of an audio signal). Typically,
these functions are approximated using neural networks, and
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24458

