The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TIV-Diffusion: Towards Object-Centric Movement for
Text-driven Image to Video Generation
Xingrui Wang1 , Xin Li1 * , Yaosi Hu2 , Hanxin Zhu1 , Chen Hou1 , Cuiling Lan, Zhibo Chen1 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{wxrui 18264819595, hanxinzhu, houchen}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, youncyhu@gmail.com,
cuilinglan@outlook.com, {xin.li, chenzhibo}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Text-driven Image to Video Generation (TI2V) aims to generate controllable video given the first frame and corresponding textual description. The primary challenges of this task
lie in two parts: (i) how to identify the target objects and ensure the consistency between the movement trajectory and the
textual description. (ii) how to improve the subjective quality of generated videos. To tackle the above challenges, we
propose a new diffusion-based TI2V framework, termed TIVDiffusion, via object-centric textual-visual alignment, intending to achieve precise control and high-quality video generation based on textual-described motion for different objects. Concretely, we enable our TIV-Diffuion model to perceive the textual-described objects and their motion trajectory by incorporating the fused textual and visual knowledge
through scale-offset modulation. Moreover, to mitigate the
problems of object disappearance and misaligned objects and
motion, we introduce an object-centric textual-visual alignment module, which reduces the risk of misaligned objects/motion by decoupling the objects in the reference image and
aligning textual features with each object individually. Based
on the above innovations, our TIV-Diffusion achieves stateof-the-art high-quality video generation compared with existing TI2V methods.

Put the oranges on the table.

Figure 1: Humans naturally disentangle different objects in
their environment. In the image above, the human wants to
‘Put the oranges on the table.’ First, he will decouple objects with different attributes, then find the target objects according to the intention and complete the action. Our model
draws inspiration from this observation.

precise specification of appearance or movement within the
generated videos. Controllable video generation enhances
the way we express our intention, with diverse applications
in creative content creation (Blattmann et al. 2023), data
augmentation (Wang et al. 2023a), and various fields.
Compared with images, videos introduce the temporal dimension, which means that the unconditional video generation process should ensure the authenticity of each frame
as well as maintain coherence between frames (Vondrick,
Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016; Sun et al. 2023; Tulyakov
et al. 2018; Mei and Patel 2023). In contrast, controllable
video generation is expected to consider control conditions
while meeting the above-mentioned basic requirements. In
particular, T2V utilizes text descriptions to specify the visual appearance and motion characteristics of the generated
video (Wu et al. 2021, 2022a; Singer et al. 2022). Typically, the text descriptions are encoded using CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) and subsequently control the generation process
via the cross-attention mechanism. While for I2V, the image or image sequence primarily restricts the visual aspects
of the target video, the model should deduce subsequent object movements based on motion cues (Yang, Srivastava, and
Mandt 2022; Tan et al. 2023b).

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10275

1

Introduction

Videos that effectively convey complex visual information
play a crucial role in human life, including entertainment,
education, and documentation (Aldausari et al. 2022). Recently, as automation advances, employing artificial intelligence algorithms for video generation has drawn numerous research attention. Early unconditional video generation (Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016; Saito, Matsumoto, and Saito 2017; Tulyakov et al. 2018) relies solely
on models to learn from unlabeled video data, yielding uncontrollable outcomes. In the pursuit of controllability, approaches such as Image-to-Video Generation (I2V) (Chang
et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2021; Gupta et al. 2022) and Text-toVideo Generation (T2V) (Ho et al. 2022; Singer et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2022b) have come to the forefront, facilitating
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7988

