The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EPT: Efficient Prompt Tuning by Multi-Space Projection and Prompt Fusion
Pengxiang Lan1 , Enneng Yang1 , Yuting Liu1 , Guibing Guo1 * , Jianzhe Zhao1 , Xingwei Wang2 *
1

Software College, Northeastern University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
{pengxianglan, ennengyang, yutingliu}@stumail.neu.edu.cn, {guogb, zhaojz}@swc.neu.edu.cn, wangxw@mail.neu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

GLUE

SuperGLUE

79
77
75
73
71
69
67
65
63
61
59

Avg.Performance(%)

Avg.Performance(%)

87

Prompt tuning is a promising method to fine-tune a pretrained language model without retraining its large-scale parameters. Instead, it attaches a soft prompt to the input text,
whereby downstream tasks can be well adapted by merely
learning the embeddings of prompt tokens. Nevertheless, existing methods still suffer from two challenges: (i) they are
hard to balance accuracy and efficiency. A longer (shorter)
soft prompt generally leads to a better (worse) accuracy but
at the cost of more (less) training time. (ii) The performance
may not be consistent when adapting to different downstream
tasks. We attribute it to the same embedding space but responsible for different requirements of downstream tasks. To
address these issues, we propose an Efficient Prompt Tuning
method (EPT) by multi-space projection and prompt fusion.
Specifically, it decomposes a given soft prompt into a shorter
prompt and two low-rank matrices, significantly reducing
the training time. Accuracy is also enhanced by leveraging
low-rank matrices and the short prompt as additional knowledge sources to enrich the semantics of the original short
prompt. In addition, we project the soft prompt into multiple subspaces to improve the performance consistency, and
then adaptively learn the combination weights of different
spaces through a gating network. Experiments on 13 natural language processing downstream tasks show that our
method significantly and consistently outperforms 11 comparison methods with the relative percentage of improvements up to 12.9%, and training time decreased by 14%.

86
85
84
83
82

105

106

FT
ATTEMPT

107

108

105

106

107

108

SPoT
DePT

LoRA
Ours

The number of trainable parameters
BitFit
MPT

PT
Adamix

Adapter
AdapterDrop

Figure 1: Average performance (y-axis) against the number
of trainable parameters (x-axis) on the GLUE and SuperGLUE benchmarks. We utilize the T5-Base for all models.

tasks effectively, avoiding full-parameter fine-tuning. Unfortunately, manually designing an effective set of task prompt
phrases heavily relies on experts’ domain knowledge, which
is still challenging in the face of a wide variety of tasks.
Recently, prompt tuning (PT) (Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021) based method has become an effective alternative to convert discrete phrases into a set of learnable parameters. PT freezes the parameters of PLMs and only trains the
attached soft (continuous) prompt vectors to the input text.
Therefore, its parameters do not dramatically scale up with
the expansion of the model size, making PT stand out in the
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) approaches (Shi and
Lipani 2024). Recent studies have leveraged some successful approaches to reduce training parameters in PT, such as
parameter-efficient transfer learning (PETL) (Vu et al. 2022;
Asai et al. 2022), multi-task learning (Wang et al. 2022b),
and decomposing soft prompts (Shi and Lipani 2024; Xiao
et al. 2023). Despite these PT variants effectively improving soft prompt performance in downstream tasks, PT still
faces several limitations that cannot be ignored. First, existing PT-based methods encounter the challenge of balancing
accuracy and efficiency (Xiao et al. 2023; Lester, Al-Rfou,
and Constant 2021; Shi and Lipani 2024). Attaching the soft
prompt to the input extends the overall length of the input
sequence. Due to the quadratic complexity of the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), lengthening the soft prompt
introduces additional training time. PT requires training a

Introduction
Fine-tuning methods have become a growing focus to adapt
a pre-trained language model (PLM) to a variety of downstream tasks (Devlin et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2019). However, the continuous expansion of the PLMs scale has led to
a significant increase in the number of parameters (Zhang
et al. 2022), such as the T5 model (Raffel et al. 2020) containing hundreds of millions of parameters. Therefore, full
fine-tuning PLMs on all parameters is unrealistic in practical applications. The discrete phrase-based tuning provides
task descriptions in the form of input text (Brown et al.
2020), guiding PLMs to perform corresponding downstream
* Guibing Guo and Xingwei Wang are corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24366

