The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ESPRESSO: An Effective Approach to Passage Retrieval for High-Quality
Conversational Recommender Systems
Taeho Kim1 , Hyeongjun Jang2, 3 * , Juwon Yu2, 3 * , Taeuk Kim1 , Hyunyoung Lee3 , Ji-hui Im3 ,
Sang-Wook Kim1†
1
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, South Korea
Department of Artificial Intelligence Application, Hanyang University, South Korea
3
KT Corporation, South Korea
{hirooms2, kimtaeuk, wook}@hanyang.ac.kr, {hyeongjun.jang, juwon1.yu, lee.hyunyoung, jihui.im}@kt.com
2

Abstract

Labeling
Module

Conversational Recommender Systems (CRS) aim to provide
tailored recommendation responses via a chat interface, including both the user’s preferred item and its accompanying explanation. However, due to its generative nature, CRS
are prone to responding with factually incorrect explanations
(i.e., hallucinations). To solve this problem, we propose incorporating a passage retrieval module into CRS with the objective of enhancing the factuality and informativeness of system responses. Specifically, we outline essential directions for
employing a passage retrieval module in CRS to address the
following critical issues: (1) the risk of passage retrieval not
aligning with the user preference; (2) the absence of supervision for training a passage retrieval module. As a solution, we
introduce ESPRESSO, a novel passage retrieval approach
for CRS, to effectively tackle the above issues with two core
ideas: adaptive item selection and relevance-based groupwise
learning. Our extensive experiments show that ESPRESSO
effectively resolves issues, achieving up to 36% higher Hit@3
accuracy than the best of 8 competing methods. Additionally,
we verify that leveraging passages retrieved by ESPRESSO
significantly improves the response quality of CRS.

Pseudo-relevant passages
loss
Retrieved passages

Generated response

Selected item
Rumble in
the Bronx

Rumble in the Bronx is
known successful work
for Jackie Chan, marking
his entry into Hollywood

I recommend his movie
'Rumble in the Bronx',
which is the first work
that made him a
Hollywood star

Recommendation
Module

Passage retrieval
Module

Generation
Module

Dialog, Response

User

Jackie Chan’s acting is impeccable and
has been recognized by the world.
Can you recommend his movies?

Figure 1: A retrieval-augmented CRS framework that follows our proposed directions.

The advancement of language models (Lewis et al. 2020a;
Touvron et al. 2023) has made CRS increasingly feasible.
However, since language models primarily rely on their intrinsic knowledge for generating responses (Lewis et al.
2020b), they are often prone to providing factually inaccurate explanations regarding recommended items (i.e., hallucinations), particularly when they lack sufficient knowledge
about the items. To address this issue, one could consider
employing retrieval-augmentation strategies (Lewis et al.
2020b). Specifically, given a dialog, these strategies are designed to initially retrieve passages describing the features
of recommended items and subsequently generate a RECresponse by drawing upon the retrieved passages.
However, we point out that existing passage retrieval
methods studied in other fields (Karpukhin et al. 2020; Sun
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023) are insufficient for properly serving CRS in their original forms. This is because the primary
objective of CRS is to present items that the user prefers
along with suitable explanations (Li et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2022), but existing passage retrieval methods are neither designed nor trained to retrieve passages that align well with
user preferences. Therefore, for the first time in the CRS domain, we explore directions for effective passage retrieval to
help CRS generate high-quality REC-responses as follows.

Code — https://github.com/Bigdasgit/ESPRESSO
Appendix — https://github.com/Bigdasgit/ESPRESSO/
blob/main/AAAI 2025 appendix.pdf

Introduction
Conversational Recommender Systems (CRS) feature a chat
interface that permits users to naturally express their preferences, fostering a user-friendly experience (Li et al. 2018;
Zhou et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2023). The implementation of
CRS usually consists of two core components: (1) the recommendation module, which aims to predict the items that
a user is likely to prefer, and (2) the generation module, responsible for delivering recommendation responses (RECresponses, in short) that contain not only a recommended
item but also an accompanying explanation for the item.
* This work was done while Hyeongjun Jang and Juwon Yu

were at Hanyang University. They are now working at KT.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11942

