The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

L ATTE: Improving LaTeX Recognition for Tables and Formulae With Iterative
Refinement
Nan Jiang1 , Shanchao Liang1 , Chengxiao Wang1, 2 , Jiannan Wang1 , Lin Tan1
1

Purdue University, USA
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
jiang719@purdue.edu, liang422@purdue.edu, cw124@illinois.edu, wang4524@purdue.edu, lintan@purdue.edu
2

Abstract

from images using either rule-based or learning-based approaches (Wang and Liu 2021; Peng et al. 2021; Deng et al.
2017; Pang et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2021; Long, Hong, and
Yang 2023; Anderson 1967). Other work focuses on extracting table structures or detecting the content in each
cell (Hashmi et al. 2021; Kayal et al. 2022), which helps
understand and analyze tables.
These existing techniques (Wang and Liu 2021; Peng
et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2017; Pang et al. 2021; Yan et al.
2021; Long, Hong, and Yang 2023; Anderson 1967) is limited in recognizing LaTeX images. First, they produce LaTeX sources in a single round of generation and often fail
to recognize complex formulae. Our insight is that humans
often write complex formulae and tables in multiple iterations. For example, if the first version of the LaTeX source
is incorrect, they fix the mistakes, re-render the modified LaTeX source, and keep this iterative process. Second, existing
techniques focus on LaTeX formulae. The few table recognition techniques do not extract ready-to-use LaTeX source
for tables (Hashmi et al. 2021; Kayal et al. 2022), but only
extract table structures or textual content. Simply combining the table structures and content does not produce LaTeX
sources that can be rendered (Kayal et al. 2022), because the
structures and content may mismatch with each other.
In this paper, we propose L ATTE, a LaTeX recognition
framework with iterative refinement. We also create a new
LaTeX table dataset, TAB2LATEX, by collecting LaTeX tables
source code from arXiv preprints and the corresponding LaTeX sources. TAB2LATEX is a dataset for end-to-end LaTeX
tables recognition, aiding the development of techniques to
produce renderable LaTeX sources for tables. We demonstrate the effectiveness of L ATTE on recognizing both LaTeX tables and formulae.
The concept of iterative refinement has been applied in
various fields, including code generation and code refinement (Madaan et al. 2023; Scheurer et al. 2023; Chen et al.
2023a,c; Olausson et al. 2023). The process typically consists of two parts: generating an initial draft and then iteratively refining it using collected feedback until it meets the
requirements. Yet, applying the refinement framework in the
field of LR is challenging, as it is hard to generate feedback
that effectively connects the expected ground-truth image
and the generated textual draft. The difference between the
expected image and the image rendered from the draft needs

Portable Document Format (PDF) files are dominantly used
for storing and disseminating scientific research, legal documents, and tax information. LaTeX is a popular application
for creating PDF documents. Despite its advantages, LaTeX
is not WYSWYG—what you see is what you get, i.e., the
LaTeX source and rendered PDF images look drastically different, especially for formulae and tables. This gap makes it
hard to modify or export LaTeX sources for formulae and
tables from PDF images, and existing work is still limited.
First, prior work generates LaTeX sources in a single iteration
and struggles with complex LaTeX formulae. Second, existing work mainly recognizes and extracts LaTeX sources for
formulae; and is incapable or ineffective for tables. This paper
proposes L ATTE, the first iterative refinement framework for
LaTeX recognition. Specifically, we propose delta-view
as feedback, which compares and pinpoints the differences
between a pair of rendered images of the extracted LaTeX
source and the expected correct image. Such delta-view
feedback enables our fault localization model to localize the
faulty parts of the incorrect recognition more accurately and
enables our LaTeX refinement model to repair the incorrect extraction more accurately. L ATTE improves the LaTeX
source extraction accuracy of both LaTeX formulae and tables, outperforming existing techniques as well as GPT-4V
by at least 7.07% of exact match, with a success refinement
rate of 46.08% (formula) and 25.51% (table).

Introduction
Portable Document Format (PDF) files are dominantly used
for storing and disseminating academic research, legal documents, and tax information (Blecher et al. 2023; Kuchta
et al. 2018a). While documents in such format provide exceptional cross-platform consistency and readability and are
flexible in display resolutions, the source code of the PDF
files is typically unavailable to the readers. Thus, it is hard
to modify, extract, and export PDF documents to other target
formats, especially those containing mathematical formulae
and tables with complex structures and styles.
Since LaTeX is one widely used system to produce PDF
documents (Kuchta et al. 2018b), researchers have explored
LaTeX recognition (LR) to extract mathematical expressions
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4030

