The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-concept Model Immunization through Differentiable Model Merging
Amber Yijia Zheng, Raymond A. Yeh
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
{zheng709, rayyeh}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Model immunization is an emerging direction that aims to mitigate the potential risk of misuse associated with open-sourced
models and advancing adaptation methods. The idea is to make
the released models’ weights difficult to fine-tune on certain
harmful applications, hence the name “immunized”. Recent
work on model immunization focuses on the single-concept
setting. However, models need to be immunized against multiple concepts in real-world situations. To address this gap,
we propose an immunization algorithm that, simultaneously,
learns a single “difficult initialization” for adaptation methods
over a set of concepts. We achieve this by incorporating a differentiable merging layer that combines a set of model weights
adapted over multiple concepts. In our experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of multi-concept immunization by generalizing prior work’s experiment setup of re-learning and
personalization adaptation to multiple concepts.

Project page — https://www.amberyzheng.com/mima

1

Introduction

With the advancements in effective adaptation techniques,
such as DreamBooth (Ruiz et al. 2023) or Textual Inversion (Gal et al. 2023), there are increasing risks of misuse
for open-sourced text-to-image models. As the models are
released, an ill-intended person can leverage adaptation methods to tune unsafe content into the models and perform malicious acts, e.g., generating unsafe or sexual content (Harwell
2023).
To tackle these risks, Zheng and Yeh (2024) propose to
“immunize” the open-sourced models before releasing them.
The idea is to learn models that are resistant (“immuned”) to
adaptations on harmful concepts. Zheng and Yeh (2024) refer
to their approach as Immunizing text-to-image Models against
Malicious Adaptation, in short, IMMA. While IMMA shows
a promising direction for mitigation, IMMA’s method and
experiments focus on the immunization of a single concept.
However, in most practical settings, a model needs to be
immunized against multiple harmful concepts.
To address this gap, we study Multi-concept Immunization
against Malicious Adaptation (MIMA). We aim to make a
single model resilient to adaptation on more than one concept.
We propose a model immunization algorithm that meta-learns
a “difficult initialization” for adaptation methods over a set of
10546

concepts formulated as a bi-level optimization with multiple
lower-level tasks. We accomplish this by introducing a differentiable model merging layer that combines the individual
lower-level task’s weights from each target concept. The bilevel optimization is solved by backpropagating through this
merging layer to immunize the model over a set of concepts.
This approach is inspired by the success of model merging
for multi-concept customization (Kumari et al. 2023b), we
hypothesize that model merging would also benefit immunization as it captures the relationships among concepts.
Empirically, we experiment with several adaptation methods, including, Textual Inversion (Gal et al. 2023), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al. 2023), LoRA (Hu et al. 2022), and CustomDiffusion (Kumari et al. 2023b) over two applications:
(a) restoring erased concepts such as artistic styles or object
categories, and (b) learning personalized concepts. We found
that MIMA successfully immunizes a model against multiple malicious concepts and outperforms IMMA-inspired
baselines.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We generalize the task of model immunization from a
single concept to multiple concepts that more closely
match the real-world scenario.
• We propose MIMA, a novel model immunization algorithm for multi-concept immunization. MIMA leverages a
differentiable model merging layer that combines multiple
adapted weights, enabling backpropagation to meta-learn
an immunized model.
• We conduct experiments over two tasks and four adaptation methods demonstrating the efficacy of MIMA.

2

Related Work

Towards safer generative AI. Several directions have been
proposed to make generative AI safer. One direction that has
received attention is removing inappropriate content from
pre-trained models (Schramowski et al. 2023; Gandikota
et al. 2023, 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Kumari et al. 2023a;
Heng and Soh 2023). Another direction is to protect the
data sources by using adversarial examples (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015) to achieve data-poisioning (Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2011; Mei and Zhu 2015), such that
when adapted on these protected images, the diffusion model
fails (Shan et al. 2023; Liang et al. 2023; Liang and Wu 2023;

