The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Internal Activation Revision:
Safeguarding Vision Language Models Without Parameter Update
Qing Li1 * , Jiahui Geng1 * , Derui Zhu2 , Zongxiong Chen3 , Kun Song1† , Lei Ma4,5 , Fakhri Karray1
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Technical University of Munich
3
Fraunhofer FOKUS
4
The University of Tokyo
5
University of Alberta
{qing.li, jiahui.geng, kun.song, fakhri.karray}@mbzuai.ac.ae, derui.zhu@tum.de, zongxiong.chen@fokus.fraunhofer.de,
ma.lei@acm.org
Abstract

that VLMs are prone to producing harmful content when
prompted with a contextually relevant image.
Currently, some efforts in safety alignment research have
made strides to ensure these models adhere to human ethical standards (Ouyang et al. 2022; Rafailov et al. 2023;
Ji et al. 2023). The earlier work, AdaShield (Wang et al.
2025), employs adaptive shield prompting to enhance the
robustness of MLLMs, focusing specifically on structurebased jailbreak attacks. Subsequently, Pi et al. (2024) introduces MLLM-Protector, which addresses safety challenges
by integrating a harm detector to identify potentially harmful outputs and a detoxifier to modify them. However, both
components require training, and if the output is harmful,
the detoxifier introduces additional computational overhead
to rewrite the response. Recently, Zong et al. (2024) introduces VLGuard, a dataset specifically designed for the
safety fine-tuning of VLMs. Also, Zhang et al. (2024) creates the SPA-VL dataset, which combines textual and visual
data to enhance safety performance through RLHF (Ouyang
et al. 2022). However, these efforts rely on extensive training data to update the models, requiring significant human
labor to obtain high-quality annotated data. When new attack methods are introduced, further model adjustments and
data collection are necessary. Therefore, there is an urgent
need for more efficient and flexible safety measures.
To investigate this area, we examine the vulnerabilities
of VLMs by analyzing the differences in internal activations between textual and textual-visual inputs. Visualizations with t-SNE reveal significant differences in activation
distributions between unimodal and multimodal inputs. We
also train a classifier on textual datasets to distinguish between safe and unsafe instructions. However, a notable performance decline of about 35% can be observed on multimodal instructions. These observations indicate that the
safety alignments in VLMs are not robust to handle activation discrepancies, potentially leading to model fragility.
We further propose an activation revision framework, internal activation revision, that enhances model safety by
shifting the model’s activations using revision vectors extracted from positive and negative samples. We develop
two revision schemes, coarse-grained layer-level, and fine-

Warning: This paper contains offensive content that may
disturb some readers. Vision-language models (VLMs)
demonstrate strong multimodal capabilities but have been
found to be more susceptible to generating harmful content
compared to their backbone large language models (LLMs).
Our investigation reveals that the integration of images significantly shifts the model’s internal activations during the forward pass, diverging from those triggered by textual input.
Moreover, the safety alignments of LLMs embedded within
VLMs are not sufficiently robust to handle the activations discrepancies, making the models vulnerable to even the simplest jailbreaking attacks. To address this issue, we propose
an internal activation revision approach that efficiently revises activations during generation, steering the model toward
safer outputs. Our framework incorporates revisions at both
the layer and head levels, offering control over the model’s
generation at varying levels of granularity. In addition, we
explore three strategies for constructing positive and negative samples and two approaches for extracting revision vectors, resulting in different variants of our method. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that the internal activation
revision method significantly improves the safety of widely
used VLMs, reducing attack success rates by an average of
48.94%, 34.34%, 43.92%, and 52.98% on SafeBench, SafeUnsafe, Unsafe, and MM-SafetyBench, respectively, while
minimally impacting model helpfulness.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have been further enhanced
by adopting visual instruction tuning to develop vision language models (VLMs), enabling more accurate and contextually relevant responses across multimodal tasks (Liu et al.
2023a, 2024; Li et al. 2024). However, recent studies show
that VLMs are more vulnerable than LLMs, with their safety
alignments more easily bypassed, leading them to easily follow malicious instructions (Zong et al. 2024; Pantazopoulos et al. 2024). Furthermore, Liu et al. (2023b) illustrates
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27428

