The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Intrinsic Image Decomposition for Robust Self-supervised Monocular Depth
Estimation on Reflective Surfaces
Wonhyeok Choi* , Kyumin Hwang* , Minwoo Choi, Kiljoon Han,
Wonjoon Choi, Mingyu Shin, Sunghoon Im†
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea
{smu06117, kyumin, subminu, kiljoon h, wjchoi, alsrb4446, sunghoonim}@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation (SSMDE) has
gained attention in the field of deep learning as it estimates
depth without requiring ground truth depth maps. This approach typically uses a photometric consistency loss between
a synthesized image, generated from the estimated depth, and
the original image, thereby reducing the need for extensive
dataset acquisition. However, the conventional photometric
consistency loss relies on the Lambertian assumption, which
often leads to significant errors when dealing with reflective
surfaces that deviate from this model. To address this limitation, we propose a novel framework that incorporates intrinsic
image decomposition into SSMDE. Our method synergistically trains for both monocular depth estimation and intrinsic
image decomposition. The accurate depth estimation facilitates multi-image consistency for intrinsic image decomposition by aligning different view coordinate systems, while the
decomposition process identifies reflective areas and excludes
corrupted gradients from the depth training process. Furthermore, our framework introduces a pseudo-depth generation
and knowledge distillation technique to further enhance the
performance of the student model across both reflective and
non-reflective surfaces. Comprehensive evaluations on multiple datasets show that our approach significantly outperforms
existing SSMDE baselines in depth prediction, especially on
reflective surfaces.

Figure 1: Illustrations of violations of the photometric constancy principle on non-Lambertian surfaces.
Recently, the focus of SSMDE research has shifted from
merely enhancing depth estimation performance to investigating intrinsic network issues, particularly the generalization of trained models to changes in domain (Saunders, Vogiatzis, and Manso 2023; Gasperini et al. 2023;
Bae, Hwang, and Im 2023). Some approaches have highlighted a critical issue: SSMDE often relies on the Lambertian assumption as a learning strategy, which does not hold
true for non-Lambertian surfaces like mirrors and reflective materials commonly found in indoor scenes. These surfaces violate the photometric constancy principle, a cornerstone assumption of SSMDE, significantly degrading depth
quality as shown in Figure 1. To address these issues, recent methods have been developed to localize the regions
that violate these assumptions using additional segmentation
masks (Costanzino et al. 2023), based on the uncertainty of
multiple networks (Shi et al. 2023), and to selectively refine
the depth in these areas using techniques such as inpainting
and 3D mesh rendering. However, the computational intensity of 3D mesh rendering and ensemble uncertainty, along
with the requirement for additional annotations, diminish the
advantages of self-supervised approaches.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel endto-end, plug-and-play method that leverages intrinsic im-

Introduction
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation (SSMDE) is a
method to estimate depth using only sequential images during training, without the need for ground truth depth maps.
This method has significantly expanded its applicability in
commercial datasets, eliminating the need for expensive data
acquisition methods like LiDAR. The key to the success of
SSMDE lies in its ability to synthesize one image into another using estimated depth from sequential images and enforcing photometric consistency constraints. Over the years,
SSMDE has consistently improved and is increasingly being
applied in industries such as autonomous driving, robotics,
and mixed reality.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

S. Im is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2555

