The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Predicting the Original Appearance of Damaged Historical Documents
Zhenhua Yang1 * , Dezhi Peng1 * , Yongxin Shi1 , Yuyi Zhang1 , Chongyu Liu1 , Lianwen Jin12†
1

South China University of Technology
INTSIG-SCUT Joint Lab on Document Analysis and Recognition
{eezhyang, pengdezhi000, scut.yxshi, yuyizhang.scut, liuchongyu1996}@gmail.com, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Damaged
Historical
Document

Historical documents encompass a wealth of cultural treasures but suffer from severe damages including character
missing, paper damage, and ink erosion over time. However, existing document processing methods primarily focus
on binarization, enhancement, etc., neglecting the repair of
these damages. To this end, we present a new task, termed
Historical Document Repair (HDR), which aims to predict
the original appearance of damaged historical documents. To
fill the gap in this field, we propose a large-scale dataset
HDR28K and a diffusion-based network DiffHDR for historical document repair. Specifically, HDR28K contains 28,552
damaged-repaired image pairs with character-level annotations and multi-style degradations. Moreover, DiffHDR augments the vanilla diffusion framework with semantic and spatial information and a meticulously designed character perceptual loss for contextual and visual coherence. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed DiffHDR trained
on HDR28K significantly surpasses existing approaches and
exhibits remarkable performance in handling real scenarios.
Notably, DiffHDR can also be extended to document editing
and text block generation, showcasing its high flexibility and
generalization capacity. We believe this study could pioneer
a new direction of document processing and contribute to the
inheritance of invaluable cultures and civilizations.

HDR Model

Repaired
Historical
Document

Figure 1: Definition of Historical Document Repair (HDR)
task. The green boxes represent the damaged regions and the
blue boxes denote the repaired regions.
Naumann 2023; Wang et al. 2022a; Xue et al. 2022), and deshadowing (Li et al. 2023c; Lin, Chen, and Chuang 2020).
However, they fall short of understanding the semantics and
stylistic elements within document images, thereby hindering their capability to repair the damaged documents. Moreover, existing historical document processing methods also
address tasks such as text restoration (Assael et al. 2022)
and individual character restoration (Nguyen et al. 2019;
Amin, Siddiqi, and Moetesum 2023); however, these unimodal methods are unsuitable for document repair because
predicting the original appearance of damaged documents
is a highly challenging multimodal task, requiring the understanding of the context and the pixel-level restoration.
Though the recent work (Zhu et al. 2024) conducts inscription restoration task, it specifically targets inscriptions with
simple backgrounds, exclusively characterized by white text
on a black background. Additionally, the font generation
task (Kong et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023b)
exhibits a higher resemblance, involving character generation under the conditions of content and style. Nevertheless,
this task is only employed for individual characters and it is
not feasible to reconstruct the documents.
Therefore, to fill the gap in this field, we introduce a new
task, termed Historical Document Repair (HDR), which involves predicting the original appearance of damaged historical document images. As shown in Figure 1, the damaged
historical document images are fed into the HDR model
to repair the damaged regions. The output images of HDR

Dataset, Code — https://github.com/yeungchenwa/HDR

Introduction
Historical documents play a pivotal role in the transmission
of cultural heritage. However, during prolonged preservation, they are susceptible to oxidization, insect damage, water erosion, etc., leading to character missing, paper damage, and ink erosion, as shown in Figure 1. Nevertheless, the
manual repair of damaged characters and corrupted backgrounds is a complex and time-consuming endeavor.
Recently, generic document image processing primarily
concentrates on the low-level vision tasks, such as rectification (Li et al. 2023a; Jiang et al. 2022), binarization (Yang
et al. 2023a; Yang and Xu 2023), enhancement (Hertlein and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9382

