The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Few-Shot Incremental Learning via Foreground Aggregation and Knowledge
Transfer for Audio-Visual Semantic Segmentation
Jingqiao Xiu1 , Mengze Li2 * , Zongxin Yang3 , Wei Ji4 * , Yifang Yin5 , Roger Zimmermann1
1

2

National University of Singapore
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Harvard University
4
Nanjing University
5
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
Audio Waves

Abstract
Audio-Visual Semantic Segmentation (AVSS) has gained significant attention in the multi-modal domain, aiming to segment video objects that produce specific sounds in the corresponding audio. Despite notable progress, existing methods still struggle to handle new classes not included in the
original training set. To this end, we introduce Few-Shot Incremental Learning (FSIL) to the AVSS task, which seeks
to seamlessly integrate new classes with limited incremental
samples while preserving the knowledge of old classes. Two
challenges arise in this new setting: (1) To reduce labeling
costs, old classes within the incremental samples are treated
as background, similar to silent objects. Training the model
directly with background annotations may worsen the loss of
distinctive knowledge about old classes, such as their outlines
and sounds. (2) Most existing models adopt early cross-modal
fusion with a single-tower design, incorporating more characteristics into class representations, which impedes knowledge transfer between classes based on similarity. To address these issues, we propose a Few-shot Incremental learning framework via class-centric foregrouNd aggreGation and
dual-tower knowlEdge tRansfer (FINGER) for the AVSS
task, which comprises two targeted modules: (1) The classcentric foreground aggregation gathers class-specific features
for each foreground class while disregarding background features. The background class is excluded during training and
inferred from the foreground predictions. (2) The dual-tower
knowledge transfer postpones cross-modal fusion to separately conduct knowledge transfer for each modality. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of the FINGER
model, significantly surpassing state-of-the-art methods.

Video Frames

Ground Truth

Sound Producers

Piano

Cello

Guitar

Violin

Drum

Session 1: Few-shot Incremental Samples Piano

Cello

Guitar

Violin

Drum

Piano

Cello

Guitar

Violin

Drum

Base Session: Many-shot Base Samples

Session 2: Few-shot Incremental Samples

Figure 1: A toy example of training an audio-visual semantic segmentation model specialized in musical instruments.
Initially, the model is trained on many-shot base samples
to learn the piano, cello, and guitar classes. In subsequent
sessions, the violin and drum classes are introduced to the
model through few-shot incremental samples. Since multiple instruments often play together, the samples in each session typically include non-target classes, which are labeled
as background in the ground truth.

Introduction

exhibit strong performance on the predefined classes during testing. Due to the significant manpower and time costs,
it is infeasible to initially label all possible sounding-body
classes in the world at the pixel level for training (Cermelli
et al. 2020, 2021). As user interests evolve, new classes need
to be constantly incorporated into the model. For instance,
as shown in Figure 1, we might begin by focusing on pop
music, where instruments like the piano, cello, and guitar
are prevalent. As trends shift toward classical music (with
the violin as key) or rock music (centered around drums),
the model must adapt to include these new classes. However, existing methods often experience a sharp performance
drop when directly applied to new classes, as they lack class-

Audio-Visual Semantic Segmentation (AVSS) is a challenging task that has garnered significant attention in the audiovisual domain (Zhou et al. 2024). It aims to segment objects
from the given video that produce specific sounds in the corresponding audio. Most existing AVSS methods (Zhou et al.
2024; Li et al. 2023a; Liu et al. 2024a; Gao et al. 2024) frame
the segmentation task as pixel-level classification, where
each pixel is assigned to a specific foreground class or background. These methods, trained with fixed object classes,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8788

