The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On Corruption-Robustness in Performative Reinforcement Learning
Vasilis Pollatos1 * , Debmalya Mandal2† , Goran Radanovic3
1

Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
2
University of Warwick
3
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
v.pollatos@athenarc.gr, debmalya.mandal@warwick.ac.uk, gradanovic@mpi-sws.org

Abstract

choices. This dual influence complicates the learning process, impacting the learner’s ability to generalize effectively.
To alleviate this challenge prior work places sensitivity assumptions, formalized as Lipschitz conditions, which limit
the extent the learner’s policy can influence the reward and
transition functions of the underlying environment. These
conditions enable convergence guarantees to a performatively stable policy during repeated retraining. This process
involves optimizing a regularized RL objective after each
deployment round to update the current policy. In the finite data regime, the retraining step solves for a saddle point
of a convex-concave objective, which approximates the Lagrangian of the regularized reinforcement learning problem.
In this paper, we additionally consider a third type of distribution shift, specifically induced by an adversary capable
of corrupting training data. This scenario is particularly relevant in practical settings where performativity plays a role.
For example, recommendation systems are vulnerable to
Sybil attacks, while chatbots can be susceptible to poisoning
poisoning attacks (e.g., see the Tay.ai incident (Neff 2016)).
Therefore, it is crucial to explore strategies for achieving
corruption-robustness in performative environments.
Our goal is to extend algorithmic and convergence results from prior work on perfomrative RL by allowing an
ϵ fraction of data points in training data to be corrupted
by adversarial noise—commonly referred to as the Huber
ϵ-contamination model. We recognize two main challenges:

In performative Reinforcement Learning (RL), an agent faces
a policy-dependent environment: the reward and transition
functions depend on the agent’s policy. Prior work on performative RL has studied the convergence of repeated retraining approaches to a performatively stable policy. In the finite sample regime, these approaches repeatedly solve for a
saddle point of a convex-concave objective, which estimates
the Lagrangian of a regularized version of the reinforcement
learning problem. In this paper, we aim to extend such repeated retraining approaches, enabling them to operate under corrupted data. More specifically, we consider Huber’s
ϵ-contamination model, where an ϵ fraction of data points
is corrupted by arbitrary adversarial noise. We propose a
repeated retraining approach based on convex-concave optimization under corrupted gradients and a novel problemspecific robust mean estimator for the gradients. We prove
that our approach exhibits last-iterate convergence to an approximately
stable policy, with the approximation error linear
√
in ϵ. We experimentally demonstrate the importance of accounting for corruption in performative RL.

Introduction
In performative reinforcement learning (Mandal, Triantafyllou, and Radanovic 2023; Rank et al. 2024), the learner operates in a policy-dependent environment, where the reward
and transition functions are influenced by the learner’s policy. A canonical example of such a setting is an RL system involving human users, such as RL-based recommender
systems or chatbots: the RL policy affects user preferences,
which in turn alters user engagement and behavior, thereby
modifying the RL environment.
For an offline learner, performativity represents a specific
type of distribution shift. Similar to standard reinforcement
learning (RL), where the learner’s policy influences the data
it encounters due to the sequential decision-making process,
performativity introduces an additional layer of complexity.
The learner not only affects the observed data but also alters
the underlying data generation process through its policy

• First, this involves solving a convex-concave optimization problem where access to a given objective function is corrupted. For instance, gradient-based methods,
which are commonly used for convex-concave optimization, rely on first-order gradient oracles to access the objective. However, existing guarantees for these methods
typically assume that the outputs of gradient oracles are
clean and not adversarially corrupted.
• Second, generic robust estimators, such as those used
for estimating gradients, do not account for the problem
structure, often making them impractical in challenging
high-dimensional settings.

* This work was done as part of a research immersion lab at the
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems.
†
The work was done while at the Max Planck Institute for Software Systems.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Contributions: Our work aims to resolve these challenges within the performative RL framework. Our contributions are as follow:
• We propose a robust version of Optimistic Optimistic
19939

