The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rare Event Detection in Imbalanced Multi-Class Datasets Using an Optimal
MIP-Based Ensemble Weighting Approach
Georgios Tertytchny1,2 * † , Georgios L. Stavrinides1† , Maria K. Michael1,2
1

2

KIOS Research and Innovation Center of Excellence
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Cyprus
{tertytchny.georgios, stavrinides.georgios, mmichael}@ucy.ac.cy

Abstract

to safety risks or system failures. Consequently, addressing
these challenges is crucial for effective rare event detection.
Ensemble learning approaches, especially weighted voting techniques, are commonly employed to handle imbalanced multi-class datasets (Khan, Chaudhari, and Chandra
2024). The aim of such methods is to improve overall performance and robustness, by leveraging the strengths of diverse
classification algorithms. Specifically, a weighted voting ensemble model combines the predictions of multiple classifiers, using different weights based on their predictive performance. Higher weights are assigned to better-performing
classifiers, either at an overall classifier level or on a per class
basis (Dogan and Birant 2019). However, existing weighting
schemes often fail to optimally balance the contribution of
each classifier, especially in the presence of a highly skewed
class distribution. Moreover, since smaller ensembles are
typically less computationally demanding, and given that
rare event detection in CPS is often performed at the network
edge on resource-constrained devices, adaptable approaches
are required to seamlessly and optimally select a predefined
number of classifiers from a larger set while assigning their
weights (Danso et al. 2022).
Aiming to fill this gap, we propose an optimal, adaptable,
and efficient mixed integer programming (MIP) weighting
scheme for weighted voting ensembles, suitable for rare
event detection in imbalanced multi-class datasets. Our approach optimally assigns weights to classifiers per class
based on their performance, leveraging their individual capabilities while selecting the predefined number of classifiers from a given set. To prevent overfitting and enhance generalization in weight assignment, we incorporate into our method the elastic net regularization technique (Zou and Hastie 2005), applying it beyond its traditional use in the training and validation phase. The proposed
weighting scheme aims to enhance performance across
all classes while ensuring computational efficiency, effectively addressing the limitations of existing approaches. Our
method optimizes weights based on empirical accuracy results, avoiding simplifying assumptions typically required
by theoretical analysis, such as independent and identically
distributed instances, which may not hold in realistic scenarios involving class imbalance and diverse classifier behavior
(Opitz and Maclin 1999).
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

To address the challenges of imbalanced multi-class datasets
typically used for rare event detection in critical cyberphysical systems, we propose an optimal, efficient, and adaptable mixed integer programming (MIP) ensemble weighting
scheme. Our approach leverages the diverse capabilities of
the classifier ensemble on a granular per class basis, while
optimizing the weights of classifier-class pairs using elastic net regularization for improved robustness and generalization. Additionally, it seamlessly and optimally selects a
predefined number of classifiers from a given set. We evaluate and compare our MIP-based method against six wellestablished weighting schemes, using representative datasets
and suitable metrics, under various ensemble sizes. The experimental results reveal that MIP outperforms all existing
approaches, achieving an improvement in balanced accuracy
ranging from 0.99% to 7.31%, with an overall average of
4.53% across all datasets and ensemble sizes. Furthermore,
it attains an overall average increase of 4.63%, 4.60%, and
4.61% in macro-averaged precision, recall, and F1-score, respectively, while maintaining computational efficiency.

Code — https://github.com/gterty019/MIPENS
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13439

Introduction
Rare event detection in cyber-physical systems (CPS) is vital for maintaining the safety and reliability of critical infrastructures, such as water distribution networks and power
grids (Taheri et al. 2024; Tertytchny, Nicolaou, and Michael
2020). Critical CPS often generate imbalanced multi-class
datasets where some classes have significantly fewer instances than others, due to the infrequent occurrence of abnormal events (e.g., faults or attacks) compared to normal
activities (Yin et al. 2020). Class imbalance poses several
challenges, such as biased model performance towards the
majority classes, poor generalization to minority classes,
and thus increased difficulty in detecting rare events (Shyalika, Wickramarachchi, and Sheth 2023). These issues are
further amplified by the critical nature of CPS, where misclassifying low-probability but high-impact events may lead
* Corresponding author.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20867

