The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DetRF: Detachable Novel Views Synthesis of Dynamic Scenes
Using Backdrop-Driven Neural Radiance Fields
Boyu Zhang1 , Zheng Zhu2 * , Wenbo Xu3
1

SenseTime Research
2
GigaAI
3
Waytous
zhangboyu1@sensetime.com, zhengzhu@ieee.org, rick0xffffff@gmail.com
Abstract
Representing and synthesizing novel views in real-world
dynamic scenes from casual monocular videos is a longstanding problem. Existing solutions typically approach dynamic scenes by applying geometry techniques or utilizing
temporal information between several adjacent frames without considering the underlying background distribution in the
entire scene or the transmittance over the ray dimension, limiting their performance on static and occlusion areas. Our
approach backdrop-driven neural radiance fields offers highquality view synthesis and a 3D solution to detach the background from the entire dynamic scene, which is called DetRF. Specifically, it employs a neural representation to capture the scene distribution in the static background and a 6Dinput NeRF to represent dynamic objects, respectively. Each
ray sample is given an additional occlusion weight to indicate
the transmittance lying in the static and dynamic components.
We evaluate DetRF on public dynamic scenes and our urban
driving scenes acquired from an autonomous-driving dataset.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms previous methods in rendering texture details and motion areas while also producing a clean static background.
Our code will be available soon.

Figure 1: Our method takes a casual monocular video clip
captured from real-world dynamic scenes as input and generates a static representation driven by the underlying backdrop code and a dynamic representation. The target novel
view rendering can be obtained by blending them with occlusion weight.

Introduction
Novel view synthesis (Avidan and Shashua 1997) from dynamic scenes aims to generate photorealistic views at arbitrary viewpoints and any time step with given images from
one or more cameras as input. It provides the possibility
to generate free-view rendering using finite-view input and
brings a lifelike representation. This can have vast and varied applications, e.g. switching views in cinematic/games
special effects (Tewari et al. 2020), rendering visuals in
AR/VR world (Cai et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022a), assisting
camera imaging (Mildenhall et al. 2022), and enabling interactive exploration in robot/autonomous-driving perception
and navigation (Li, Li, and Zhu 2023).
In essence, novel view synthesis of dynamic scenes is
an extension of representing static 3D scenes from discrete
2D images, which is highly ill-posed (Ivanov, Vasin, and
Tanana 2013) since there are infinite solutions that can render the input video appropriately while only a single 2D

image observation is available at each view. Compared to
static scenes (Kar, Hne, and Malik 2017; Niemeyer et al.
2019), dynamic novel view synthesis is more challenging
since approaches for dynamic scenes need to capture spatialtemporal information using a 6D plenoptic representation
(I(t) = Φ(x, d, t; θ) : R3 × R2 × R → R3 ), and the occlusion between different objects might also be tricky.
Traditionally, novel view synthesis in real-world dynamic
scenes (Yoon et al. 2020; Lei, Xing, and Chen 2020; Luo
et al. 2020; Oswald, Stühmer, and Cremers 2014) requires
images from multiple camera views to estimate the geometry and occlusion of the entire scene. However, capturing
such multi-view inputs is laborious and expensive. Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) offers a
new circumvention to this problem when just given monocular views. Rather than explicit shape representation, NeRF
encodes 3D location and viewing angle to color and density using a neural network and generates arbitrary novel
views through volume rendering. Recent NeRF-based methods (Park et al. 2021; Kundu et al. 2022; Jayasundara et al.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9860

