The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explicit Relational Reasoning Network for Scene Text Detection
Yuchen Su1 , Zhineng Chen1 , Yongkun Du1 , Zhilong Ji2 , Kai Hu3 , Jinfeng Bai2 , Xieping Gao4 †
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Tomorrow Advancing Life
3
School of Computer Science, Xiangtan University
4
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence and International Communication, Hunan Normal University
{ycsu23, ykdu23}@m.fudan.edu.cn, zhinchen@fudan.edu.cn, zhilongji@hotmail.com, jfbai.bit@gmail.com,
kaihu@xtu.edu.cn, xpgao@hunnu.edu.cn
(a)

Abstract
Connected component (CC) is a proper text shape representation that aligns with human reading intuition. However, CCbased text detection methods have recently faced a developmental bottleneck that their time-consuming post-processing
is difficult to eliminate. To address this issue, we introduce an
explicit relational reasoning network (ERRNet) to elegantly
model the component relationships without post-processing.
Concretely, we first represent each text instance as multiple
ordered text components, and then treat these components as
objects in sequential movement. In this way, scene text detection can be innovatively viewed as a tracking problem. From
this perspective, we design an end-to-end tracking decoder to
achieve a CC-based method dispensing with post-processing
entirely. Additionally, we observe that there is an inconsistency between classification confidence and localization quality, so we propose a Polygon Monte-Carlo method to quickly
and accurately evaluate the localization quality. Based on this,
we introduce a position-supervised classification loss to guide
the task-aligned learning of ERRNet. Experiments on challenging benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our ERRNet. It consistently achieves state-of-the-art accuracy while
holding highly competitive inference speed.

1

(b)

Merge

Order

Group

no object
T
ERRNet
t+1

Queries

Frames

t

Figure 1: (a) Post-processing illustration of typical CCbased methods, which require grouping and ordering components one by one. (b) The pipeline of ERRNet, which
has no post-processing. ERRNet views each text instance
as multiple text components in sequential movement. Same
shape queries indicate predictions in different text instances
but in the same sequential position, same color queries represent predictions in one instance, and temporal relationships
denote the sequential relationships of components.

Introduction

2022b; Su et al. 2024) regress parameterized text shapes to
directly capture the text’s overall geometric layout, which
have higher resistance to local noise. However, these methods lack scale and shape invariance, as text scale and shape
show great variability, making it difficult to directly perceive
the overall geometric layout of complex text with accuracy,
as shown in Fig. 2(b).
From a hybrid perspective, connected component (CC)based methods (Zhang et al. 2020), which treat each text
instance as a combination of a series of adjacent text components, are a reasonable integration of the above two types
of methods. Compared to complex text contours, text components have fixed shapes (e.g., circles (Long et al. 2018),
quadrilaterals (Feng et al. 2019)), and smaller size variations. Meanwhile, components are more resistant to local
noise than individual pixels. However, CC-based methods
have been less studied recently due to their tricky and timeconsuming post-processing, which includes grouping components one by one based on their associative relationships
to differentiate between text instances, and then ordering in-

Scene text detection aims to locate text regions within images. It is a fundamental step for many computer vision and
artificial intelligence tasks (Zhang et al. 2021a; Wei et al.
2022; Fang et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022a; Meng et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2024). Despite recent advancements, detecting
text in the wild remains challenging due to the varied scales,
shapes, colors, and fonts of text.
Segmentation- and regression-based methods are two
mainstream scene text detection methods. The former (Liao
et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2024) utilize shrunk text kernel
to separate adhesive text instances and cluster text pixels
into distinct instances through heuristic post-processing. Although this pixel-level representation approach can flexibly
fit arbitrary-shaped text, it overly focuses on local textual
cues, leading to sensitivity to local noise, as illustrated in
Fig. 2(a). In contrast, regression-based methods (Wang et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author.

7069

