The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Ready for You When You Are Back: Content-Driven Session-Based
Recommendation for Continuity of Experience
Brijraj Singh, Sonal, Niranjan Pedanekar
Data Science, Sony Research India
brijraj.singh@sony.com, sonal.dabral@sony.com, niranjan.pedanekar@sony.com

Abstract
Recommender systems used in online platforms can drive
users to consume content continuously in an attempt to maximize satisfaction. Such engagement is invariably broken due
to more pressing work, alternate pursuits, distractions or fatigue. Recommender systems need to ensure the continuity of
experience when the user joins back. Session-based recommender systems typically create different sessions based on a
fixed time interval (θ), often resulting in creation of a separate
session when the user gets off the platform temporarily. When
the user joins back, session-based recommender systems are
likely to recommend content different than what they would
have in case the earlier session had continued. This may cause
dissatisfaction given that there is a difference in the predicted
world model of the user, i.e. the expectation from the last session, and the observed one, i.e. the recommendations.
To handle this problem, we propose the creation of contentdriven sessions instead of time-driven sessions. In our setting, a session continues while a single item category dominates in the user-item interactions. A new session is created
when a different item category begins to dominate. The proposed content-driven method also solves the long-standing
problem of deciding the optimal value of time threshold (θ)
for defining the time-based session. We report that the proposed method outperforms existing SOTA methodologies set
by time-based sessions by a large margin in terms of recommendation performance on multiple datasets.

Figure 1: Cases when CD-SBRS differs from TS-SBRS

(Friston et al. 2014) by continuing the engagement. In the
case of online services, we realize that it is the recommendation model that provides more relevant content to the user
which the brain finds closer to the predicted world model
(based on prior experience of engagement) and is one of the
reasons for Dopamine release. This often results in a continuous engagement with the platform, which is invariably
broken at some time, due to more pressing work, alternate
pursuits, distractions, fatigue, or simply wanting to get out
of a rabbit hole 1 .
Session-based recommendation models have been
tremendously successful in keeping users engaged with
online platforms (de Souza Pereira Moreira et al. 2021),
(Dabral, Singh, and Onoe 2023), (Liu et al. 2018), (Li et al.
2017). Yet, such a recommendation model needs to take
into account that the user has temporarily left the platform
so that when the user comes back again, she should have the
same experience as before. In a typical case of a time-driven
session-based recommendation system (SBRS), if the user
is inactive or off the platform for a period longer than a
threshold θ, recommendations can get altered when she
joins back, as compared to what she would have got in
continued interaction. This may lead to a difference between
the predicted world model (i.e. expectation from the last
session) and the observed one (i.e. new recommendations)
and can trigger a sense of dissatisfaction.
This work proposes using a content-driven session for
session-based recommendation, which alters recommendations only if the user drifts toward new choices of content,

Extended version —
https://github.com/brijraj08/Ready Recommendation

Introduction
Though recommender systems are technical in nature, they
essentially deal with human behavior. This work is motivated by following behavioral and technical considerations.
Behavioral Motivation: According to the theory of predictive coding and the free energy principle in neuroscience,
the human brain works towards reducing the difference between the predicted world model and the observed world
state through sensory input (Friston and Kiebel 2009), where
the difference is known as free energy. The reduction in free
energy gives a sense of satisfaction through the release of
Dopamine and motivates the brain to optimize it even further

1
https://hbr.org/2022/01/the-psychology-of-your-scrollingaddiction

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12533

