The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SOLA-GCL: Subgraph-Oriented Learnable Augmentation Method
for Graph Contrastive Learning
Tianhao Peng1 , Xuhong Li2 , Haitao Yuan3∗ , Yuchen Li2, 4 , Haoyi Xiong2 *
1

Beihang University
2
Baidu Inc.
3
Nanyang Technological University
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
pengtianhao@buaa.edu.cn, lixuhong@baidu.com, yuchenli@sjtu.edu.cn
haitao.yuan@ntu.edu.sg, haoyi.xiong.fr@ieee.org
Abstract
Graph contrastive learning has emerged as a powerful technique for learning graph representations that are robust and
discriminative. However, traditional approaches often neglect the critical role of subgraph structures, particularly the
intra-subgraph characteristics and inter-subgraph relationships,
which are crucial for generating informative and diverse contrastive pairs. These subgraph features are crucial as they vary
significantly across different graph types, such as social networks where they represent communities, and biochemical
networks where they symbolize molecular interactions. To address this issue, our work proposes a novel subgraph-oriented
learnable augmentation method for graph contrastive learning,
termed SOLA-GCL, that centers around subgraphs, taking
full advantage of the subgraph information for data augmentation. Specifically, SOLA-GCL initially partitions a graph into
multiple densely connected subgraphs based on their intrinsic
properties. To preserve and enhance the unique characteristics
inherent to subgraphs, a graph view generator optimizes augmentation strategies for each subgraph, thereby generating tailored views for graph contrastive learning. This generator uses
a combination of intra-subgraph and inter-subgraph augmentation strategies, including node dropping, feature masking,
intra-edge perturbation, inter-edge perturbation, and subgraph
swapping. Extensive experiments have been conducted on various graph learning applications, ranging from social networks
to molecules, under semi-supervised learning, unsupervised
learning, and transfer learning settings to demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed approach.

Introduction
Graph structures are used to represent data such as social networks (Zhou et al. 2020), molecules (Li et al. 2023b; Zhang
et al. 2023b), and traffic flows (Yuan and Li 2021; Yuan et al.
2023). Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling
2017; Velickovic et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019; Yun et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2022) have become popular for graph representation
learning (Lin et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023f; Cai
et al. 2023; Yuan et al. 2021; Li et al. 2025), but they require
labeled data. To learn from unlabeled data, contrastive learning has been adapted to graph data (You et al. 2020, 2021;
* Both Haitao Yuan and Haoyi Xiong are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19875

Velickovic et al. 2019; Suresh et al. 2021; Yin et al. 2022).
This involves generating two views by perturbing the graph
and learning representations by maximizing feature consistency (You et al. 2020, 2021; Velickovic et al. 2019; Li et al.
2023c). Graph-structured data are more complex than image
or text data due to their properties and distribution shifts (Hassani 2022; Li et al. 2023e; Yuan, Cong, and Li 2024). Methods like DGI (Velickovic et al. 2019), GRACE (Zhu et al.
2020), and GraphCL (You et al. 2020) use random augmentations, but lack automatic selection of augmentation policies,
affecting the graphs’ semantic integrity.
Recent advances in Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL)
leverage methods like JOAO (You et al. 2021) and
LG2AR (Hassani and Ahmadi 2022) adaptively select one
augmentation strategy from a predefined pool for specific
graph data, followed by random graph view generation process such as node masking and edge dropping. While these
methods improve the adaptability of selecting augmentation
strategies for individual graphs, their reliance on random
view generation may change the original graph semantics.
Despite some advancements with end-to-end methods like
AD-GCL and AutoGCL, which introduce learnable augmentations, the full potential of subgraph information is still
largely unexplored. Methods like MSSGCL (Liu et al. 2023)
and SUBG-CON (Jiao et al. 2020) attempt to address this by
focusing on the relationships between sampled subgraphs and
the entire graph or the central nodes, respectively. However,
they still struggle to capture the intra-subgraph characteristics
and inter-subgraph relationships (e.g., communities in social
networks). Furthermore, while these learnable methods manage to preserve the semantics of original graphs, they lack
adaptability across different datasets due to their reliance on
uniform augmentation strategies (You et al. 2021, 2020; Li
et al. 2024; Lyu et al. 2024), which ultimately limits their flexibility. Here, we conclude the limitations of existing methods
as follows.
• Loss of intra-subgraph and inter-subgraph information:
Graphs contain important details within subgraphs (intrasubgraph characteristics) and between different subgraphs
(inter-subgraph relationships). For instance, in social networks, distinct communities exhibit unique characteristics, while in chemistry, combinations of functional

