The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Meme Trojan: Backdoor Attacks Against Hateful Meme Detection via
Cross-Modal Triggers
Ruofei Wang1,2 , Hongzhan Lin1 , Ziyuan Luo1,2 , Ka Chun Cheung2 ,
Simon See2 , Jing Ma1 , Renjie Wan1 *
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA
{ruofei, danielhzlin, ziyuanluo}@life.hkbu.edu.hk, {chcheung, ssee}@nvidia.com, {majing, renjiewan}@hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

the inference phase. This investigation uncovers the potential security risk associated with hateful meme detection and
underscores the urgent need for further exploration.
During the training stage of hateful meme detectors, a realistic threat is caused by backdoor attacks (Li et al. 2022).
Such a risk usually arises from the use of third-party datasets
that may contain poisoned samples (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and
Garg 2017) and is significantly difficult to detect (Liu et al.
2020). Generally, attackers can inject a backdoor into the
victim model by poisoning the training data, thereby manipulating the model’s behavior during the inference. As shown
in the Fig. 1 (II), the victim model correctly classifies the
benign samples (1st row: without triggers) while giving malicious results when encountering poisoned memes (2nd row:
with triggers). This attack enables malicious users to bypass hateful meme detectors, facilitating the dissemination
of hateful memes. However, the corresponding exploration
of such an attack still leaves a blank.
Memes are formed by an image and a short piece of text
embedded within it (Kiela et al. 2020), showing a unique
characteristic that text coexists with the image (Koutlis,
Schinas, and Papadopoulos 2023). Such a characteristic and
the automatic detection pipeline make current backdoor attack methods designed for uni-modality (i.e., image (Gu,
Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017; Liu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021)
or text (Chen et al. 2021; Qi et al. 2021b)) invalid. First,
existing backdoor attacks (Chen et al. 2021; Walmer et al.
2022) designed for text modality necessitate the prior acquisition of the text component to inject triggers. However, the
text information is inaccessible for humans in an automatic
detection system, resulting in low effectiveness. Second, if
a malicious user inputs texts and injects triggers manually,
the poisoned texts show inconsistency with the original texts
embedded in the image, reducing stealthiness. As shown in
case (a) of Fig. 1 (II), the extra word “Consider” appears
extremely doubtful, and the injected image trigger (i.e., the
random patch) is very noticeable.
The aforementioned two issues stem from overlooking the
unique characteristic of multimodal memes: text coexisting
with the image. Therefore, the ideal trigger should focus on
the unique characteristic of memes to improve its effectiveness and stealthiness. For effectiveness, the trigger needs to
be crafted with cross-modal functionality, enabling it to initi-

Hateful meme detection aims to prevent the proliferation of
hateful memes on various social media platforms. Considering its impact on social environments, this paper introduces a
previously ignored but significant threat to hateful meme detection: backdoor attacks. By injecting specific triggers into
meme samples, backdoor attackers can manipulate the detector to output their desired outcomes. To explore this, we
propose the Meme Trojan framework to initiate backdoor attacks on hateful meme detection. Meme Trojan involves creating a novel Cross-Modal Trigger (CMT) and a learnable
trigger augmentor to enhance the trigger pattern according to
each input sample. Due to the cross-modal property, the proposed CMT can effectively initiate backdoor attacks on hateful meme detectors under an automatic application scenario.
Additionally, the injection position and size of our triggers are
adaptive to the texts contained in the meme, which ensures
that the trigger is seamlessly integrated with the meme content. Our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art backdoor
attack methods, showing significant improvements in effectiveness and stealthiness. We believe that this paper will draw
more attention to the potential threat posed by backdoor attacks on hateful meme detection.

Introduction
With the rise of social media platforms (e.g., Twitter, Reddit,
etc.), memes, a kind of multimodal content, have emerged
as popular mediums to express users’ ideas and emotions (Kiela et al. 2020). As memes may convey hateful
and satirical messages, leading to online abuse and hate
speech (Vickery 2014; Kiela et al. 2020) (see Fig. 1 (I)),
hateful meme detection is proposed to mitigate these societal risks. Despite the significant achievement in hateful
meme detection (Zhu, Lee, and Chong 2022; Koutlis, Schinas, and Papadopoulos 2023; Lin et al. 2024a), Aggarwal
et al. (Aggarwal et al. 2023) have revealed that simple adversarial examples can deceive the hateful meme detector at
* Corresponding author.
Disclaimer: This paper includes discriminatory content that may
disturb some readers. We have chosen these examples for the illustration purpose only.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7844

