The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning from Summarized Data:
Gaussian Process Regression with Sample Quasi-Likelihood
Yuta Shikuri
Tokio Marine Holdings, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
shikuriyuta@gmail.com

Abstract

Laplace approximation represents the posterior distribution
as a Gaussian centered at the maximum a posteriori estimate (Williams and Barber 1998). Expectation propagation
finds the parameters in a Gaussian that approximate the posterior distribution through an iterative scheme of matching
moments (Minka 2001). Variational inference maximizes a
lower bound on the marginal likelihood via a Gaussian approximation (Sheth, Wang, and Khardon 2015). These methods for specifying non-Gaussian likelihoods allow us to handle various types of observations.
Difficulties have been encountered when only summarized data is available. This situation arises particularly in
the context of spatial modeling. Due to privacy concerns associated with location-specific observation information, spatial data is often summarized to include representative locations, summary statistics, and counts. Too fine locations
might identify individuals even if direct identifiers are removed. Hence, the granularity of summarized data tends
to be intentionally coarse to ensure that personal information (e.g., financial assets, interests, purchase activity, and
medical history) is not exposed. In addition to protecting individual privacy, management costs necessitate aggregating
data by specific units (e.g., cities, branches, hospitals, and
schools). To analyze regional trends, the latitude and longitude pair for each unit is linked to the corresponding summary statistics. Consequently, techniques are required for
spatial modeling given only summarized data.
In this study, we address learning and inference from summarized data in Gaussian process regression. Figure 1 illustrates the overview of our approach. For input approximation
using representative features, we demonstrate the theoretical errors in the marginal likelihood and posterior distribution within the Gaussian process regression framework. We
also propose the concept of sample quasi-likelihood. This
approach enables the computation of the marginal likelihood and posterior distribution using only summarized data,
offering straightforward implementation and low computational complexity. The sample quasi-likelihood is defined
by a variance function. Specifying this variance function allows for capturing non-Gaussian likelihoods that satisfy certain conditions. Theoretical and experimental results indicate that the approximation performance strongly depends
on the granularity of summarized data relative to the length
scale of covariance functions. Experiments using real-world

Gaussian process regression is a powerful Bayesian nonlinear regression method. Recent research has enabled the capture of many types of observations using non-Gaussian likelihoods. To deal with various tasks in spatial modeling, we
benefit from this development. Difficulties still arise when we
can only access summarized data consisting of representative
features, summary statistics, and data point counts. Such situations frequently occur primarily due to concerns about confidentiality and management costs associated with spatial data.
This study tackles learning and inference using only summarized data within the framework of Gaussian process regression. To address this challenge, we analyze the approximation errors in the marginal likelihood and posterior distribution that arise from utilizing representative features. We also
introduce the concept of sample quasi-likelihood, which facilitates learning and inference using only summarized data.
Non-Gaussian likelihoods satisfying certain assumptions can
be captured by specifying a variance function that characterizes a sample quasi-likelihood function. Theoretical and experimental results demonstrate that the approximation performance is influenced by the granularity of summarized data
relative to the length scale of covariance functions. Experiments on a real-world dataset highlight the practicality of our
method for spatial modeling.

1

Introduction

Gaussian process regression is a Bayesian nonlinear regression method that can handle many types of observation data
(Rasmussen and Williams 2006). A key application of Gaussian process regression is spatial modeling (Cressie 1993)
across various fields, such as geology, agriculture, marketing, and public health. For example, it is used to estimate the
distribution of soil moisture and regional medical expenses.
Specifying likelihood functions according to these tasks impacts prediction performance. While a conventional choice
is a Gaussian likelihood that is conjugate with a Gaussian
process prior, recent research has focused extensively on applying Gaussian process regression to non-Gaussian likelihoods. The challenge of specifying non-Gaussian likelihoods lies in posterior distributions that lack closed-form
expressions. Gaussian approximations of the posterior distribution are commonly used to overcome this challenge.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20445

