The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Editing Memories Through Few Targeted Neurons
Wei Zhou1, 2 , Wei Wei1, 2 * , Guibang Cao3 , Fei Wang4
1

Cognitive Computing and Intelligent Information Processing (CCIIP) Laboratory, School of Computer Science and
Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Joint Laboratory of HUST and Pingan Property & Casualty Research (HPL), China
3
Ping An Property & Casualty Insurance Company of China, Ltd
4
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
zw02138@gmail.com, weiw@hust.edu.cn, sunfacy@163.com, wangfei@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

Model editing is a novel research topic in large language
models (LLMs), aimed at efficiently handling various knowledge editing tasks. Since irrelevant knowledge is difficult to
measure, existing editing methods often lack explicit ways to
preserve it, especially for editing methods based on the finetuning paradigm. They generally control the locality performance of model editing by constraining the range of changes
in model parameters. However, their performance improvements are not always ideal, and may even lead to a decrease
in the editing reliability. In this paper, we try to explore effective editing locality control methods based on the relationship between the stored knowledge and the strongly associated model components. Based on the discovery of “knowledge neurons” and enough experimental results, we further
explore the potential characteristics between knowledge and
model components, confirm and point out: (1) only 1% neurons have significant contributions to specific knowledge storage, and (2) these targeted neurons often have a high overlap for knowledge with similar relational descriptions, which
means that knowledge with similar relationships may be
severely affected when these targeted neurons are modified.
Based on these findings, we propose Targeted Neurons Finetuning with Data Augmentation (TNF-DA), which performs
data augmentation based on the relational representation of
edited knowledge to improve editing locality. By freezing
most of the model parameters and only fine-tuning the highly
contributing neurons corresponding to the edited knowledge,
we obtain desirable results in terms of generalization and
specificity compared with previous fine-tuning-based methods. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the superior
editing performance achieved by our proposed method.

Figure 1: Finding the neurons highly contributed to the
knowledge, we only modify these targeted neurons while
freezing other parameters

ered a knowledge base (Petroni et al. 2019; Roberts, Raffel, and Shazeer 2020; Jiang et al. 2020; Shin et al. 2020),
with the capability to respond in natural language. However, as the world doesn’t remain the same, some knowledge may change over time. It’s obviously hard to strike a
balance between significant computational costs and smallscale knowledge editing needs (Carlini et al. 2019). To address this challenge, model editing has been proposed (Zhu
et al. 2020).
Currently, numerous studies on model editing have been
proposed. (Zheng et al. 2023; Meng et al. 2022a,b; Mitchell
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2020; Mitchell et al.
2022; Hartvigsen et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2023; Hernandez, Li, and Andreas 2023) These works can be categorized
into two classes: adding extra information to a frozen model
somewhere and directly modifying the model’s parameters.
The former focuses on determining when and what information should be inputted into the model, paying little attention to finding the optimal location. Among the latter, the
existing parameter optimization method is optimal (Meng
et al. 2022a,b; Li et al. 2024), which divides the model editing task into two parts: location and optimization, and points
out where knowledge is stored.

Code — https://github.com/lifeforzw/TNF-DA

Introduction
Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) (Radford et al.
2019; Mann et al. 2020; Vaswani et al. 2017; Zhao et al.
2023; Qiao et al. 2022) have already become commonly
used tools in NLP tasks. Since their remarkable performance in understanding human-like text and the vast number of parameters they contain, LLMs are usually consid* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26111

