The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Coherency Improved Explainable Recommendation via Large Language Model
Shijie Liu1 * , Ruixing Ding1 * , Weihai Lu2 * , Jun Wang1 , Mo Yu3 , Xiaoming Shi1 , Wei Zhang1†
1

East China Normal University,
2
Peking University,
3
WeChat AI, Tencent
karrich128@gmail.com, zhangwei.thu2011@gmail.com

Abstract

Predict the

Explainable recommender systems are designed to elucidate
the explanation behind each recommendation, enabling users
to comprehend the underlying logic. Previous works perform
rating prediction and explanation generation in a multi-task
manner. However, these works suffer from incoherence between predicted ratings and explanations. To address the issue, we propose a novel framework that employs a large language model (LLM) to generate a rating, transforms it into
a rating vector, and finally generates an explanation based
on the rating vector and user-item information. Moreover,
we propose utilizing publicly available LLMs and pre-trained
sentiment analysis models to automatically evaluate the coherence without human annotations. Extensive experimental
results on three datasets of explainable recommendation show
that the proposed framework is effective, outperforming stateof-the-art baselines with improvements of 7.3% in explainability and 4.4% in text quality.

's rating of

and explain it.

I think rating is : 4
Beacuse “but the film is waste of time .”
NRT

I think rating is : 5
Beacuse “the plot was ok but it was ok but it was ok .”
PETER

I think rating is : 5
Beacuse “the film is good but too dated .”
CER

Green means

Red means

Figure 1: Explanations generated by NRT, PETER, and CER
for an example from Amazon Movies.

Code — https://github.com/karrich/CIER
tion layer but having individual output layers. Despite improvements in explanations, these methods suffer from incoherence between predicted ratings and explanations. As
shown in Figure 1, NRT (Li et al. 2017) and PETER (Li,
Zhang, and Chen 2021) generate inconsistent explanations.
This inconsistency arises because these two tasks only share
hidden layer representation, and explanation generation does
not explicitly include rating information. To enhance the coherency, CER (Raczyński, Lango, and Stefanowski 2023)
proposes explanation-based rating estimation, obtaining explanation embeddings through max pooling of generated
text embeddings and minimizing the distance between the
explanation and the corresponding rating vectors. Despite
the improved coherency, CER suffers from two issues: (1)
CER utilizes a small-sized transformer as the backbone,
which limits the generative performance. (2) CER struggles
to enforce coherence due to poor sentence embedding, as
it relies on max pooling of pre-trained word embeddings,
which fails to capture rich contextual information (Neelakantan et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023). As such, CER fails
to generate coherent explanations, as reflected in the figure.
Recently, the revolutionary progress in large language
models (LLM) (Zeng et al. 2022; OpenAI 2023; Touvron
et al. 2023) has catalyzed substantial technological trans-

Introduction
Recommendation systems provide personalized suggestions
to maximize user engagement and satisfaction based on
historical interactions and preferences (Zhang et al. 2019),
showing significant potential and technological value. Recently, to relieve the concerns regarding trustworthiness
due to the inherent lack of transparency and explainability, explainable recommendation systems have been introduced (Zhang and Chen 2020; Zhang et al. 2022). These systems elucidate the rationale behind each recommendation,
enabling users to comprehend the underlying logic. This enhanced understanding empowers users to make informed decisions and fosters greater trust in the system’s suggestions.
Current works on explainable recommendation systems
generate ratings and provide corresponding explanations (Ni
et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2020; Li, Zhang, and Chen 2021;
Cheng et al. 2023). Specifically, the rating prediction and explanation generation modules are jointly learned in a multitask learning manner, sharing a common hidden representa* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12201

