The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EvoChart: A Benchmark and a Self-Training Approach Towards Real-World
Chart Understanding
Muye Huang1,2 , Han Lai1,2 , Xinyu Zhang1,3 , Wenjun Wu1,3 ,
Jie Ma2 * , Lingling Zhang1,2 , Jun Liu1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering
{huangmuye, hanlai, zhang1393869716, nickjun98}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
{jiema, zhanglling, liukeen}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Original
What is the difference between
Bad and Good in 2015?

Chart understanding enables automated data analysis for humans, which requires models to achieve highly accurate visual comprehension. While existing Visual Language Models (VLMs) have shown progress in chart understanding, the
lack of high-quality training data and comprehensive evaluation benchmarks hinders VLM chart comprehension. In this
paper, we introduce EvoChart, a novel self-training method
for generating synthetic chart data to enhance VLMs’ capabilities in real-world chart comprehension. We also propose EvoChart-QA, a noval benchmark for measuring models’ chart comprehension abilities in real-world scenarios.
Specifically, EvoChart is a unique self-training data synthesis
approach that simultaneously produces high-quality training
corpus and a high-performance chart understanding model.
EvoChart-QA consists of 650 distinct real-world charts collected from 140 different websites and 1,250 expert-curated
questions that focus on chart understanding. Experimental results on various open-source and proprietary VLMs tested
on EvoChart-QA demonstrate that even the best proprietary
model, GPT-4o, achieves only 49.8% accuracy. Moreover,
the EvoChart method significantly boosts the performance of
open-source VLMs on real-world chart understanding tasks,
achieving 54.2% accuracy on EvoChart-QA.

15%
Modified
What is ··· who think the
economic is Good in 2015?
42%
What is ··· who think the
economic is Bad in 2015?

71%

Figure 1: Case of Modified ChartQA. “Original” refers to
the question from the ChartQA dataset, while “Modified”
refers to our modified version.

However, their real-world performance is notably weaker
than their ChartQA test set performance. We conducted a
test to illustrate this, as shown in Figure 1, we discarded
complex reasoning problems in the ChartQA (Masry et al.
2022) training set and posed 103 basic understanding questions. We then evaluated various VLMs on these questions.
The results, presented in the Appendix, show that performance dropped by over 40% compared to ChartQA scores,
even for questions on training set charts. This highlights two
points: first, current VLMs are capable of answering some
chart-reasoning questions, but they lack a comprehensive
understanding of charts. Second, the ChartQA dataset allows
models to correctly answer questions without a comprehensive understanding of the charts, leading to an overestimation of the capabilities of current models (Wang et al. 2024).
Firstly, the lack of high-quality chart training data is a major reason why current models lack robust chart understanding capabilities. Existing methods (Masry et al. 2022, 2023;
Meng et al. 2024) for collecting chart training data fall into
two categories: manual annotation and automatic synthesis.
Manually annotated data have real-world chart appearances
but suffer from coarse granularity and high human costs. Automatically synthesized data offer fine-grained annotations
but lack real-world diversity, leading to poor model robustness. Thus, constructing chart datasets is a challenging bal-

Homepage — https://github.com/MuyeHuang/EvoChart

1

Introduction

Chart Question Answering (CQA) aims to answer specific
questions based on the context provided by chart images,
enabling automated data analysis, such as the business data
reports. This process requires complex chart understanding
and visual reasoning skills to interpret various elements, including visual components, text and values. Consequently,
CQA tasks have attracted the interest of researchers (Kafle
et al. 2018; Methani et al. 2020; Masry et al. 2022).
Recently, VLMs (Liu et al. 2023b; Dai et al. 2023; Lin
et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2024) have shown significant advancements in general visual capabilities, especially in chart understanding, achieving high scores on the ChartQA dataset
(Zhang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023a; Meng et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3680

