The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unlocking the Potential of Reverse Distillation for Anomaly Detection
Xinyue Liu1 , Jianyuan Wang2 * , Biao Leng1 , Shuo Zhang3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, School of Computer & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
{liuxinyue7, lengbiao}@buaa.edu.cn, wangjianyuan@ustb.edu.cn, zhangshuo@bjtu.edu.cn

Input

2

Abstract

Ours RD++ RD

GT

Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a promising approach for
unsupervised Anomaly Detection (AD). However, the student network’s over-generalization often diminishes the crucial representation differences between teacher and student in
anomalous regions, leading to detection failures. To address
this problem, the widely accepted Reverse Distillation (RD)
paradigm designs the asymmetry teacher and student, using
an encoder as teacher and a decoder as student. Yet, the design
of RD does not ensure that the teacher encoder effectively distinguishes between normal and abnormal features or that the
student decoder generates anomaly-free features. Additionally, the absence of skip connections results in a loss of fine
details during feature reconstruction. To address these issues,
we propose RD with Expert, which introduces a novel ExpertTeacher-Student network for simultaneous distillation of both
the teacher encoder and student decoder. The added expert
network enhances the student’s ability to generate normal features and optimizes the teacher’s differentiation between normal and abnormal features, reducing missed detections. Additionally, Guided Information Injection is designed to filter
and transfer features from teacher to student, improving detail
reconstruction and minimizing false positives. Experiments
on several benchmarks prove that our method outperforms
existing unsupervised AD methods under RD paradigm, fully
unlocking RD’s potential.

Figure 1: Anomaly localization examples. Our method reduces missed detections and false positives in RD.

student network is distilled by the pre-trained teacher network. Since the student network is trained only on normal
images, it is unable to obtain the teacher network’s anomaly
representation ability. Therefore, during inference, the difference in feature representations between the teacher and
student networks is used to determine whether there are
anomalies. Early KD-based AD methods (Bergmann et al.
2020; Salehi et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022)
use teacher and student networks with identical or similar architectures and data flow, leading to the student overgeneralizing the teacher’s anomaly representation ability. To
tackle this shortfall, Reverse Distillation (RD) (Deng and Li
2022) innovatively combines the concept of knowledge distillation with feature reconstruction, using a pre-trained encoder as the teacher and a decoder as the student. The asymmetric network architectures and the reverse data flow of RD
results in better anomaly localization performance.
Although RD is simple and effective for unsupervised
AD, there exist some shortcomings in its architectural design: (1) RD’s bottleneck module claims to filter out abnormal information so that the student decoder generates
anomaly-free features. However, since there is only normal
supervision during training, the anomaly filtering is not explicitly guaranteed. Thus, in some cases, the decoder still
reconstructs features similar to the teacher encoder’s, giving rise to missed detections. (2) To inject encoder features into the decoder for better detail reconstruction from
high-level representations, most reconstruction networks introduce skip connection. To prevent anomaly leakage, RD,
though as a feature reconstruction network, discards skip

Code — https://github.com/hito2448/URD

Introduction
Anomaly Detection (AD) is one of the key tasks in industry.
Due to the difficulty in obtaining anomalous images and the
high cost of labeling, unsupervised Anomaly Detection has
been extensively studied. Unsupervised AD uses only normal images during training, enabling the model to detect and
localize anomalies in the test images. In recent years, thanks
to the application of techniques such as reconstruction models, diffusion models, normalizing flow, and knowledge distillation, unsupervised AD has seen rapid advancements.
Knowledge distillation is one of the common paradigms
for unsupervised AD (Bergmann et al. 2020). Similar to traditional knowledge distillation, KD-based AD methods typically rely on a teacher-student network, where an initialized
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5640

