The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Encoder of Thoughts: Enhancing Planning Ability in Language Agents through
Structural Embeddings
Yuxiang Zhang1, , Jitao Sang1,2 *
1

Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Peng Cheng Lab
yuxiangzhang@bjtu.edu.cn, jtsang@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
1.36

Large Language Models (LLMs), when combined with agent
mechanisms, show great promise in applications requiring
robust planning ability, such as financial analysis and medical diagnostics. However, the increasingly complex reasoning structures designed to enhance the planning ability of language agents often exceed the processing and comprehension capabilities of LLMs, thereby limiting their effectiveness. To address these challenges, we introduce the Encoder
of Thoughts (EoT), a novel reasoning structure modeling
method based on graph neural networks. EoT processes the
reasoning structures of planning methods through a plug-andplay structural encoder and aligns these structural information with the input space of LLMs, enabling seamless integration with existing language agents. Experiments on multi-step
reasoning and plan generation demonstrate that EoT significantly improves the performance of language agents. Moreover, EoT demonstrated stable results when combined with
different LLMs and planning algorithms, further underscoring its potential for broader application.

Perplexity

1.33
1.3

1.27

Nodes only
Graph Description
EoT

1.24
1.21
1.18

3

7

10

13

16

Number of Nodes

18

30

Figure 1: Perplexity comparison of reasoning path reconstruction on GSM8K. The figure compares the perplexity of
reasoning paths across action graphs of different sizes. The
blue curve represents node-only reconstruction, the yellow
curve includes graph descriptions, and the green curve uses
EoT.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) combined with agent
mechanisms, known as language agents, have achieved significant success in various fields, such as financial analysis (Li et al. 2023) and intelligent recommendation systems
(Huang et al. 2023). The core of this approach lies in integrating planning methods with LLMs, providing reasoning
capabilities that surpass those of standalone LLMs, thereby
broadening their application scope. However, a fundamental limitation of built-in planning methods is their difficulty in effectively understanding and managing the current
planning state when faced with complex reasoning structures. Despite enhancements from existing work, such as
tree search algorithms (Yao et al. 2024; Hao et al. 2023),
language agents still face significant challenges in complex
planning and reasoning tasks.
Some studies approach language agent planning as the
task of finding the optimal solution path within an action
graph, sometimes referred to as a task graph (Wang et al.

2024) or thought topology (Besta et al. 2024). The effectiveness of the planning module primarily depends on the structure of the prompt engineering, as demonstrated in frameworks like CoT-SC (Wang et al. 2022), ReAct (Yao et al.
2023), Tree of Thoughts (ToT) (Yao et al. 2024), Reasoning via Planning (Hao et al. 2023), and Graph of Thoughts
(GoT) (Besta et al. 2024). These various reasoning structures can be viewed as special forms of graph (Besta et al.
2024). Based on these reasoning structures, language agents
can effectively choose the optimal solution path using search
algorithms such as BFS (Yao et al. 2024), MCTS (Hao et al.
2023) and A* (Hazra, Dos Martires, and De Raedt 2024),
thus improving performance during the inference process.
The performance of planning methods hinges on the comprehensive modeling of reasoning structures. However, existing planning-based prompt methods are devoted to designing increasingly complex reasoning structures, which is
evidenced by the evolution from CoT to GoT. This makes
it harder for language agents to grasp the current planning
state and increasingly challenging to reflect on and learn
from past explorations. To address these challenges, re-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25994

