The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diffusion Model Patching via Mixture-of-Prompts
Seokil Ham1 * , Sangmin Woo1 * , Jin-Young Kim2 , Hyojun Go2 , Byeongjun Park1 , Changick Kim1 ,
1

KAIST
Twelve Labs
1
{gkatjrdlf, smwoo95, pbj3810, changick}@kaist.ac.kr, 2 {seago0828, gohyojun15}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
We present Diffusion Model Patching (DMP), a simple
method to boost the performance of pre-trained diffusion
models that have already reached convergence, with a negligible increase in parameters. DMP inserts a small, learnable set of prompts into the model’s input space while keeping the original model frozen. The effectiveness of DMP is
not merely due to the addition of parameters but stems from
its dynamic gating mechanism, which selects and combines
a subset of learnable prompts at every timestep (i.e., reverse
denoising steps). This strategy, which we term “mixture-ofprompts”, enables the model to draw on the distinct expertise
of each prompt, essentially “patching” the model’s functionality at every timestep with minimal yet specialized parameters. Uniquely, DMP enhances the model by further training
on the original dataset already used for pre-training, even in
a scenario where significant improvements are typically not
expected due to model convergence. Notably, DMP significantly enhances the FID of converged DiT-L/2 by 10.38% on
FFHQ, achieved with only a 1.43% parameter increase and
50K additional training iterations.

50K

Pre-training

Converged

6.26

6.80
6.51
5.61

Figure 1: Further training of the fully converged DiT-L/2
model using the same dataset as the pre-training phase. Our
method, DMP achieves a 10.38% FID improvement in just
50K iterations, while other methods exhibit overfitting.

Project Page — https://sangminwoo.github.io/DMP/
Extended Paper — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17825

Introduction

steps share the same goal of generating high-quality images,
each step has distinct characteristics that contribute to shaping the final output (Go et al. 2023; Park et al. 2023). The visual concepts that diffusion models learn vary based on the
noise ratio of input (Choi et al. 2022). At higher noise levels (timestep t is close to T ), where images are highly corrupted and thus contents are unrecognizable, the models focus on recovering global structures and colors. As the noise
level decreases and images become less corrupted (timestep
t is close to 0), the task of recovering images becomes more
straightforward, and diffusion models learn to recover finegrained details. Recent studies (Balaji et al. 2022; Choi et al.
2022; Go et al. 2023; Park et al. 2023) suggest that considering stage-specificity is beneficial, as it aligns better with
the nuanced requirements of different stages in the generation process. However, many existing diffusion models do
not explicitly consider this aspect.
Our goal is to enhance already converged diffusion models by introducing stage-specific capabilities using the same

The rapid progress in generative modeling has been largely
driven by the advancement of diffusion models (SohlDickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020), which
have gained attention for their desirable properties, such
as stable training, smooth model scaling, and good mode
coverage (Nichol and Dhariwal 2021). Diffusion models have set new standards in generating high-quality, diverse samples that closely match the distribution of various
datasets (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Ramesh et al. 2021;
Saharia et al. 2022b; Poole et al. 2022).
Diffusion models are characterized by their multi-step denoising process, which progressively refines random noise
into structured outputs, such as images. Each step aims to
denoise a noised input, gradually converting completely random noise into a meaningful image. Despite all denoising
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17023

