The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Batch Selection for Multi-Label Classification Guided by Uncertainty and
Dynamic Label Correlations
Ao Zhou1 , Bin Liu 1 * , Jin Wang1 , Grigorios Tsoumakas2
1

Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Visual Computing, School of Computer Science and Technology, Chongqing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
2
School of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
zacqupt@gmail.com, {liubin, wangjin}@cqupt.edu.cn, greg@csd.auth.gr
Abstract

Deep learning has recently proven successful in learning
from multi-label data (Liu et al. 2021). By forming appropriate latent embedding spaces, deep neural networks manage to unravel the complex dependencies between features
and labels in multi-label data (Yeh et al. 2017; Bai, Kong,
and Gomes 2021). Moreover, deep learning models can successfully dissect and analyze label correlations (Hang and
Zhang 2021; Zhao et al. 2021). In addition, their inherent
strength in representation learning allows them to naturally
model label-specific features (Hang et al. 2022).
Recent studies highlight the critical role of mini-batch
sample selection in the performance of deep neural networks
(DNNs). Training with simple examples (Kumar, Packer,
and Koller 2010) can enhance robustness against outliers
and noisy labels, but their smaller loss and gradients lead
to slower model convergence. Conversely, focusing on instances that are difficult to predict correctly (Liu et al. 2023;
Huang et al. 2020; Shrivastava, Gupta, and Girshick 2016)
accelerates training, but overemphasizing the losses of hard
examples may lead to overfitting on noisy data. Uncertaintybased batch selection, exemplified by Active Bias (Chang,
Learned-Miller, and McCallum 2017), is a compromise solution that prioritizes uncertain samples—those with unstable predictions, whether correct or incorrect, during the
training process—thereby expediting model convergence
while mitigating the risk of overfitting. Recency Bias (Song
et al. 2020a) evaluates instance uncertainty within recent observations rather than the entire history, offering a more dynamic assessment.
While batch selection methods are well-studied in singlelabel tasks (binary or multi-class classification), their effectiveness in multi-label data is less explored. Balanced
(Hand, Castillo, and Chellappa 2018) is a multi-label batch
selection method that maintains label distributions in each
batch consistent with the whole dataset via a re-weighting
strategy. However, it only relies on the prior label distribution, neglecting losses or predictions of instances within
each step of the training procedure. Hard Imbalance (Zhou
et al. 2024) prioritizes hard samples associated with more
highly imbalanced (low-frequency) labels during multi-label
batch selection, but it also suffers the risk of overfitting due
to overemphasizing difficult instances.
This paper adapts the uncertainty-based batch selection
strategy to multi-label data. To achieve this, there are two is-

The accuracy of deep neural networks is significantly influenced by the effectiveness of mini-batch construction during training. In single-label scenarios, such as binary and
multi-class classification tasks, it has been demonstrated that
batch selection algorithms preferring samples with higher
uncertainty achieve better performance than difficulty-based
methods. Although there are two batch selection methods
tailored for multi-label data, none of them leverage important uncertainty information. Adapting the concept of uncertainty to multi-label data is not a trivial task, since there are
two issues that should be tackled. First, traditional variance
or entropy-based uncertainty measures ignore fluctuations of
predictions within sliding windows and the importance of the
current model state. Second, existing multi-label methods do
not explicitly exploit the label correlations, particularly the
uncertainty-based label correlations that evolve during the
training process. In this paper, we propose an uncertaintybased multi-label batch selection algorithm. It assesses uncertainty for each label by considering differences between
successive predictions and the confidence of current outputs,
and further leverages dynamic uncertainty-based label correlations to emphasize instances whose uncertainty is synergistically expressed across multiple labels. Empirical studies demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in improving
the performance and accelerating the convergence of various
multi-label deep learning models.

Introduction
Multi-label classification (MLC) involves learning from instances associated with multiple labels simultaneously. Its
goal is to derive a model capable of assigning a relevant set
of labels to unseen instances. For example, a news document
might cover various topics in text categorization (Chai et al.
2024; Jiang et al. 2021); an image could contain annotations
for different scenes (Zhou, Huang, and Xing 2021; Nguyen,
Vu, and Le 2021), and a video may consist of multiple different clips (Gupta et al. 2023; You et al. 2020). For classifying
such complex scenarios, multi-label learning approaches are
seen as viable solutions for handling data with multiple labels.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22902

