The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

From Coarse to Fine: A Matching and Alignment Framework for Unsupervised
Cross-View Geo-Localization
Xueyi Wang1 , Lele Zhang1 , Zheng Fan1 , Yang Liu1 , Chen Chen1 , Fang Deng1,2 *
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing Institute of Technology Chongqing Innovation Center
{wangxueyi, zhanglele, fanzheng, liuyang, xiaofan, dengfang}@bit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

localization (Liu and Li 2019; Shi et al. 2020b, 2019; Sun
et al. 2019). However, cross-view geo-localization remains
a major challenge due to the orthogonality of the two views,
resulting in limited feature intersections. The advancement
of drone technology has introduced drone view to enhance
cross-view geo-localization(Zheng, Wei, and Yang 2020;
Lin et al. 2022; Sun, Liu, and Yuan 2023; Wang et al. 2022).
The drone view plays a transitional role in image matching between the ground and satellite views, and images collected from the drone have more features overlapping with
the images from the other two views. Therefore, dronesatellite geo-localization is proposed, including drone-view
target localization and drone navigation (Zheng, Wei, and
Yang 2020). The former aims to locate the target by retrieving the corresponding satellite image. The latter is to guide
the drone to its destination by matching the given satellite
image with the drone image located at the same location in
the gallery.
Recently, more and more cross-view geo-localization
datasets with labels have been proposed (Zhu, Yang, and
Chen 2021; Zheng, Wei, and Yang 2020). Leveraging these
datasets, cross-view geo-localization has achieved excellent effectiveness along with the evolution of deep learning. Existing optimization objectives for cross-view geolocalization methods can be broadly categorized into two
main groups: one aims to distinguish between matched and
unmatched pairs by pulling matched pairs closer and pushing unmatched pairs apart (Hu et al. 2018; Liu and Li 2019),
and the other is to define the problem as a classification
task, which refers to learning discriminative representation
for different location classes (Wang et al. 2021; Shen et al.
2023). All these methods have requirements on the input,
either images with known locations or matched and unmatched image pairs, which significantly consumes time and
human labor. In addition, not all images in reality come with
matched images in another view or location tags. Therefore,
we introduce the unsupervised method for cross-view geolocalization. Our objective is to learn view-invariant features
and distinguish different location classes to achieve crossview matching in cases where the image labels are unknown
and no matching image pairs can be found.
For unsupervised cross-view geo-localization, there are
two main challenges in bridging the gap between views and
performing intra- and inter-view location associations of im-

Cross-view geo-localization aims at determining the geographic location of a query image by matching the reference
images. The matching pairs can be captured from diverse perspectives, such as those from satellites and drones. Most existing methods are supervised that require input of locationlabeled images or matched and unmatched image pairs for
training, resulting in high labor costs. Moreover, current unsupervised methods perform instances matching directly between different perspectives with dramatic discrepancies, resulting in poor performance. To address these issues, this
paper proposes a novel matching and alignment framework
from coarse instance-cluster level to fine intermediate instance level for unsupervised cross-view geo-localization. We
first introduces cluster-based contrastive learning, assigning
pseudo-labels to the instances and generate clusters within
each view. Then we design a cross-view location alignment
module that fully exploits the feature relationships between
instances and clusters for intra- and inter-views. Finally, we
design an intermediate state transition module that facilitates
further alignment between views by constructing intermediate states and bringing both views closer to the intermediate
domain simultaneously. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method surpasses state-of-the-art unsupervised crossview geo-localization methods and even achieves comparable
performance to state-of-the-art supervised methods.

Introduction
Cross-view geo-localization aims to locate an image by retrieving images from the same location but different views
in a large-scale gallery (Workman, Souvenir, and Jacobs
2015). Different from traditional vision-based geometry
geo-localization (Zhang et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2020; Gao
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022), this research is capable of
autonomous geo-localization in the absence or weakness of
the global navigation satellite system (GNSS) signal, with
more robust and flexible localization capabilities that enable
widespread appliances across various domains, including
unmanned ground vehicles and drone localization and navigation in GNSS-denied environments (Shetty and Gao 2019;
Shi et al. 2020a). Images captured from ground and satellite perspectives are frequently utilized in cross-view geo* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8024

