The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

What is a Good Question? Assessing Question Quality via Meta-Fact Checking
Bo Zhang1 , Jianghua Zhu1 , Chaozhuo Li2 * , Hao Yu1 , Li Kong1 , Zhan Wang1 , Dezhuang Miao3 ,
Xiaoming Zhang3 , Junsheng Zhou1
1

School of Computer and Electronic Information/School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing Normal University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (MoE),
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, China
Question: Who played Dumbledore in the film has a character
named Ghost of the Cavalier?

Abstract
Knowledge-based questions are typically employed to evaluate LLM’s knowledge boundaries; meanwhile, numerous
studies focus on question generation as a means to enhance
the capabilities of both models and individuals. However,
there is a lack of in-depth exploration about what constitutes
a good question from the perspective of knowledge cognition.
This paper proposes aligning the complete knowledge underlying questions with educational criteria effectively employed
in physics courses, thereby developing novel knowledgeintensive metrics of question quality. To this end, we propose
Meta-Fact Checking (MFC), which transforms questions into
knowledge graph (KG) triples utilizing LLMs through fewshot prompting, thereby quantifying question quality based
on the patterns observed within these triples. MFC introduces
a novel interaction mechanism for KGs that communicates
meta-facts, illustrating the types of knowledge that KGs can
offer to the LLM for reasoning questions, rather than relying
solely on the original triples. This strategy ensures that MFC
remains unaffected by unexplored triples that LLM has not
yet encountered within KGs compared to the retrieve-whilereasoning routine. Experiments across multiple datasets and
LLMs demonstrate that MFC significantly improves the accuracy and efficiency of both question answering and assessing. This research marks a pioneering effort to automate the
evaluation of question quality based on cognitive capabilities.

(a) Direct Knowledge for Answering Question
Ghost of the
Cavalier

film
The Sorcerer’s
character
Stone

(b) Complete Knowledge for
Assessing Question
film
Ghost of the
The Sorcerer’s
character
Cavalier
Stone

film
actor

film
actor
film
actor

Richard
Harris

portrayed
In films

Dumbledore

Richard
Harris

portrayed
in films

Dumbledore

Daniel
Radcliffe

John
Gambon

Rupert
Grint

Jude Law

…

…

portrayed
in films

Figure 1: Knowledge requirement for question answering
and question assessing.
rent approaches combine metric-based assessments, including BLEU, ROUGE and METEOR, with human evaluations
that consider fluency, relevance, and difficulty (Nema and
Khapra 2018; Kurdi et al. 2020; Mulla and Gharpure 2023;
Benedetto et al. 2023). They define high-quality questions
mainly based on well-structured syntax and grammar, which
is inadequate for effectively evaluating individuals or models’ capabilities in knowledge-intensive tasks.
In contrast to prior linguistic-based metrics, this paper
advocates for designing knowledge-intensive metrics. To
achieve this, we draw upon education-oriented criteria to define high-quality questions (Bates et al. 2014), which have
proven effective in evaluating student-generated questions
in physics courses. These criteria include Cognitive Levels
that span from Recall to Analysis, the strategic inclusion of
feasible Distractors, Unambiguity in the description of the
question, and Correctness which involves a clear explanation of the correct solution. This evaluation framework takes
into account individuals’ cognitive capabilities, which emphasizes the relevant knowledge, how it is processed, and its
retention in memory when responding to questions. Unfortunately, these criteria can only be assessed by domain experts, and varying interpretations may arise among different
experts and disciplines. This variability presents challenges
in quantitatively measuring question quality.
The principal aim of education-oriented criteria is to measure both knowledge density and knowledge correlation possessed by individuals. By developing knowledge-intensive

Introduction
Employing a variety of questions is a common approach to
evaluate the knowledge boundary of large language models (LLMs), highlighting their efficacy in detecting and
mitigating factuality hallucination (Ji et al. 2023; Huang
et al. 2023). Furthermore, studies have generated questions
through automated or semi-automated methods, serving as
constructing benchmark datasets to specific domains (Gu
et al. 2021a; Molina et al. 2024), educational scene (Kurdi
et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2023) and model self-evaluation
(Wang, Cho, and Lewis 2020; Zhang et al. 2023, 2024). It
is essential to assess whether the utilized or generated questions possess the necessary quality for designated purposes.
The quest for effective methodologies in the automatic
assessment of question quality continues to evolve. Cur* Corresponding author: C. Li (lichaozhuo@bupt.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15248

