The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Small Language Model Makes an Effective Long Text Extractor
Yelin Chen1 * † , Fanjin Zhang2 * ‡ , Jie Tang2‡
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xinjiang University, Urumqi 830049, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
ylin@stu.xju.edu.cn, {fanjinz, jietang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Dr. Ware's profile snippet:

Abstract

Prior to joining the UMMS faculty , Dr. Ware founded QualityMetric
Incorporated and served as its CEO and Chairman for more than 10
years . ...... where he led the development of health status measures used
in the Health Insurance Experiment . He has published more than 400
peer-reviewed articles , …… was the first recipient of the International
Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research ( ISPOR )
Avedis Donabedian Outcomes Research Lifetime Achievement Award .

Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental problem
in natural language processing (NLP). However, the task of
extracting longer entity spans (e.g., awards) from extended
texts (e.g., homepages) is barely explored. Current NER
methods predominantly fall into two categories: span-based
methods and generation-based methods. Span-based methods require the enumeration of all possible token-pair spans,
followed by classification on each span, resulting in substantial redundant computations and excessive GPU memory usage. In contrast, generation-based methods involve prompting or fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) to adapt
to downstream NER tasks. However, these methods struggle with the accurate generation of longer spans and often
incur significant time costs for effective fine-tuning. To address these challenges, this paper introduces a lightweight
span-based NER method called SeNER, which incorporates a
bidirectional arrow attention mechanism coupled with LogNScaling on the [CLS] token to embed long texts effectively, and comprises a novel bidirectional sliding-window
plus-shaped attention (BiSPA) mechanism to reduce redundant candidate token-pair spans significantly and model interactions between token-pair spans simultaneously. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-ofthe-art extraction accuracy on three long NER datasets and
is capable of extracting entities from long texts in a GPUmemory-friendly manner.

Work Experience Gender Award

Figure 1: An example of entity/attribute extraction from an
author’s homepage, where “work experience” is a long entity block and “award” is a long entity.

Despite extensive studies, existing NER research rarely
focuses on extracting named entities from long texts, a common real-world scenario such as extracting author attributes
from homepages and identifying “methods” and “problems”
in academic papers. For example, in Figure 1, “work experience” is a long entity block while “award” is a long entity,
posing greater challenges for the NER task. We also extend
the input length of a NER method to extract short entities in
academic papers, as shown in Figure 2a, suggesting that long
input length brings clear benefits to extract entities more precisely due to the perception of longer contexts.
Traditional approaches treat the NER task as a sequence
labeling task, assigning a single label to each token, exemplified by the BIOES format. However, these methods are
inadequate for recognizing nested entities. To address this
issue, later efforts typically employ span-based methods (Su
et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2023b), which consider all possible token-pair spans and classify each span. These methods achieve satisfactory accuracy on sentence-based NER
tasks but struggle to identify entity blocks across sentences
or extract entities from long texts due to substantial redundant computations and GPU memory usage resulting
from O(L2 ) computation complexity based on the tokenpair span tensor, where L is the input length.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) demonstrate remarkable performance on a spectrum of natural language
understanding and generation tasks (Zhao et al. 2023). However, LLMs still fall short and do not align well with information extraction tasks (Qi et al. 2024). On the ScholarXL dataset (Zhang et al. 2024), extracting author attributes
via prompting GPT-4o (Achiam et al. 2023) by providing

Code — https://github.com/THUDM/scholarprofiling/tree/main/sener

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER), a fundamental task in
information extraction (IE), aims to identify spans indicating specific types of entities. It serves as the foundation for numerous downstream tasks, including relation extraction (Miwa and Bansal 2016), knowledge graph construction (Xu et al. 2017), and question answering (Mollá,
Van Zaanen, and Smith 2006).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Part of the work was done when Yelin interned at Zhipu AI.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

23623

