The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UniTR: A Unified Framework for Joint Representation Learning of Trajectories
and Road Networks
Jie Zhao1 * , Chao Chen1 * † , Yuanshao Zhu2 , Mingyu Deng1 , Yuxuan Liang2
1

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
{csjiezhao, cschaochen, dmy}@cqu.edu.cn, yuanshao@ieee.org, yuxliang@outlook.com
2

Abstract

Enhancing geospatial
awareness

High-order Regional mobility
relationship
statistics

Representation learning of urban spatial-temporal data is fundamental and critical, serving a wide range of intelligent applications. Given that road networks and trajectories are inherently interrelated, their joint representation learning can
significantly enhance the accuracy and utility of these applications. However, effectively learning joint representations
for these two types of data remains challenging, particularly
due to the complexities of interaction modeling and crossscale optimization. To this end, we propose a unified framework, named UniTR, for joint representation learning of road
networks and trajectories. Specifically, we first design a hierarchical propagation mechanism to model the complex manyto-many interactions between road networks and trajectories,
thereby generating informative embeddings. Then, a triplelevel contrastive optimization module is incorporated to systematically select valid positive and negative samples, further refining the embeddings. Experiments conducted on realworld datasets from two cities clearly demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of UniTR.

Connectivity

Transition
1 0.2 0.5 0.0 0.3
0.1 1 0.4 0.5 0.1
0.1 0.2 1 0.2 0.1
0.1 0.6 0.1 1 0.5
0.7 0.0 0.0 0.3 1

Empowering mobility
semantics

Multimodal data

Trajectory
MapMatching

Topology

Lanes, Type
Street view

Extra
attributes

Geographical
context

Road network

Figure 1: Illustration of mutual enhancement in joint representation of road networks and trajectories.

two data types into a unified learning framework allows for
mutual enhancement, leading to more effective representations. Figure 1 illustrates how the road network’s topology
constrains trajectory movements, while multi-modal information from road segments supplements their geographic
context. Meanwhile, trajectories reveal the high-order relationships between road segments, with transition frequencies highlighting the different significance of segments.
A few studies (Chen et al. 2021; Mao et al. 2022; Ma
et al. 2024), have sought to jointly characterize road networks and trajectories. These approaches typically use separate branches to extract features from road networks and trajectories, allowing the representations to complement each
other in a self-supervised manner. However, this paradigm of
separate modeling may not adequately account for the interactions between spatial structure and human mobility. Furthermore, effective joint representation learning of road networks and trajectories requires addressing two key aspects:
First, interactions between road networks and trajectories. Trajectories interact with multiple road segments, and
road segments are traversed by numerous trajectories. Modeling these complex many-to-many relationships is crucial
for learning effective representations. Second, joint optimization across different representations. The embedding
spaces for road networks and trajectories exist on different scales. Both same-scale and cross-scale embedding optimization are vital for achieving meaningful representations.
To address the above challenges, we propose a unified
contrastive learning framework named UniTR for joint
representation learning of road networks and trajectories.

Code — https://github.com/csjiezhao/UniTR

Introduction
Urban spatial-temporal data, particularly road networks and
trajectories, are pivotal in understanding and modeling urban dynamics (Wang, Cao, and Philip 2020). The process of
representation learning for this data is essential, as it converts spatial-temporal objects into compact and informative
vector representations (Chen et al. 2024a). In practice, these
representations serve as the foundation for a wide range of
intelligent applications, such as traffic prediction (Zhao et al.
2023), route planning (Liu et al. 2023), and mobility analysis (Luca et al. 2021).
Road networks and trajectories are inherently interconnected, with road networks providing the foundational spatial structure and trajectories capturing the dynamic mobility
patterns that occur within this structure (Mao et al. 2022).
Given this interplay, their respective representations should
be learned jointly, rather than in isolation. Integrating these
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: cschaochen@cqu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13348

