The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual Information Purification for Lightweight SAR Object Detection
Xi Yang, Jiachen Sun, Songsong Duan, De Cheng *
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an
710071, China
{yangx, dcheng}@xidian.edu.cn, {sunjc, ssduan}@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Teacher

Before
SNS+KLD

𝑭𝒕𝒆𝒂

𝓛𝒌𝒅

𝓛𝒌𝒅

𝑭𝒔𝒕𝒖

Student
(b) Existing Methods

Head

𝑭𝒕𝒆𝒂

Head

SNS+KLD
𝓛𝒌𝒅

After
SNS+KLD

Synthetic aperture radar (SAR) object detection requires accurate identification and localization of targets at various
scales within SAR images. However, background clutter
and speckle noise can obscure key features and mislead the
knowledge distillation process. To address these challenges,
we introduce the Dual Information Purification Knowledge
Distillation (DIPKD) method, which improves the performance of the student model through three key strategies:
denoising, enrichment, and decoupling. First, our Selective
Noise Suppression (SNS) technique reduces speckle noise in
global features by minimizing misleading information from
the teacher model. Second, the Knowledge Level Decoupling
(KLD) module separates features into target and non-target
knowledge, balancing feature mapping and reducing background noise to enhance the extraction of critical information
for the student model. Finally, the Reverse Information Transfer (RIT) module refines intermediate features in the student
model, compensating for the loss of detailed local information. Experimental results demonstrate that DIPKD significantly outperforms existing distillation techniques in SAR
object detection, achieving 60.2% and 51.4% mAP scores
on the SSDD and HRSID datasets, respectively. Additionally,
the student model shows performance improvements of 1.3%
and 2.9% over the teacher model, highlighting the effectiveness of the information purification approach.

Teacher

Head

SNS+KLD

Student

𝓛𝒓𝒊
𝑭𝒔𝒕𝒖

RIT

Head

(b) Ours Method

Figure 1: Comparison of existing methods with ours: (a)
Existing methods often overlook noise management, leading to the unfiltered distillation of misleading information
from teacher models to student models. (b) Our approach
refines knowledge with precision and supplements intermediate features with detailed output information.

As illustraged in Figure 1(a), most existing KD methods typically guide the student model to learn the predictions (Wang et al. 2024) (Chen et al. 2021), intermediate
features (Zhixing et al. 2021) (Li et al. 2023) (He et al.
2024) (Ni et al. 2023), and attention maps (Zagoruyko and
Komodakis 2022) of teacher model via knowledge transfer.
In order to overcome the issue of misleading noisy information, various decoupling strategies have been proposed
(Guo et al. 2021) (Yang et al. 2022c). These strategies distinguish context-related foregrounds from context-unrelated
backgrounds by generating imitation masks. However, these
approaches have three limitations. First, unlike natural images, SAR images contain unique speckle noise (Singh and
Shree 2016), which introduces a significant amount of misleading information into teacher models. Second, the extreme background ratio in remote sensing images makes it
challenging for the student model to learn effective knowledge. Finally, the limited semantic detail in SAR images hinders the student model’s ability to extract effective local information, making it challenging to achieve accurate detection results by relying solely on intermediate features.
To address these problems, this paper introduces the Dual
Information Purification Knowledge Distillation (DIPKD)
method, illustrated in Figure 1(b). The strategy focuses
on three key elements: (1) Mitigating speckle noise in
global features through selective wavelet domain noise re-

Introduction
Synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery is characterized by
its all-day, all-weather capabilities, making it a crucial tool
for earth observation. SAR object detection aims to identify and locate specific targets, such as ships or aircraft,
across vast SAR images, playing a vital role in monitoring
and safeguarding marine and air domains. Although largescale deep learning models perform well in SAR object detection, they still fall short of meeting real-time processing
requirements. Therefore, balance between accuracy and efficiency has become a crucial and significant research for the
lightweight object detection. Knowledge Distillation (KD)
(Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) is one of the effective
methods to address this issue.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9274

