The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HI-DR: Exploiting Health Status-Aware Attention and an EHR Graph+
for Effective Medication Recommendation
Taeri Kim1 , Jiho Heo1 , Hyunjoon Kim2 , Sang-Wook Kim1 *
1

Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, South Korea
2
Department of Data Science, Hanyang University, South Korea
{taerik, linda0123, hyunjoonkim, wook}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract

chronic. However, instance-based methods are unable to distinguish between the two conditions, which can be estimated
from each patient’s past health records (Shang et al. 2019b;
Yang et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2024).
To alleviate this limitation of instance-based methods,
longitudinal-based methods utilize not only the diagnoses
and procedures given at the patient’s current visit but also
her past health records (Shang et al. 2019b; Yang et al.
2021; Ma et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023; Kim
et al. 2024). Longitudinal-based methods usually consist of
two components, an encoder to obtain patient representation
and a predictor to determine the medications that align with
this patient representation. The encoders in most of these
methods aggregate the diagnoses/procedures given at both
the patient’s current and past visits via a Gated Recurrent
Unit (Cho et al. 2014) to obtain a patient representation indicative of her current health status considering her acute or
chronic condition. The predictors in many of these methods
first obtain medication representations by capturing relations between co-prescribed medications. For this, they apply Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling
2017) to the Electronic Health Records (EHR) graph, which
represents medications as nodes and connects two medication nodes with an edge if and only if they have been coprescribed in at least one visit among all visits of all patients.
Then, they utilize the patient representation generated by the
encoder and these medication representations to obtain (a)
a representation for every medication, reflecting how much
each medication is relevant to the patient’s current health
status, and (b) a vector for the medications prescribed at the
patient’s past visits, reflecting how much the health status
at each of her past visits is related to her current one. Finally, they recommend medications to the patient by fusing
the patient representation, representation (a), and vector (b).
Based on this common framework, many longitudinal-based
methods have been developed by improving one of the encoder and the predictor in existing ones.
In this paper, we focus on the following two ideas in the
predictor for effective medication recommendation.
(Idea 1) To recommend accurate medications, in generating vector (b), the medications prescribed in the health status
dissimilar to the patient’s current one should not be considered, even if they were prescribed at her past visits; the medications prescribed in the health status similar to the patient’s

We focus on the medication recommendation problem aiming to recommend accurate medications for a patient’s current visit. Most existing methods for this problem utilize
the patient’s current health status, medications prescribed
at her past visits, and an Electronic Health Records (EHR)
graph which represents whether medications have been coprescribed. However, we point out their two key limitations:
(1) they have difficulty in utilizing only the medications
which have been prescribed in health status similar to the patient’s current health status, regardless of whether they are
prescribed at her past visits or at other patients’ visits; (2)
for two medications that have ever been co-prescribed, their
EHR graph does not consider the degree to which one medication is prescribed together when the other is prescribed.
To address these two limitations, we propose a novel medication recommendation framework, named HI-DR (pronounced as ‘Hi Doctor’), composed of following two core
ideas: (Idea 1) Health status-aware attentIon; (Idea 2) an electronic health recorDs gRaph+. Extensive experiments on realworld datasets demonstrate the significant superiority of HIDR (up to 18.69% higher accuracy than the best competitor)
and the effectiveness of two core ideas in HI-DR.

Code — https://github.com/Bigdasgit/HI-DR

1

Introduction

Medication recommendation aims to recommend accurate
medications to a patient at her current visit. This field has
been actively studied as it can save time and effort of doctors in prescribing medications to patients, and can be useful
even in circumstances short of doctors (Choi et al. 2016a;
Zheng et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2020, 2022; Kim et al. 2024).
Early medication recommender systems relied on
instance-based methods (Zhang et al. 2017; Wang et al.
2018; Gong et al. 2021), which recommend medications to
a patient by considering the diagnoses and procedures only
given at her current visit. Even if some patients receive
the same diagnoses and procedures at their current visit,
the appropriate medications to prescribe could be different
depending on whether each patient’s condition is acute or
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11950

