The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

WatE: A Wasserstein t-distributed Embedding Method for
Information-enriched Graph Visualization
Minjie Cheng1 , Dixin Luo2 , Hongteng Xu1,3 *
1

2

Gaoling School of Artifcial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract
Aggregation

As a fundamental problem of graph analysis, graph visualization aims to embed a set of graphs in a low-dimensional
(e.g., 2D) space and provide insights into their distribution
and clustering structure. Focusing on this problem, we propose a novel Wasserstein t-distributed embedding (WatE)
method, leading to an information-enriched graph visualization paradigm. Our method learns a graph neural network to
represent each graph as the mean and covariance of its node
embedding distribution. Accordingly, our method can visualize each graph as an ellipse (determined by the mean and
the covariance) rather than a single point. The positions of
different ellipses reveal the relations among different graphs
as traditional visualization methods do, while the size and
shape of an ellipse preserve the node-level structural information of the corresponding graph. We propose a regularized
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (Rt-SNE) framework to learn the visualization model, deriving a Wasserstein distance-based Student’s t-distribution of graph pairs
and fitting the distribution to the data distribution under regularization. Both subjective and objective evaluations demonstrate that WatE achieves encouraging performance in various
graph visualization and clustering tasks.

Node
Embeddings

Typical Graph
Embeddings

Our Graph
Embeddings

Figure 1: llustrations of typical graph embeddings and our
approach. For our graph embeddings, the ellipses are determined by the corresponding mean vectors and covariance
matrices related to the graph, while the arrows represent the
principal components of these covariance matrices, incorporating more graph information.

et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2019; You et al. 2020; Suresh et al.
2021) aggregate its node embeddings (via various readout
or global pooling operations) as its representation. Combining these embedding methods with traditional visualization
methods, e.g., t-SNE (Van der Maaten and Hinton 2008) often leads to encouraging graph visualization results, which
can capture graph-level clustering structures. However, this
strategy loses the node-level structural information due to
the aggregation of node embeddings — each graph is embedded as a single point in the latent space. Thus, the distribution of its node embeddings is ignored. On the contrary, although some attempts have been made to represent
a graph via the set of node embeddings directly (Grover and
Leskovec 2016; Kipf and Welling 2017; Petric Maretic et al.
2019), such set-level representations significantly increase
the difficulties in graph visualization. In particular, when
representing each graph as a set of node embeddings, we
have to compute the distance/similarity between two arbitrary graphs by comparing their node embedding sets with
high computational complexity. Additionally, when visualizing multiple graphs, we need to consider the hierarchical
structure of their node embeddings, which requires us to ensure the visualization reflects both the graph-level clustering
structure and the node-level distribution within each graph.
To overcome the above challenges, we propose a novel
Wasserstein t-distributed Embedding (WatE) method in this
study, which provides a new learning paradigm for graph
visualization. As illustrated in Figure 1, our WatE method

Code — https://github.com/minjiecheng/WatE

Introduction
In many application scenarios, we often need to explore the
distribution of graphs and visualize the graphs in a lowdimensional space, which may provide valuable insights for
downstream tasks. In drug development, each molecule can
be represented as a graph whose nodes are atoms and edges
are chemical bonds. Given multiple molecules, capturing
their clustering structure through visualization is significant
for toxicological analysis and virtual screening. For social
networks, each community corresponds to a subgraph of
users. It is beneficial for social network analysis to visualize
different communities based on their topological similarity.
Solving the above visualization problems requires us to
develop a graph embedding model that represents graphs in
a latent space. Given a graph, most existing methods (Xu
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16010

