The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CaRDiff: Video Salient Object Ranking Chain of Thought Reasoning for
Saliency Prediction with Diffusion
Yunlong Tang1,2, * , Gen Zhan1 , Li Yang1 , Yiting Liao1 , Chenliang Xu2
1

ByteDance
University of Rochester
{yunlong.tang, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu, {zhangen, yangli.ai, liaoyiting}@bytedance.com
2

Abstract
Video saliency prediction aims to identify the regions in a
video that attract human attention and gaze, driven by bottomup features from the video and top-down processes like memory and cognition. Among these top-down influences, language plays a crucial role in guiding attention by shaping
how visual information is interpreted. Existing methods primarily focus on modeling perceptual information while neglecting the reasoning process facilitated by language, where
ranking cues are crucial outcomes of this process and practical guidance for saliency prediction. In this paper, we propose CaRDiff (Caption, Rank, and generate with Diffusion),
a framework that imitates the process by integrating multimodal large language model (MLLM), a grounding module,
and a diffusion model, to enhance video saliency prediction.
Specifically, we introduce a novel prompting method VSORCoT (Video Salient Object Ranking Chain of Thought),
which utilizes an MLLM with a grounding module to caption
video content and infer salient objects along with their rankings and positions in each frame. This process derives ranking
maps that can be sufficiently leveraged by the diffusion model
to accurately decode the saliency maps for the given video.
Extensive experiments showcase the effectiveness of VSORCoT in improving the performance of video saliency prediction. CaRDiff performs better than state-of-the-art models on
the MVS dataset and demonstrates cross-dataset capabilities
on the DHF1k dataset through zero-shot evaluation.

Figure 1: Given (a) the input video, CaRDiff generates (b)
video captions and (c) salient objects ranking via VSORCoT. These create (d) ranking maps that guide the diffusion
model, resulting in (e) saliency predictions, which show accuracy compared to (f) ground-truth saliency maps.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of online video platforms, millions
of videos are produced and consumed daily. This surge
presents new challenges in video processing, such as enhancing video quality to improve user experience and compressing videos to save storage costs. Identifying regions of
interest (ROIs) within videos has, therefore, become crucial:
on the one hand, quality enhancement can focus on these regions; on the other hand, compression algorithms can be locally applied to non-interest regions. This maximizes users’
experience while minimizing video storage and transmission
costs. This growing importance of identifying and prioritizing ROIs in videos has led to increased research on video
saliency prediction (Droste et al. 2020; Bellitto et al. 2021;

Wang et al. 2021b; Jain et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2022; Xiong
et al. 2024; Wen et al. 2024), which aims to predict the regions of a video most likely to capture human attention and
gaze.
Though significant progress has been made in this area, as
today’s video content becomes increasingly rich and scenes
become more complex, video saliency prediction models
trained on limited-size and limited-scope datasets (Wang
et al. 2018; Mathe and Sminchisescu 2015) are gradually
becoming inadequate. To address this issue, some works
have proposed datasets with more diverse scenes, such as
the NPF (Yang et al. 2023) and the MVS dataset (Wen et al.
2024). However, due to the high costs associated with fixation annotation, the size of these datasets remains limited.

* Work done during internship at ByteDance.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7302

