The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Emergence-Inspired Multi-Granularity Causal Learning
Hanwen Luo1, 2 , Guoxian Yu1, 2, * , Jun Wang2 , Yanyu Xu1 , Yongqing Zheng2, 3 , Qingzhong Li2, 3
1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
SDU-NTU Joint Centre for AI Research, Shandong University, Jinan, China
3
Dareway Software Co., Ltd., Jinan, China
hwluo@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {gxyu, kingjun, xu yanyu, lqz}@sdu.edu.cn, zhengyongqing@dareway.com.cn
2

Abstract

timization techniques (Lee et al. 2020), and robustness enhancements (He et al. 2021). These studies aim to improve
the performance of causal learning algorithms when handling complex datasets, and increase their robustness and
adaptability to noise. The exploration of multi-granularity
data (Liang et al. 2024b) has emerged as a current research
focus, presenting new challenges for application of causal
learning methods in complex systems.
While micro structures focus on the direct causality between micro variables, we define the macro structures as
the collective influence of certain micro variables impacting
other micro ones. At the micro-level, it is possible to capture more detailed and comprehensive information. However, when the number of micro-level variables is large and
the structure becomes overly complex, this complexity may
lead to inaccuracies or omissions in causal discovery. In
contrast, observing from a macro perspective allows certain causal relationships to manifest with stronger causal effects, thereby facilitating their identification. Contemporary
causal learning algorithms predominantly focus on microlevel causal discovery, neglecting the potential insights that
can be gained from learning causal structures at the macrolevel.
Emergence phenomena manifesting as overall behaviors
that cannot be directly inferred from the behavior of individual parts, exhibiting entirely new properties not present in
the individuals (Tononi and Koch 2015; Epstein and Axtell
1996; Wei et al. 2022). It reveals that the collective influence of micro-level groups on other variables cannot simply
be decomposed into the individual effects of each variable
within the group. Inspired by the emergence phenomenon,
we developed a multi-granularity causal discovery approach,
EMCausal. Our method first aggregates micro-level variables into macro-level using a Progressive Mapping Encoder
(PME), motivated by the concept of supervenience (Horgan
1993), wherein the complete observation of the micro system determines the state of the macro system then utilizes
both the micro variables and macro representations to reconstruct the micro variables, simulating the process of causal
emergence to extract a multi-granularity causal structure.
Additionally, EMCausal imposes a micro-macro consistency constraint to ensure coherence in the multi-granularity
causal structure. Upon completion of training, these multigranularity causal structures can be derived directly from

Existing causal learning algorithms focus on micro-level
causal discovery, confronting significant challenges in identifying the influence of macro systems, composed of microlevel variables, on other variables. This difficulty arises because the causal relationships in macro systems are often mediated through micro-level causal interactions, which can lead
to erroneous causal discovery or omission when dispersed.
To address this issue, we propose the Emergence-inspired
Multi-granularity Causal learning (EMCausal) method. Inspired by the emerging phenomena of aggregating micro level
variables into macro level representations, EMCausal introduces a progressive mapping encoder to simulate the process,
thus capturing the causal relationships driven by these macro
entities. Next, it introduces a causal consistency constraint to
collaboratively reconstruct micro variables using macro-level
representations, enabling the learning of a multi-granular
causal structure. Experimental results on both synthetic and
real datasets demonstrate that EMCausal can identify causal
graphs under the influence of causal emergence, outperforming competitive baselines in term of accuracy and robustness.

Introduction
Causal discovery is integral to scientific research, as it focuses on uncovering the underlying mechanisms that drive
observed phenomena. In the complex systems, distinguishing causal relationships from mere correlations is essential for the effective design of interventions, policy development, and the formulation of predictive models that can
adapt to dynamic environments (Cui and Athey 2022; Cai
et al. 2024).
Early causal discovery algorithms primarily rely on conditional independence tests (Spirtes et al. 2000; Colombo,
Maathuis et al. 2014), which require large sample sizes. Alternatively, another line of works involve searching for the
causal graph with the highest score using various search
strategies (Chickering 2002b; Yang et al. 2023). Since
Zheng et al. (2018) proposed the continuous optimization
acyclicity constraint, researchers have further extended the
continuous optimization of causal learning, including nonlinear extensions (Zheng et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2019), op* Corresponding author: Guoxian Yu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19198

