The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Depth-Centric Dehazing and Depth-Estimation from
Real-World Hazy Driving Video
Junkai Fan1 , Kun Wang1 , Zhiqiang Yan1 , Xiang Chen1 , Shangbing Gao2 , Jun Li1 * and Jian Yang1 *
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Huaiyin Institute of Technology, China
{junkai.fan, kunwang, yanzq, chenxiang, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, gaoshangbing@hyit.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we study the challenging problem of simultaneously removing haze and estimating depth from real monocular hazy videos. These tasks are inherently complementary:
enhanced depth estimation improves dehazing via the atmospheric scattering model (ASM), while superior dehazing contributes to more accurate depth estimation through the brightness consistency constraint (BCC). To tackle these intertwined
tasks, we propose a novel depth-centric learning framework
that integrates the ASM model with the BCC constraint. Our
key idea is that both ASM and BCC rely on a shared depth
estimation network. This network simultaneously exploits adjacent dehazed frames to enhance depth estimation via BCC
and uses the refined depth cues to more effectively remove
haze through ASM. Additionally, we leverage a non-aligned
clear video and its estimated depth to independently regularize
the dehazing and depth estimation networks. This is achieved
by designing two discriminator networks: DMFIR enhances
high-frequency details in dehazed videos, and DMDR reduces
the occurrence of black holes in low-texture regions. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the proposed method outperforms
current state-of-the-art techniques in both video dehazing and
depth estimation tasks, especially in real-world hazy scenes.

(a) Misaligned video frame pairs (L: hazy frame, R: matched clear reference)

(b) Estimate depth using hazy videos (L: hazy frame, R: depth-Lite-Mono)

(c) Dehaze first, then estimate depth (L: dehazed-DVD, R: depth-Lite-Mono)

(d) Simultaneously dehaze and estimate depth (L: dehazed, R: depth) (Ours)

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of DVD (Fan et al. 2024), LiteMono (Zhang et al. 2023) and our DCL for dehazing and
depth estimation in real-world hazy scenes.

Code — https://github.com/fanjunkai1/DCL

Introduction

with d(x) as the scene depth and β(λ) as the scattering coefficient for wavelength λ. Clearly, t(x) shows that ASM
is depth-dependent, with improved depth estimation leading to better dehazing performance. Depth is estimated from
real monocular hazy video using a brightness consistency
constraint (BCC) between a pixel position x in the current
frame and its corresponding pixel position y in an adjacent
frame (Wang et al. 2021), that is,

Recently, video dehazing and depth estimation in real-world
monocular hazy video have garnered increasing attention
due to their importance in various downstream visual tasks,
such as object detection (Hahner et al. 2021), semantic segmentation (Ren et al. 2018), and autonomous driving (Li
et al. 2023). Most video dehazing methods (Xu et al. 2023;
Fan et al. 2024) rely on a single-frame haze degradation
model expressed through the atmospheric scattering model
(ASM) (McCartney 1976; Narasimhan and Nayar 2002):
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A∞ (1 − t(x)),

y ∼ KPx→y d(x)K −1 x,

(2)

where K is the camera intrinsic parameter and Px→y is the
relative pose for the reprojection. This suggests that clearer
frames contribute to more accurate depth estimation. These
two findings motivate the integration of the ASM model with
the BCC constraint into a unified learning framework.
In practice, while both ASM and BCC yield promising dehazing results and depth estimates on synthetic hazy
videos (Xu et al. 2023; Gasperini et al. 2023), respectively,
they often fall short in real-world scenes as it is difficult to

(1)

where I(x), J(x) and t(x) denote the hazy image, clear image and transmission map at a pixel position x, respectively.
A∞ represents the infinite airlight and t(x) = e−β(λ)d(x)
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2852

