The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multimodal Variational Autoencoder: A Barycentric View
Peijie Qiu1 , Wenhui Zhu2 , Sayantan Kumar1 , Xiwen Chen3 , Jin Yang1 , Xiaotong Sun4 , Abolfazl
Razi3 , Yalin Wang2 , Aristeidis Sotiras1*
1

Washington University in St. Louis
2
Arizona State University
3
Clemson University
4
University of Arkansas
{peijie.qiu, sayantan.kumar, yang.jin, aristeidis.sotiras}@wustl.edu
{wzhu59, ylwang}@asu.edu, {xiwenc, arazi}@clemson.edu, xs018@uark.edu
Abstract

as unsupervised, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs; Goodfellow et al. 2014) and variational autoencoders (VAEs; Kingma and Welling 2013). In particular, we focus on VAEs for multimodal representation learning since VAEs are graphical probabilistic models capable
of learning an explicit latent distribution, which has the
potential to directly learn the joint distributions of multiple modalities (Suzuki, Nakayama, and Matsuo 2016; Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2018). Despite their nice
probabilistic properties and the success in unimodal applications, the direct translation of VAEs to the multimodal case
(e.g., feeding the multimodal data to VAEs) is challenging,
as they struggle with handling missing modalities and performing cross-modal generations. Therefore, the design of
multimodal VAEs seeks to form a modality-invariant and
modality-specific latent representation by learning a joint latent distribution (so-called joint posterior) to aggregate the
information from different modalities (Ngiam et al. 2011;
Suzuki, Nakayama, and Matsuo 2016; Baltrušaitis, Ahuja,
and Morency 2018). The modality-specific and modalityinvariant formulation naturally enables a cross-modal generation (Shi et al. 2019). In addition, it can also handle missing
modalities by directly sampling the learned joint posterior.
The core objective of multimodal VAEs then revolves
around how to approximate the joint posterior by aggregating the unimodal posterior, also known as unimodal inference distribution in VAEs. This typically involves finding
a proper aggregation function. However, such aggregation
functions are challenging to identify due to the intractability of the true joint posterior. Previous explorations of multimodal VAEs addressed this challenge mainly through the
lens of experts in statistics by aggregating unimodal inference distributions with a product of experts (PoE; Wu and
Goodman 2018), a mixture of experts (MoE; Shi et al. 2019),
or a combination of both (MoPoE; Sutter, Daunhawer, and
Vogt 2021). Although empirical studies have shown their
success for multimodal VAEs, theoretical analysis of their
properties is still insufficient.
In this paper, we provide a theoretical view of previous multimodal VAEs in a unified way through the lens
of barycenter. The barycentric distribution is the mean distribution of a set of distributions, defined by minimizing
the weighted sum of divergences to these distributions. Interestingly, we discovered that the distributions aggregated

Multiple signal modalities, such as vision and sounds, are naturally present in real-world phenomena. Recently, there has
been growing interest in learning generative models, in particular variational autoencoder (VAE), for multimodal representation learning especially in the case of missing modalities. The primary goal of these models is to learn a modalityinvariant and modality-specific representation that characterizes information across multiple modalities. Previous attempts at multimodal VAEs approach this mainly through the
lens of experts, aggregating unimodal inference distributions
with a product of experts (PoE), a mixture of experts (MoE),
or a combination of both. In this paper, we provide an alternative generic and theoretical formulation of multimodal
VAE through the lens of barycenter. We first show that PoE
and MoE are specific instances of barycenters, derived by
minimizing the asymmetric weighted KL divergence to unimodal inference distributions. Our novel formulation extends
these two barycenters to a more flexible choice by considering different types of divergences. In particular, we explore
the Wasserstein barycenter defined by the 2-Wasserstein distance, which better preserves the geometry of unimodal distributions by capturing both modality-specific and modalityinvariant representations compared to KL divergence. Empirical studies on three multimodal benchmarks demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Multiple data types are naturally present together to characterize the same underlying phenomena in the real world.
Multimodal representation learning is thus of interest across
various fields, including computer vision, natural language
processing, and the biomedical domain. However, understanding and interrelating different modalities is a challenging task due to the laboriousness of human annotations and
the absence of certain modalities in practice. These two factors pose a significant challenge to the application of unimodal and discriminative (supervised) representation learning methods to the multimodal case (see e.g., Karpathy and
Fei-Fei 2015; Pham et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2023).
Therefore, we focus on the generative models for
representation learning, which are typically considered
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20060

