The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RTP-LX: Can LLMs Evaluate Toxicity in Multilingual Scenarios?
Adrian de Wynter1 2 , Ishaan Watts1 , Tua Wongsangaroonsri1 , Minghui Zhang1 , Noura Farra1 ,
Nektar Ege Altıntoprak1 , Lena Baur1 , Samantha Claudet1 , Pavel Gajdušek1 , Qilong Gu1 ,
Anna Kaminska1 , Tomasz Kaminski1 , Ruby Kuo1 , Akiko Kyuba1 , Jongho Lee1 , Kartik Mathur1 ,
Petter Merok1 , Ivana Milovanović1 , Nani Paananen, Vesa-Matti Paananen1 , Anna Pavlenko1 ,
Bruno Pereira Vidal1 , Luciano Ivan Strika1 , Yueh Tsao1 , Davide Turcato1 , Oleksandr Vakhno1 ,
Judit Velcsov1 , Anna Vickers1 , Stéphanie F. Visser1 , Herdyan Widarmanto1 , Andrey Zaikin1 ,
Si-Qing Chen1
1

Microsoft
The University of York
adewynter@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

Human
Llama 3, 70B
Mistral-v2, 7B
Gemma, 7B

Large language models (LLMs) and small language models (SLMs) are being adopted at remarkable speed, although
their safety still remains a serious concern. With the advent of multilingual S/LLMs, the question now becomes a
matter of scale: can we expand multilingual safety evaluations of these models with the same velocity at which they
are deployed? To this end, we introduce RTP-LX, a humantranscreated and human-annotated corpus of toxic prompts
and outputs in 28 languages. RTP-LX follows participatory
design practices, and a portion of the corpus is especially designed to detect culturally-specific toxic language. We evaluate 10 S/LLMs on their ability to detect toxic content in a
culturally-sensitive, multilingual scenario. We find that, although they typically score acceptably in terms of accuracy,
they have low agreement with human judges when scoring holistically the toxicity of a prompt; and have difficulty
discerning harm in context-dependent scenarios, particularly
with subtle-yet-harmful content (e.g. microaggressions, bias).
We release this dataset to contribute to further reduce harmful
uses of these models and improve their safe deployment.

Llama 3, 8B
Mistral-v3, 7B
Llama 2, 7B
Gemma, 2B

Bias
Identity Attack

Microaggression

Violence

0

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

Self-Harm

Toxicity

Sexual Content
Insult

Figure 1: Weighted Cohen’s κ correlations per harm category in RTP-LX prompts. S/LLMs could detect insults, violence, and sexual content. Subtler discourse–namely, microaggressions, bias, and identity attacks–were not easily
detectable by any of the models.

Repository — https://github.com/microsoft/RTP-LX

1

GPT-4 Turbo
ACS
Llama 2, 70B
Llama Guard

Introduction

Warning: This paper contains and discusses content that
may be offensive or upsetting. Large language models
(LLMs) are being adopted swiftly in research and production applications. However, their tendency to memorise content (Carlini et al. 2023; Lee et al. 2023; De Wynter et al.
2023) and the fact that they are trained from publiclyavailable data means that they are very prone to spew harmful content (Sheng et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2023; Rauh et al.
2022; Gehman et al. 2020). With the advent of more capable, multilingual LLMs such as GPT-4 (OpenAI 2024) or
BLOOMZ (Wang, Zhai, and Hassan 2020), toxic language
detection must scale fast and effectively to the dozens, if not
hundreds, of languages these models support.

LLMs and their more-portable, typically-open-source
counterparts, small language models (SLMs) have been
used as annotators for some tasks with good results (Wei,
Chen, and Luo 2024; Zheng et al. 2023). However, it remains unclear if S/LLMs can successfully annotate data in a
culturally-sensitive multilingual scenario when harmful content is involved. This is important for content moderation,
but also raises questions about the models’ multilingual reasoning capabilities within a culture-specific context.

Contributions
To address whether S/LLMs can annotate and reason over
toxic, culturally-specific content, we introduce a multilin-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27940

