The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cherry-Picking in Time Series Forecasting: How to Select Datasets to Make Your
Model Shine
Luis Roque1, 2 , Vitor Cerqueira1, 2 , Carlos Soares1, 2, 3 , Luis Torgo4
1

Faculdade de Engenharia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal
2
Laboratory for AI and CS (LIACC), Porto, Portugal
3
Fraunhofer Portugal AICOS, Porto, Portugal
4
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada
luis roque@live.com

Abstract

1. A limited number of datasets,
2. Datasets that may not be representative of real-world
data,
3. A subset of time series when working with large datasets,
and
4. A small set of baseline and state-of-the-art (SOTA) models for comparison, often with inconsistent and unfair
tuning efforts.

The importance of time series forecasting drives continuous
research and the development of new approaches to tackle
this problem. Typically, these methods are introduced through
empirical studies that frequently claim superior accuracy for
the proposed approaches. Nevertheless, concerns are rising
about the reliability and generalizability of these results due
to limitations in experimental setups. This paper addresses a
critical limitation: the number and representativeness of the
datasets used. We investigate the impact of dataset selection
bias, particularly the practice of cherry-picking datasets, on
the performance evaluation of forecasting methods. Through
empirical analysis with a diverse set of benchmark datasets,
our findings reveal that cherry-picking datasets can significantly distort the perceived performance of methods, often exaggerating their effectiveness. Furthermore, our results
demonstrate that by selectively choosing just four datasets
— what most studies report — 46% of methods could be
deemed best in class, and 77% could rank within the top
three. Additionally, recent deep learning-based approaches
show high sensitivity to dataset selection, whereas classical
methods exhibit greater robustness. Finally, our results indicate that, when empirically validating forecasting algorithms
on a subset of the benchmarks, increasing the number of
datasets tested from 3 to 6 reduces the risk of incorrectly
identifying an algorithm as the best one by approximately
40%. Our study highlights the critical need for comprehensive evaluation frameworks that more accurately reflect realworld scenarios. Adopting such frameworks will ensure the
development of robust and reliable forecasting methods.

Regarding point 3), recent work addresses this problem
and identifies several flaws in the most commonly used
datasets in the area of time series anomaly detection. It suggests that comparisons in many papers introducing new approaches might not generalize to the real world (Wu and
Keogh 2023). An example of point 4) is the comparison
between simple one-layer linear models and sophisticated
Transformer-based time series forecasting models (Zeng
et al. 2022). To the best of our knowledge, no work has yet
been published that attempts to understand the implications
of point 1) and 2). In this paper, we focus on understanding the consequences of point 1) and how such selection can
introduce bias, impacting the quality and generalizability of
the results.
In the context of dataset selection, we use the term cherrypicking for the deliberate or random process of selecting a
limited number of datasets that may not be representative
of the broader data landscape. This practice involves selecting specific datasets that might showcase the strengths of
a model while ignoring others that could reveal its weaknesses. Cherry-picking can lead to biased results and overly
optimistic model performance estimates. Thus, it can also
significantly impact the quality and generalizability of new
forecasting models, making them less reliable in real-world
applications.
Our results show that cherry-picking specific datasets can
significantly distort perceived model performance, even as
the number of datasets used for reporting results increases.
Our analysis shows that with a commonly used selection of
4 selected datasets, 46% of models could be reported as the
best, and 77% could be presented within the top 3 positions,
highlighting the potential for biased reporting.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides background information, including definitions of
the forecasting problem and the modeling approaches used.

Code and Datasets — https://github.com/luisroque/bench

Introduction
Time series forecasting is critical in various application domains, including finance, meteorology, and industry. Over
the past decades, there has been significant interest in developing accurate forecasting models, leading to a variety of
methods, from traditional statistical techniques to advanced
deep learning models.
The selection of datasets for evaluating forecasting models can significantly impact the experimental results. For various reasons, such as reducing computational complexity, researchers often select:
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20192

