The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tensorized Label Learning Based Fast Fuzzy Clustering
Xingyu Xue* , Jingjing Xue* , Quanxue Gao† , Qianqian Wang
School of Telecommunication Engineering, Xidian University, Shaanxi 710071, China.
23011211150@stu.xidian.edu.cn,xuejingjing@xidian.edu.cn,qxgao@xidian.edu.cn,qqwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view graph clustering methods have been widely concerned due to the ability of dealing with arbitrarily shaped
datasets. However, many methods with higher time and space
complexity make them challenging to deal with large-scale
datasets. Besides, many fuzzy clustering methods needs additional regularization terms or hyper-parameters to obtain the
membership matrix or avoid trivial solutions, which weakens
the model generalization ability. Furthermore, inconsistent
clustering labels can arise when there are significant discrepancies between views, making it challenging to effectively
leverage the complementary information from different views.
To this end, we propose Tensorized Label Learning based Fast
Fuzzy Clustering (TLLFFC). Specifically, we design a novel
balanced regularization term to reduce pressure of tuning regularization parameters for fuzzy clustering. The label transmission strategy with the anchor graph makes TLLFFC suitable
for large-scale datasets. Moreover, incorporating the Schatten
p-norm regularization on the label matrices can effectively
unearth the complementary information distributed among
views, thereby align the labels across views more consistently.
Extensive experiments verify the superiority of TLLFFC.

Introduction
In recent decades, data mining and machine learning techniques have been increasingly applied in fields such as image processing (Gong, Yuan, and Bao 2021a), video annotation (Liu and Tsang 2015), and data analysis (Liu and
Tsang 2017). Meanwhile, with the widespread use of various
sensors and technologies, descriptions of the same object
have become increasingly diverse and heterogeneous (Gong
et al. 2022; Gong, Yuan, and Bao 2021b). Multi-view clustering methods (Cui et al. 2023) can identify these multiview datasets with common features and integrate them into
groups, ensuring that samples within the same cluster exhibit
high similarity. Among them, multi-view graph clustering
methods (Wan et al. 2023) become popular due to their abilities of dealing with arbitrarily shaped multimedia data better.
Multi-view graph clustering methods (Wang, Yang, and Liu
2019; Wu, Lin, and Zha 2019) usually need to construct an
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21868

n × n large graph, and implement the eigenvalue decomposition step, or solve the optimal problem directly (Wang,
Yang, and Liu 2019), whose time complexity are O(V n3 )
or O(V n2 ). Therefore, they are not suitable for large-scale
multi-view datasets.
The anchor technique (Xia et al. 2023) has been utilized to
reduce the size of the similarity matrix and expedite the optimization process, yielding impressive performance across
various applications. Anchor points, which are representative
data points, effectively cover the entire data point cloud and
capture the internal structure of the data. Anchor-based methods first generate representative anchors from the original
samples using a specific strategy and then construct a similarity graph to measure the similarity between samples and
anchors. Following this, clustering processes are applied to
the representation matrix.
Further, some researches use the two-step strategy to get
final label matrices (Wang et al. 2021; Kang et al. 2020),
whose solutions are suboptimal, as they are far away from the
solutions obtained by directly solving the original problem.
Therefore, (1) the rank constraint are introduce to ensure c
connected components to avoid the post-process (Xia et al.
2023; Li et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2023; Xue et al. 2024); (2)
some novel optimization strategies (Qiang et al. 2023; Nie
et al. 2022) or Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) models (Yang et al. 2020) are proposed, which can obtain the final
solution directly. The former has high requirements on parameters, and in some cases it may not be possible to obtain
bipartite graphs with clear connected components. The latter
employs the crisp partitioning to make each data point belong
to a cluster. In contrast to crisp partitioning, fuzzy clustering
methods (Zhang et al. 2024) can represent the degree of ambiguity or certainty with which a data point belongs to a cluster.
In practical scenarios, the class attributes of most objects are
inherently ambiguous, making fuzzy clustering techniques
a more accurate reflection of the real world. Consequently,
many researchers have chosen to explore and advance this
technique.
However, in order to obtain the membership matrix or
avoid trivial solutions, some regularization terms or hyperparameters are introduced (Jiang and Gao 2022; Hu et al.
2024; Yang et al. 2024). Considering these parameters do
not have practical interpretations, how to tactfully determine
them is a severe challenge. A common way is to search these

