The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedPIA – Permuting and Integrating Adapters Leveraging Wasserstein
Barycenters for Finetuning Foundation Models in
Multi-Modal Federated Learning
Pramit Saha1 , Divyanshu Mishra1 , Felix Wagner1 , Konstantinos Kamnitsas1 , J. Alison Noble1
1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{pramit.saha, divyanshu.mishra, felix.wagner, konstantinos.kamnitsas, alison.noble}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

tion of large VLMs has highlighted the importance of finetuning, essential for adapting these models to specific tasks
with high accuracy. To enhance the generalization ability of
foundation models, extensive fine-tuning with large amounts
of diverse data from various sources is typically required.
However, aggregating all training data for centralized finetuning poses significant challenges. For example, collecting
data from clinical centers across multiple countries is often
infeasible due to privacy regulations.
The need to protect data privacy has led to the exploration of alternative approaches such as Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020; Acar et al.
2021; Karimireddy et al. 2020; Saha et al. 2024b; Wagner et al. 2024; Hernandez-Cruz et al. 2024; Wagner et al.
2023; Saha, Mishra, and Noble 2023). FL involves training models on local devices, like those in medical clinics
and hospitals, without transferring sensitive data to a central server. This decentralized approach mitigates the risk
of data breaches and ensures compliance with privacy regulations. However, fine-tuning models in local devices faces
challenges if there are limited computational resources and
small, localized datasets. These limitations hinder the independent fine-tuning of large VLMs, which require extensive
parameters and diverse datasets to capture the complexities
of real-world language and visual data. Addressing these
challenges requires solutions that balance data privacy with
the computational and dataset limitations of local devices.
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) has recently
gained attention. It freezes the original backbone and finetuning a small subset or a newly introduced set of parameters. FL, combined with PEFT, emerges as a promising
paradigm for collaborative model training while respecting
data privacy and minimizing communication overhead.
Related works have primarily explored combinations of
centralized PEFT algorithms and FedAvg. For example,
some approaches focus on training and communicating
adapters (Houlsby et al. 2019) or a small number of trainable
input tokens (Guo, Guo, and Wang 2023; Guo et al. 2023).
These investigations are mostly limited to single modality
scenarios, addressing only visual or textual tasks. Besides,
none of these studies tackle the issue of data heterogeneity
or task heterogeneity that lead to model drifts during local
client updates and result in an unstable and sub-optimal convergence of the server model (Li et al. 2020). Besides, such

Large Vision-Language Models (VLMs), possessing millions
or billions of parameters, typically require large text and image datasets for effective fine-tuning. However, collecting
data from various sites, especially in healthcare, is challenging due to strict privacy regulations. An alternative is to finetune these foundation models on end-user devices, such as
in medical clinics and hospitals, without sending data to a
server. These local clients typically have limited computing
power and small datasets, which are not enough for fully
fine-tuning large VLMs on their own. A naive solution to
these scenarios is to leverage parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) strategies such as adapters and apply federated learning (FL) algorithms to combine the learned adapter weights,
thereby respecting the resource limitations and data privacy
of the clients. However, this approach does not fully leverage
the knowledge from multiple adapters trained on diverse data
distributions and for diverse tasks. The adapters are adversely
impacted by data heterogeneity and task heterogeneity across
clients resulting in sub-optimal convergence. To this end,
we propose a novel framework called FedPIA that improves
upon the naive combinations of FL and PEFT by introducing Permutation and Integration of the local Adapters in the
server and global Adapters in the clients exploiting Wasserstein barycenters for improved blending of client-specific and
client-agnostic knowledge. This layerwise permutation helps
to bridge the gap in the parameter space of local and global
adapters before integration. We conduct over 2000 clientlevel experiments utilizing 48 medical image datasets across
five different medical vision-language FL task settings encompassing visual question answering as well as image and
report-based multi-label disease detection. Our experiments
involving diverse client settings, ten different modalities, and
two VLM backbones demonstrate that FedPIA consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art PEFT-FL baselines.

Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have recently
achieved significant progress in multi-modal learning (Li
et al. 2021; Kim, Son, and Kim 2021). Central to their capabilities are vast numbers of parameters, often in the millions or billions, which encapsulate the learned representations necessary for multi-modal comprehension. The evoluCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20228

