The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HEP-NAS: Towards Efficient Few-shot Neural Architecture Search via
Hierarchical Edge Partitioning
Jianfeng Li1 , Jiawen Zhang1 , Feng Wang1 * , Lianbo Ma2 *
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
College of Software, Northeastern University
fengwang@whu.edu.cn, malb@swc.neu.edu.cn

Abstract

tion. To improve search efficiency, (Pham et al. 2018) proposed one-shot NAS, which integrates all potential networks
within a supernet and trains them simultaneously using a
weight-sharing strategy, then uses this supernet as an estimator to evaluate the performance of candidate architectures.
This innovation significantly reduces the time cost from
thousands of GPU-Days to merely a few. However, despite
notable improvements, one-shot NAS is criticized (Bender
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021) for its diminished effectiveness as a proxy for evaluating candidate architecture performance and difficulties in identifying superior architectures
within the search space, due to the inherent properties of
joint training, namely co-adaptation. To elaborate, consider
two sub-supernets Na (wa , ws ) and Nb (wb , ws ) that share
the same weight ws . If they produce mismatched gradients
for ws when optimized independently, then optimizing the
whole supernet Ns (wa , wb ; ws ) would lead to a compromise
weight aimed at a global optimum, which may not be ideal
for either Na or Nb individually. As a result, evaluation of
Na and Nb might not reflect their true performance. To improve its accuracy, few-shot methods (Zhao et al. 2021; Hu
et al. 2022; Ly-Manson et al. 2024) divide operations into
distinct sub-supernets via edge-wise partition strategy, facilitating weight-sharing within each sub-supernet while maintaining separation across them, thereby mitigating disagreement among sub-supernets on how to update the weights of
shared module, which proved to be effective.

One-shot methods have significantly advanced the field of
neural architecture search (NAS) by adopting weight-sharing
strategy to reduce search costs. However, the accuracy of performance estimation can be compromised by co-adaptation.
Few-shot methods divide the entire supernet into individual
sub-supernets by splitting edge by edge to alleviate this issue, yet neglect relationships among edges and result in performance degradation on huge search space. In this paper, we
introduce HEP-NAS, a hierarchy-wise partition algorithm designed to further enhance accuracy. To begin with, HEP-NAS
treats edges sharing the same end node as a hierarchy, permuting and splitting edges within the same hierarchy to directly search for the optimal operation combination for each
intermediate node. This approach aligns more closely with
the ultimate goal of NAS. Furthermore, HEP-NAS selects the
most promising sub-supernet after each segmentation, progressively narrowing the search space in which the optimal
architecture may exist. To improve performance evaluation
of sub-supernets, HEP-NAS employs search space mutual
distillation, stabilizing the training process and accelerating
the convergence of each individual sub-supernet. Within a
given budget, HEP-NAS enables the splitting of all edges and
gradually searches for architectures with higher accuracy. Experimental results across various datasets and search spaces
demonstrate the superiority of HEP-NAS compared to stateof-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/Jianf-l/hepnas

Although few-shot methods outperform one-shot counterparts in performance, their partition strategy is not ideal.
Firstly, it overlooks the interrelationships among edges, providing limited alleviation to co-adaption within a hierarchy.
To begin with, selecting the optimal combination of operations for each intermediate node, works more relevant to
the objectives of NAS than choosing the best operation for
each edge independently. However, with edge-wise partition strategy, after segmenting a specific edge, each resulting sub-supernet still retains all operations on other edges
within the same hierarchy, leading to co-adaptation within
this hierarchy persisting during the subsequent joint training
process until all edges in this hierarchy are split. As a result,
when assessing the performance of candidate sub-supernets
and determining the optimal connections for an intermediate node using weights inherited from the supernet, the performance estimation remains inaccurate since the combina-

Introduction
In recent years, NAS has received widespread attention from
both academia and industry (Jiang, Wang, and Bie 2024;
Wang et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024) for its ability to automatically search for optimal network architecture for specific
tasks. Compared to traditional manually designed network
(He et al. 2016), NAS simplifies the human iterative design
process and uncovers more efficient and innovative network
architectures.
NAS was first introduced by (Zoph and Le 2016) using
reinforcement learning, which requires substantial computational resources, thereby impeding its practical applica* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18314

