The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Logical Analysis of Hanabi
Elise Perrotin
AIST, Tokyo, Japan
elise.perrotin@aist.go.jp

Abstract

represented not only all worlds that agents consider possible, but also all worlds they consider that other agents might
think possible, etc. This makes for very large and impractical
models. In particular satisfiability in multi-agent DEL with
common knowledge is known to be 2E XP T IME-complete
(Charrier et al. 2018).
DEL being too computationally heavy for practical applications is not a new problem, and a number of lightweight
fragments have been studied, generally with tractable epistemic planning as a goal. One of these proposals is the Epistemic Logic of Observation, or EL-O (Perrotin 2021). While
the standard knowledge modality is that of ‘knowing that’—
Ka φ reads “agent a knows that φ is true”—EL-O uses the
alternative ‘knowing whether’ operator, also interpreted as
‘seeing’: Sa φ reads “agent a knows whether φ is true”, or,
put differently, “agent a sees (the truth value of) φ”. The two
operators are interdefinable: knowing that a formula is true
amounts to seeing a formula that is true (i.e., Ka φ is equivalent to φ ∧ Sa φ), and seeing a formula amounts to either
knowing that it is true, or knowing that it is false (i.e., Sa φ
is equivalent to Ka φ ∨ Ka ¬φ). The scope of this ‘seeing’
operator is then restricted, so that agents can see propositional formulas and whether other agents see propositional
formulas, etc., but they cannot know disjunctions in general.
That is, formulas of the form Sa (φ ∨ ψ) are disallowed. This
restriction limits the reasoning power of agents, and in the
end ensures propositional complexity results by translation
into propositional logic: the EL-O satisfiability problem is
NP-complete, and the extension of EL-O with STRIPS-like
actions leads to PS PACE-complete planning.
In this paper we explore a formalization of Hanabi in ELO. Some of the static concepts of the game, such as knowing
whether a card is of a certain color, have a natural representation in EL-O. However, two main difficulties arise. The first
is that of common knowledge within groups of agents that
are not the full set of agents. Common knowledge in EL-O
is only defined for the full set of agents, and finite semantics for an extension of EL-O with common knowledge for
any group of agents is still an open problem. However the
latter is necessary in order to faithfully represent Hanabi in
EL-O while maintaining finiteness of actions descriptions.
Consider for example the following scenario:
Scenario 1. There are five players, and the cards have just
been distributed. By chance, all 5’s are already in players’

The card game Hanabi has recently gained popularity as a
benchmark for handling epistemic reasoning in AI systems.
However it has until now mostly been approached through
the lens of machine learning rather than formal logical analysis. This is mostly due to the fact that modeling Hanabi in
the standard epistemic logic DEL is untractable. In this paper we take a different approach to formalizing Hanabi, using
the simple epistemic logic EL-O as a starting point. We generalize common knowledge in EL-O to arbitrary groups of
agents and show how to overcome some of the limitations
EL-O places on agent reasoning by introducing a special reasoning action. Analyzing our formalization of Hanabi finally
leads us to introduce an alternative semantics for our generalization of EL-O in which models are finite and satisfiability
checking is NP-complete, and which is enough to fully describe the evolution of knowledge in a game of Hanabi.

Introduction
The importance of handling epistemic reasoning in AI systems has been receiving increasing recognition, as it is crucial in multi-agent situations with incomplete information
and in particular for human-robot collaboration. The card
game Hanabi has been proposed as a benchmark for advances in this field (Bard et al. 2020). Hanabi is a cooperative card game with partial information, where players
can see other players’ cards but not their own. Players must
then coordinate through restricted means of communication
to play cards in a particular order. Theory of mind is required
in order to communicate efficiently and reason about why
other players have made certain choices.
Most of the literature on Hanabi involves a combination of
heuristics and reinforcement learning to create a system capable of mimicking theory of mind well enough to play the
game (see e.g. Aru et al. (2023); Walton-Rivers, Williams,
and Bartle (2019)). Attempts at formal representations, on
the other hand, are typically limited to small fragments of
the game (Chetcuti-Sperandio et al. 2020; Gamblin, Niveau,
and Bouzid 2022). This is mostly due to the untractability
of the standard Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) (Van Ditmarsch, van Der Hoek, and Kooi 2007), in which must be
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15118

