The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Ship License Plate Recognition in the Wild: A Large Benchmark and
Strong Baseline
Baolong Liu1,2,3 , Ruiqing Yang1 , Roukai Huang1 , Wenhao Xu1 , Xin Pan4
Chuanhuang Li1 , Bin Wang5 , Xun Wang1,3 , Jianfeng Dong1,3 *
1
Zhejiang Gongshang University, 2 Key Laboratory of Public Security Information Application Based on Big-Data
Architecture, Ministry of Public Security, 3 Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data and Future E-Commerce Technology,
4
Zhejiang University and 5 Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) Network and Data Security

Abstract
The paper targets the challenging task of Ship License
Plate (SLP) recognition. Existing methods for SLP recognition are hampered by the scarcity of large and publicly
available datasets, leading to evaluations on small and nonrepresentative datasets. To alleviate it, we have built a large
dataset, called SLP34K, which consists of 34,385 images
collected by an intelligent traffic surveillance system. The
dataset is carefully manually annotated with text labels and
attributes, and presents high data diversity by multiple installation locations and long capturing period of the cameras. Additionally, we propose a simple yet effective SLP
recognition baseline method. The baseline is equipped with
a strong visual encoder that benefits from initial pre-training
via self-supervised learning, followed by further refinement
through our devised semantic enhancement module. Extensive experiments on SLP34K verify the effectiveness of our
proposed baseline. Moreover, while our baseline is designed
for SLP recognition, it can also be used for common scene
text recognition and achieve state-of-the-art performance on
seven mainstream scene text recognition datasets.

(a) Our collected ship license plates

(b) Extreme imaging conditions

Code, dataset, and supplementary materials —
https://github.com/HuiGuanLab/SLP34K
(c) Car license plates in CCPD dataset

Figure 1: Due to (a) complex character layouts and (b) extreme weather conditions, ship license plates face more intricate recognition challenges than (c) car license plates.

Introduction
Ship License Plate (SLP) is an important identity information that uniquely identifies ships. Hence, SLP recognition
is crucial in the field of intelligent waterway traffic, which
plays a significant role in a variety of ship-related applications, such as ship identity recognition, trajectory tracking,
and navigation safety.
In recent years, there have been ongoing research efforts
focusing on SLP recognition (Liu et al. 2017, 2022b; Zhou,
Jiang, and Guo 2022; Wu et al. 2023), while the progress
of this field has been limited. It is mainly due to the difficulty of capturing ship images, thus hindering the collection of large-scale SLP recognition datasets. Several datasets
have been developed for ship license plate recognition (Liu
et al. 2022b; Zhou, Jiang, and Guo 2022; Xu et al. 2024).
For instance, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2018) pioneered the

creation of an SLP dataset comprising 6,000 images from
103 different ships. Afterwards, Liu et al. (Liu et al. 2022b)
built a dataset of 2,350 SLP images, and Xu et al. (Xu et al.
2024) constructed a dataset that consists of 2,259 SLP images. However, all these datasets are small-scale, limiting
their utility for training deep learning based models. In addition, the images of existing SLP datasets are usually captured in a specific location, which restricts the diversity of
collected SLP images. This lack of diversity hampers the
development of robust SLP recognition models that are capable of performing effectively in real-world scenarios.
Beyond the dataset limitations, SLP itself poses great
challenges, primarily due to complex character spatial layout and visual degradation. This is mainly reflected in the

* Corresponding author, dongjf24@gmail.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5352

