The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FAMNet: Frequency-aware Matching Network for Cross-domain Few-shot
Medical Image Segmentation
Yuntian Bo, Yazhou Zhu, Lunbo Li, Haofeng Zhang*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{yuntian.bo, zyz nj, lunboli, zhanghf}@njust.edu.cn

CT

Abstract
Existing few-shot medical image segmentation (FSMIS)
models fail to address a practical issue in medical imaging: the domain shift caused by different imaging techniques,
which limits the applicability to current FSMIS tasks. To
overcome this limitation, we focus on the cross-domain fewshot medical image segmentation (CD-FSMIS) task, aiming to develop a generalized model capable of adapting to a
broader range of medical image segmentation scenarios with
limited labeled data from the novel target domain. Inspired
by the characteristics of frequency domain similarity across
different domains, we propose a Frequency-aware Matching
Network (FAMNet), which includes two key components:
a Frequency-aware Matching (FAM) module and a MultiSpectral Fusion (MSF) module. The FAM module tackles two
problems during the meta-learning phase: 1) intra-domain
variance caused by the inherent support-query bias, due to
the different appearances of organs and lesions, and 2) interdomain variance caused by different medical imaging techniques. Additionally, we design an MSF module to integrate
the different frequency features decoupled by the FAM module, and further mitigate the impact of inter-domain variance
on the model’s segmentation performance. Combining these
two modules, our FAMNet surpasses existing FSMIS models
and Cross-domain Few-shot Semantic Segmentation models
on three cross-domain datasets, achieving state-of-the-art performance in the CD-FSMIS task.

Spatial
domain

MRI

Frequency
domain

Smilarity Metrics

FFT

FFT

(a)

Low/Left
High/Right
Bands (Frequency)/Positon (Spatial)
(b)

Figure 1: Motivation of the proposed method. (a) CT and
MRI scans in the spatial and frequency domains. Frequency
spectra are processed using a Hamming window (Hamming 1977) and are center-shifted. (b) Quantitative metrics
for the similarity of CT and MRI in the spatial and frequency domains using structural similarity index measure
(SSIM) (Wang et al. 2004) and normalized mean square error (NMSE). Metrics are calculated using registered images.

tested on the data with domain shifts, which restricts their
applicability to only a single domain.
Recently, some researchers have started investigating
cross-domain few-shot semantic segmentation (CD-FSS)
(Lei et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2024; Herzog 2024; Su et al.
2024; Nie et al. 2024; He et al. 2024), which has demonstrated impressive segmentation capabilities on datasets like
Deepglobe (Demir et al. 2018) and FSS-1000 (Wei et al.
2019). Although this operation paves the way for crossdomain applications in few-shot scenarios, these models
cannot be directly applied to the medical field due to the
unique characteristics of medical images, e.g., grayscale,
intensity variations, and foreground-background imbalance.
Meanwhile, existing domain generalization methods in medical imaging (Ouyang et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022; Xu et al.
2022; Su et al. 2023) mainly focus on domain randomization, neglecting the model itself and the few-shot setting.
Two major challenges hinder the development of crossdomain few-shot medical image segmentation (CD-FSMIS),
which we try to address in this paper: 1) Intra-domain variations: Medical images exhibit significant variability between
individual organs, e.g., size, fat content, and pathology, mak-

Code — https://github.com/primebo1/FAMNet
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09319

Introduction
To bridge the gap between limited labeled samples and the
need for precise segmentation, few-shot medical image segmentation (FSMIS) (Guha Roy et al. 2019; Ouyang et al.
2022; Hansen et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2022;
Feng et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023; Ding
et al. 2023; Cheng et al. 2024) has emerged. By training on
base categories, FSMIS models can leverage only a few annotated samples to segment new categories in medical images directly. Nevertheless, due to the limited generalization
capability, they often exhibit diminished performance when
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1889

