The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Code-switching Mediated Sentence-level Semantic Learning
Shuai Zhang1 , Jiangyan Yi1 , Zhengqi Wen1 , Jianhua Tao 1* , Feihu Che 1* , Jinyang Wu1 , Ruibo Fu2
1

Department of Automation & BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhang shuai, yijy, zqwen, jhtao, qkr, wu-jy23}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, ruibo.fu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
semantic space mapping

Code-switching is a linguistic phenomenon in which different languages are used interactively during conversation. It
poses significant performance challenges to natural language
processing (NLP) tasks due to the often monolingual nature
of the underlying system. We focus on sentence-level semantic associations between the different code-switching expressions. And we propose an innovative task-free semantic learning method based on the semantic property. Specifically, there
are many different ways of languages switching for a sentence
with the same meaning. We refine this into a semantic computational method by designing the loss of semantic invariant
constraint during the model optimization. In this work, we
conduct thorough experiments on speech recognition, speech
translation, and language modeling tasks. The experimental results fully demonstrate that the proposed method can
widely improve the performance of code-switching related
tasks.

you are so cute
你 so cute
你 真 cute
你真可爱

(a) code-switching formal space

(b) sentence-level semantic space

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the correspondence between code-switching expressions and semantics. (a) represents the code-switching formal space, where each point
represents a language mixing modality and similar expressions are distributed in adjacent regions. (b) represents the
sentence-level semantic space, each dot denotes a sentence
semantic, with correspondences to the many different forms
of the left diagram.

Introduction
Code-switching is a common linguistic phenomenon in
which several languages are used interactively during conversation (Poplack 1981). The number of multilingual
speakers far outnumbers monolingual speakers in the worldwide population (Tucker 2003; Winata et al. 2021). Codeswitching expressions are widely used in a variety of scenarios, including and not limited to daily conversations, classroom teaching, conferences, social media, etc. It is a strong
incentive to develop technologies that can handle codeswitching efficiently. However, progress in this area has been
limited, primarily since code-switching typically occurs during informal expressions, such as spoken language, where
real-time data collection is difficult (Sitaram et al. 2019; Jose
et al. 2020; Doruz et al. 2021). The significant increase of
smart speech devices has alleviated this problem, while new
technologies are developed to fulfill users’ needs for multilingual interaction.
Code-switching computation research focuses on two
main areas: speech processing and text processing. Automatic speech recognition (ASR) and speech synthesis are the
most widely researched tasks in speech processing (Graves

et al. 2006; Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013; Jia et al.
2019; Sperber et al. 2019; Bérard et al. 2016), and the most
interesting tasks for researchers in text processing are language identification, sentiment analysis, and language modeling, with some other research in text classification, question answering, and sequence labeling (Solorio et al. 2014;
Molina et al. 2019; Patra, Das, and Das 2018; Qin et al.
2020; Zheng et al. 2021). This strong correlation between
task and venue shows that the speech-processing and textprocessing communities remain somewhat fragmented and
tend to work in isolation from each other. Such research
isolation limits the study of code-switching and hinders the
ability to draw more generalized task-independent insights
(Napoli et al. 2014).
This study aims to explore the semantic association across
code-switching expressions and develop a novel generalized
semantic learning method for various tasks. Specifically, the
process of code-switching occurs with a certain degree of
randomness, influenced by linguistic rules, social psychology, and other factors (Poplack 1981). There are multiple
legitimate textual candidates for each position in a sentence,
leading to many different expression forms of the same

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*: corresponding author

25913

