The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PanAdapter: Two-Stage Fine-Tuning with Spatial-Spectral Priors Injecting for
Pansharpening
Ruocheng Wu1 * , Zien Zhang1 * , Shangqi Deng2 , Yule Duan1 , Liang-Jian Deng1†
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
wuruocheng333@outlook.com, zienzhang314@gmail.com, shangqideng0124@gmail.com,
duanyll@std.uestc.edu.cn, liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

Stage 1

Trainable
Param.

Pretrained CNN

Pansharpening is a challenging image fusion task that involves restoring images using two different modalities: lowresolution multispectral images (LRMS) and high-resolution
panchromatic (PAN). Many end-to-end specialized models
based on deep learning (DL) have been proposed, yet the
scale and performance of these models are limited by the size
of dataset. Given the superior parameter scales and feature
representations of pre-trained models, they exhibit outstanding performance when transferred to downstream tasks with
small datasets. Therefore, we propose an efficient fine-tuning
method, namely PanAdapter, which utilizes additional advanced semantic information from pre-trained models to alleviate the issue of small-scale datasets in pansharpening tasks.
Specifically, targeting the large domain discrepancy between
image restoration and pansharpening tasks, the PanAdapter
adopts a two-stage training strategy for progressively adapting to the downstream task. In the first stage, we fine-tune
the pre-trained CNN model and extract task-specific priors at
two scales by proposed Local Prior Extraction (LPE) module. In the second stage, we feed the extracted two-scale priors into two branches of cascaded adapters respectively. At
each adapter, we design two parameter-efficient modules for
allowing the two branches to interact and be injected into
the frozen pre-trained VisionTransformer (ViT) blocks. We
demonstrate that by only training the proposed LPE modules and adapters with a small number of parameters, our
approach can benefit from pre-trained image restoration models and achieve state-of-the-art performance in several benchmark pansharpening datasets.

LPE

Frozen
Param.

LPE

Spectral
Priors

Stage 2
Pretrained
Transformer

Spatial
Priors

CTI

CTF

CTF

CTF

Cascade
Token
Fusioner

CTI

Cascade
Token
Injector

LPE

Local Prior
Extraction

CTI

CTF

CTF

Figure 1: PanAdapter’s two-stage fine-tuning framework.

and deep learning-based methods. Traditional methods include component substitution (CS) techniques (Choi, Yu,
and Kim 2010; Vivone 2019), multi-resolution analysis
(MRA) methods (Vivone et al. 2013; Vivone, Restaino, and
Chanussot 2018), and variational optimization-based (VO)
approaches (Palsson, Sveinsson, and Ulfarsson 2013; He
et al. 2014; Yan et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022). In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been
widely applied to pansharpening (Masi et al. 2016). Benefiting from the inductive bias and residual structures of CNNs,
increasingly deeper networks have been proposed to address
pansharpening tasks, such as PanNet (Yang et al. 2017),
MSDCNN (Wei et al. 2017), BDPN (Zhang et al. 2019),
DiCNN (He et al. 2019), FusionNet (Deng et al. 2020),
MSDRN (Wang et al. 2021) and PMACNet (Liang et al.
2022). However, because CNNs struggle to extract global
information and high-level semantic features, researchers
explore methods based on Transformers. Leveraging longrange dependencies and scalability to pre-trained models
and datasets, models such as full Transformers (Zhou, Liu,
and Wang 2022; Meng et al. 2022) and hybrids of CNNs
and Transformers (Zhu et al. 2023; Su et al. 2023; Li et al.

Code — https://github.com/RC-Wu/PanAdapter

Introduction
Due to the hardware limitations, existing sensors only
acquire low-resolution multispectral images (LRMS) and
high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) images. Pansharpening fuses LRMS and PAN images to produce highresolution multispectral images (HRMS). Various pansharpening methods have been proposed, including traditional
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8450

