The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Identifying Predictions That Influence the Future: Detecting Performative
Concept Drift in Data Streams
Brandon Gower-Winter, Georg Krempl, Sergey Dragomiretskiy, Tineke Jelsma, Arno Siebes
Utrecht University 8 Hiedelberglaan, Utrecht, 3584 CS, NL
b.gower-winter@uu.nl, g.m.krempl@uu.nl, sdragomiretsky@gmail.com, tinekejelsma@gmail.com, a.p.j.m.siebes@uu.nl

Abstract

where the presence of PD is known a priori. Consequently,
a research gap has been formed whereby most work in the
performative domain neglects the practical setting in which
these performative models operate. These settings are categorised by high-volumes of heterogeneous, non-stationary
and potentially transient data. Properties that appropriate
themselves naturally to the domain of Stream and Online
Learning (Gama et al. 2014), (Lu et al. 2018).
The primary goal of this research is to join together these
two topics (Performative Prediction and Stream Learning),
so that we may take existing research from one to solve
problems or limitations in the other. In particular, we address the problem of detecting PD in settings where its presence is not known beforehand. At first glance, using Concept
Drift detectors seems appropriate, however they are limited
in that they are unable to distinguish between drift types.
This means that if a traditional drift detector in used in a
performative setting, one will be unable to identify if any
drift detections are triggered by PD or by some other type of
intrinsic drift. We address this limitation in the state-of-theart by introducing a first-of-its-kind performative drift detector called CheckerBoard Performative Drift Detection (CBPDD) and evaluate its efficacy under various experimental
conditions. In short, this paper contributes the following:
1. A definition of performative drift and illustration as to
why it is different to intrinsic drift.
2. A method for detecting performative drift.
3. A first-of-its-kind data generator for evaluating performative drift detectors.
4. An evaluation of CB-PDD across various experimental
scenarios including a sensitivity analysis, comparison to
other drift detection techniques, a robustness evaluation
in settings with both performative and intrinsic drift, and
a demonstration of the efficacy of CB-PDD on three
datasets with imputed performative drift.

Concept Drift has been extensively studied within the context of Stream Learning. However, it is often assumed that
the deployed model’s predictions play no role in the concept
drift the system experiences. Closer inspection reveals that
this is not always the case. Automated trading might be prone
to self-fulfilling feedback loops. Likewise, malicious entities
might adapt to evade detectors in the adversarial setting resulting in a self-negating feedback loop that requires the deployed models to constantly retrain. Such settings where a
model may induce concept drift are called performative. In
this work, we investigate this phenomenon.
Our contributions are as follows: First, we define performative drift within a stream learning setting and distinguish it
from other causes of drift. We introduce a novel type of
drift detection task, aimed at identifying potential performative concept drift in data streams. We propose a first such
performative drift detection approach, called CheckerBoard
Performative Drift Detection (CB-PDD). We apply CB-PDD
to both synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets that exhibit
varying degrees of self-fulfilling feedback loops. Results are
positive with CB-PDD showing high efficacy, low false detection rates, resilience to intrinsic drift, comparability to other
drift detection techniques, and an ability to effectively detect performative drift in semi-synthetic datasets. Secondly,
we highlight the role intrinsic (traditional) drift plays in obfuscating performative drift and discuss the implications of
these findings as well as the limitations of CB-PDD.

Code — https://github.com/BrandonGowerWinter/CheckerboardDetection/releases/tag/v1.0
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10545

Introduction
Performative Drift (PD) is a specific type of Concept Drift
that occurs when predictions, made by deployed models,
affect the future distributions they predict on. Prevalent in
many practical domains such as Recommender Systems
(Mansoury et al. 2020), adversarial settings such as malware, fraud and spam detection, learning in such scenarios is
called Performative Prediction (Hardt and Mendler-Dünner
2023). For the most part, research has focused on settings

Background
Data Streams and Online Machine Learning
(Read and Žliobaitė 2023) define a data-stream as a mode of
access to a potentially infinite sequence of instances generated by some concept and delivered to a learning algorithm
by an instance-delivery-process (IDP). This may then be formally written as follows:

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11726

