The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Generalization of Universal Adversarial Perturbation via
Dynamic Maximin Optimization
Yechao Zhang1 , Yingzhe Xu1 , Junyu Shi1 , Leo Yu Zhang2 ,
Shengshan Hu1 , Minghui Li1 , Yanjun Zhang3
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Griffith University
3
University of Technology Sydney
{ycz, hynxyz, string1, hushengshan, minghuili}@hust.edu.cn, leocityu@outlook.com, yanjun.j.zhang@gmail.com
Abstract

mispredictions against universal input samples (MoosaviDezfooli et al. 2017; Khrulkov and Oseledets 2018; Poursaeed et al. 2018; Shafahi et al. 2020). In addition to this
characteristic of cross-sample universality, UAPs could also
possess another element of generalization in adversarial attacks, termed cross-model transferability. This denotes the
capacity of (AEs) to preserve their efficacy across different DNN models (Hu et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024). Together,
these capabilities enable UAPs to facilitate the generation of
transferable AEs at scale, compromising various DNN architectures and multiple machine learning tasks simultaneously
(Zhong and Deng 2022; Xie et al. 2021; Ding et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023a,b, 2024). Consequently,
UAPs have garnered significant attention and have become
a focal point of extensive research in the field.
Recent research aimed at improving the generalization of
UAPs has explored different aspects. Some focus on analyzing the training data used for UAP generation (Zhang et al.
2020b; Li et al. 2022), while others reinterpret the gradient
aggregation within and between the training batch (Shafahi
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2023). In addition, refinements to training loss have also been explored (Zhang et al. 2021). However, these existing works fall short by only refining UAPs
against fixed DNN parameters, thereby limiting the generalization to static instances of the model without fully harnessing the adaptive capabilities inherent in the model.
In this work, we highlight that utilizing the ever-evolving
optimized model parameter configurations can enable the
generation of stronger and more transferable UAPs. The intuition behind this is that exposing the generation process to
a wider range of model variance, even within a fixed architecture, fosters UAPs to capture a wider spectrum of vulnerabilities between models. This, in turn, allows UAPs to generalize to models on which they were not directly optimized.
Furthermore, we embed the objectives of cross-sample universality and cross-model transferability into a unified maximin formulation, which involves the composite inner minimization of the model parameters and training data and an
outer maximization of the UAP. In other words, we generate UAPs on a wide range of parameter-data pairs that have
jointly minimized the classification loss w.r.t. their respective labels. In this way, the generated UAP is optimized to
maximize the loss in more antagonistic scenarios from a
combined landscape of both parameter and input space.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are susceptible to universal
adversarial perturbations (UAPs). These perturbations are
meticulously designed to fool the target model universally
across all sample classes. Unlike instance-specific adversarial examples (AEs), generating UAPs is more complex because they must be generalized across a wide range of data
samples and models. Our research reveals that existing universal attack methods, which optimize UAPs using DNNs
with static model parameter snapshots, do not fully leverage the potential of DNNs to generate more effective UAPs.
Rather than optimizing UAPs against static DNN models with
a fixed training set, we suggest using dynamic model-data
pairs to generate UAPs. In particular, we introduce a dynamic
maximin optimization strategy, aiming to optimize the UAP
across a variety of optimal model-data pairs. We term this
approach DM-UAP. DM-UAP utilizes an iterative max-minmin optimization framework that refines the model-data pairs,
coupled with a curriculum UAP learning algorithm to examine the combined space of model parameters and data thoroughly. Comprehensive experiments on the ImageNet dataset
demonstrate that the proposed DM-UAP markedly enhances
both cross-sample universality and cross-model transferability of UAPs. Using only 500 samples for UAP generation,
DM-UAP outperforms the state-of-the-art approach with an
average increase in fooling ratio of 12.108%.

Code — https://github.com/yechao-zhang/DM-UAP

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) represent the cutting edge of
computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016). A key
strength of DNNs is their ability to identify subtle patterns beyond human perception. However, this capability of
DNNs can unintentionally enable adversarial attacks, where
deceptively minor adversarial perturbations of the input—
imperceptible to humans—create adversarial examples (AE)
that lead to mispredictions of DNNs (Szegedy et al. 2014).
Adding to this concern is the emergence of a notable
class of adversarial techniques known as universal adversarial perturbation (UAP), which are designed to induce
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10293

