The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DZAD: Diffusion-based Zero-shot Anomaly Detection
Tianrui Zhang1, 2 , Liang Gao1 , Xinyu Li1 * , Yiping Gao1
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
National University of Singapore
E1011227@u.nus.edu, gaoliang@hust.edu.cn, lixinyu@hust.edu.cn, gaoyiping@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

particularly meaningful. Consequently, we have initiated research on zero-shot anomaly detection (ZSAD) and propose
a novel framework for this purpose.
ZSAD is a challenging task without real data from unseen
classes. Prior knowledge about the expected behavior of normal data and the potential behavior of anomalies is easily
available, even without visual examples (Wang et al. 2023a).
With the emergence of visual language models such as CLIP
(Radford et al. 2021) and SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023), some
methods have demonstrated their capability to detect unknown features by encoding this prior knowledge in natural
language and then aligning it with image features. Current
zero-shot anomaly detection typically relies on the CLIP and
SAM frameworks, describing product anomalies in natural
language text (Cao et al. 2023). Building on this idea, some
methods (Li et al. 2024) (Deng et al. 2023) (Zhang et al.
2023a) enhance these natural language text features to better suit zero-shot anomaly detection. These methods heavily depend on the accuracy of text features, often generating
many text features for individual samples or enhancing the
accuracy of prior information through extensive experimentation. To address this, we propose the zero-shot anomaly
detection method that does not require text prompt input.
Diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022) have recently
demonstrated exceptional image generation capabilities,
with some approaches adapting them for anomaly detection
tasks. However, traditional denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) and latent
diffusion models (LDM) (Rombach et al. 2022) face challenges in reconstructing anomalies in input images while
preserving semantic information through the addition of
noise at different timesteps. By incorporating semantic features, some methods (He et al. 2024) (Zhang et al. 2023b)
have addressed these reconstruction issues within the diffusion model framework. We find that semantic features
during the diffusion process are particularly meaningful for
zero-shot anomaly detection, yet these methods have only
applied them in traditional anomaly detection tasks to influence the generation of latent features in the latent space.
Therefore, we introduce a diffusion model-based approach
for zero-shot anomaly detection.
To address the above problems, we propose the first
diffusion-based framework DZAD for zero-shot anomaly
detection and localization as shown in Figure 1, which

Zero-shot anomaly detection (ZSAD) aims to identify
anomalies in new classes of images, and it’s vital in industry
and other fields. Most current methods are based on the multimodal models CLIP and SAM, which have prior knowledge
to assist model training, but they are highly dependent on the
input of the prompts and their accuracy. We found that some
diffusion model-based anomaly detection methods generate
a large amount of semantic information and are very valuable for the ZSAD task. Therefore, we propose a diffusion
model based zero-shot anomaly detection method, DZAD,
and no additional prompt input is required. First, we propose
the first diffusion-based zero-shot anomaly detection framework, which uses the proposed multi-timestep noise features
extraction method to achieve anomaly detection in the denoising process of a latent space diffusion model with a semanticguided (SG) network. Second, based on the detection results,
we proposed a two-branch feature extractor for anomaly maps
at different scales. Third, based on the difference between
the anomaly detection task and other general image detection tasks, we propose a noise feature weight function for
the diffusion model in the zero-shot anomaly detection task.
Comparing with 7 recently state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
on MVTec AD and VisA datasets and analysis of the role of
each component in ablation studies. The experiments demonstrate the validity of the method beyond the existing methods.

Introduction
In the field of computer vision, unsupervised anomaly detection (AD) tasks (Cao et al. 2024a) (Liang et al. 2023)
(Wang et al. 2023b) aim to identify and localize anomalies
in images using models trained only on normal images. Previous methods have focused on training dedicated models
for each category, relying on vast collections of normal images as reference (Chen, Han, and Zhang 2023). However,
in practical applications, it’s challenging to collect extensive
training images for each category of diverse industrial products. These models are typically evaluated only on data categories observed during training. Thus, the ability of a model
to evaluate samples in an open-world environment, i.e., detecting anomalies in new classes not seen during training, is
* Corresponding author: lixinyu@hust.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10131

