The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Mandatory Federations: Balancing Egoism, Utilitarianism and
Egalitarianism in Mixed-Motive Games
Shaokang Dong1, 2 , Chao Li3 , Shangdong Yang3 , Hongye Cao2 , Wanqi Yang1 * , Yang Gao2
1

School of Computer and Electronic Information, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
shaokangdong@gmail.com, yangwq@njnu.edu.cn, gaoy@nju.edu.cn.
2

Abstract
In the field of mixed-motive games, extensive multi-agent
learning studies have explored the balance between egoism
(individual interest), utilitarianism (collective interest), and
egalitarianism (fairness). Traditional approaches often rely
on manually designed reward functions, social norms, and
alliance/federation mechanisms to transition agents from individualistic behaviors toward cooperative strategies. However,
these methods typically require all agents to share private local information or to mandatorily participate in federations,
which is impractical in real-world applications. To address
these issues, this paper proposes a Flexible-Participation Federation (FPF) framework that allows agents to participate in
the federation voluntarily. Furthermore, we extend the federation from a global to a Local Multi-Federation (LMF) framework, enabling agents to form multiple localized federations,
thereby promoting more efficient and adaptive cooperation.
Theoretical evidence demonstrates that the global FPF model,
along with the discrepancy between decentralized egoistic
policies and federated utilitarian policies, achieves an O(1/T)
convergence rate. Agents in the LMF framework also reach
consensus within a sublinear gap. Extensive experiments show
that agents opting out of federation participation experience a
reduction in egoism, and our approach outperforms multiple
baselines in terms of both utilitarianism and egalitarianism.

Code — https://github.com/Shaokang-Agent/FPF-LMF.

Introduction
Egoism (individual interest), utilitarianism (collective interest) and egalitarianism (fairness) are three critical considerations in the field of mixed-motive games, including common
resource allocation (Ostrom 2008; Perolat et al. 2017), task
scheduling (Arunarani, Manjula, and Sugumaran 2019), and
autonomous driving (Zhou et al. 2021; Vinitsky et al. 2022).
For instance, in the coordination dilemma of autonomous
driving at a crossroad, each agent seeks to reach its destination as quickly as possible. However, agents exclusively
prioritizing egoism may cause severe traffic congestion and
accidents, adversely affecting long-term individual returns.
Simultaneously, the system must consider overall road travel
time, potentially requiring some agents to prioritize others,

which may compromise egalitarianism. A potential resolution
to this paradox involves balancing egoism, utilitarianism and
egalitarianism in mixed-motive games (Dong et al. 2024a).
Extensive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
methods have been developed to balance these criteria, guiding agents from individualistic behaviors toward cooperation.
Some approaches address inequity aversion (Hughes et al.
2018), causal influence (Jaques et al. 2019), or fairer allocation (Jiang and Lu 2019; Zimmer et al. 2021) among agents
by manually designing reward functions. Other works adopt
a systemic perspective, promoting social norms (Vinitsky
et al. 2023; Köster et al. 2022; Anastassacos et al. 2021) and
alliance/federation mechanisms (Baker 2020; Anastassacos,
Hailes, and Musolesi 2020; Dong et al. 2024b).
However, these methods frequently overlook a critical aspect: It is impractical to require all agents to share private
local information or participate in alliances/federations. One
issue is that certain agents in the system may experience
downtime at any given step. Additionally, sharing private
information and mandating participation in a centralized federation disregards agent autonomy, potentially destabilizing
cooperation and increasing the risk of free-riding (Hughes
et al. 2018; Köster, et al. 2020) or exploitation by other agents
(Chelarescu 2021).
In this paper, we first propose a Flexible-Participation Federation (FPF) framework where agent engagement in the
global federation is voluntary. The federation integrates the
egoistic policy parameters of participating agents and broadcasts the utilitarian and egalitarian policy parameters to all
agents. Then the participating agents regularize their egoistic
policy parameters, fostering a balance between egoism, utilitarianism and egalitarianism. Moreover, we extend the global
federation to a Local Multi-Federation (LMF) framework,
enabling agents to efficiently exchange local policy parameters or policy gradients within self-organized groups while
retaining the option to operate independently. In summary,
the contributions of this work are three-fold:
• We propose FPF and LMF frameworks as alternatives to
mandatory federation to balance egoism, utilitarianism
and egalitarianism in mixed-motive games.
• Theoretical analysis shows that the FPF model, as well
as the discrepancy between decentralized egoistic policies and federated utilitarian policies, achieves an O(1/T )

* Corresponding author: Wanqi Yang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16336

