The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Impact of Literal Sorting on Cardinality Constraint Encodings
Joseph E. Reeves1 , João Filipe1,2 , Min-Chien Hsu1 , Ruben Martins1 , Marijn J. H. Heule1
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States
2
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{jereeves,minchieh,rubenm,mheule}@andrew.cmu.edu, j.sa@uva.nl

blow-up in size. Auxiliary variables do much more than keep
the formula small: They represent abstractions over the original problem variables that can be leveraged during clause
learning to help a solver find short proofs.
Thus, good encodings, with the right abstractions, are crucial to the performance of modern CDCL solvers. Previous work on developing new types of encodings for various high-level constraints, such as all-different (Gent and
Nightingale 2004), cardinality (Marques-Silva and Lynce
2007), and XOR constraints (Bard, Courtois, and Jefferson.
2007), has focused on optimizing structural features, including the size of the encoding, i.e., the number of clauses and
auxiliary variables introduced, and their propagation power.
In this paper, we shift the focus from optimizing structural
features of a specific encoding towards finding the right literal ordering for any encoding. We sort together related literals within cardinality constraints so that the auxiliary variables in the encoding summarize the related groups. We find
that improving the meaning of auxiliary variables is often
more important than choosing the best encoding type.
Cardinality constraints are one of the most important
high-level constraints in SAT, appearing frequently (Reeves,
Heule, and Bryant 2024), often as resource bounds for
optimization problems. For example, the cardinality constraint x1 + x2 + · · · + xn ≤ k is satisfied if at most k
of the data literals x1 , x2 . . . , xn are satisfied. Cardinality
constraints have been the subject of encoding research for
decades. The most common encodings, totalizer (Bailleux
and Boufkhad 2003; Ogawa et al. 2013; Morgado, Ignatiev,
and Marques-Silva 2015), sorting network (Batcher 1968;
Eén and Sörensson 2006), cardinality network (Ası́n et al.
2009; Ası́n et al. 2011; Abı́o et al. 2013; Karpinski and Piotrów 2019), and sequential counter (Sinz 2005) break the
cardinality constraint into subproblems via trees, networks,
or grids, and are often compared by the encoding size and
performance (Nguyen et al. 2021; Martins, Manquinho, and
Lynce 2011; Karpinski and Piotrów 2019). For each of these
encodings, the order of data literals will impact the meaning
of auxiliary variables within the encoding.

Abstract
The effectiveness of satisfiability solvers strongly depends on
the quality of the encoding of a given problem into conjunctive normal form. Cardinality constraints are prevalent in numerous problems, prompting the development and study of
various types of encoding. We present a novel approach to
optimizing cardinality constraint encodings by exploring the
impact of literal orderings within the constraints. By strategically placing related literals nearby each other, the encoding
generates auxiliary variables in a hierarchical structure, enabling the solver to reason more abstractly about groups of
related literals. Unlike conventional metrics such as formula
size or propagation strength, our method leverages structural
properties of the formula to redefine the roles of auxiliary
variables to enhance the solver’s learning capabilities. The
experimental evaluation on benchmarks from the maximum
satisfiability competition demonstrates that literal orderings
can be more influential than the choice of the encoding type.
Our literal ordering technique improves solver performance
across various encoding techniques, underscoring the robustness of our approach.

Code — https://github.com/jreeves3/LiteralSorting

Introduction
Over the past two decades, Boolean satisfiability (SAT)
solving, in particular conflict-driven clause learning
(CDCL) (Marques-Silva, Lynce, and Malik 2021), has
been applied to problems across many domains including
planning (Rintanen, Heljanko, and Niemelä 2006), quantum
circuit synthesis (Yang et al. 2024), cryptography (Soos,
Nohl, and Castelluccia 2009), hardware (Biere et al. 1999)
and software verification (Kroening and Tautschnig 2014),
and combinatorial mathematics (Heule 2018). The effectiveness of CDCL solvers on such a wide-ranging set of
problems is surprising, especially given that these problems
must all be reduced to the same simple input format,
conjunctive normal form (CNF), erasing all high-level,
problem-specific information.
Encoding a problem into CNF requires the introduction of
auxiliary variables, that is, new variables introduced into the
formula that abstract information, to prevent an exponential

Example 1 Consider the following formula with one cardinality constraint that has not been encoded yet:
(x1 + x2 + · · · + x100 ≤ 2) ∧
(x1 ∨ x3 ∨ · · · ∨ x99 ) ∧ (x2 ∨ x4 ∨ · · · ∨ x100 ) ∧ F

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11327

