The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GenAL: Generative Agent for Adaptive Learning
Rui Lv1 , Qi Liu1,2 * , Weibo Gao1 , Haotian Zhang1 , Junyu Lu2 , Linbo Zhu2
1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
lvrui2018@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn,
{weibogao,sosweetzhang,lujunyu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lbzhu@iai.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

learner’s unique needs (Liu et al. 2019), which is generalized researched as the Learning Path Recommendation
(LPR) tasks. Early works employ traditional recommendation algorithms or deep learning-based methods to suggest similar learning paths to comparable users (Elshani and
Nuçi 2021; Nabizadeh et al. 2020a), which is usually limited under complex and dynamic learning processes. Recent attempts model the LPR task as a dynamic sequential
decision-making problem and learn optimized recommendation strategies using Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques (Liu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2023b, 2024), which demonstrated remarkable effectiveness. However, the current process of LPR has three aspects of limitations: (1) Coarsegrained information: The utilization of information from
both learners and items is not sufficient. For instance, these
models are unable to leverage the semantic information contained within the textual content of the items. The text of
the items contains rich, fine-grained semantic information
that implicitly reveals various attributes of the items (e.g.,
the knowledge concepts covered, difficulty level, and cognitive layers being assessed), which are hard to utilize in existing methods sufficiently. For example, although both exercises assess the knowledge concept of “linear functions”,
exercise A: “Write the equation of the linear function” focuses only on the basic concepts, while exercise B:“Given
the linear function y = kx + b with its graph passing through
points A(0, 3) and B(-4, 0). Determine the distance from
the (0,0) to the line AB.” not only examines the concept of
“linear functions” but also assesses the deeper knowledge
of “distance from a point to a line”. While some existing
works utilize knowledge graphs (Liu et al. 2019; Li et al.
2023b; Wu et al. 2024) to assist in recommending learning
paths, they are limited by the size of the knowledge graph
and the granularity of the knowledge concepts, resulting in
less accurate recommendations. (2) Limited generalization
ability: Existing methods rely on training within a specific
scenario (e.g., a standard dataset), resulting in very limited
generalization capabilities. For example, when new scenarios are introduced or a dataset shift occurs, these methods
require retraining, which limits the generalization of these
methods. (3) Performance instability: Several works have
adopted advanced Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods,
which rely on rich interaction sequence for training (Liu
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2023b; Kubotani, Fukuhara, and Mor-

Adaptive learning, also known as adaptive teaching, relies
on learning path recommendations that sequentially suggest
personalized learning items (such as lectures and exercises)
to meet the unique needs of each learner. Despite the extensive research in this field, previous approaches have primarily modeled the interaction sequences between learners
and items using simple indexing, leading to three issues:
(1) The utilization of information from both learners and
items is not sufficient. For instance, these models are unable to leverage the semantic information contained within
the textual content of the items. (2) Models need to be retrained on different datasets separately, which makes it difficult to adapt to the continuously expanding item pool in
online educational scenarios. (3) The existing recommendation paradigm based on trained reinforcement learning frameworks, suffers from unstable recommendation performance
in sparse learning logs. To address these challenges, we propose a generalized Generative Agent for Adaptive Learning
(GenAL), which integrates educational tools with LLMs’ semantic understanding to enable effective and generalizable
learning path recommendations across diverse data distributions. Specifically, our framework consists of two components: the Global Thinking Agent, which updates the learner
profile and reflects on recommendation outcomes based on
the learner’s historical learning records. The other is the Local
Teaching Agent, which recommends items using educational
prior knowledge. Leveraging the LLM’s robust semantic understanding, our framework does not rely on item indexing
but instead extracts relevant information from the textual content. We evaluated our approach on three real-world datasets,
and the experimental results demonstrate that our GenAL not
only consistently outperforms all baselines but also exhibits
strong generalization ability.

Introduction
Learning serves as a cornerstone for human advancement, allowing individuals to acquire knowledge and skills.
Unlike traditional methods of education (e.g., classroom
courses) that deliver uniform material to all learners, adaptive learning focuses on providing personalized learning items (e.g., exercises) and pathways tailored to each
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

577

