The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Proportionally Fair Makespan Approximation
Michal Feldman1,2 , Jugal Garg3 , Vishnu V. Narayan1 , Tomasz Ponitka1
1

Tel Aviv University
2
Microsoft ILDC
3
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, USA

Abstract

be desired. A natural question arises: how do these other
desiderata affect the makespan approximation?
A paradigmatic example, introduced by Nisan and Ronen (1999), considers scenarios where the processing times
of jobs on each machine are private information, and one
seeks a truthful mechanism—namely a schedule combined
with payments to machines—that incentivizes machines to
report their processing times truthfully. This problem has
been foundational in the initiation of the field of algorithmic mechanism design. Nisan and Ronen (1999) conjectured that any truthful deterministic mechanism incurs a
factor-m loss in the makespan compared to the optimal solution (even in the absence of any computational constraints),
sparking a significant body of research which culminated in
the recent proof by Christodoulou, Koutsoupias, and Kovács
(2023) confirming their conjecture.
Another major desideratum, which is the focus of this paper, is fairness. There is a large body of literature on the fair
division problem, which asks how to divide a collection of
undesirable items (chores) among a set of agents in a manner
that is fair to every agent (see the recent surveys of (Amanatidis et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024)). The job scheduling problem can be interpreted as a fair division problem by viewing
jobs as chores and machines as agents. In this setting, the
makespan objective aligns with the egalitarian social cost.
The fair division problem has a rich history, beginning
with the seminal work of Steinhaus (1948), who proposed
proportionality as a fairness objective. This notion ensures
that each agent’s cost does not exceed their fair share (a 1/m
fraction of the total cost). Proportionality is one of the key
fairness notions in the extensive research on the fair division of chores. Another prominent fairness notion is envyfreeness, introduced by Foley (1967), where every agent
weakly prefers their own allocation over that of any other
agent. It is known that for job scheduling, both envy-freeness
and proportionality can be achieved through a mechanism
with payments (Aragones 1995; Hartline et al. 2008; Cohen
et al. 2010). We note that payments are necessary to achieve
either notion; this can be demonstrated via a simple instance
with one indivisible job and two agents. In this work, the
main question we ask is the following:

We study fair mechanisms for the classic job scheduling problem on unrelated machines with the objective of minimizing the makespan. This problem is equivalent to minimizing the egalitarian social cost in the fair division of chores.
The two prevalent fairness notions in the fair division literature are envy-freeness and proportionality. Prior work has
established that no envy-free mechanism can provide better
than an Ω(log m/ log log m)-approximation to the optimal
makespan, where m is the number of machines, even when
payments to the machines are allowed. In strong contrast to
this impossibility, our main result demonstrates that there exists a proportional mechanism (with payments) that achieves
a 3/2-approximation to the optimal makespan, and this ratio is tight. To prove this result, we provide a full characterization of allocation functions that can be made proportional
with payments. Furthermore, we show that for instances with
normalized costs, there exists a proportional mechanism that
achieves the optimal makespan. We conclude with important directions for future research concerning other fairness
notions, including relaxations of envy-freeness. Notably, we
show that the technique leading to the impossibility result for
envy-freeness does not extend to its relaxations.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08572

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of fairly and efficiently scheduling
a set [n] of indivisible jobs on a collection [m] of machines.
Each machine-job pair (i, j) has an associated processing
time ci,j . A schedule is an assignment of jobs to machines,
where the processing time of machine i is the sum of ci,j
over all jobs j assigned to machine i. A major objective in
job scheduling is to minimize the makespan, which is the
processing time of the machine with the largest processing
time (i.e., the time needed to complete all the jobs).
The makespan minimization problem has been of great
interest to the algorithms community. The seminal work of
Lenstra, Shmoys, and Tardos (1990) provided a polynomialtime 2-approximation algorithm for this problem and
showed that no poly-time algorithm can guarantee a factor
less than 3/2 unless P = NP. However, beyond computational efficiency, there are additional properties that may

Does there exist an assignment of jobs to machines (with
payments) such that the resulting allocation is fair and also
has a small makespan?

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13839

