The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MAPLE: A Framework for Active Preference Learning
Guided by Large Language Models
Saaduddin Mahmud, Mason Nakamura, Shlomo Zilberstein
Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{smahmud,mnakamura,shlomo}@umass.edu

Abstract

ChatGPT (Achiam et al. 2023), with prompting-based approaches to learn preferences from natural language instructions. However, these methods often require significant computational resources and taxing human supervision, as they
lack a systematic querying approach.
To address these challenges, we introduce a novel framework: MAPLE (Model-guided Active Preference Learning).
MAPLE begins by utilizing a large language model (LLM)
to interpret the natural language instructions from humans
and to estimate an initial distribution over preference functions. Then, it applies an active learning approach to systematically reduce uncertainty on the correct preference function. This is achieved through standard Bayesian posterior
updates, conditioned on both conventional preference learning feedback, such as pairwise trajectory rankings, and linguistic feedback such as clarification or explanations of the
cause behind the preference. By integrating Bayesian inference with LLMs, MAPLE achieves higher preference inference accuracy than a general-purpose pre-trained LLM
while offering greater sample efficiency and flexibility than
purely Bayesian methods.
To further ease human effort, MAPLE incorporates a
language-conditioned in-context (Dong et al. 2024) active
query selection mechanism that takes advantage of feedback
on the difficulty of previous queries to choose future queries
that are informative and easier to answer. MAPLE represents preference functions as a linear combination of abstract language concepts, providing a modular structure that
enables the framework to acquire new concepts over time
and enhance sample efficiency for future instructions. Moreover, this interpretable structure allows for human auditing
of the learning process, facilitating human-guided validation (Mahmud, Saisubramanian, and Zilberstein 2023) before applying the preference function to optimize behavior.
In our experiments, we evaluate the efficacy of MAPLE
in terms of sample efficiency during learning, as well as
the quality of the final preference function. We use an environment based on the popular Minigrid (Chevalier-Boisvert
et al. 2023) and introduce a new realistic vehicle routing
benchmark based on OpenStreetMap (OpenStreetMap Contributors 2017) data, which includes text descriptions of the
road network of different cities in the USA. Our evaluation shows the effectiveness of MAPLE on preference inference while improving the human’s ability to answer queries.

The advent of large language models (LLMs) has sparked
significant interest in using natural language for preference learning. However, existing methods often suffer from
high computational burdens, taxing human supervision, and
lack of interpretability. To address these issues, we introduce MAPLE, a framework for large language modelguided Bayesian active preference learning. MAPLE leverages LLMs to model the distribution over preference functions, conditioning it on both natural language feedback and
conventional preference learning feedback, such as pairwise
trajectory rankings. MAPLE employs active learning to systematically reduce uncertainty in this distribution and incorporates a language-conditioned active query selection mechanism to identify informative and easy-to-answer queries, thus
reducing the burden on humans. We evaluate MAPLE’s sample efficiency and preference inference quality across two
benchmarks, including a real-world vehicle route planning
benchmark using OpenStreetMap data. Our results demonstrate that MAPLE accelerates the learning process and effectively improves humans’ ability to answer queries.

Introduction
With recent advances in artificial intelligence, autonomous
agents are being increasingly deployed in real-world applications to address complex tasks (Zilberstein 2015; Dietterich 2017). A prominent method for efficiently aligning these agents with human preferences is Active Learning
from Demonstration (Active LfD) (Biyik 2022). Preferencebased Active LfD, a variant of LfD, aims to infer a preference function from human-generated rankings over a set
of observed behaviors using a Bayesian active learning approach.
Recent advancements in natural language processing have
inspired many researchers to leverage language-based abstraction for learning human preferences (Soni et al. 2022;
Guan, Sreedharan, and Kambhampati 2022). This approach
offers a more flexible and interpretable way of learning preferences compared to conventional methods (Sadigh et al.
2017; Brown, Goo, and Niekum 2019; Brown et al. 2019).
More recent work (Yu et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023) has focused on utilizing large language models (LLMs), such as
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27518

