The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DynASyn: Multi-Subject Personalization Enabling Dynamic Action Synthesis
Yongjin Choi, Chanhun Park, Seung Jun Baek*
Department of Computer Science, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
{dydwls8445, cksgns2010, sjbaek}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

finetuning the text embedding representing the subject. Subsequent works (Wu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024a; Hua et al.
2023) explored personalization of a single subject based on
a single image by using an additional image encoder. However, they had difficulties in varying the actions of personalized objects or required additional constraints like depth
maps or skeletons. Recent works (Avrahami et al. 2023; Kim
et al. 2024; Matsuda et al. 2024) proposed personalization of
multiple subjects from a single image, enabling more convenient and diverse applications. However, they struggled to
modulate diverse actions (Avrahami et al. 2023) or needed
explicit spatial guidance on subject regions when generating
additional images (Kim et al. 2024; Matsuda et al. 2024).
We aim to achieve multi-subject personalization from a
single image while avoiding overfitting by introducing regularization through attention maps guided by the subject’s
concept-based prior. These priors, including class information, capture typical behaviors and enhance generalization.
Unlike existing approaches that use MSE loss between segmentation masks and attention maps to isolate identities
(Avrahami et al. 2023; Xiao et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024b),
which ignore conceptual priors, our method employs loss
functions on attention maps informed by subject concepts.
Furthermore, we implement concept-based prompt and
image augmentation to encompass the subject’s descriptive
attributes and actions. Specifically, our Guided SDE Augmentation (GSA), inspired by SDEdit (Meng et al. 2021),
directs a T2I model with augmented prompts to generate
images that balance identity preservation and action diversity. These augmentations enable diverse appearances, actions, and dynamic interactions among subjects. Experiments show that DynASyn produces images that are quantitatively and qualitatively superior to prior state-of-the-art
methods. Our main contributions are summarized as follows. (1) We propose DynASyn for personalizing multiple
subjects from a single image, which aligns the conceptbased priors with the subject appearances and actions to
mitigate overfitting. (2) We propose concept-based attention regularization and prompt-and-image augmentation for
an effective alignment with concept priors. (3) Experiments
on diverse datasets and prompts demonstrate that DynASyn
achieves state-of-the-art personalization capabilities of synthesis for novel contexts and dynamic actions for the subjects.

Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models spurred
research on personalization, i.e., a customized image synthesis, of subjects within reference images. Although existing
personalization methods are able to alter the subjects’ positions or to personalize multiple subjects simultaneously, they
often struggle to modify the behaviors of subjects or their dynamic interactions. The difficulty is attributable to overfitting
to reference images, which worsens if only a single reference image is available. We propose DynASyn, an effective
multi-subject personalization from a single reference image
addressing these challenges. DynASyn preserves the subject
identity in the personalization process by aligning conceptbased priors with subject appearances and actions. This is
achieved by regularizing the attention maps between the subject token and images through concept-based priors. In addition, we propose concept-based prompt-and-image augmentation for an enhanced trade-off between identity preservation
and action diversity. We adopt an SDE-based editing guided
by augmented prompts to generate diverse appearances and
actions while maintaining identity consistency in the augmented images. Experiments show that DynASyn is capable
of synthesizing highly realistic images of subjects with novel
contexts and dynamic interactions with the surroundings, and
outperforms baseline methods in both quantitative and qualitative aspects.

Introduction
Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) generative models
(Rombach et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al.
2022) have enabled the rendition of highly realistic and creative images. These models are trained on large datasets of
image-text pairs like LAION (Schuhmann et al. 2022), allowing them to generate novel images from text prompts. In
particular, there has been growing interest on T2I personalization (Gal et al. 2022; Ruiz et al. 2023a). The T2I personalization is a task of generating variations of user-provided
images in novel contexts by modifying aspects such as pose,
action, color, and interactions between subjects.
The studies on T2I personalization initially focused on the
synthesis regarding a single subject given multiple images
containing the subject (Gal et al. 2022; Ruiz et al. 2023a) by
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2564

