The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BrainMAP: Learning Multiple Activation Pathways in Brain Networks
Song Wang1 * , Zhenyu Lei1 * , Zhen Tan2 , Jiaqi Ding3 , Xinyu Zhao3 , Yushun Dong4 ,
Guorong Wu3 , Tianlong Chen3 , Chen Chen1 , Aiying Zhang1 , Jundong Li1
1
University of Virginia
Arizona State University
3
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
4
Florida State University
{sw3wv, vjd5zr, zrh6du, xsa5db, jundong}@virginia.edu, ztan36@asu.edu, {jiaqid, xinyuzh, tianlong}@cs.unc.edu,
yd24f@fsu.edu, guorong wu@med.unc.edu
2

Transition from fMRI data to FC Graphs

Abstract
Functional Magnetic Resonance Image (fMRI) is commonly
employed to study human brain activity, since it offers insight into the relationship between functional fluctuations and
human behavior. To enhance analysis and comprehension of
brain activity, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been
widely applied to the analysis of functional connectivities
(FC) derived from fMRI data, due to their ability to capture
the synergistic interactions among brain regions. However,
in the human brain, performing complex tasks typically involves the activation of certain pathways, which could be represented as paths across graphs. As such, conventional GNNs
struggle to learn from these pathways due to the long-range
dependencies of multiple pathways. To address these challenges, we introduce a novel framework BrainMAP to learn
Multiple Activation Pathways in Brain networks. BrainMAP
leverages sequential models to identify long-range correlations among sequentialized brain regions and incorporates
an aggregation module based on Mixture of Experts (MoE)
to learn from multiple pathways. Our comprehensive experiments highlight BrainMAP’s superior performance. Furthermore, our framework enables explanatory analyses of crucial
brain regions involved in tasks.

4D functional
MRI data

Correlation
Matrix

Challenge 2:
Multiple Pathways

Challenge 1:
Sequential Dependency
5
4

1

2

Graph
Representations

3

3

2
1
1

2
1

3

4
2

Figure 1: An illustration of the transition from fMRI data
to FC graphs, along with two challenges for learning from
pathways in FC graphs: (1) The sequential dependency, a
fundamental feature of human brain activity, is not naturally
presented in FC graphs; (2) Multiple pathways exist in FC
graphs, making the extraction of them more difficult.

Code — https://github.com/LzyFischer/BrainMAP

1

brain (Bassett and Sporns 2017). More specifically, BOLD
signals are commonly used to construct networks of brain
regions from fMRI data, where the functional connectivities
(FC) among distinct brain regions are associated with various normal and pathological states (Kawahara et al. 2017),
as shown in Fig. 1. Studying the FC features that correspond
to the different brain states enables the identification of specific behavioral traits and neurological disorders linked to
particular FC patterns (Morris et al. 2019).
To extract patterns in FC features, they are generally
modeled as FC graphs, where nodes represent brain Regions of Interest (ROIs), and edges represent their relationships (Cui et al. 2022b,a). In this way, the correlations
among brain regions could be explicitly represented (Said
et al. 2023). With the development of Graph Machine Learning (GML) techniques, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
are widely applied to FC graphs (Wang et al. 2022; Zhou
et al. 2020). By capitalizing on the structured nature of
the FC graphs and integrating local information, GNNs fa-

Introduction

Recently, significant research has focused on learning complex patterns in brain activities, which has promoted tasks
such as cognitive process decoding (Li and Fan 2019;
Thomas, Ré, and Poldrack 2022; Finn, Poldrack, and Shine
2023) and the diagnosis of mental health disorders (Jo, Nho,
and Saykin 2019; Eslami et al. 2019). Generally, brain activities could be represented as functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) data (Fox and Raichle 2007; Zhang, Ji, and
Liu 2024), which measures blood-oxygen-level-dependent
(BOLD) responses and reflects changes in metabolic demand associated with neural activity (Kohoutová et al. 2020;
Davis et al. 2020). By leveraging fMRI’s unique blend of
spatial and temporal characteristics, researchers can delve
into the complexities of cognitive processes in the human
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14432

