The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BeyondGender: A Multifaceted Bilingual Dataset
for Practical Sexism Detection
Xuan Luo1,2 , Li Yang1 , Han Zhang1,3 , Geng Tu1 , Qianlong Wang1 ,
Keyang Ding1 , Chuang Fan1 , Jing Li2,5 , Ruifeng Xu1,3,4 *
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies, China
5
Research Centre on Data Science & Artificial Intelligence, Hong Kong, China
gracexluo@hotmail.com, jing-amelia.li@polyu.edu.hk, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

which may appear subjectively positive, e.g. ‘Women are
nurturing, caring, or cooperative’. HS is easily recognizable
due to its aggressive expressions, whereas BS often presents
itself as positive but ultimately regards women as amiable
yet weak. Therefore, BS is a guise of luring women to stay
at a lower social status than men (Cowie, Greaves, and Sibley 2019). Although sexism has historically disadvantaged
women, men also suffer from the negative consequences of
sexism or misogyny, albeit in more subtle ways, including
being sexually objectified and facing pressure to conform
to masculine norms (Mabrouk 2020; Dafaure 2022). On the
other hand, Misandry, ‘hatred of, contempt for, or prejudice against men or boys’, represents women’s anger against
their oppressors (e.g. ‘In fact, a man has less worth than a
woman because he has one less place for another man to
shove his dick into.’). It often manifests in portrayals of men
as absent, insensitive, or abusive. However, there is a lack of
studies addressing the situation of men.
Another issue is the excessively broad annotation found in
existing public datasets (e.g., (Jiang et al. 2022; Kirk et al.
2023)), making it impractical to detect harmful discrimination from harmless prejudices. For example, these datasets
classify facts or phenomena subject to debates on gender
equality3 , as well as profanity words stemming from individual misconduct rather than having directed connection
to gender, as instances of sexism. It introduces bias during
model training and leads to an excess of false positive predictions, ultimately limiting real-world application.

Sexism affects both women and men, yet research often overlooks misandry and suffers from overly broad annotations
that limit AI applications. To address this, we introduce BeyondGender, a dataset meticulously annotated according to
the latest definitions of misogyny and misandry. It features
innovative multifaceted labels encompassing aspects of sexism, gender, phrasing, misogyny, and misandry. The dataset
includes 6.0K English and 1.7K Chinese sexism instances,
alongside 13.4K non-sexism examples. Our evaluations of
masked language models and large language models reveal
that they detect misogyny in English and misandry in Chinese more effectively, with F1-scores of 0.87 and 0.62, respectively. However, they frequently misclassify hostile and
mild comments, underscoring the complexity of sexism detection. Parallel corpus experiments suggest promising data
augmentation strategies to enhance AI systems for nuanced
sexism detection, and our dataset can be leveraged to improve
value alignment in large language models.

Introduction
Sexism, prejudice, or discrimination based on one’s sex or
gender, has exacerbated gender inequality and injustices.
Research has been made to assist the detection of sexism at
scale (Grosz and Conde-Cespedes 2020; Jiang and Zubiaga
2023; Rizzi et al. 2023; Krenn et al. 2024).1
Sexism primarily affects women and misogyny2 , a
widespread and enduring sexist ideology, has been practiced for thousands of years (Holland 2012). According to
Ambivalent Sexism theory (Glick and Fiske 1996), sexism
towards women has two sub-components: 1) Hostile Sexism (HS), characterized by overtly negative evaluations and
stereotypes, e.g. ‘Women belong in the kitchen, not in the
engineering department’, and 2) Benevolent Sexism (BS),

Objectives and Contributions
We aim to provide a valuable resource and benchmark for
the comprehensive detection of sexism. Specifically, it seeks
to address the following objectives that have been overlooked in previous research: to raise awareness and facilitate the detection of sneaky misogyny and sexism towards
men and foster constructive debates. To achieve these goals,
we introduce BeyondGender developed with the following
labels: 1) Sexism: If the text shows the poster’s prejudice
or discrimination based on someone’s gender. 2) Gender:

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Content warning: This article contains examples of offensive
or hateful language to explain concepts and illustrate the annotation
guidelines and case study.
2
As given by Wikipedia, misogyny is ‘hatred of, contempt for,
or prejudice against women or girls’. It is used to keep women’s
subordination to men, maintaining the social roles of patriarchy.

3
Without exhibiting personal bias or endorsing unequal treatment and systemic discrimination.

24750

