The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

You Should Learn to Stop Denoising on Point Clouds in Advance
Chuchen Guo1 , Weijie Zhou1 , Zheng Liu1 * , Ying He2
1

School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences (Wuhan)
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
guocconly1@foxmail.com, zhouzz0722@cug.edu.cn, liu.zheng.jojo@gmail.com, yhe@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

The success of neural networks on point clouds, such
as PointNet (Charles et al. 2017a), PointNet++ (Charles
et al. 2017b), and DGCNN (Wang et al. 2019), has recently led to the adoption of deep learning approaches for
point cloud denoising. For example, PointCleanNet (Rakotosaona et al. 2020) employs a two-stage learning network
that first classifies and removes outliers and then estimates
correction vectors to project noisy points onto the underlying surface for noise removal. Pointfilter (Zhang et al.
2021) shares a similar network structure to PointCleanNet, but it elaborately designs a bilateral loss function that
considers both point and normal information to preserve
sharp edges. DMRDenoise (Luo and Hu 2020) performs
manifold reconstruction during the downsampling process
to reduce the impact of noisy points. Score (Luo and Hu
2021) estimates the noise-convolved distribution score from
noisy input and uses gradient ascent to iteratively relocate
noisy points to the underlying surface for denoising. IterativePFN (de Silva Edirimuni et al. 2023b) simulates progressive smoothing using an adaptive loss function and several
iterative modules.

Point clouds have become the preferred data format for a
variety of tasks in 3D vision and graphics. However, raw
point clouds often contain significant noise. This paper introduces the Adaptive Stop Denoising Network (ASDN), a
novel approach aimed at restoring high-quality point clouds
from noisy data. Our method is built upon a pivotal observation: during the denoising phase, high-noise points draw
more focus from the network, which may suppress the points
that have already been effectively denoised. This observation
has led us to develop an adaptive strategy that ceases denoising already cleaned points to prevent over-denoising, while
continuing to refine points that remain noisy. We employ a
U-Net architecture complemented by an adaptive classifier,
which utilizes a recoverability factor to assess the completion of denoising and make dynamic decisions about when to
halt the process. Our method not only demonstrates superior
noise removal efficiency but also preserves geometric details
more effectively, reducing over- or under-denoising artifacts.
Extensive experiments and evaluations demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art both qualitatively and
quantitatively.

Code — https://github.com/git-guocc/ASDN

Introduction
Point clouds are the predominant data for describing the
shapes and structures of real-world objects. With the rapid
advancement of 3D acquisition equipment such as LiDAR
and depth cameras, more and more point clouds are routinely obtained and wildly employed in various industries,
such as autonomous driving, robotic navigation, and architectural modeling. However, the raw point clouds are inevitably contaminated by noise, resulting in declining point
cloud quality. Therefore, point cloud denoising, which aims
to restore point cloud quality, is a fundamental issue in 3D
vision. Despite the significant progress, traditional denoising methods are still limited by their reliance on local point
cloud information and their struggle with complex noise patterns (Liu et al. 2023). Furthermore, in order to produce
promising results, traditional methods typically require numerous parameters and laborious parameter tuning.

Figure 1: Our main observation and motivation. Top: at a
certain denoising phase, points in a high-noise state may
lead to the network focusing more on them, potentially causing points in a low-noise state to be suppressed and negatively impacted in the subsequent phase. Bottom: this insight inspires us to stop denoising the well-denoised points
and continue to denoise those points in the high-noise state.

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

It is crucial to realize that during the denoising process,
the noise and geometry information are intricately inter3212

