The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Differentiable Information Enhanced Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Xiaoyuan Zhang1,2,3 , Xinyan Cai4 , Bo Liu1 , Weidong Huang3 ,
Song-Chun Zhu3,1,2 , Siyuan Qi3 , Yaodong Yang1,2 *
1

2

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI, Beijing, China
4
Institute of automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Abstract

However, the design of MBRL methods in differentiable environments presents new challenges. Firstly, ensuring the stability of policy training in a differentiable environment is crucial. Gradient-based methods have
been developed, with the most representative one being
SHAC (Xu et al. 2021) (which we will also refer to as a
differentiable-based method in the following text). These algorithms make better use of gradient information and often achieve better experimental performance compared to
non-differentiable-based approaches(such as PPO (Schulman et al. 2017), SAC (Haarnoja et al. 2018), etc.) in differentiable environments. However, due to the presence of
collisions(discontinuities in gradients) and the issue of vanishing or exploding gradients during long trajectory backpropagation, differentiable-based methods often suffer from
instability of training and are highly sensitive to trajectory
lengths (Suh et al. 2022). This can be particularly detrimental to robot control. For various types of robot control, especially in environments such as humanoid robots, the stability
of policy training is crucial for performance (Andrychowicz et al. 2020; Abeyruwan et al. 2023).Second, in terms of
model learning, a critical challenge arises from the accumulation of model errors (Plaat, Kosters, and Preuss 2023),
which manifest in both trajectory prediction and first-order
gradient prediction (Li et al. 2022).

Differentiable environments have heralded new possibilities for learning control policies by offering rich differentiable information that facilitates gradient-based methods. In
comparison to prevailing model-free reinforcement learning
approaches, model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL)
methods exhibit the potential to effectively harness the power
of differentiable information for recovering the underlying
physical dynamics. However, this presents two primary challenges: effectively utilizing differentiable information to 1)
construct models with more accurate dynamic prediction and
2) enhance the stability of policy training. In this paper,
we propose a Differentiable Information Enhanced MBRL
method, MB-MIX, to address both challenges. Firstly, we
adopt a Sobolev model training approach that penalizes incorrect model gradient outputs, enhancing prediction accuracy and yielding more precise models that faithfully capture system dynamics. Secondly, we introduce mixing lengths
of truncated learning windows to reduce the variance in policy gradient estimation, resulting in improved stability during
policy learning. To validate the effectiveness of our approach
in differentiable environments, we provide theoretical analysis and empirical results. Notably, our approach outperforms
previous model-based and model-free methods, in multiple
challenging tasks involving controllable rigid robots such as
humanoid robots’ motion control and deformable object manipulation.

1

In this paper, we present a novel MBRL approach, MBMIX, to address these challenges. Our method leverages
path derivatives (Clavera, Fu, and Abbeel 2020) for policy
optimization. To enhance the stability of policy training, we
introduce trajectory length mixing (MIX) in subsection 3.2.
This technique combines both long and short trajectories,
reducing variance in policy gradient estimation. We conduct
a theoretical analysis of MIX approach in subsection 3.4,
demonstrating its effectiveness in achieving low-variance
policy gradient estimation. To address the problem of model
errors, we propose Sobolev model training method (Czarnecki et al. 2017; Parag et al. 2022) for learning dynamics
models that make effective use of differentiable information.
This approach trains the model by matching its predictions
of environmental dynamics and their first-order gradients.
We also analyze the internal connection between these two
methods in 3.3. By combining trajectory length mixing and
Sobolev training, we mitigate the impact of cumulative prediction errors of long trajectory models on policy training.

Introduction

Robot control aims to develop effective control inputs to
guide robots in accomplishing assigned tasks. Differentiable environments present a promising opportunity, enabling precise computation of first-order gradients of task
rewards with respect to control inputs (Xu et al. 2021).
This gradient information facilitates gradient-based policy optimization methods (Antonova et al. 2023; Freeman et al. 2021). Model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL) methods show greater potential than model-free
approaches in leveraging environmental differentiable information to construct accurate models, thereby improving performance (Moerland et al. 2023).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22605

