The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SEAS: Self-Evolving Adversarial Safety
Optimization for Large Language Models
Muxi Diao1 , Rumei Li2 , Shiyang Liu2 ,
Guogang Liao2 , Jingang Wang2 , Xunliang Cai2 , Weiran Xu1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Meituan, Beijing, China
{dmx,xuweiran}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

However, as the performance of LLMs continues to improve, their security and robustness are also enhanced,
which may be accompanied by changes in security vulnerabilities (Ge et al. 2023), resulting in more subtle and covert
failure modes (Ganguli et al. 2022; Ge et al. 2023). These
changes pose significant challenges to existing red team
methods. Additionally, current methods of generating adversarial data for red teaming lack diversity (Hong et al. 2024),
as they are confined to using a single predefined attack strategy (Zhou et al. 2023b; Fernando et al. 2023). This limitation hampers the broad exploration of adversarial prompts,
and with the advancement of model capabilities, fixed attack
strategies are likely to become ineffective. Furthermore, existing methods are limited in complexity and fail to consider
the potential flaws of the Target models themselves, thus unable to implement targeted attacks, resulting in lower attack
success rates (Ge et al. 2023). Therefore, the development
and testing of current LLMs still heavily rely on manual red
teaming (OpenAI et al. 2023; Anthropic 2024).
To address these issues, we propose a Self-Evolving
Adversarial Safety (SEAS) optimization framework, which
includes a SEAS dataset and a SEAS pipeline. To generate
more complex adversarial prompts, we have constructed the
SEAS dataset. This dataset not only encompasses various
types of risk categories but also includes adversarial attack
styles. In the SEAS pipeline, through the initialization using the SEAS dataset and subsequent iterative updates, the
Red Team model generates more diverse adversarial attack
prompts and dynamically explores the vulnerabilities of the
Target model, which in turn updates itself with the generated
data to enhance its security performance.
As shown in Figure 1, our pipeline comprises three stages.
In the Initialization Stage, the Red Team model (R0 , where
“R” stands for Red Team model and “0” denotes the initial iteration) undergoes fine-tuning using the SEAS dataset
to produce adversarial prompts. Concurrently, the Target
model (T0 , where “T ” stands for Target model and “0” denotes the initial iteration) is fine-tuned using open-source
data to enhance its instruction-following capabilities. In the
Attack Stage, the Red Team model generates adversarial
prompts, which are inputted to the Target model to elicit
responses. The Safe Classifier then evaluates the safety of
these responses based on the concatenated prompts and responses. In the Adversarial Optimization Stage, adversar-

As Large Language Models (LLMs) continue to advance in
capability and influence, ensuring their security and preventing harmful outputs has become crucial. A promising approach to address these concerns involves training models to
automatically generate adversarial prompts for red teaming.
However, the evolving subtlety of vulnerabilities in LLMs
challenges the effectiveness of current adversarial methods,
which struggle to generate diverse, complex prompts and dynamically explore the weaknesses of these models. To tackle
these challenges, we introduce the Self-Evolving Adversarial
Safety (SEAS) optimization framework, which includes both
a SEAS dataset and a SEAS pipeline. The SEAS dataset comprises complex adversarial prompts, while the SEAS pipeline
operates through three stages: Initialization, Attack, and Adversarial Optimization. This framework generates a diverse
range of adversarial prompts and dynamically explores the
model’s vulnerabilities to enhance its security. Our contributions include a novel adversarial framework, a comprehensive
safety dataset, and empirical evidence demonstrating the effectiveness of SEAS.

Project Homepage — https://SEAS-LLM.github.io/

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in various fields (OpenAI
et al. 2023). Meanwhile, security risks associated with
deploying LLMs in practical applications have raised
widespread public concern (Christian 2023; Chilton 2023).
One potentially useful approach to enhance safety is red
teaming (Perez et al. 2022; OpenAI et al. 2023; Meta 2024;
Anthropic 2024). This is a proactive risk identification approach that employs manual or automated techniques to
generate attack data, which is then used to critically examine a language model for harmful outputs. The model
is subsequently updated to prevent these issues. Due to the
high costs and time consumption associated with manual red
teaming (Ganguli et al. 2022; Anthropic 2024), a promising alternative is to automate the generation of adversarial
prompts using a Red Team LLM (Perez et al. 2022).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23778

