The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Black-Box Optimization with Implicit Constraints for Public Policy
Wenqian Xing1 , JungHo Lee2 , Chong Liu3 , Shixiang Zhu2
1
Stanford University
Carnegie Mellon University
3
University at Albany, State University of New York
wxing@stanford.com, junghol@andrew.cmu.edu, cliu24@albany.edu, shixianz@andrew.cmu.edu
2

Abstract
Black-box optimization (BBO) has become increasingly relevant for tackling complex decision-making problems, especially in public policy domains such as police redistricting.
However, its broader application in public policymaking is
hindered by the complexity of defining feasible regions and
the high-dimensionality of decisions. This paper introduces a
novel BBO framework, termed as the Conditional And Generative Black-box Optimization (CageBO). This approach
leverages a conditional variational autoencoder to learn the
distribution of feasible decisions, enabling a two-way mapping between the original decision space and a simplified,
constraint-free latent space. The CageBO efficiently handles
the implicit constraints often found in public policy applications, allowing for optimization in the latent space while
evaluating objectives in the original space. We validate our
method through a case study on large-scale police redistricting problems in Atlanta, Georgia. Our results reveal that our
CageBO offers notable improvements in performance and efficiency compared to the baselines.

(a) Pre-2019

(b) Post-2019

(c) Infeasible

Figure 1: An illustrative example showing the difficult-todefine constraints using three districting plans for the Atlanta Police Department (APD). Gray lines represent the basic geographical units patrolled by the police, red lines outline the districting plans, and dashed blue lines highlight the
changes made to the pre-2019 plan. (a) and (b) are feasible
plans implemented by the APD pre and post 2019. (c) appears to be a feasible plan but was ultimately rejected by the
APD because it overlooked traffic constraints and inadvertently cut off access to some highways with its zone boundaries.

Introduction
In recent years, black-box optimization (BBO) has emerged
as a critical approach in addressing complex decisionmaking challenges across various domains, particularly
when dealing with objective functions that are difficult to
analyze or explicitly define. Unlike traditional optimization
methods that require gradient information or explicit mathematical formulations, black-box optimization treats the objective function as a “black box” that can be queried for
function values but offers no additional information about
its structure (Pardalos et al. 2021). This methodology is especially valuable for designing public policy, such as police
redistricting (Zhu et al. 2020; Zhu, Wang, and Xie 2022),
site selection for emergency service systems (Xing and Hua
2022), hazard assessment (Xie et al. 2021) and public healthcare policymaking (Chandak et al. 2020). Policymakers and
researchers in these areas frequently encounter optimization
problems embedded within complex human systems, where
decision evaluations are inherently implicit, and conducting them can be resource-intensive. Black-box optimization,
therefore, stands out as a potent tool for navigating through

these intricate decision spaces, providing a means to optimize outcomes without necessitating a detailed understanding of the underlying objective function’s analytical properties.
However, the broader application prospects of BBO in
public policymaking are hampered due to two major hurdles: (1) Defining the feasible region or setting clear constraints for decisions is inherently complicated for real human systems. Policymakers often encounter a myriad of
both explicit and implicit rules when making an optimal decision, adding a significant layer of complexity to the optimization process. For instance, in police districting, police
departments often organize their patrol forces by dividing
the geographical region of a city into multiple patrol areas
called zones. Their goal is to search for the optimal districting plan that minimizes the workload variance across zones
(Larson 1974; Larson and Odoni 1981; Zhu et al. 2020;
Zhu, Wang, and Xie 2022). As shown in Figure 1, a wellconceived plan necessitates each zone to adhere to certain
shape constraints (e.g., contiguity and compactness) that are
analytically challenging to formulate (Shirabe 2009), while

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28511

