The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedCFA: Alleviating Simpson’s Paradox in Model Aggregation
with Counterfactual Federated Learning
Zhonghua Jiang1 * , Jimin Xu1 * , Shengyu Zhang1† , Tao Shen1 ,
Jiwei Li1 , Kun Kuang1 , Haibin Cai2 , Fei Wu1
1
Zhejiang University
East China Normal University
{jiangzhonghua, xujimin, sy zhang, tao.shen, jiwei li, kunkuang, wufei}@zju.edu.cn, hbcai@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
2

global

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a promising technology for data
privacy and distributed optimization, but it suffers from data
imbalance and heterogeneity among clients. Existing FL
methods try to solve the problems by aligning client with
server model or by correcting client model with control variables. These methods excel on IID and general Non-IID
data but perform mediocrely in Simpson’s Paradox scenarios.
Simpson’s Paradox refers to the phenomenon that the trend
observed on the global dataset disappears or reverses on a
subset, which may lead to the fact that global model obtained
through aggregation in FL does not accurately reflect the distribution of global data. Thus, we propose FedCFA, a novel
FL framework employing counterfactual learning to generate
counterfactual samples by replacing local data critical factors with global average data, aligning local data distributions
with the global and mitigating Simpson’s Paradox effects. In
addition, to improve the quality of counterfactual samples, we
introduce factor decorrelation (FDC) loss to reduce the correlation among features and thus improve the independence
of extracted factors. We conduct extensive experiments on
six datasets and verify that our method outperforms other FL
methods in terms of efficiency and global model accuracy under limited communication rounds.

local

aggregated

client1

client2

Global data distribution

client3

client4

client5

Local data distribution

Figure 1: Simpson’s Paradox.
Client 𝑖 local dataset 𝐷!

Counterfactual positive/negative samples

White Cat

White Cat

Black Cat

Red Cat

White Dog

Black Dog

Black Dog

White Dog

Yellow Dog

Black Cat

White
Black

‘cat’
‘dog’

FedCFA

Cat
Dog

‘cat’
‘dog’

Figure 2: FedCFA can generate counterfactual samples that
do not exist locally on client i, preventing the model from
learning incorrect feature-label relationships.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a technology to enable collaborative learning among multiple parties without violating data
privacy (Konečnỳ et al. 2016). In FL, many clients collaborate to train a shared model under the coordination of a
server while keeping data dispersed. This reduces the risk of
privacy breaches generated by centralized machine learning.
FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017), a basic FL algorithm,
applies gradient descent to train models on distributed
clients. In order to adapt to the special scenarios of FL,
many researchers have proposed various improved algorithms (Reguieg et al. 2023; Li et al. 2021b; Rothchild et al.
2020) based on FedAvg to enhance the fairness of resource
allocation (Ilhan, Su, and Liu 2023; Hao et al. 2021), communication efficiency (Liao et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2023),

privacy security (Zhang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022) and defense attack ability (Ovi et al. 2023; Cao and Gong 2022)
of FL. Among them, the imbalance and heterogeneity (Luo
et al. 2023; Mendieta et al. 2022; Qu et al. 2022) of client
data are one of the most prominent problems in FL.
The inherent variability in data across clients presents a
formidable challenge to FL, causing locally-trained client
models to overlook broader patterns evident in the global
data. Such heterogeneity further results in inefficient collaborative training and increased communication rounds. To address this problem, existing FL methods mainly adopt two
strategies. The first involves (Fang and Ye 2022; Seo and
Elmroth 2023; Li et al. 2023a) leveraging data outside of local data to enhance local model optimization, albeit at the
potential cost of compromising data privacy. The second
strategy (Cheng et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022; Li, He, and
Song 2021) involves heuristically adjusting local models to

* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17662

