The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semi-Implicit Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
Hong Zhang 1 , Ying Liu 2 , Romit Maulik 1,3
1

Argonne National Laboratory
2
University of Iowa
3
Pennsylvania State University
hongzhang@anl.gov, ying-liu-1@uiowa.edu, rmm7011@psu.edu

Abstract

Despite the advancement in gradient calculation approaches, however, implicit NNs are still limited by the bottleneck created by computationally expensive algorithms for
solving the linear or nonlinear system. New methods have
been developed to circumvent the need to solve the original linear systems. The Jacobian-free backpropagation (JFB)
method in (Fung et al. 2022) exploits a preconditioning technique. Proximal implicit neural ODEs (Baker et al. 2022)
approximate the solution of the linear system with an optimization algorithm. However, all these methods are rooted
in low-order iterative procedures, which eases differentiation but suffers from suboptimal convergence speed and instability. Traditional linear solvers, including those highly
optimized for AI accelerators such as GPUs, have favorable
convergence properties but are not widely used in machine
learning due to training efficiency constraints.
For neural ODEs, an additional bottleneck comes from
the numerical stability. Explicit solvers, especially those
based on Runge-Kutta (RK) methods, have been the default choice for the training of neural ODEs. These methods
are only conditionally stable, requiring small time steps to
maintain stability. The step size can be extremely small for
stiff ODEs. Stiffness may result from dramatically different time scales involved in the dynamics that the ODE models, or from the spatial discretization of partial differential
equations (PDEs) on a grid. For example, the Graph Neural
Diffusion (GRAND) model, recently proposed for building
continuous-depth graph NNs (GNNs) (Xhonneux, Qu, and
Tang 2020) using graph neural ODEs (Poli et al. 2019), results in stiff diffusion equations. With explicit methods, one
has to use a step size as small as 0.005 to main stability,
leading to 43, 908 NN evaluations per epoch. See Sec. 5 for
details on the experiments on GRAND and more examples.
This work makes the following contributions:

Classical neural ODEs trained with explicit methods are intrinsically limited by stability, crippling their efficiency and
robustness for stiff learning problems that are common in
graph learning and scientific machine learning. We present
a semi-implicit neural ODE approach that exploits the partitionable structure of the underlying dynamics. Our technique
leads to an implicit neural network with significant computational advantages over existing approaches because of enhanced stability and efficient linear solves during time integration. We show that our approach outperforms existing approaches on a variety of applications including graph classification and learning complex dynamical systems. We also
demonstrate that our approach can train challenging neural
ODEs where both explicit methods and fully implicit methods are intractable.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural networks (NNs) (Winston and Kolter 2020;
Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2019) have emerged as a new
paradigm for designing infinite-depth networks. The traditional neural network consists of an explicit stack of layers. In contrast, an implicit neural network represents an implicit model that often involves a nonlinear system, such as
neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (Chen et al.
2018; Dupont, Doucet, and Teh 2019; Massaroli et al. 2020;
Kidger 2022) and equilibrium models (Winston and Kolter
2020; Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2019). In order to solve the
nonlinear system, an iterative procedure is often needed. For
example, neural ODEs require a time integrator to obtain
the solution at desired time points. Deep equilibrium (DEQ)
models (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2019) solve an implicit system with fixed-point iteration. Differentiating through the
iterative procedure with direct backpropagation can be intractable, however, due to the memory consumption that increases linearly. Key to the success of existing implicit NNs
is using high-level adjoint methods for gradient calculation.
The adjoint methods can reduce the memory footprint significantly for both equilibrium models (Winston and Kolter
2020) and ODE models (Chen et al. 2018; Zhuang et al.
2020; Zhang and Zhao 2022).

• We propose a semi-implicit neural ODE (SINODE), a
new type of implicit neural network, based on a linearnonlinear partitioning of the system. The partitioned system is integrated with implicit-explicit (IMEX) methods,
providing significant improvement in computational efficiency and stability over traditional neural ODEs.
• We develop a differentiable IMEX ODE solver as the
backbone of SINODE. The solver provides reverseaccurate gradients through a discrete adjoint approach,
avoiding the cost of backpropagation through the ODE

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22416

