The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

New Compilation Languages Based on Restricted Weak Decomposability
Petr Illner
Department of Theoretical Computer Science and Mathematical Logic, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University, Czech Republic
illner3@gmail.com

Abstract

2024), and structured DNNF (SDNNF) circuits (Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2008) are appropriate for such queries.
These circuit types have been thoroughly studied in terms
of the knowledge compilation map. The other circuit types
that satisfy the mentioned queries (for example, deterministic DNNF (d-DNNF) circuits (Darwiche 2001b), decisionDNNF circuits (Huang and Darwiche 2007), SDDs (Darwiche 2011), or OBDDs (Bryant 1986)) also satisfy other
unnecessarily more complex queries (for example, the
model counting query) at the expense of succinctness, meaning that circuits can be exponentially bigger.
Knowledge compilation is concerned with transforming
a given propositional theory (usually a CNF formula) into
a circuit of an appropriate type. For this purpose, (knowledge) compilers are used. The existence of a compiler is
a vital part of a language. For wDNNF circuits, there is
a compiler called Bella (Illner and Kučera 2024). To our
knowledge, there is no compiler that compiles (directly) into
DNNF or SDNNF circuits. Hence, instead of compiling directly into DNNF circuits, decision-DNNF circuits, which
are strictly less succinct, are used. The well-known compilers for decision-DNNF circuits are C 2 D (Darwiche 2004),
D4 (Lagniez and Marquis 2017), D SHARP (Muise et al.
2010), and SharpSAT-TD (Kiesel and Eiter 2023).
Besides theoretical aspects, circuits can also be employed
in applications. The main idea is divided into two phases:
Offline and online. Let us assume we have a CNF formula
that represents the problem we wish to solve. The CNF formula is compiled into a circuit of an appropriate type in the
offline phase. This phase is time-consuming but is done only
once. In the online phase, we solve multiple instances of that
problem in polynomial time in the size of that circuit using an appropriate query that is tractable for that circuit type
and is suitable for solving that problem. Such knowledge
compilation-based approaches are often considered state-ofthe-art, even if the circuit is used only once.
The maximum and minimum cardinality queries are
known to be tractable for DNNF circuits (Darwiche 2001a),
and we prove that they are intractable for wDNNF circuits.
Therefore, if we are interested in any of these queries, which
are essential for many applications, we must use decisionDNNF circuits. Addressing this issue, we introduce two new
restricted variants of wDNNF circuits, namely pwDNNF
and nwDNNF circuits, that satisfy these queries.

This paper introduces two new compilation languages
restricting weak decomposable negation normal form
(wDNNF) circuits and integrates them into the knowledge
compilation map. Positive (resp. negative) wDNNF circuits
restrict wDNNF circuits so that each variable shared among
the inputs of a conjunction node can only have positive (resp.
negative) occurrences in that subcircuit. Unlike wDNNF circuits, pwDNNF (resp. nwDNNF) circuits satisfy the maximum (resp. minimum) cardinality query. We present a
compiler for converting CNF formulae into pwDNNF and
nwDNNF circuits by extending Bella — the state-of-the-art
compiler for wDNNF circuits. We introduce a new caching
scheme, called Cara, that exploits isomorphism. Using that
scheme, we show a new compilation method based on copying subcircuits, which may significantly speed up compilations at the expense of increasing circuit sizes. Our experiments demonstrate that nwDNNF circuits are suitable for
computing most probable explanations (MPEs) in two-layer
Bayesian networks (BNs) with large domains.

Introduction
Knowledge representation is a research area that studies representations (also called languages) of propositional theories. The knowledge compilation map (Darwiche and Marquis 2002) consists of languages that have been studied
from the following perspectives: (1) Universality: Can the
language represent any Boolean function? (2) Succinctness (Gogic et al. 1995): How compactly can the language
represent Boolean functions with respect to other languages?
(3) Tractable operations: What operations (that is, queries
and transformations) does the language satisfy?
This paper focuses only on a particular class of languages:
Circuits based on negation normal form (NNF) circuits
enriched with additional properties. The decomposability
property (Darwiche 1999) or its variants (that is, weak decomposability (Akshay et al. 2018) or structured decomposability (Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2008)) are sufficient
for the following queries: Consistency check, clausal entailment check, and model enumeration. Therefore, decomposable NNF (DNNF) circuits (Darwiche 1999), weak DNNF
(wDNNF) circuits (Akshay et al. 2018; Illner and Kučera
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14987

