The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Homophily: Graph Contrastive Learning
with Macro-Micro Message Passing
Yiyuan Chen, Donghai Guan* , Weiwei Yuan, Tianzi Zang
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
{yy.chen, dhguan, yuanweiwei, zangtianzi}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

represents the opposite. For instance, social graphs often
exhibit homophily, with individuals connecting based on
shared interests or backgrounds. In contrast, protein structures demonstrate heterophily, as different types of amino
acids tend to connect. We maintain that such assumption,
while beneficial for homophilous graphs, restricts both the
direction (macro-level) and process (micro-level) of message passing, thereby weakening GCL’s effectiveness in
non-homophilous graphs.
From a macroscopic perspective, the neighborhood preference, which controls the direction of message passing,
varies in graphs with varying levels of homophily. Our
exploratory study reveals that homophilous graphs predominantly utilize structural neighborhood, whereas nonhomophilous graphs rely on attribute neighborhood, which
is defined by neighbors based on node attribute similarity.
This explains why traditional GNNs struggle to handle nonhomophilous graphs using structural neighborhood, and existing GCL methods based on GNN encoders inherit this
issue. From a microscopic perspective, the role preference
of self-loops in the process of message passing also varies
across different graphs. To preserve the node intrinsic information, traditional GNNs incorporate self-loops as additional neighbors to normalize the adjacency matrix during
feature propagation. The equivalent treatment of node itself
and its neighbors may not fully accommodate graphs with
low homophily, where nodes often exhibit significant differences from their neighbors. Some works (Zhu et al. 2020; Jin
et al. 2021) have attempted to bridge this gap by diversifying
the aggregation of higher-order neighbors, which not only
increases algorithmic complexity but may also degrade performance on homophilous graphs. So far, few studies have
specifically explored the perspective of self-loops’ role preference across different graphs.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we integrate
Macro and Micro Message Passing in GCL to propose the
M3 P-GCL framework. It comprehensively captures both
structural and attribute information of graph, and adapts
the self-propagation mode to learn expressive node representations for diverse graphs beyond homophily in a selfsupervised manner. In response to the macro-level neighborhood preference, we leverage two views defined by distinct
edge types—the structural view and the attribute view—and
further define the priority view and supporting view to high-

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has drawn much research
attention for its ability to learn node representations in a
self-supervised manner. However, the homophily assumption inherent in GNN encoders limits the direction (macrolevel) and the process (micro-level) of message passing in
current GCL frameworks, impairing the expressive power
of GCL in non-homophilous graphs. This paper presents a
novel framework that employs Macro and Micro Message
Passing in GCL (M3 P-GCL) to overcome these limitations
and advance performance in both homophilous and nonhomophilous graphs. Specifically, at the macro-level, we integrate structural and attribute views to enhance the direction of message passing, and employ an Aligned PrioritySupporting View Encoding (APS-VE) strategy to facilitate
contrastive training; at the micro-level, we propose an Adaptive Self-Propagation (ASP) strategy based on role segmentation of self-loops to diversify the process of message passing
in the encoder. These enhancements effectively address the
limitations imposed by the homophily assumption. Experiments demonstrate that M3 P-GCL outperforms both supervised and unsupervised baselines in the node classification
task on various datasets with different levels of homophily.

Introduction
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has garnered considerable
attention for its effectiveness in reducing reliance on costly
and labor-intensive annotated graph data (Ju et al. 2024).
By maximizing the similarity between positive sample pairs
and dissimilarity between negative sample pairs, the GCL
paradigm has achieved promising results on many graphbased tasks (Xiong et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022a). To boost
GCL performance, efforts often involve developing new data
or model augmentation strategies (Wu et al. 2023; Gong,
Yang, and Shi 2023) and refining effective contrastive objectives (Li, Jing, and Tong 2022; Chen et al. 2023).
Despite the successes of GCL, its ability to handle nonhomophilous graphs is limited due to the homophily assumption in GNN encoders (Chen and Kou 2023). Homophily in a graph indicates that nodes with similar labels are likely to be closely connected, whereas heterophily
* Corresponding author: Donghai Guan (dhguan@nuaa.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15948

