The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SCott: Accelerating Diffusion Models with Stochastic Consistency Distillation
Hongjian Liu1 * , Qingsong Xie2 * † , Tianxiang Ye3 , Zhijie Deng3† , Chen Chen2 , Shixiang Tang4 ,
Xueyang Fu1 , Haonan Lu2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1

University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
OPPO AI Center
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
jeffeey@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xieqingsong1, chenchen4,luhaonan}@oppo.com, {coulson tx, zhijied}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{xyfu, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn, shixiangtang@cuhk.edu.hk,
Abstract

However, it is widely recognized that DMs’ iterative reverse sampling process leads to slow inference. One remediation is improving the solvers used for discretizing the
reverse process (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Lu et al.
2022a,b), but it is still hard for them to generate within a limited number of steps (e.g., 5) due to the inevitable discretization errors. Another strategy involves distilling an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) based generation process of a
pre-trained DM into a shorter one (Salimans and Ho 2022;
Meng et al. 2023), but the cost of such progressive distillation
is routinely high. Alternatively, consistency distillation (CD)
trains unified consistency models (CMs) to fit the consistency mappings characterized by the diffusion ODE for fewstep generation (Song et al. 2023). Latent consistency model
(LCM) (Luo et al. 2023a) further applies CD to the latent
space of a pre-trained autoencoder to enable high-resolution
image generation. However, its sample quality is poor within
2 sampling steps. Recently, InstaFlow (Liu et al. 2023), UFOGen (Xu et al. 2024), and ADD (Sauer et al. 2023b) have
succeeded in faithfully generating high-resolution images in
just 1-2 steps, but they share the limitation of failing to trade
additional sampling steps for improved outcomes.

The iterative sampling procedure employed by diffusion models (DMs) often leads to significant inference latency. To address this, we propose Stochastic Consistency Distillation
(SCott) to enable accelerated text-to-image generation, where
high-quality and diverse generations can be achieved within
just 2-4 sampling steps. In contrast to vanilla consistency distillation (CD) which distills the ordinary differential equation
solvers-based sampling process of a pre-trained teacher model
into a student, SCott explores the possibility and validates the
efficacy of integrating stochastic differential equation (SDE)
solvers into CD to fully unleash the potential of the teacher.
SCott is augmented with elaborate strategies to control the
noise strength and sampling process of the SDE solver. An
adversarial loss is further incorporated to strengthen the consistency constraints in rare sampling steps. Empirically, on
the MSCOCO-2017 5K dataset with a Stable Diffusion-V1.5
teacher, SCott achieves an FID of 21.9 with 2 sampling steps,
surpassing that of the 1-step InstaFlow (23.4) and the 4-step
UFOGen (22.1). Moreover, SCott can yield more diverse samples than other consistency models for high-resolution image
generation, with up to 16% improvement in a qualified metric.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.01505
One-step samplers are hard to generate satisfactory outputs, and numerous works (Luo et al. 2023a; Salimans and
Ho 2022; Meng et al. 2023) improve their one-step performance via additional steps with acceptable cost (e.g., 4 steps).
Our objective is to strike a unified model capable of generating high-quality outputs with 2-4 steps. This is based on
the fact that over-emphasizing the one-step generation capacity would unavoidably bias the DM, hence weakening the
multi-step generation capacity. Sampling with 2-4 steps does
not substantially increase the practical cost compared to 1
step but is likely to improve the upper bound of the sampling
quality significantly. We base our solution on CMs because
they enjoy the cost-quality trade-off by alternating denoising
and noise injection at inference time. Yet, current CD approaches have not fully unleashed the potential of the teacher,
considering that for a well-trained DM, ODE-based solvers
usually underperform stochastic differential equation (SDE)
ones with adequate sampling steps (Xu et al. 2023; Karras
et al. 2022; Gonzalez et al. 2023). This is verified by results in
Table 1. Empowered by these, we aim to develop Stochastic

Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; SohlDickstein et al. 2015; Song et al. 2020) have emerged as
a pivotal component in the realm of generative modeling,
facilitating notable progress in domains including image generation (Ramesh et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022), video
synthesis (Blattmann et al. 2023; Ho et al. 2022), and beyond.
In particular, latent diffusion models (LDMs), such as Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022), have exhibited exceptional
capabilities for high-resolution text-to-image synthesis and
are acting as fundamental building components for a wide
spectrum of downstream applications (Gal et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2023b; Mou et al. 2023).
* These authors contributed equally. Work done during Hongjian

Liu’s internship at OPPO.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5451

