The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fine-grained Adaptive Visual Prompt for Generative Medical Visual Question
Answering
Ting Yu1 , Zixuan Tong1 , Jun Yu2 , Ke Zhang3, *
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, China
School of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
3
Key Laboratory of Complex Systems Modeling and Simulation, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
yut@hznu.edu.cn, tongzixuan@stu.hznu.edu.cn, yujun@hit.edu.cn, ke.zhang@hdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

: Soft tissue mass in the region of the terminal
ileum with mesenteric lymphadenopathy.

Medical Visual Question Answering (MedVQA) serves as
an automated medical assistant, capable of answering patient queries and aiding physician diagnoses based on medical images and questions. Recent advancements have shown
that incorporating Large Language Models (LLMs) into MedVQA tasks significantly enhances the capability for answer
generation. However, for tasks requiring fine-grained organlevel precise localization, relying solely on language prompts
struggles to accurately locate relevant regions within medical images due to substantial background noise. To address
this challenge, we explore the use of visual prompts in MedVQA tasks for the first time and propose fine-grained adaptive visual prompts to enhance generative MedVQA. Specifically, we introduce an Adaptive Visual Prompt Creator that
adaptively generates region-level visual prompts based on image characteristics of various organs, providing fine-grained
references for LLMs during answer retrieval and generation
from the medical domain, thereby improving the model’s precise cross-modal localization capabilities on original images.
Furthermore, we incorporate a Hierarchical Answer Generator with Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) techniques,
significantly enhancing the model’s understanding of spatial and contextual information with minimal parameter increase, promoting the alignment of representation learning
with the medical space. Extensive experiments on VQARAD, SLAKE, and DME datasets validate the effectiveness
of our proposed method, demonstrating its potential in generative MedVQA.

: Yes.

Large Language Model
...

Visual Prompt

Questions
: What is wrong
with the patient's scan?
: Is the GI tract is
highlighted by contrast?

Figure 1: Main idea of FAVP. We introduce eight types of
visual prompts (e.g., circle, contour, mask, box) for accurate
localization assistance. Here we show an example of using
the circle.

of medical images at various granular levels and establishing reliable cross-modal associations, which are essential
for assisting physicians in diagnosis, preventing misdiagnoses, and enhancing patient care efficiency and experience.
Consequently, MedVQA has emerged as a prominent focus
in computer-aided diagnosis. In addition to traditional discriminative MedVQA models, the success of large language
models (LLMs) in general domains has inspired their adaptation to the medical field (Liu et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2023; Li
et al. 2024). These models leverage their robust generative
capabilities to address MedVQA tasks better. Despite medical LLMs’ strong zero-shot transfer abilities, there remain
two challenges. (i) For fine-grained, instance-level precise
localization required by MedVQA, language prompts alone
in medical LLMs struggle to accurately identify relevant information amid substantial background noise, as shown in
Figure 1. (ii) Typically, medical LLMs are featured by large
parameter sizes and extensive training times. Full parameter
fine-tuning across diverse downstream tasks is parameterinefficient and compromises model generalization.
To address these challenges, we treat MedVQA as a
generative task and introduce Fine-grained Adaptive Visual

Code — https://github.com/OpenMICG/FAVP

Introduction
The convergence of breakthroughs in computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP) has catalyzed significant interest in multimodal tasks, such as visual captioning (Zhang et al. 2023a,b, 2024; Yu et al. 2024d), visual grounding (Yuan et al. 2024), and visual question answering (VQA) (Yu et al. 2019, 2020, 2024a,b). Among
these, Medical Visual Question Answering (MedVQA) (Yu
et al. 2024c) stands out as a crucial extension in the medical domain. MedVQA necessitates a deep understanding
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9662

