The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting Segment Anything Model Towards Open-Vocabulary Learning
Xumeng Han1 * , Longhui Wei2† , Xuehui Yu1 , Zhiyang Dou1 , Xin He2 ,
Kuiran Wang1 , Yingfei Sun1 , Zhenjun Han1† , Qi Tian2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Huawei Inc.
{hanxumeng19, yuxuehui17, douzhiyang23, wangkuiran19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
{weilh2568, whut.hexin}@gmail.com, {yfsun, hanzhj}@ucas.ac.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Input

The recent Segment Anything Model (SAM) has emerged
as a new paradigmatic vision foundation model, showcasing potent zero-shot generalization and flexible prompting.
Despite SAM finding applications and adaptations in various domains, its primary limitation lies in the inability to
grasp object semantics. In this paper, we present Sambor
to seamlessly integrate SAM with the open-vocabulary object detector in an end-to-end framework. While retaining
all the remarkable capabilities inherent to SAM, we boost it
to detect arbitrary objects from human inputs like category
names or reference expressions. Building upon the SAM image encoder, we introduce a novel SideFormer module designed to acquire SAM features adept at perceiving objects
and inject comprehensive semantic information for recognition. In addition, we devise an Open-set RPN that leverages
SAM proposals to assist in finding potential objects. Consequently, Sambor enables the open-vocabulary detector to
equally focus on generalizing both localization and classification sub-tasks. Our approach demonstrates superior zero-shot
performance across benchmarks, including COCO and LVIS,
proving highly competitive against previous state-of-the-art
methods. We aspire for this work to serve as a meaningful
endeavor in endowing SAM to recognize diverse object categories and advancing open-vocabulary learning with the support of vision foundation models.

1

Image
Encoder

Mask
Decoder

Output

SAM

Abstract

SAM

Input

SAM: class-agnostic

Sambor

Image
Encoder

SideFormer

Open-set RPN

Open-Vocabulary Detector

Output

Input

Prompt
Encoder

Sambor: hat, bicycle, golfcart, ...

Figure 1: We develop an end-to-end open-vocabulary object
detector called Sambor, building upon the vision foundation
model SAM. Sambor enables SAM to recognize arbitrary
object categories, bridging semantic gaps. It also leverages
SAM’s generalization and interactive capabilities to enhance
zero-shot performance and extend versatility.

more profound exploration to enhance its semantic understanding. In this work, we boost SAM towards openvocabulary learning to detect objects of arbitrary categories,
a paradigm commonly referred to as open-vocabulary object
detection (Zareian et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2024).
Recent works (Gu et al. 2021; Zhong et al. 2022; Minderer et al. 2022; Kuo et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022a; Yao et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2023) commonly follow two lines to achieve
open-vocabulary object detection. One seeks to expand the
cognitive categories by transferring knowledge from pretrained vision-language (VL) models (Radford et al. 2021;
Jia et al. 2021). The other unifies the formulation of object
detection and phrase grounding tasks, extending the available data scope from object detection to a diverse range of
image-text pairs (Sharma et al. 2018; Vicente et al. 2016;
Thomee et al. 2016). The utilization of large-scale data encourages the model to learn the feature alignment between
object regions and language phrases. Previous efforts have
been built upon conventional object detection models, introducing the VL paradigm to extend the object detection classifier from the close-set to the open-set domain. With the
emergence of the powerful vision foundation model SAM,

Introduction

Vision foundation models (Radford et al. 2021; He et al.
2022; Oquab et al. 2024) serve as robust backbones that
excel across a diverse spectrum of vision tasks. The recent Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al. 2023)
has garnered widespread attention within the community as
a foundational visual model for general image segmentation. Trained with billion-scale mask labels, it demonstrates
impressive zero-shot segmentation performance, seamlessly
applied across a variety of applications through simple
prompting (Ren et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023). While exhibiting outstanding performance, SAM is constrained to
scenarios with class-agnostic applications, necessitating a
* This work was done during the internship in Huawei Inc.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3356

