The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Strategyproof Matching of Roommates and Rooms
Hadi Hosseini1 , Shivika Narang2 , Sanjukta Roy3
1
Pennsylvania State University
University of New South Wales, Sydney
3
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
hadi@psu.edu, s.narang@unsw.edu.au, sanjukta@isical.ac.in
2

and long-term stays such as Airbnb, Roomi1 , and Roomsurf2 , where agents can specify their preferences over rooms
as well as roommates.
Within three-dimensional matchings (as well as hedonic
games), additivity of preferences is a common assumption.
Similarly, some recent work on matching roommates and
rooms considers additive utilities over rooms and roommates
(Chan et al. 2016; Gan, Li, and Li 2023). Additive preferences model a more substitutionary approach to aggregate
preferences. That is, receiving one undesirable match/item
can be compensated by also receiving a desirable one. While
this is plausible when partitioning agents into coalitions,
it does not always provide a sufficiently meaningful way
to compare choices, particularly when outcomes involve
complementary alternatives. When matching roommates and
rooms, for a person who values proximity to their classes,
the utility derived from living with a close friend cannot necessarily substitute for being assigned a room in a remote corner of the campus.
Complementary Preferences via Leontief. A compelling
alternative model for capturing complementarity is Leontief
utilities that are common in production economics (Leontief
1965) as well as resource allocation and scheduling (Ghodsi
et al. 2011; Dolev et al. 2012). Under Leontief utilities, different types of items or alternatives may be complements
such as burgers and buns, pen and paper, someone’s room
and their roommate etc. This extends to many different settings. In group projects, students are only able to produce
good quality work if they get along with their partners and
have some interest in their topic.
In this paper, we consider the problem of matching roommates and rooms where the preferences of agents over
other agents and rooms are given by cardinal values. The
two fundamental notions in game theory and social choice
are economic efficiency–measured by social welfare–and
strategyproofness–no agent can obtain a more preferred outcome by manipulating its preferences. Prior works in this
space largely explored the objective of maximizing social
welfare–as a desirable notion for economic efficiency–under
additive utilities without considering strategyproofness.
We depart from prior works by (i) assuming that pref-

Abstract
We initiate the study of matching roommates and rooms
wherein the preferences of agents over other agents and
rooms are complementary and represented by Leontief utilities. In this setting, 2n agents must be paired up and assigned
to n rooms. Each agent has cardinal valuations over the rooms
as well as compatibility values over all other agents. Under
Leontief preferences, an agent’s utility for a matching is the
minimum of the two values. We focus on the tradeoff between
maximizing utilitarian social welfare and strategyproofness.
Our main result shows that—in a stark contrast to the additive
case—under binary Leontief utilities, there exist SP mechanisms that maximize the social welfare. We further devise
a SP mechanism that implements such a welfare maximizing algorithm and is parameterized by the number of agents.
Along the way, we highlight several possibility and impossibility results, and give upper bounds and lower bounds for
welfare with or without strategyproofness.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13887

1

Introduction

The roommates matching problem is concerned with pairing
up 2n agents (roommates) and assigning them to n rooms.
This problem originates from the seminal paper by Gale and
Shapley—and discussed by Knuth—as a generalization of
Stable Marriage (Gale and Shapley 1962). The goal is finding a stable disjoint pairing of agents such that no pair of
agents would prefer each other to their current match. This
problem has inspired a large body of work on roommate
matching (Irving 1985), 3-dimensional matching (McKay
and Manlove 2021), and coalition formation (Knuth 1976).
Even though the problem was mainly inspired by the college dormitory assignment, the majority of work on roommate matchings study stability where agents have preferences over other agents while being agnostic to their rooms.
3-Dimensional extensions of this problem primarily focus
on finding stable coalitions of size three and do not consider
preferences over different types of (often) complementary
entities (e.g. roommates and rooms). This is particularly an
important issue in common online marketplaces for short

1

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

13926

Roomi: https://roomiapp.com/
Roomsurf: https://www.roomsurf.com/

