The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VidSole: A Multimodal Dataset for Joint Kinetics Quantification and Disease
Detection with Deep Learning
Archit Kambhamettu1, * , Samantha Snyder1, * , Maliheh Fakhar1 , Samuel Audia1 , Ross Miller1 , Jae
Kun Shim1 , Aniket Bera2
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Purdue University
{architk, snyder36, mfakhar, sjaudia, rosshm, jkshim}@umd.edu, aniketbera@purdue.edu
Abstract

in osteoarthritis (Miyazaki et al. 2002; Chehab et al. 2014);
however, altering gait to reduce joint loads can reduce symptoms of osteoarthritis (Eddo et al. 2017; Shull et al. 2013;
Rynne et al. 2022). Therefore, the accurate measurement
of the lower body kinetics (e.g., joint loads, moments) and
kinematics (e.g., joint angles, speed) during ADL is vital in
preventing joint-related diseases (Sharma et al. 2010; Heiden, Lloyd, and Ackland 2009; Fitzgerald, Piva, and Irrgang
2004; Winter 2009; Labban et al. 2021).
Current methods to measure the kinetics and kinematics
of joints require high-quality 3D motion capture systems
and force plates, costing over $150,000. Furthermore, traditional gait analysis is time-consuming (Hulleck et al. 2022)
and requires the guidance of trained biomechanists. While
biomechanics experts have hinted at the potential transition
from the tedious use of body markers and force plates to
cost-effective wearables and video, they have emphasized
the need for the proper development of accurate, lightweight
models that can reduce the complexity of the problems for
users of minimal technical expertise (Stenum et al. 2024).
Although this is an active area of research (Molavian et al.
2023), practical applications and streamlined approaches applicable to clinical settings do not exist yet.
Recent methods to measure osteoarthritis-related risk factors propose AI applied to video datasets (Uhlrich et al.
2023) or wearable devices such as instrumented insoles (Jacobs and Ferris 2015; Savelberg and Lange 1999; Sim et al.
2015); however, these unimodal approaches are still timeconsuming, require technical expertise, and need to be further validated in practical environments.
We aim to foster developments in robust, easy-to-use
approaches to estimating joint kinetics and kinematics by
first designing a comparatively economical, tri-axial instrumented insole that measures the forces and moments across
five pressure points on the foot. We then conduct a largescale, multimodal gait analysis, consisting of 52 participants
who each perform 25 walking, 10 walking with a sidestep,
10 sit-to-stand, 10 stand-to-sit, 15 running, and 6 standing
trials on average. For each trial, we collect the corresponding force plate, 3D motion capture, instrumented insole, and
2-viewpoint RGB video data to create VidSole, our multimodal biomechanics dataset.

Understanding internal joint loading is critical for diagnosing gait-related diseases such as knee osteoarthritis; however, current methods of measuring joint risk factors are timeconsuming, expensive, and restricted to lab settings. In this
paper, we enable the large-scale, cost-effective biomechanical analysis of joint loading via three key contributions: the
development and deployment of novel instrumented insoles,
the creation of a large multimodal biomechanics dataset (VidSole), and a baseline deep learning pipeline to predict internal joint loading factors. Our novel instrumented insole
measures the tri-axial forces and moments across five highpressure points under the foot. VidSole consists of the forces
and moments measured by these insoles along with corresponding RGB video from two viewpoints, 3D body motion capture, and force plate data for over 2,600 trials of 52
diverse participants performing four fundamental activities
of daily living (sit-to-stand, stand-to-sit, walking, and running). We feed the insole data and kinematic parameters extractable from video (i.e., pose, knee angle) into a deep learning pipeline consisting of an ensemble Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) activity classifier followed by activity-specific Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) regression networks to estimate
knee adduction moment (KAM), a biomechanical risk factor
for knee osteoarthritis. The successful classification of activities at an accuracy of 99.02 percent and KAM estimation
with mean absolute error (MAE) less than 0.5 percent*body
weight*height, the current threshold for accurately detecting
knee osteoarthritis with KAM, illustrates the usefulness of
our dataset for future research and clinical settings.

Introduction
Over one in three Americans older than the age of 65 experience some form of physical disability (Fuller-Thomson, Ferreirinha, and Ahlin 2023). These disabilities prevent them
from performing activities of daily living (ADL), such as
sitting, standing, walking, and running. Osteoarthritis, the
leading cause of disability in this age group, is characterized by joint structural changes and cartilage degeneration
due to gait abnormalities that cause an uneven distribution
of forces. (Martel-Pelletier et al. 2016; Felson 2013). During an individual’s lifetime, cyclical joint loading can result
* co-first authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The design and deployment of a novel, reliable instrumented insole capable of measuring tri-axial forces and
28142

