The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging Anatomical Consistency for Multi-Object Detection in Ultrasound
Images via Source-free Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Bin Pu1 , Xingguo Lv2 , Jiewen Yang1 , Xingbo Dong2 , Yiqun Lin1 , Shengli Li3 ,
Kenli Li4† , Xiaomeng Li1†
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, HKSAR, China
2
Anhui University, Hefei, China
3
Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital, Southern Medical University, Shenzhen, China
4
Hunan University, Changsha, China
{eebinpu, eexmli}@ust.hk, xingbo.dong@ahu.edu.cn, lkl@hnu.edu.cn
Abstract

Source
Domain

Source-free unsupervised domain adaptation aims to eliminate domain shifts when data from the source domain and annotation from the target domain are not available. The multiobject detection tasks in medical image analysis are constrained by patient privacy and extremely huge annotation
consumption. Hence, Source-free UDA is considered a more
practical approach for eliminating the domain gap. However, relevant research that explores this topic is a dearth. In
this paper, we design an Anatomy-aware Alignment TeacherStudent learning method using topological consistency based
on a mean-teacher framework for Source-free UDA in multiple medical object detection named AATS, including Unsupervised Structure Refinement (USR) and Graph-aware Morphology Alignment (GMA). To match the student and teacher
at the low-level and visual features, we propose the USR via
an unsupervised clustering algorithm to group organs in ultrasound images. Based on USR, we obtain a graph with organ
relations on the teacher branch. While in the student branch,
we acquire visual features to construct graphical space and
optimize the model with graph propagation. Finally, to match
the student and teacher, GMA is designed to align the teacher
and student based on both topology and morphology information that is derived from prior medical knowledge. Four
groups of adaptation experiments were conducted on available medical datasets, and the outcomes demonstrate that our
approach not only achieves state-of-the-art performance but
also provides substantial advantages over existing methods.

Fixed
Pre-train

Target
Domain
Fine-tune

RV

LV

LA RA
Low-level
Difference

DAO
SP
Structure
Consistency

Anatomy
Similarity
LV

RV

LA
RV
RA

RA

DAO
SP

LV

DAO

LA

SP

Figure 1: Motivation of our AATS. Left Ventricle (LV),
Right Ventricle (RV), Left Atrium (LA), Right Atrium (RA),
Spine (SP), and Descending Aorta (DAO). Our adaptation
technique obviates the need for source domain data and
leverages solely the pre-trained weights that suffice to safeguard the privacy of the source domain. Upon observations,
it becomes evident that capitalizing on the inherent topological consistency of anatomical structures across various
domains can effectively bridge domain gaps.

model trained within medical center A to data from medical center B may result in diminished detection performance
or render the approach ineffective. Meanwhile, obtaining a
large number of detailed box-based annotations for different
domains is usually costly/ unavailable. Domain adaptation
techniques have been developed to address the cross-domain
adaptation problem in the absence of labeled target domain
data, such as unsupervised domain adaptation object detection (UDAOD) (Oza et al. 2023) and Source-free UDAOD
(Li et al. 2024).
UDAOD requires source-domain data to be trained together with target-domain data, often utilizing techniques
such as invariant feature learning (Vs et al. 2021), selftraining (Zhao et al. 2020), image translation (Chen et al.
2020), and domain randomization (Kim et al. 2019) to improve detection performance. In some specific real-world
medical scenarios, patient privacy concerns or data storage
limitations may prevent the availability of the source data.

Code — https://github.com/xmed-lab/AATS

Introduction
Medical multi-object detection deep models, which is essential for downstream tasks such as imaging quality control
(Lin et al. 2019), standardized automatic screening (Baumgartner et al. 2017), and auxiliary diagnosis (Nguyen et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2024), are often deployed across several
different domains/hospitals. However, there are wide domain shifts between the data collected by different hospitals due to the use of different medical devices and the skills
of the scanning physicians. Therefore, d1irectly applying a
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding authors.

6532

