The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Patch-level Sounding Object Tracking for Audio-Visual Question Answering
Zhangbin Li* , Jinxing Zhou* , Jing Zhang, Shengeng Tang, Kun Li, Dan Guo†
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
lizhangbin.mail@gmail.com, zhoujxhfut@gmail.com, guodan@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Audio-Visual Question Answering
Audio:

Answering questions related to audio-visual scenes, i.e., the
AVQA task, is becoming increasingly popular. A critical
challenge is accurately identifying and tracking sounding objects related to the question along the timeline. In this paper, we present a new Patch-level Sounding Object Tracking
(PSOT) method. It begins with a Motion-driven Key Patch
Tracking (M-KPT) module, which relies on visual motion information to identify salient visual patches with significant
movements that are more likely to relate to sounding objects
and questions. We measure the patch-wise motion intensity
map between neighboring video frames and utilize it to construct and guide a motion-driven graph network. Meanwhile,
we design a Sound-driven KPT (S-KPT) module to explicitly
track sounding patches. This module also involves a graph
network, with the adjacency matrix directly regularized by
audio-visual correspondence map. The M-KPT and S-KPT
modules are performed in parallel for each temporal segment,
allowing balanced tracking of salient and sounding objects.
Based on the tracked patches, we further propose a Questiondriven KPT (Q-KPT) module to retain patches highly relevant
to the question, ensuring the model focuses on the most informative clues. The audio-visual-question features are updated
during the processing of these modules, which are then aggregated for final answer prediction. Extensive experiments
on standard datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method, achieving competitive performance even compared
to recent large-scale pretraining-based approaches.

…

Vision:

Question: How many instruments sound always?
Answer: one

(b) Patch-level Sounding Object Tracking
感谢您下载包图网平台上提供的PPT作品，为了您和包图网以及原创作者的利益，请勿复制、传播、销售，否则将承担法律责任！包图网将对作品进行维权，按照传播下载次数进行十倍的索取赔偿！

motion-driven

ibaotu.com

𝑡 = {1,2, … , 𝑇}

sound-driven
Time

question-driven

Figure 1: Illustration of the AVQA task and our main
idea. (a) AVQA task requires accurate comprehension of
sounding objects related to the question. (b) Our method explores the visual motion information and audio-visual correspondence to identify key salient and sounding patches. The
question is then used to select the highly relevant patches.

methods emphasize the spatial-temporal reasoning of audiovisual scenes by exploring sounding regions (Li et al. 2022),
question-related temporal segments (Jiang and Yin 2023;
Li, Hou, and Hu 2023), or object-level cross-modal relations (Li et al. 2024). In particular, some methods attempt to
utilize the frozen parameters of ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020)
models and insert learnable adapter layers to explore audiovisual relations, making the model suitable for the AVQA
task (Lin et al. 2023; Duan et al. 2024). Another branch
of methods relies on large-scale pre-training. For example,
some works (Shu et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2024) attempt to
extend large language models, e.g., Vicuna (Touvron et al.
2023), into multimodal scenarios, making them capable of
downstream AVQA task. Recently, VALOR (Chen et al.
2023) introduced a pretraining model that generates unified
and advanced audio-visual-language representations, which
generalizes well to AVQA task. However, all these methods
require high computational resources or large-scale multi-

Introduction
Audio-Visual Question Answering (AVQA) is an attractive
task in multimodal learning that involves the comprehension
and utilization of audio, visual, and text modalities (Mao
et al. 2024; Shen et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2024; Wang et al.
2024). As shown in Fig. 1(a), given a long audible video and
a related question, the AVQA task requires predicting the
correct answer, necessitating the accurate perception of the
pivotal audio-visual signals that are relevant to the question.
Mainstream methods on the AVQA task focus on designing efficient expert models. With limited training data, these
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5075

