The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GLAD: Improving Latent Graph Generative Modeling
with Simple Quantization
Van Khoa Nguyen, Yoann Boget, Frantzeska Lavda, Alexandros Kalousis
Geneva School for Business Administration (HES-SO)
University of Geneva, 1214 Geneva, Switzerland
{van-khoa.nguyen, yoann.boget, frantzeska.lavda}@etu.unige.ch, alexandros.kalousis@unige.ch

Abstract

initial graph diffusion methods rely on continuous score
functions to model the graph distributions. They learn these
score functions by denoising graph structures that have been
noised with real-valued noise (Niu et al. 2020; Jo, Lee, and
Hwang 2022). Continuous score functions are a poor match
for structures that are inherently discrete. A rather limited
number of diffusion-based works treat graphs heads-on as
discrete objects (Vignac et al. 2023). Moreover, constructing appropriate score functions over the original graph representation is challenging. Common approaches factorise
the score function to node- and adjacency-matrix-specific
components, which require their own distinct denoising networks. These partial score functions provide a fragmented
view of the graph and do not reflect well the true score function making them a poor choice to model graph distributions.
Diffusion-based methods typically have a denoising component which operates over the edges. The denoising process
takes place over dense, fully-connected, graphs (Niu et al.
2020; Jo, Lee, and Hwang 2022; Vignac et al. 2023), posing
significant scalability challenges (Qin, Vignac, and Frossard
2023).

Learning graph generative models over latent spaces has received less attention compared to models that operate on the
original data space and has so far demonstrated lacklustre
performance. We present GLAD a latent space graph generative model. Unlike most previous latent space graph generative models, GLAD operates on a discrete latent space
that preserves to a significant extent the discrete nature of
the graph structures making no unnatural assumptions such
as latent space continuity. We learn the prior of our discrete
latent space by adapting diffusion bridges to its structure. By
operating over an appropriately constructed latent space we
avoid relying on decompositions that are often used in models that operate in the original data space. We present experiments on a series of graph benchmark datasets that demonstrates GLAD as the first equivariant latent graph generative
method achieves competitive performance with the state of
the art baselines.

Code — https://github.com/v18nguye/GLAD

Introduction
Graph generation has posed a longstanding challenge with
very diverse methods proposed over time. Most of them operate directly over the original data space and learn generative models over node and edge features (Shi et al. 2020;
Luo, Yan, and Ji 2021; Kong et al. 2023). Considerably less
attention has been given to methods that operate over graph
latent spaces and the appropriate definition and design of
such latent spaces. Some initial efforts (Simonovsky and Komodakis 2018; Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018; Liu et al.
2018; Samanta et al. 2020) propose learning the graph distribution over the continuous latent space of variational autoecoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013). Yet, such approaches often suffer from high reconstruction errors, have
to solve challenging graph-matching problems, and/or rely
on heuristic corrections for the generated graphs.
Diffusion-based models have recently emerged as a compelling approach for modeling graph distributions (Niu et al.
2020; Jo, Lee, and Hwang 2022; Vignac et al. 2023).
They allow for the natural incorporation of permutationinvariance as an inductive bias within their denoising component; nevertheless, they are not without limitations. The

In this work we start from certain desiderata that a graph
generative model should satisfy, which will guide the design of our model. Graph generative models should learn
graph distributions that are invariant to node permutations.
Graphs should be treated in a holistic manner without relying on artificial decompositions to their components. Finally graphs should be treated as discrete objects, as they
are. To address these desiderata we propose Graph Discrete
Latent Diffusion (GLAD) a generative model that operates
on a carefully designed permutation-equivariant discrete latent space that explicily accounts for the discrete nature of
graphs. We quantize our latent node embeddings to preserve
their discrete nature in the graph space a fact that ensures
efficient graph encoding and supports highly accurate reconstructions, compared to existing methods operating on
continuous latent spaces. Subsequently, we tailor diffusion
bridges, (Liu et al. 2023) proposed for constrained data domains, to model latent graph distributions over the quantized
space. Our latent diffusion model relies on a geometric set
of latent nodes, where latent node coordinates encode local
graph substructures, and does not resort to a component specific decomposition as other diffusion models operating on
the graph space do. To the best of our knowledge, GLAD is

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19695

