The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Open-Set Cross-Network Node Classification via Unknown-Excluded Adversarial Graph Domain Alignment
Xiao Shen1, Zhihao Chen1, Shirui Pan2,
Shuang Zhou3, Laurence T. Yang4, 5, and Xi Zhou1*
1

Hainan University
Griffith University
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
4
Zhengzhou University
2

5

St. Francis Xavier University

xshen@hainanu.edu.cn, zhchen@hainanu.edu.cn, s.pan@griffith.edu.au,
shuang.zhou@connect.polyu.hk, ltyang@ieee.org, xzhou@hainanu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph
Domain
Adaptation

Existing cross-network node classification methods are
mainly proposed for closed-set setting, where the source network and the target network share exactly the same label
space. Such a setting is restricted in real-world applications,
since the target network might contain additional classes that
are not present in the source. In this work, we study a more
realistic open-set cross-network node classification (OCNNC) problem, where the target network contains all the
known classes in the source and further contains several target-private classes unseen in the source. Borrowing the concept from open-set domain adaptation, all target-private classes are defined as an additional “unknown” class. To address
the challenging O-CNNC problem, we propose an unknownexcluded adversarial graph domain alignment (UAGA)
model with a separate-adapt training strategy. Firstly, UAGA
roughly separates known classes from unknown class, by
training a graph neural network encoder and a neighborhoodaggregation node classifier in an adversarial framework.
Then, unknown-excluded adversarial domain alignment is
customized to align only target nodes from known classes
with the source, while pushing target nodes from unknown
class far away from the source, by assigning positive and negative domain adaptation coefficient to known class nodes and
unknown class nodes. Extensive experiments on real-world
datasets demonstrate significant outperformance of the proposed UAGA over state-of-the-art methods on O-CNNC.

?

?

?
?

?
?

?
?

Source Network

Target Network

?

Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Unknown Class
Labeled
Unlabeled
Attributes

Figure 1: An illustration of the O-CNNC problem.
of nodes in a target network that lacks labels. Existing
CNNC methods (Shen et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Huang,
Xu, and Wang 2022; Dai et al. 2023; Qiao et al. 2023; Shao
et al. 2024; Shen et al. 2024) are mainly under the closedset assumption that the source and target networks share an
identical group of node classes. However, it is hard to guarantee such a closed-set setting in real-world CNNC applications, since we cannot determine whether the source and target networks share the same label space if no target labels
are available.
To break through the restriction of the closed-set assumption, this work studies a more realistic open-set cross-network node classification (O-CNNC) problem, where the target network contains not only all the known classes in the
source network, but also an additional “unknown” class
(Saito et al. 2018) covering all the target-private classes unseen in the source. Figure 1 illustrates the O-CNNC problem,
the goal is to classify target nodes from known classes into
the corresponding seen classes, and recognize target nodes
belonging to target-private classes as “unknown”.
To effectively address the O-CNNC problem, one need
to solve two challenges in essence: 1) Since the target network is without any labels, we do not know which target

Code —https://github.com/3480430977/UAGA

Introduction
Cross-network node classification (CNNC) (Shen et al.
2021) aims to leverage the knowledge obtained from a
source network with rich labels to facilitate the classification
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20398

