The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DualCP: Rehearsal-Free Domain-Incremental Learning
via Dual-Level Concept Prototype
Qiang Wang1 , Yuhang He1 * , Songlin Dong1 , Xiang Song1 ,
Jizhou Han1 , Haoyu Luo1 , Yihong Gong1,2 *
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
qwang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, heyuhang@xjtu.edu.cn,
{dsl972731417, songxiang, jizhou han, luohaoyu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, ygong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Domain-Incremental Learning (DIL) enables vision models
to adapt to changing conditions in real-world environments
while maintaining the knowledge acquired from previous domains. Given privacy concerns and training time, RehearsalFree DIL (RFDIL) is more practical. Inspired by the incremental cognitive process of the human brain, we design
Dual-level Concept Prototypes (DualCP) for each class to address the conflict between learning new knowledge and retaining old knowledge in RFDIL. To construct DualCP, we
propose a Concept Prototype Generator (CPG) that generates both coarse-grained and fine-grained prototypes for each
class. Additionally, we introduce a Coarse-to-Fine calibrator
(C2F) to align image features with DualCP. Finally, we propose a Dual Dot-Regression (DDR) loss function to optimize
our C2F module. Extensive experiments on the DomainNet,
CDDB, and CORe50 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method.

Introduction

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of most existing methods, where
new domain features and old domain features compete
within the feature space. (b) Illustration of our method
based on dual-level concept prototypes. Different colors
(red, green, blue, and purple) represent different classes,
while different shapes (◦, □, and ⋄) represent different domains. Best viewed in color.

Domain-Incremental Learning (DIL) aims to train a unified model incrementally across continuously encountered
domains. It has drawn remarkable attention in recent
years (Zhang and Mueller 2022; Verwimp et al. 2023) and
has a wide range of applications. For example, in a visual
recognition model on an autonomous vehicle, the model
is expected to incrementally learn and adapt to new and
dynamic environments (Wang et al. 2024) such as forests,
deserts, cities, etc. As the number of domains increases,
the model may forget previously acquired knowledge. Many
studies (Isele and Cosgun 2018; Zhao et al. 2021) address
the retention of knowledge by preserving and retraining
old samples, known as rehearsal. Rehearsal-based methods,
however, require longer training time, and storing old domain images may raise privacy concerns (Wan et al. 2024a).
Therefore, Rehearsal-Free DIL (RFDIL) is more practical
for real-world scenarios compared to rehearsal-based approaches.
The primary challenge of RFDIL is the conflict between
learning new domains and preventing forgetting of old ones.

On the one hand, learning new domain knowledge may overwrite parameters related to old domains, leading to catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). On the
other hand, adding artificial constraints to prevent forgetting old domains will hinder learning new ones. To mitigate
this dilemma, the method (Zhu et al. 2021) proposes generating samples for the old domains as a supplement to retain knowledge; the methods (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Hou et al.
2019) suggest employing knowledge distillation strategies
to slow down the forgetting of old knowledge; the methods (Douillard et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022b; Smith et al.
2023; Wang, Huang, and Hong 2022) propose to train a set
of learnable prompt tokens for knowledge retention. However, most methods aim to balance new-domain learning and
old-domain forgetting, resulting in a zero-sum game. As il-

* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21198

