The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Relieving Universal Label Noise for Unsupervised Visible-Infrared Person
Re-Identification by Inferring from Neighbors
Xiao Teng1 * , Long Lan1 * , Dingyao Chen1 , Kele Xu1 , Nan Yin2†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{tengxiao14,long.lan,chendingyao}@nudt.edu.cn, {kelele.xu,yinnan8911}@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification (USLVI-ReID) is of great research and practical significance yet
remains challenging due to the absence of annotations. Existing approaches aim to learn modality-invariant representations in an unsupervised setting. However, these methods
often encounter label noise within and across modalities due
to suboptimal clustering results and considerable modality
discrepancies, which impedes effective training. To address
these challenges, we propose a straightforward yet effective
solution for USL-VI-ReID by mitigating universal label noise
using neighbor information. Specifically, we introduce the
Neighbor-guided Universal Label Calibration (N-ULC) module, which replaces explicit hard pseudo labels in both homogeneous and heterogeneous spaces with soft labels derived from neighboring samples to reduce label noise. Additionally, we present the Neighbor-guided Dynamic Weighting
(N-DW) module to enhance training stability by minimizing
the influence of unreliable samples. Extensive experiments on
the RegDB and SYSU-MM01 datasets demonstrate that our
method outperforms existing USL-VI-ReID approaches, despite its simplicity.

Figure 1: Illustration of the motivation of our method. Due to
inferior clustering results, images of the same person can be
divided into different groups in each modality. As a result,
one-hot pseudo labels are limited to represent their identities
in both homogeneous and heterogeneous learning processes.
Additionally, the reliability of labeling can vary for diverse
samples during the learning process.

Code — https://github.com/tengxiao14/Neighbor-guidedUSL-VI-ReID
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12220

Introduction
Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) focuses
on identifying the same person from the visible or infrared
camera when a query image is provided from the other
modality (Hao et al. 2021; Ye et al. 2021a). It has attracted widespread attention due to its potential in night vision surveillance applications, where traditional visible cameras cannot work well. Benefiting from accurate manual
annotations, recent works have achieved notable improvement on the VI-ReID task. However, the reliance on annotations within and across modalities heavily limits their
applications. To address the issue, the task of unsupervised
visible-infrared person re-identification (USL-VI-ReID) has

emerged and garnered substantial interest (Yang et al. 2022;
Yang, Chen, and Ye 2024).
The key of USL-VI-ReID is to learn modality-shareable
feature representations using only an unlabeled training set
(Liang et al. 2021). To achieve this, existing approaches
(Yin et al. 2024a; Cheng et al. 2023b,a) typically generate pseudo labels to optimize model parameters. Specifically, these methods first apply clustering algorithms to create pseudo labels within each modality independently. Subsequently, these pseudo labels are used to establish crossmodality correspondences, which aim to create a definitive
association between visible and infrared modalities. However, as illustrated in Fig. 1, suboptimal clustering results can
lead to images of the same person being assigned to different groups. Consequently, relying solely on one-hot pseudo

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Nan Yin is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7356

