The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Task and Motion Planning with Metric Time for Multiple Object
Navigation
Elisa Tosello, Alessandro Valentini, Andrea Micheli
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
etosello@fbk.eu, alvalentini@fbk.eu, amicheli@fbk.eu

Abstract

Valentini, Micheli, and Cimatti 2020), their integration
is still unexplored. Current TAMP approaches generate
feasible task-motion plans, but overlook action durations
and overlaps. Temporal planners manage time constraints
but lack motion integration and fail to consider trajectory
impacts, like navigating narrow passages to meet deadlines
despite moving through open spaces. The challenge lies in
combining them, involving durative and overlapping motion
actions, thus intertwining temporal and spatial reasoning to
manage concurrent, potentially conflicting movements.
To this end, this paper introduces Temporal Task and Motion Planning (TTAMP), formalizes the TTAMP problem of
concurrent multi-object navigation, and enhances the opensource modeling tool from (Tosello, Valentini, and Micheli
2024) with metric time and simultaneous motion support.
We designed and implemented a new interleaved TTAMP
solver, named T-TAMPEST (Temporal Task and Motion Planning by Encoding into Satisfiability Testing),
which leverages incremental Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) (Barrett et al. 2009) to incorporate reasoning
on deadlines and actions duration, coupled with a motion
planner supporting simultaneous object motion. For motion planning, we use a sampling-based algorithm from the
Open Motion Planning Library (OMPL) (Şucan, Moll, and
Kavraki 2012), while the collision checker handles objectspecific obstacles to accommodate robots with diverse geometries and dynamics. Our solver uses an interleaved approach, where the SMT solver generates candidate plans
and a refiner checks motion constraints. Geometric data produced by the motion planner prunes those regions of the
symbolic space that are unreachable due to obstacles, as
in (Tosello, Valentini, and Micheli 2024). For single-object
scenarios, time constraints limit the motion path search to
areas reachable within the maximum action duration. The
motion planner then supplies the task planner with the actual action duration to aid in state space pruning. For multiple objects, T-TAMPEST incorporates contextual information about the conflicts learned from the motion planner on
overlapping actions. If the motion planner fails, new temporal constraints are imposed at the task level, pruning classes
of temporal plans and ensuring the end of the interplay.
Finally, we provide a comprehensive benchmark suite for
TTAMP and a detailed assessment of T-TAMPEST, showcasing its performance in leveraging such constraints.

Integrating metric time into Task And Motion Planning
(TAMP) is challenging, especially with simultaneous object motion. Existing work focuses on classical and numeric
TAMP, not considering deadlines, motions overlapping in
time, and other temporal constraints. In this paper, we fill
this gap by formalizing Temporal Task and Motion Planning
(TTAMP) for multi-object navigation. We propose a novel interleaved planning technique for this problem, which leverages incremental Satisfiability Modulo Theory to ensure efficient reasoning on deadlines and action duration coupled with
a motion planner supporting simultaneous object motion. Geometric data on encountered obstacles prunes unreachable
symbolic regions, while temporal bounds limit the geometric search space. For multiple moving objects, our algorithm
contextualizes the conflicts learned from the motion planner
on overlapping actions so that entire classes of temporal plans
are pruned from the search space of the task planner, ensuring the eventual termination of the interplay. We provide a
comprehensive benchmark suite and demonstrate the effectiveness of our solver in leveraging these scenarios.

Code — https://github.com/fbk-pso/tampest.git

Introduction
Planning for multiple objects moving simultaneously is
highly complex, requiring the integration of task planning
(what actions to take to achieve a goal), temporal reasoning
(scheduling activities to meet constraints), and motion planning (how to move the system). Consider a fleet of warehouse robots delivering orders within specific time windows.
The task planning model defines available actions (e.g., motion and task allocation) and initial and final configurations
of robots and items, with the aim to find a course of actions to achieve the goal. Temporal planning includes durations, time constraints (e.g., delivery deadlines), and potential overlaps (parallel execution). The motion planner ensures motion actions feasibility by checking collision avoidance with static and dynamic obstacles (e.g., other robots)
while ensuring sufficient time for their physical execution.
Despite advances in Task and Motion Planning
(TAMP) (Garrett et al. 2021; Dantam 2020) and Temporal Planning (Shin and Davis 2005; Coles et al. 2021;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26716

