The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GSDiff: Synthesizing Vector Floorplans via
Geometry-enhanced Structural Graph Generation
Sizhe Hu, Wenming Wu* , Yuntao Wang, Benzhu Xu, Liping Zheng∗
Hefei University of Technology
2024010072@mail.hfut.edu.cn, wwming@hfut.edu.cn, wyt@mail.hfut.edu.cn, {bzxu, zhenglp}@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract

typically optimize based on various explicit rules as constraints. This process is often sensitive to the modeling of
constraints and the selection of parameters. The latter (Hu
et al. 2020; Chaillou 2020; Nauata et al. 2021; Para et al.
2021), using deep neural networks, learns implicit design
rules from real floorplans. While addressing the shortcomings of rule-based methods, it also introduces new issues: (i)
It is challenging to ensure that generated floorplans meet explicit constraints, such as pronounced misalignment; (ii) The
generated results usually require heuristic post-processing to
be converted into usable vector floorplans.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework called GSDiff to directly synthesize vector floorplans. The core idea is
to view vector floorplan synthesis as structural graph generation and decouple it into two tasks: wall junction generation
and wall segment prediction. We represent the floorplan as
a structural graph (Sun et al. 2022), where nodes represent
wall junctions and edges represent wall segments. Additionally, to capture the floorplan semantics, we consider room
labels as one of the node attributes. We first use a generative
model based on a diffusion model to generate graph nodes,
and then a predictive model based on a Transformer is used
to determine graph edges between generated nodes, resulting in a complete structural graph. To improve the design
aesthetics, we also propose geometry-enhanced optimization techniques. During the node generation phase, we introduce a novel node alignment loss that optimizes the alignment error of nodes in mixed-base representations, which
empowers the generative model to constrain node alignment.
In the edge prediction phase, we employ an innovative edge
perception enhancement strategy. This involves randomly
interpolating a third point on the edges and self-supervising
the model to predict the interpolation coefficients, which enhances the geometric perception ability of our edge prediction model, thereby improving the topological connectivity
of structural graphs. Finally, vector floorplans can be directly
extracted from the generated structural graphs.
Extensive evaluations show that our method has significant advantages over state-of-the-art techniques on all metrics, enabling free generation and constrained generation.
Our contributions are as follows: (i) A novel framework for
automatically generating diverse, high-quality vector floorplans with various constraints by transforming the problem
into a structured graph generation process. (ii) An alignment

Automating architectural floorplan design is vital for housing and interior design, offering a faster, cost-effective alternative to manual sketches by architects. However, existing methods, including rule-based and learning-based approaches, face challenges in design complexity and constrained generation with extensive post-processing, and tend
to obvious geometric inconsistencies such as misalignment,
overlap, and gaps. In this work, we propose a novel generative
framework for vector floorplan design via structural graph
generation, called GSDiff, focusing on wall junction generation and wall segment prediction to capture both geometric
and semantic aspects of structural graphs. To improve the geometric rationality of generated structural graphs, we propose
two innovative geometry enhancement methods. In wall junction generation, we propose a novel alignment loss function to
improve geometric consistency. In wall segment prediction,
we propose a random self-supervision method to enhance the
model’s perception of the overall geometric structure, thereby
promoting the generation of reasonable geometric structures.
Employing the diffusion model and the Transformer model,
as well as the geometry enhancement strategies, our framework can generate wall junctions, wall segments and room
polygons with structural and semantic information, resulting
in structural graphs that accurately represent floorplans. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method surpasses
existing techniques, enabling free generation and constrained
generation, marking a shift towards structure generation in
architectural design.

Code — https://github.com/SizheHu/GSDiff

Introduction
Automatic design of architectural floorplans has garnered
widespread attention, as detailed architectural blueprints are
crucial for constructing residences and designing interior
scenes. Recent years have seen significant advancements in
the automated floorplan generation. Existing methods can be
broadly categorized into rule-based and learning-based approaches. The former (Merrell, Schkufza, and Koltun 2010;
Liu et al. 2013; Laignel et al. 2021; Shekhawat et al. 2021),
relying on specific user requirements and expert knowledge,
* Corresponding authors: Wenming Wu, Liping Zheng
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17323

