The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bayesian Low-Rank Learning (Bella):
A Practical Approach to Bayesian Neural Networks
Bao Gia Doan* 1 , Afshar Shamsi* 2 , Xiao-Yu Guo1 , Arash Mohammadi2 , Hamid Alinejad-Rokny4
Dino Sejdinovic1 , Damien Teney3 , Damith C. Ranasinghe1 , Ehsan Abbasnejad1
1

The University of Adelaide
2
Concordia University
3
Idiap Research Institute
4
University of New South Wales
{giabao.doan,xiaoyu.guo,dino.sejdinovic,damith.ranasinghe,ehsan.abbasnejad}@adelaide.edu.au; damien.teney@idiap.ch;
h.alinejad@unsw.edu.au; {afshar.shamsi,arash.mohammadi}@concordia.ca

Computational complexity of Bayesian learning is impeding
its adoption in practical, large-scale tasks, despite demonstrations of significant merits such as improved robustness and
resilience to unseen or out-of-distribution inputs over their
non-Bayesian counterparts. Although, Deep ensemble methods have proven to be highly effective for Bayesian deep
learning, their practical application is hindered by substantial computational cost. In this study, we introduce an innovative framework to mitigate the computational burden of
ensemble Bayesian deep learning. We explore a more feasible alternative, inspired by the recent success of low-rank
adapters, we introduce Bayesian Low-Rank LeArning (Bella).
We show, i) Bella achieves a dramatic reduction in the number
of trainable parameters required to approximate a Bayesian
posterior; and ii) it not only maintains, but in some instances,
surpasses the performance–in accuracy and out-of-distribution
generalisation–of conventional Bayesian learning methods
and non-Bayesian baselines. Our extensive empirical evaluation in large-scale tasks such as ImageNet, CAMELYON17,
DomainNet, VQA with CLIP, LLaVA demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of Bella in building highly scalable and
practical Bayesian deep models for real-world applications.

37

(prediction)

28
18

Train Error (%)

Test Error (%)

10

Figure 1: Train and Test Error (%) landscapes of
CAMELYON17. Training landscape demonstrates the learned
3 particle approximation of the modes of the posterior from a
pre-trained model θ—modification of parameters in the constrained region (∆θ) leads to approaching posterior modes
in inference. Here, we observe a key benefit of our Bella
approximation compared to a point estimate—while a single
parameter particle (e.g. θ + ∆θ 1 ) do not generalize well,
Bayesian prediction with Equation (1), effectively an average
over multiple parameter settings, leads to better performance.

Code — https://bnn-bella.github.io/BNN-Bella/

1

47

Bella
inference

Abstract

Introduction

Bayesian deep learning (Neal 2012) provides mechanisms,
for building predictive models more robust to adversarial
attacks, resilient to unseen or out-of-distribution data and a
theoretical framework for estimating model uncertainty (Ye
and Zhu 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Izmailov et al. 2020; Chen and
Ghattas 2020; Wilson et al. 2022; Doan et al. 2023, 2024).
Consequently, embracing Bayesian deep learning (BDL) represents a significant stride towards building more reliable
and trustworthy AI systems for various real-world applications (e.g., autonomous driving, medical image analysis, etc.).
Unfortunately, their practical use is encumbered by computational complexity.
* These two authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16298

Unlike traditional alternatives with point estimates—a single set of model parameters mapping inputs to outputs—
Bayesian models learn the distribution of model parameters
to offer a distribution over possible predictions. Consider
a neural network f (x, θ) with input x parameterized by θ
and its corresponding prior distribution p(θ). The likelihood
p(D|θ) is determined by f (Bishop 2006) and then, Bayesian
inference seeks to use Bayes’ theorem to derive a posterior
distribution given by p (θ|D) = p (D|θ) p (θ)/p(D) to compute the predictive distribution:
Z
p(y|x, D) =

p(y | x, θ)p(θ | D)dθ.

(1)

Despite evidence to support the adoption of Bayesian learning, their widespread use is hindered by several challenges; a
primary issue is the intractability of the posterior distribution
p(θ|D) in practical learning tasks. The exact solution for
the posterior, even for networks of moderate size, is impractical. Because of deep neural network’s complexity and the
high-dimensional integral of the resulting denominator. This
necessitates the use of approximations.

