The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Gradient Weight-normalized Low-rank Projection for Efficient LLM Training
Jia-Hong Huang* , Yixian Shen* , Hongyi Zhu, Stevan Rudinac, Evangelos Kanoulas
University of Amsterdam
j.huang@uva.nl, y.shen@uva.nl, h.zhu@uva.nl, s.rudinac@uva.nl, E.Kanoulas@uva.nl

Abstract

Algorithm 1: Our proposed GradNormLoRP
Require: Weight matrix W
Ensure: Updated weight matrix Wupdated
1: Normalize each column weight vector of W to get
Wnorm
2: Apply LoRA with two low-rank matrices I and J to
reformulate Wnorm
3: Initialize two sets of low-rank projection matrices
(UI , VI ) and (UJ , VJ )
4: for i = 1 to N do
5:
Compute gradient matrices ZI and HJ based on I
and J
6:
Project ZI and HJ using (UI , VI ) and (UJ , VJ )
7:
if i is a multiple of 250 then
8:
Update (UI , VI ) and (UJ , VJ )
9:
end if
10: end for
11: return Wupdated (Wnorm , ZI , (UI , VI ), HJ , (UJ , VJ ))

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable performance across various tasks, but the escalating demands
on computational resources pose significant challenges, particularly in the extensive utilization of full fine-tuning for
downstream tasks. To address this, parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods have been developed, but they often underperform compared to full fine-tuning and struggle
with memory efficiency. In this work, we introduce Gradient
Weight-Normalized Low-Rank Projection (GradNormLoRP),
a novel approach that enhances both parameter and memory
efficiency while maintaining comparable performance to full
fine-tuning. GradNormLoRP normalizes the weight matrix
to improve gradient conditioning, facilitating better convergence during optimization. Additionally, it applies low-rank
approximations to the weight and gradient matrices, significantly reducing memory usage during training. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our 8-bit GradNormLoRP reduces optimizer memory usage by up to 89.5% and enables the
pre-training of large LLMs, such as LLaMA 7B, on consumerlevel GPUs like the NVIDIA RTX 4090, without additional
inference costs. Moreover, GradNormLoRP outperforms existing low-rank methods in fine-tuning tasks. For instance, when
fine-tuning the RoBERTa model on all GLUE tasks with a
rank of 8, GradNormLoRP achieves an average score of 80.65,
surpassing LoRA’s score of 79.23. These results underscore
GradNormLoRP as a promising alternative for efficient LLM
pre-training and fine-tuning.

Code — https://github.com/Jhhuangkay/Gradient-Weightnormalized-Low-rank-Projection-for-Efficient-LLMTraining
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.19616

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) pre-trained on extensive
datasets have demonstrated exceptional effectiveness across
various domains (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; He et al.
2022; Xie et al. 2022; Baevski et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2019; Tan
and Bansal 2019). As time progresses, open-source LLMs
have consistently improved in their capabilities, accompanied by a striking increase in the scale of pre-trained models (Raffel et al. 2020a; Zhang et al. 2022; Le Scao et al.
2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Tay et al. 2023). Consequently,
employing full fine-tuning, where all learnable parameters
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24123

of a pre-trained model are updated for performing downstream tasks, poses unparalleled challenges despite its track
record of delivering numerous state-of-the-art results. These
challenges primarily stem from the escalating demands on
computational resources.
To tackle the aforementioned challenge, researchers have
developed parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques
(Houlsby et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2022; Lialin et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2024; Kopiczko, Blankevoort, and Asano 2024). These
methods are tailored to update only a small amount of taskspecific parameters while leaving the majority of the model’s
parameters unchanged. Among these techniques, low-rank
approximation-based approaches utilize low-rank matrices
to approximate weight changes during training, achieving
both parameter and memory efficiency without requiring
additional trainable subnetworks to be added to the original
model architecture.
Despite their advantages, low-rank-based methods often
underperform compared to full-rank fine-tuning (Hu et al.
2022; Lialin et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024). This performance
gap is typically attributed to the reduced number of trainable parameters, but other underlying factors, such as altered
gradient dynamics due to reparameterization, also play a
significant role. In Figure 2 of our Extended Version, we
observe that the gradient descent process can become neither
smooth nor stable when fine-tuning LLMs in an unnormalized subspace. This instability arises from conducting gradi-

