The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SSAN: A Symbol Spatial-Aware Network for Handwritten Mathematical
Expression Recognition
Haoran Zhang1,2,3 , Xiangdong Su1,2,3 * , Xingxiang Zhou1,2,3 , Guanglai Gao1,2,3
1

2

College of Computer Science, Inner Mongolia University, China
National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Information Processing Technology for Mongolian, China
3
Inner Mongolia Key Laboratory of Multilingual Artificial Intelligence Technology, China
zhryidr962@gmail.com, cssxd@imu.edu.cn, zxx.w@outlook.com, csggl@imu.edu.cn
Abstract

Similar

(a)

The great challenge of handwritten mathematical expression
recognition (HMER) is the complex structures of the expressions, which are directly related to the symbol spatial positions. Existing HMER methods typically employ attention
mechanisms in the decoder of their models to implicitly perceive the symbol positions, or employ symbol counting and
tree-based strategies to model the symbol spatial relation.
However, these methods still cannot effectively capture the
structural information of formulas, thus negatively impacting the symbol decoding in HMER. To deal with this problem and enhance the HMER performance, this paper proposes a novel auxiliary task, namely predicting the symbol
spatial distribution map of handwritten expression images.
On such basis, this paper designs a symbol spatial-aware network (SSAN) for this task, which is jointly optimized with the
HMER model. Specifically, considering the similarity of the
symbol spatial positions between the handwritten mathematical expression images and their corresponding printed templates, we obtain the symbol spatial distribution map by first
generating printed templates from LaTeX ground-truth for
handwritten formula images and then replacing the connected
components of printed templates with 2D Gaussian distribution maps of the same size. Meanwhile, due to the loose alignment of the symbol spatial positions between handwritten and
printed formula images, and misclassification of similar symbols, we further propose a coarse-to-fine alignment strategy
and an attention-guided symbol masking strategy in SSAN to
tackle these issues. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
SSAN significantly improves the recognition performance of
the HMER models, and the proposed auxiliary tasks are more
effective in enhancing HMER performance than existing auxiliary tasks.

(b)

Similar

(c)

(d)
Formula Image

Symbol Spatial Distribution Map

Figure 1: Illustration of symbol spatial distribution maps
for handwritten mathematical expression images and their
printed templates. For easy comparison, the symbol spatial distribution maps of (a) and (c) are manually annotated,
while (b) and (d) are generated using the proposed method.

diverse handwriting styles but also complex spatial relationships (Zhou et al. 2013; Li et al. 2019; He, Tan, and Bi
2020). These challenges complicate the accurate modeling
of long-distance correlations and adherence to LaTeX grammatical specifications (Zhao et al. 2021), especially with
nested structures, lengthy sequences, and other intricate
configurations. As a result, the recognition accuracy often
varies with the complexity of the mathematical expression
(ME) structure, further reducing overall performance.
Prevalent approaches regard HMER as an image-tosequence task and design attention-based encoder-decoder
models for this task. These models depend on the attention mechanism to facilitate the symbol decoding in generating the target LaTeX sequences. For example, WAP
(Zhang et al. 2017) incorporated a coverage attention mechanism to improve recognition accuracy. ABM (Bian et al.
2022) proposed a bidirectional mutual learning method to
help the model understand the long-distance correlations in
MEs. Some recent works focus on enhancing the capability of recognizers to understand the positional and hierarchical relationships among symbols in formula images. CAN
(Li et al. 2022) introduced a symbol counting task with a
weakly supervised counting module to ensure precise alignment between attention features and symbol regions. BPD

Code — https://github.com/Howrunz/SSAN

Introduction
Handwritten Mathematical Expression Recognition
(HMER) aims to convert formula images into LaTeX
sequences, which is widely used in answer sheet scoring,
office automation, and document understanding. Unlike
handwritten text line recognition, HMER faces not only
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22398

