The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-Shot Learning for Materials Science Texts: Leveraging Duck Typing
Principles
Xin Zhang1 , Peiliang Zhang1,3 , Jingling Yuan1,2 * , Lin Li1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, China
Hubei Key Laboratory of Transportation Internet of Things, Wuhan University of Technology, China
3
Department of Library and Information Science, Yonsei University, Korea
{xinz, zhangpl109, yjl, cathylilin}@whut.edu.cn
Abstract

Materials science text mining (MSTM), involving tasks like
property extraction and synthesis action retrieval, is pivotal
for advancing research by deriving critical insights from scientific literature. Descriptors, serving as essential task labels, often vary in meaning depending on researchers’ usage
purposes across different mining tasks. (e.g., ‘Material’
can refer to both synthesis components and participants in
fuel cell experiment). This meaning difference makes it difficult for existing methods, fine-tuned to specific task, to handle the same descriptors in other tasks. To overcome above
limitation, we propose MatDuck, a simple and effective approach for Zero-Shot MSTM by evoking material knowledge within Large Language Models (LLMs). Specifically,
inspired by the Duck Typing principles in programming languages, we present a ClassDefinition-Style Descriptor generation method that evokes task-specific characteristics to address usage variation. Subsequently, we introduce code-style
in-context learning for zero-shot tasks, reframing them into
code to leverage LLMs’ proficiency in code understanding.
Extensive experiments on eight benchmark datasets demonstrate that MatDuck, as a plug-and-play approach, significantly improves the Zero-Shot MSTM performance of LLMs
by an average of 11.3% across seven tasks.

Figure 1: Illustration of meaning differences due to varying
usage purposes, and two proposed Duck Typing principles.
Descriptors are abstract representations of material properties, structures, or behaviors, enabling data-driven analysis in materials science domain (Isayev et al. 2017;
Wyrzykowska et al. 2022; Kabylda et al. 2023). In text mining, they often function as task labels. Researchers typically define descriptors based on task objectives, construct
datasets, and fine-tune models accordingly. As a result, the
meaning of descriptors can vary depending on their specific
requirements in different tasks (Song, Miret, and Liu 2023;
Gupta et al. 2024). For instance, the descriptor ‘Material’
in materials science can refer to both the materials used in
synthesis of target and those mentioned as participants in
fuel cell experiment. As shown in Figure 1 (a), when encountering new tasks with the same descriptor but different purposes, variations in usage pose a challenge to the
generalizability of specifically trained models. Retraining
or fine-tuning often requires high effort and computational
cost (Zhao et al. 2024; Xia et al. 2024), making it unaffordable for many material researchers, especially those with no
background in natural language processing.
Given this challenge, from a broader research perspective, the meaning difference highlights the urgent need for
paradigms that reduce fine-tuning on task-specific labeled
data. In this context, Zero-Shot MSTM aims to exploit the
embedded material knowledge and powerful generalisabil-

Introduction
Material Science Text Mining (MSTM) focuses on extracting valuable elements using predefined descriptors from materials science-related texts, which are more challenging
than general texts due to their specialized terms, complex
structures, and precise information requirements. (Gupta
et al. 2022; Song, Miret, and Liu 2023; Song et al. 2023).
Key MSTM tasks include named entity recognition, relation extraction, and sentence classification, among others.
By applying these, researchers can efficiently organize and
interpret vast amounts of material science data, including research papers, patents, and experimental reports (Tshitoyan
et al. 2019; Suvarna et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024; Dagdelen
et al. 2024). This paradigm facilitates the identification of
critical patterns and relationships in material properties, performance characteristics, and practical applications, driving
faster innovation and deployment of new materials.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1129

