The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Controllable 3D Dance Generation Using Diffusion-Based Transformer U-Net
Puyuan Guo, Tuo Hao, Wenxin Fu, Yingming Gao, Ya Li*
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{guopy, haotuo absolute, fuwenxin2003, yingming.gao, yli01}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

movement generation task (Li et al. 2022b; Tseng, Castellon, and Liu 2023; Zhuang et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024). Although these models can generate high-quality dance movements, they still lack the ability to control the generated results. However, this control capability is crucial for practical
applications. For the GPT models, Huang et al. (2024) designed a pose codebook, where each code corresponds to the
semantic actions of different body parts. By replacing codes
during the generation process, they achieved control over
the generated movements. However, for diffusion models,
although some works (Shafir et al. 2023a; Dai et al. 2024)
have contributed to generating motions along specific trajectories, researches on controlling body movements are still
lacking. Therefore, we propose a controllable dance generation framework based on diffusion models, which can guide
the generation of body movements according to 2D keypoints.
Inspired by ControlNet (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala
2023), we first train a dance movement generation U-Net
using a larger-scale dataset with music as the only condition. This U-Net is composed of Transformer decoder layers. We then use this model as a base, fix its parameters,
and duplicate its “downsampling” layers to create a control
network, using 2D keypoints as inputs and music features
as conditions. The outputs of each layer in the control network serve as a control signal for the corresponding “upsampling” layers, guiding the final generated results to resemble the 2D keypoints. This approach enables the control
network to acquire the ability to affect the model’s results using control signals. During the inference process, inputting
2D keypoints as control signals and musics as the conditions
allows for the generation of dance movements that resemble
the keypoint movements.
In this paper, our contributions are as follows:

Recently, dance generation has attracted increasing interest.
In particular, the success of diffusion models in image generation has led to the emergence of dance generation systems
based on the diffusion framework. However, these systems
lack controllability, which limits their practical applications.
In this paper, we propose a controllable dance generation
method based on the diffusion model, which can generate 3D
dance motions controlled by 2D keypoint sequences. Specifically, we design a transformer-based U-Net model to predict actual motions. Then, we fix the parameters of the U-Net
model and train an additional control network, enabling the
generated motions to be controlled by 2D keypoints. We conduct extensive experiments and compared our method with
existing works on the widely used AIST++ dataset, demonstrating that our approach has certain advantages and controllability. Moreover, we also test our model on in-the-wild
videos and find that it is capable of generating dance movements similar to the motions in the videos as well.

Introduction
The 3D dance generation task refers to generating 3D dance
movements that match the given music, which has broad application scenarios such as film production, video games,
and virtual reality. By utilizing dance generation models, we
can efficiently obtain 3D motion data, thereby saving a significant amount of time.
The researches on dance generation models develop along
with the emergence of generative models, evolving from
long short-term memory (LSTM) models (Tang, Jia, and
Mao 2018; Tang, Mao, and Jia 2018; Ye et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2021; Zhuang et al. 2022) to Transformers (Li et al.
2020, 2021, 2022a). After that, generative adversarial networks (GAN) are also applied to this task (Lee et al. 2019;
Sun et al. 2021; Ferreira et al. 2021). Recently, diffusion
models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020), which are very popular in the field of image generation (Dhariwal and Nichol
2021; Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Rombach
et al. 2022), and generative pre-trained transformers (GPT),
used in large language models (Radford et al. 2019; Devlin
et al. 2019), have provided new approaches for the dance

• We propose a novel Transformer U-Net model for 3D
dance movement generation, which not only generates
high-quality dance motions but also adopts to the controllable network architecture we subsequently introduce.
• We propose a controllable dance generation framework
based on diffusion models. By combining with the aforementioned U-Net model, we can use 2D keypoints as
control signals to guide the final generated results.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3284

