The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Fine-Grained Vision-Language Pretraining
with Negative Augmented Samples
Yeyuan Wang 1∗ , Dehong Gao 2 * , Lei Yi 3 , Linbo Jin 3 , Jinxia Zhang 4 ,
Libin Yang 2† , Xiaoyan Cai 1†
1
2

School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
4
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
{wangyeyuan, dehong.gdh, libiny, xiaoyanc}@nwpu.edu.cn
{yilei.yi, yuyi.jlb}@alibaba-inc.com
{jinxiazhang}@seu.edu.cn
Abstract

in human daily life (Wang et al. 2022a). However, current vision-language pretraining models mainly focus on
capturing the overall relationship between vision and language (Wang et al. 2022b; Ji et al. 2023), often overlooking
the more nuanced, local interactions (Gao et al. 2020; Wei
et al. 2021). The ability of modeling the local relationship,
which we refer to as fine-grained capability, is crucial in various artificial intelligence domains such as medicine (Wang
et al. 2021), agriculture (Van Horn et al. 2018), and ecommerce (Bai et al. 2020). Therefore, it is necessary to
conduct in-depth research to better understand and model
the fine-grained attributes of vision and language modalities.

Existing Vision-Language Pretraining (VLP) methods have
achieved remarkable improvements across a variety of visionlanguage tasks, confirming their effectiveness in capturing
coarse-grained semantic correlations. However, their capability for fine-grained understanding, which is critical for many
nuanced vision-language applications, remains limited. Prevailing VLP models often overlook the intricate distinctions
in expressing different modal features and typically depend
on the similarity of holistic features for cross-modal interactions. Moreover, these models directly align and integrate
features from different modalities, focusing more on coarsegrained general representations, thus failing to capture the nuanced differences necessary for tasks demanding a more detailed perception. In response to these limitations, we introduce Negative Augmented Samples(NAS), a refined visionlanguage pretraining model that innovatively incorporates
NAS to specifically address the challenge of fine-grained
understanding. NAS utilizes a Visual Dictionary(VD) as a
semantic bridge between visual and linguistic domains. Additionally, it employs a Negative Visual Augmentation(NVA)
method based on the VD to generate challenging negative image samples. These samples deviate from positive samples
exclusively at the token level, thereby necessitating that the
model discerns the subtle disparities between positive and
negative samples with greater precision. Comprehensive experiments validate the efficacy of NAS components and underscore its potential to enhance fine-grained vision-language
comprehension.

Achieving this goal relies on two pivotal advancements:
fine-grained feature extraction (the accurate extraction of
subtle information from each input modality), and finegrained modality alignment (the precise calibration of
multi-modal features). According to fine-grained feature
extraction, the discrete tokens are frequently selected as
the fine-grained text features (Devlin et al. 2019) for language modality, while various image features (from the single pixels to patches or region features) are selected for visual modality (Huang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Zeng,
Zhang, and Li 2022). For example, salient visual regions
can be located with pretrained object detectors as visual region features (Hu et al. 2022). The kaleidoscope-like patches
are leveraged to represent multi-scale visual features (Zhuge
et al. 2021). These image features have propelled the advancement of VLP in the general domain; however, researchers still struggle to achieve fine-grained capability due
to the huge semantic gaps between those discrete language
tokens and these continuous visual features (Zhao et al.
2023). According to fine-grained modality alignment, researchers apply contrastive learning, such as CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021), to align images and sentences globally. The later
extensions explored patch-token interactive methods to capture the fine-grained correlation (Yao et al. 2021). Recently,
researchers attempted to improve the fine-grained capability through Negative Textual Augmentation(NTA) (Yuksekgonul et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2024). As shown in Figure 1
(a), these NTA approaches employ either auxiliary models

Introduction
Multi-modal machine learning, which aims to process and
relate information of multiple modalities, is a domain that
has a significant impact on general artificial intelligence (Li
2022). Among these modalities, there has been a surge of
interest in vision-language research, as the vision and language modalities are widely used and closely intertwined
* These authors contributed equally and † corresponding authors.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8060

