The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EchoDiffusion: Waveform Conditioned Diffusion Models for Echo-Based Depth
Estimation
Wenjie Zhang1,2,3 , Jun Yin1 , Long Ma1 , Peng Yu1 , Xiaoheng Jiang1,2,3 , Zhen Tian1,2,3 * ,
Mingliang Xu1,2,3 *
2

1
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450001, China
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Swarm Systems, Ministry of Education, Zhengzhou, 450001, China
3
National Supercomputing Center in Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou, 450001, China
{wjzhang, jiangxiaoheng, ieztian, iexumingliang}@zzu.edu.cn, {yinjun, malong, pengyuu}@gs.zzu.edu.cn
Previous Framework:

Abstract
To extract spatial information, depth estimation using conventional echo-based methods typically employs models with
encoder-decoder architectures, such as UNet. However, these
methods may face challenges in extracting fine details from
echo waveforms and handling multi-scale feature extraction
with high precision. To address these challenges, we introduce EchoDiffusion, a framework that incorporates diffusion models conditioned on waveform embeddings for echobased depth estimation. This framework employs the MultiScale Adaptive Latent Feature Network (MALF-Net) to extract multi-scale spatial features and perform adaptive fusion,
encoding the echo spectrograms into the latent space. Additionally, we propose the Echo Waveform Detail Embedder
(EWDE), which leverages a pre-trained Wav2Vec model to
extract detailed spatial information from echo waveforms, using these details as conditional inputs to guide the reverse
diffusion process in the latent space. By embedding the echo
waveforms into the reverse diffusion process, we can more
accurately guide the generation of depth maps. Our extensive evaluations on the Replica and Matterport3D datasets
demonstrate that EchoDiffusion establishes new benchmarks
for state-of-the-art performance in echo-based depth estimation.

Encoder

Decoder

Diffusion

Regressor

Ours Framework:
MALF-Net

EWDE

Extract
Skip Connection
Conditional Embedder

Figure 1: Previous Framework v.s. Our Framework. The
conventional training model uses echo spectrograms as input, extracts features through an encoder, and then directly
predicts depth information via a decoder. In contrast, our approach incorporates the echo waveforms as an additional input to guide the diffusion process of the echo spectrograms,
with the depth map being generated by a regressor.

depth information at close range. Echo-based approaches,
inspired by echolocation (Senocak et al. 2019), offer an alternative by emitting sound waves and analyzing their reflections to infer depth. Echo-based methods receive the transmitted sound signals through the air medium to perceive
spatial information, are not affected by light, and provide a
relatively wide field of view. Given these advantages, many
studies focus on using echoes for depth estimation.
To capture spatial features from echo spectrograms, research on echo-based depth estimation often employs UNetlike architectures. The UNet architecture effectively leverages its encoder-decoder structure to extract relevant contextual features from the echo spectrograms and accurately
reconstruct depth maps. In Christensen et al. (2020), the authors used the UNet network to perform depth estimation
from echo spectrograms and initially explored the possibility of direct depth estimation using echo waveforms. Vasudevan et al. (2020) utilized a modified UNet architecture
without skip connections, applying Atrous Spatial Pyramid
Pooling (ASPP) (Chen et al. 2017) during the encoder phase
to extract and fuse multi-scale information from echo spectrograms. Irie, Shibata et al. (2022) introduced a co-attentive
model that uses echo spectrograms and angular spectra as in-

Code — https://github.com/wjzhang-ai/EchoDiffusion

Introduction
Depth estimation has become a critical task in computer vision, enabling applications such as autonomous driving (Hu
et al. 2024; Zheng et al. 2024), attitude estimation (Ren
et al. 2023; Kawai et al. 2023), and 3D object detection
(Li et al. 2023). However, depth estimation faces challenges
across various environments, prompting research into multiple modalities. Conventional methods, including imagebased techniques (Zhang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024),
infrared sensors (Shimada et al. 2022), and LiDAR (Shao
et al. 2023; Singh et al. 2023), each offer distinct advantages.
Image-based methods excel at capturing detailed information in well-lit conditions. LiDAR provides high-resolution
3D data, while infrared sensors are effective for detecting
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22578

