The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Controllable Distortion-Perception Tradeoff Through Latent Diffusion for Neural
Image Compression
Chuqin Zhou1 , Guo Lu1 * , Jiangchuan Li1 , Xiangyu Chen2 , Zhengxue Cheng1 , Li Song1 , Wenjun
Zhang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
{zhouchuqin,luguo2014,cl4p-123,zxcheng,song li,zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn, chxy95@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Neural image compression often faces a challenging trade-off
among rate, distortion and perception. While most existing
methods typically focus on either achieving high pixel-level
fidelity or optimizing for perceptual metrics, we propose a
novel approach that simultaneously addresses both aspects
for a fixed neural image codec. Specifically, we introduce a
plug-and-play module at the decoder side that leverages a latent diffusion process to transform the decoded features, enhancing either low distortion or high perceptual quality without altering the original image compression codec. Our approach facilitates fusion of original and transformed features
without additional training, enabling users to flexibly adjust
the balance between distortion and perception during inference. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our
method significantly enhances the pretrained codecs with a
wide, adjustable distortion-perception range while maintaining their original compression capabilities. For instance, we
can achieve more than 150% improvement in LPIPS-BDRate
without sacrificing more than 1 dB in PSNR.

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed method. D represents a
plug-and-play adaptive latent fusion module at decoder side
for a base neural codec. We can achieve different distortion
(PSNR) and perception (LPIPS) trade-offs, controlled by τ .
For simplicity, quantization and entropy coding are omitted.

Introduction

bitrate. For example, HiFiC (Mentzer et al. 2020) proposes
to use Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to optimize neural image codecs. In contrast, CDC (Yang and Mandt 2023) employs a diffusionbased (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) decoder to improve
perceptual quality. However, both approaches struggle to
achieve high pixel-level fidelity, as they may introduce highfrequency noise and unrealistic textures. Blau and Michaeli
(2019) explains this phenomenon by highlighting a fundamental trade-off between perceptual quality and distortion.
They suggest that these two goals cannot be fully achieved
simultaneously within a given architecture. We argue that
both pixel-level fidelity and image-level realism are crucial
for neural image compression frameworks. The inability to
achieve both metrics simultaneously is a significant limitation in current image codecs. Given this limitation, an ideal
codec should have the flexibility to traverse between different distortion-perception trade-offs at a given bitrate.
Recent research has explored flexible distortionperception tradeoffs in image compression. A notable
example is MRIC (Agustsson et al. 2023), which introduces
a hyperparameter in the loss function to balance perception
and distortion. This hyperparameter also serves as a condition for the decoder to adjust its reconstruction. However,

As digital visual data continues to dominate Internet traffic, the development of efficient image and video codecs becomes increasingly crucial. In recent years, deep learningbased codecs have achieved significant advancements in
both image domain (Cheng et al. 2020; Mentzer et al. 2020)
and video domain (Hu, Lu, and Xu 2021; Li, Li, and Lu
2023; Lu et al. 2019, 2021, 2024a). These codecs have
demonstrated a superior compression performance compared to traditional codecs (Bellard 2018; Bross et al. 2021).
Current learning-based image codecs primarily rely on
the transform coding paradigm and variational autoencoders
(VAEs) (Ballé et al. 2018). Most of these models use a ratedistortion loss function, directly optimizing for low distortion performance. However, distortion-oriented codecs often exhibit mode averaging behavior at low bitrates (Zhao,
Song, and Ermon 2017), resulting in blurring that significantly degrades visual quality for human observers.
Recent studies demonstrate that optimizing for perceptual quality can lead to greater compression gains by allowing for imperceptible distortions, thereby reducing the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10725

