The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

iMoT: Inertial Motion Transformer for Inertial Navigation
Son Minh Nguyen, Duc Viet Le, Paul Havinga
Department of Computer Science, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
{m.s.nguyen; v.d.le; p.j.m.havinga}@utwente.nl

Abstract

physics-based methods, heuristic priors-based methods, and
data-driven priors-based methods. Since quadratic errors are
leaked through the double integral of noisy IMU measurements whilst computing displacements, classical physicsbased methods, exemplified by strap-down inertial navigation systems (SINS) (Titterton and Weston 2004) result
in huge drift accumulation in a very short time. Heuristic
priors-based methods, represented by pedestrian dead reckoning (PDR) approaches (Jimenez et al. 2009; Tian et al.
2015), decompose trajectory estimation into discrete components: step detection, step-length estimation, and heading
estimation, all operating under assumptions of regular human gait patterns. However, these methods often face limitations in adaptability, with step detection and step-length estimation being confined to specific scenarios and occasionally
relying on fixed parameters. Moreover, heading estimation
may suffer from inaccuracies induced by gravitational and
magnetic disturbances. In an advanced manner, data-driven
priors-based methods (Chen et al. 2018a; Herath, Yan, and
Furukawa 2020; Liu et al. 2020) utilize end-to-end deep
learning architectures to directly estimate velocity segments
from IMU sequences, significantly reducing drifting errors
in trajectory reconstruction. Despite their progress, these
methods fail to consider modality distinctions between acceleration and angular rates, as well as motion uncertainties
among individuals, resulting in compromised accuracy.
In this paper, we present a multimodal inertial Motion
Transformer (iMoT), which maximizes the utilization of
complementary features between motion and rotation inputs to dynamically represent motion uncertainties for different instantaneous velocity segments. Firstly, we address
the practical challenges of input tokenization in iMoT. Conventional tokens captured at a single time step with multiple
variates (i.e., channels) often struggle to convey a complete
chain of motion events due to excessively local receptive
fields and time-unaligned events represented by concurrent
time points (Zhang and Yan 2023). In contrast, we consider
the entire time series of each variate as an input token.
Secondly, given the multivariate time series nature of
IMU sequences, we extend the time series decomposition
(Hyndman and Athanasopoulos 2018), a widely adopted
pre-processing technique, into Progressive Series Decoupler
(PSD), a trainable module that can be seamlessly integrated
within encoder layers. Specifically, PSD enhances unimodal

We propose iMoT, an innovative Transformer-based inertial odometry method that retrieves cross-modal information
from motion and rotation modalities for accurate positional
estimation. Unlike prior work, during the encoding of the motion context, we introduce Progressive Series Decoupler at
the beginning of each encoder layer to stand out critical motion events inherent in acceleration and angular velocity signals. To better aggregate cross-modal interactions, we present
Adaptive Positional Encoding, which dynamically modifies
positional embeddings for temporal discrepancies between
different modalities. During decoding, we introduce a small
set of learnable query motion particles as priors to model motion uncertainties within velocity segments. Each query motion particle is intended to draw cross-modal features dedicated to a specific motion mode, all taken together allowing the model to refine its understanding of motion dynamics
effectively. Lastly, we design a dynamic scoring mechanism
to stabilize iMoT’s optimization by considering all aligned
motion particles at the final decoding step, ensuring robust
and accurate velocity segment estimation. Extensive evaluations on various inertial datasets demonstrate that iMoT significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in delivering
superior robustness and accuracy in trajectory reconstruction.

Code — https://github.com/Minh-Son-Nguyen/iMoT

Introduction
Inertial odometry systems are intended to estimate the threedimensional trajectories of a moving body by jointly analyzing motion, rotation, and geographically magnetic interactions from Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) signals. Given
privileges typified by energy efficiency, privacy preservation, and environmental robustness over other modalities,
these approaches become more essential for tracking and
tracing missions, including virtual and augmented reality,
biodiversity monitoring, and rescue operations, especially
in harsh environments, such as areas shrouded in smoke, or
mist where common modalities (e.g., radio, acoustic, and visual signals) are no longer reliable for tracking purposes.
Contemporary approaches to inertial navigation are commonly classified into three distinct research paradigms:
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6209

