The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Backdoor Attack on Propagation-based Rumor Detectors
Di Jin1 , Yujun Zhang1 , Bingdao Feng1, * , Xiaobao Wang1,2, * , Dongxiao He1 , Zhen Wang3
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Guangdong Laboratory of Artiffcial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
3
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
{jindi, zhangyujun, fengbingdao, wangxiaobao, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn, w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

information is crucial, as it reflects the interrelationships between posts, reveals the collective wisdom and stance of user
comments (Ma, Gao, and Wong 2018; Rosenfeld, Szanto,
and Parkes 2020) and serves as a vital feature for distinguishing rumors from non-rumors. Therefore, to bolster detection capabilities, recent studies (Bian et al. 2020; Wei
et al. 2021) have begun to incorporate the propagation structure into rumor detection models by leveraging GNN and integrating other advanced techniques. The propagation structure of rumors provides valuable clues on how a claim in the
original post spreads and evolves over time.
Despite the excellent performance of propagation-based
methods on rumor detection tasks, malicious users and miscreants may exploit the vulnerability of GNNs (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018) to evade or interfere with
rumor detection results, raising concerns about security issues in rumor detectors. While recent studies have focused
on adversarial attacks, such as AdRumor-RL (Lyu et al.
2023) and MARL (Wang et al. 2023), which employ reinforcement learning frameworks to explore the vulnerability of rumor detectors under structural adversarial attacks,
a different type of attack, i.e., the backdoor attack (Zhang
et al. 2021), has been largely overlooked. In a backdoor attack, the target model is compromised by injecting carefully
crafted triggers and modifying labels in a small subset of the
training data. Once trained, the model performs normally on
clean samples but misclassifies samples containing the triggers as the attacker’s desired labels. This allows the attacker
to silently alter detection results during system operation.
Such attacks can bypass initial security reviews and tests,
posing a significant threat to rumor detection models. In this
context, we investigate backdoor attacks on propagationbased rumor detectors. Given the critical role of the rumor
propagation structure, our backdoor attack specifically targets the rumor propagation tree (RPT) constructed from it,
thereby enhancing the attack’s generality and effectiveness.
Several studies have explored backdoor attacks against
GNNs (Zhang et al. 2021; Xi et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2024).
They typically perturb the graph topology to form fixedsize subgraph triggers, which perform well on graph classification tasks but are unsuitable for rumor detection tasks
where propagation trees vary widely in size. More importantly, RPTs differ significantly from graphs, presenting two
primary challenges when attempting to attack them: (i) Any

Rumor detection is critical as the spread of misinformation on
social media threatens social stability. The propagation structure has garnered attention for its ability to capture discriminative information, such as crowd stance, which has led to the
development of enhanced detection methods. However, these
detectors are vulnerable to attacks that can manipulate results
and evade detection, potentially disrupting public order or influencing public opinion. While adversarial attacks on rumor
detectors have been studied, the use of backdoor attacks—an
evasive and powerful method—remains unexplored due to
the challenges in applying them to propagation trees. In
this paper, we introduce the first backdoor attack framework against propagation-based rumor detectors, designed
to maintain overall detector performance while enabling targeted attacks on specific rumors. We propose an adaptive discrete trigger generator that injects trigger nodes into critical
nodes, creating evasive, transferable attacks. Extensive experiments on three real-world rumor datasets demonstrate that
our framework effectively undermines the performance of
propagation-based rumor detectors and is transferable across
different architectures.

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet, social media has
become an important channel for communication and information sharing. The widespread and rapid dissemination of
inaccurate and unverified content, particularly malicious rumors, is causing significant harm to society. Therefore, the
detection of rumors on social platforms has become crucial.
Deep learning plays an important role in rumor detection, as it can auto-efficiently learn feature vectors containing deep semantic information. For example, RNNs-based
methods (Ma et al. 2016) can capture temporal relationships
between posts. CNN-based methods (Lu and te Li 2020; Yu
et al. 2017) can learn local spatial feature representations of
rumors. Additionally, some multimodal studies (Dong et al.
2023, 2024; Hua et al. 2023) integrate text and image information for detection. However, these approaches primarily focus on the content of rumors, neglecting the structural
information inherent in rumor propagation. This structural
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17680

