The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

N O M ATTER XAI: Generating “No Matter What” Alterfactual Examples for
Explaining Black-Box Text Classification Models
Tuc Van Nguyen1 , James Michels2 , Hua Shen3 , Thai Le1
1

Department of Computer Science, Indiana University
Department of Computer Science, University of Mississippi
3
Information School, University of Washington
tucnguye@iu.edu, jrmichel@go.olemiss.edu, huashen@uw.edu, tle@iu.edu
2

Abstract

Non-Toxic Behavior

In Explainable AI (XAI), counterfactual explanations (CEs)
are a well-studied method to communicate feature relevance
through contrastive reasoning of “what if” to explain AI models’ predictions. However, they only focus on important (i.e.,
relevant) features and largely disregard less important (i.e., irrelevant) ones. Such irrelevant features can be crucial in many
applications, especially when users need to ensure that an AI
model’s decisions are not affected or biased against specific
attributes such as gender, race, religion, or political affiliation.
To address this gap, the concept of alterfactual explanations
(AEs) has been proposed. AEs explore an alternative reality of
“no matter what”, where irrelevant features are substituted with
alternative features (e.g., “republicans”→“democrats”) within
the same attribute (e.g., “politics”) while maintaining a similar
prediction output. This serves to validate whether the specified attributes influence AI model predictions. Despite the
promise of AEs, there is a lack of computational approaches to
systematically generate them, particularly in the text domain,
where creating AEs for AI text classifiers presents unique challenges. This paper addresses this challenge by formulating AE
generation as an optimization problem and introducing N O M ATTER XAI, a novel algorithm that generates AEs for text
classification tasks. Our approach achieves high fidelity of up
to 95% while preserving context similarity of over 90% across
multiple models and datasets. A human study further validates
the effectiveness of AEs in explaining AI text classifiers to
end users.

Race
Features
"It doesn't matter
how many
innocent Asian
people you label,
she still will never
be able to aﬀord a
home in
Vancouver"

"It doesn't matter
[...] innocent
Black people you
label, she [...]
Vancouver"

Toxic Behavior

"It doesn't matter
[...] sinful Asian
people you label,
she [...]
Vancouver"

"It doesn't matter
[...] innocent
Asian people you
label, she [...]
New York"

Gender
Features "It doesn't matter
[...] innocent
Asian people you
label, he [...]
Vancouver"

Decision Boundary
Original
Counterfactual
Semifactual
Alterfactual

Figure 1: A comparison of various AI explanation algorithms,
including Counterfactual, Semifactual, and our proposed Alterfactals explanations. Alterfactual explanations aim to validate whether AI model predictions are influenced by specific
attributes such as race or gender.

Code — https://github.com/nguyentuc/NomatterXAI
Extend version — https://www.arxiv.org/abs/2408.10528

Introduction
As AI advances, complex machine learning (ML) text classifiers have been developed to yield predictive performance
competitively to that of humans for myriad tasks (Pouyanfar
et al. 2018). However, many of such models are so-called
“black-box” models that are notorious for their lack of transparency. This may limit both the comprehension and societal
acceptance of ML in critical fields, such as healthcare (Tjoa
and Guan 2021), finance (Benhamou et al. 2021). The field of
Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) (Adadi and Berrada
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24939

2018) aims to remedy this by explaining the factors at play
in a model’s predictions.
A common paradigm found in XAI is the counterfactual
explanation (CE) (Miller 2019) where an alternative reality
is presented in which minor alterations to the input directly
change the output of an AI model applied to the classification
problems of image, tabular, and text data (Verma, Dickerson,
and Hines 2020; Garg et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020). CE
follows the thought process of counterfactual thinking by
asking “What if...?”, which is a common occurrence in the
human psyche, through emotions such as regret, suspense,
and relief (Roese and Morrison 2009). CE is often delivered
via natural language in the form of “What if” messages (Le,
Wang, and Lee 2020; Hendricks et al. 2018). For example, a
classifier that labels email messages as spam or ham could
provide the text “Had the word ‘credit’ and ‘money’ is used
twice in the message, it would have been classified as spam
rather than ham.” (Le, Wang, and Lee 2020).

