The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CustomTTT: Motion and Appearance Customized Video Generation via
Test-Time Training
Xiuli Bi1 , Jian Lu1 , Bo Liu1 , Xiaodong Cun2 * , Yong Zhang3 , Weisheng Li1 , Bin Xiao1,4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China,
2
GVC Lab, Great Bay University, Dongguan, China,
3
Meituan, China
4
Jinan Inspur Data Technology Co., Ltd., Jinan, China
{bixl, boliu, liws, xiaobin}@cqupt.edu.cn, s230201078@stu.cqupt.edu.cn, cun@gbu.edu.cn, zhangyong201303@gmail.com
Abstract

neer works (Wei et al. 2024) still face the problem of appearance overfitting and low-fidelity.

Benefiting from large-scale pre-training of text-video pairs,
current text-to-video (T2V) diffusion models can generate
high-quality videos from the text description. Besides, given
some reference images or videos, the parameter-efficient finetuning method, i.e. LoRA, can generate high-quality customized concepts, e.g., the specific subjects or the motions.
However, combining the trained multiple concepts from different references into a single network shows obvious artifacts. To this end, we propose CustomTTT, where we can
joint custom the appearance and the motion of the given video
easily. In detail, we first analyze the prompt influence in the
current video diffusion model and find the LoRAs are only
needed for the specific layers for appearance and motion customization. Besides, since each LoRA is trained individually,
we propose a novel test-time training technique to update parameters after combination utilizing the trained customized
models. We conduct detailed experiments to verify the effectiveness of the proposed methods. Our method outperforms
several state-of-the-art works in both qualitative and quantitative evaluations.

1

We aim for multiple customization methods including
the subject and the motion. Inspired by the current LoRA
merged methods (Yadav et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024), we can
train different LoRAs and merge them for this purpose. Differently, in our task, we can naturally select different layers (i.e., spatial and temporal layers) in video diffusion models for motion and appearance customization. However, the
resulting video shows heavy artifacts. Thus, we should finetune the model when merging two LoRAs to reduce the conflicts during the merging process further.
Therefore, we present CustomTTT for joint motion and
appearance customization. In detail, to find the most criteria layers for appearance and motion modeling in the VDM,
we perform the text-embedding replacement experiment inspired by the text-to-image customization method (Frenkel
et al. 2025). On the other hand, after training and interpolating two LoRA adapters for motion and appearance customization, we utilize the pre-trained single LoRA model
to produce a suitable reference latent for distillation in a
certain step. Thus, the multi-customized model can learn to
guarantee the motion and appearance from their single customized reference. We conduct the experiments over various
motions and the subject reference. Compared with state-ofthe-art methods, our method shows much better visual quality and text-video alignment under the multi-customization
settings.

Introduction

In the realm of text-to-video (T2V) diffusion models (Guo
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023, 2024a; Sterling 2023), significant progress has been achieved through large-scale pretraining of text-video pairs, enabling the generation of highquality videos from text descriptions. However, these pretrained models present difficulties in generating specific objects or motions that are hard to describe from text prompts
only.
To solve this problem, early model customization methods, e.g., Dreambooth (Ruiz et al. 2023), LoRA (Hu et al.
2021), are proposed to produce customized concepts, such
as specific subjects or motions, when providing reference
images or videos. However, these methods focus only on
the specific one concept. There are also some works for the
multi-concept generation. However, they are mostly works
for the two different subjects (Yuan et al. 2023; Kumari et al.
2023). For the customized appearance and motion, the pio-

Overall, the contribution can be summarized as:
• We analyze the prompt embedding importance in the
T2V model for the first time and train LoRA adapters on
the specific layers for better multiple-concept customization.
• We design a novel test-time training process to improve
the text-video alignment in multiple concept customization.
• The experiments show the advantage of the proposed
method over current methods.

* Corresponding Author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1871

