The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Safe Planner: Empowering Safety Awareness in Large Pre-Trained Models for
Robot Task Planning
Siyuan Li1 , Feifan Liu1 , Lingfei Cui2 , Jiani Lu1 , Qinqin Xiao1 , Xirui Yang3 , Peng Liu1 ,
Kewu Sun3 * , Zhe Ma3 , Xun Wang3
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
Institute of Computer Application Technology, Norinco Group
3
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy Limited of CASIC
siyuanli@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Robot task planning is an important problem for autonomous
robots in long-horizon challenging tasks. As large pre-trained
models have demonstrated superior planning ability, recent
research investigates utilizing large models to achieve autonomous planning for robots in diverse tasks. However, since
the large models are pre-trained with Internet data and lack
the knowledge of real task scenes, large models as planners may make unsafe decisions that hurt the robots and the
surrounding environments. To solve this challenge, we propose a novel Safe Planner framework, which empowers safety
awareness in large pre-trained models to accomplish safe and
executable planning. In this framework, we develop a safety
prediction module to guide the high-level large model planner, and this safety module trained in a simulator can be effectively transferred to real-world tasks. The proposed Safe
Planner framework is evaluated on both simulated environments and real robots. The experiment results demonstrate
that Safe Planner not only achieves state-of-the-art task success rates, but also substantially improves safety during task
execution.

Figure 1: An illustrative example of safe planning.

task descriptions. Recently as large pre-trained models have
demonstrated superior planning abilities in general settings,
more and more researchers (Guan et al. 2023; Zhao, Lee,
and Hsu 2024; Song et al. 2023) try to employ large pretrained models to achieve autonomous robot task planning
with languages as instructions.
Recent robot task planning methods based on large
pre-trained models mainly utilize vision-language models
(VLMs) and large language models (LLMs) to understand
the task scenes and decompose the challenging long-horizon
tasks (Driess et al. 2023; Hu et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023b).
These models are pre-trained with large-scale data, and thus
are endowed with great generalization abilities. However, as
lacking real-world training data, it is quite difficult for these
models to accurately understand the task scenes, which may
lead to unsafe and unexecutable planning results, causing
damage to the robots and the real-world environments. For
example, in a moving-object task shown in Figure 1, a bunch
of objects has been put on one table, and the task is to move
object A to a target position. The pre-trained models without real scene knowledge may output a direct planning solution, e.g., picking object A, and then placing it at the target
place. However, as object A is surrounded by other objects,
directly moving A may damage the nearby objects or cause
collisions. Therefore, only using the pre-trained models is
not enough, and a smarter planning model with safety awareness is needed, which is expected to move the objects nearby
object A to other places before moving the target object A.

Extended version —
https://sites.google.com/view/safeplanner

Introduction
Robot task planning is a challenging temporal planning
problem (Kaelbling and Lozano-Pérez 2013), aiming at obtaining a subtask sequence to accomplish a long-horizon target task, which is of great importance in the autonomous
robot domain (Guo et al. 2023). Classical robot task planning methods are mostly based on search or STRIPS (Fikes
and Nilsson 1993). However, these classical methods require
much domain-specific knowledge and can hardly be applied to dynamic real-world environments. Following taskplanning researchers pay attention to learning-based methods, e.g., reinforcement learning and imitation learning (Ceola et al. 2019; McDonald and Hadfield-Menell 2022; Jiang
et al. 2019). Although these learning-based methods have
shown promising results, they usually overfit the training scenes and cannot support natural languages as target
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14619

