The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EF2X Exists for Four Agents
Arash Ashuri1 , Vasilis Gkatzelis2 , Alkmini Sgouritsa3 ,
1

Sharif University of Technology, Iran
2
Drexel University, USA
3
Athens University of Economics and Business, and Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
arash.ashoori0330@sharif.edu, gkatz@drexel.edu, alkmini@aueb.gr

Abstract

if removing any good from the bundle allocated to an agent
would ensure that no agent envies the remaining bundle. Despite a plethora of attempts to prove the existence (or nonexistence) of EFX allocations in general, this problem remains open. Plaut and Roughgarden (2020) proved the existence of EFX allocations for two agents with general monotone valuations. For instances with three agents, Chaudhury,
Garg, and Mehlhorn (2024) were able to prove the existence of EFX allocations for additive valuations, and this
was subsequently extended to nice-cancelable valuations (a
special case of cancelable valuations) by Berger et al. (2022)
and even more general (e.g., MMS-feasible) valuations by
(Akrami et al. 2023). The existence of EFX allocations for
instances involving four agents remains a very challenging
open problem, even in the case of additive valuations.
Our work focuses on an interesting relaxation of EFX,
namely EF2X. An allocation is EF2X if removing any two
goods from the bundle allocated to an agent would ensure
that no agent envies the remaining bundle. This notion was
introduced by Akrami, Rezvan, and Seddighin (2022), who
proved that an EF2X allocation exists for instances involving any number of agents, but with restricted additive valuations: an agent’s value for a bundle equals the sum of their
value for each good, but their value for each good g is restricted to be either 0 or v(g), where the latter value is the
same for all agents. In a very recent work, Kaviani, Seddighin, and Shahrezaei (2024) proved the same result for
a different class of valuations ((∞, 1)-bounded valuations).
This class defines a good to be relevant for an agent if its
marginal value is not always zero, and the crucial restriction
is that any two agents share at most one relevant good.

We study the fair allocation of indivisible goods among a
group of agents, aiming to limit the envy between any two
agents. The central open problem in this literature, which has
proven to be extremely challenging, is regarding the existence
of an EFX allocation, i.e., an allocation such that any envy
from some agent i toward another agent j would vanish if
we were to remove any single good from the bundle allocated
to j. Prior work has shown that when the agents’ valuations
are additive, which has been the main focus of prior works,
an EFX allocation is guaranteed to exist for all instances involving up to three agents. Subsequent work extended this
guarantee to more general valuations, like nice-cancelable
and MMS-feasible. However, the existence of EFX allocations for instances involving four agents remains open, even
for additive valuations.
We contribute to this literature by focusing on EF2X, a relaxation of EFX which requires that any envy toward some
agent would vanish if any two of the goods allocated to that
agent were to be removed. Our main result shows that EF2X
allocations exist for any instance with four agents, even for
the class of cancelable valuations, which is more general than
additive. Our proof is constructive, proposing an algorithm
that computes such an allocation in pseudo-polynomial time.
Furthermore, for instances involving three agents we provide
an algorithm that computes an EF2X allocation in polynomial time, in contrast to EFX for which the fastest known
algorithm for three agents is only pseudo-polynomial.

1

Introduction

During the last decade, the main focus of the fair division literature has been on allocating a set M of indivisible goods,
and one of the main fairness goals within this line of work is
to limit the amount of envy between any two agents. Since it
is well-known that some amount of envy is inevitable when
allocating indivisible goods (e.g., one of the goods could be
more valuable than all other goods combined, so any agent
who receives it is bound to be envied), a vast amount of work
has focused on relaxations of “envy-freeness” and the extent
to which they can be achieved or approximated.
A central problem within this literature is regarding the
existence of allocations satisfying the EFX property, introduced by Caragiannis et al. (2019). An allocation is EFX

Our Results
Rather than significantly restricting the valuations that the
agents may have, we focus on valuations that are much more
expressive, and we study the existence of EF2X allocations
for instances involving four agents. Specifically, we consider
cancelable valuations, introduced by Berger et al. (2022),
which strictly generalize the well-studied class of additive
valuations. A valuation v is cancelable if for any two bundles
S, T ⊂ M and any good g ∈ M \ (S ∪ T ), we have that
v(S ∪ {g}) > v(T ∪ {g}) implies v(S) > v(T ).
Our main result uses a constructive argument to prove that
EF2X allocations always exist for any instance involving

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13555

