The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ModelDiff: Symbolic Dynamic Programming for
Model-Aware Policy Transfer in Deep Q-Learning
Xiaotian Liu1 Jihwan Jeong1 , Ayal Taitler1,3 , Michael Gimelfarb1 , Scott Sanner1,2
1

University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Vector Institute for AI, Toronto, ON, Canada
3
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be’er Sheva, Israel
xiaotian.liu@mail.utoronto.ca, jhjeong@mie.utoronto.ca, ataitler@bgu.ac.il, mike.gimelfarb@mail.utoronto.ca,
ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca
2

Abstract

transfer). However, the existing TL literature often treats
positive and negative transfer as separate problems (Zhu,
Lin, and Zhou 2020; Zhang et al. 2023). Most TL techniques
focus on positive transfer by learning a diverse set of policies (Fernández and Veloso 2006) or features (Barreto et al.
2018) that can generalize to new but similar tasks. The problem of negative transfer is studied separately, often through
techniques such as regularization (Jung et al. 2020) and data
selection (Wang and Carbonell 2018).
Developing methods that are robust to negative transfer is
crucial for real-world applications, where safety is a major
concern. Moreover, access to multiple source policies or extensive training data is often impractical (Vettoruzzo et al.
2023; Tian et al. 2020). A frequently overlooked aspect is
that exact or analytic models of the environment are available for many RL applications, and existing works fail to
fully leverage this knowledge (Dulac-Arnold et al. 2021).
Thus there is a significant opportunity for more targeted
transfer learning methods using model knowledge that have
the ability to avoid negative transfer.
In this work, we focus on scenarios where the source and
target domains are known and dynamically similar but their
rewards differ in structurally simple ways. As an illustration,
Figure 1 shows the reward functions of Rs , Rt , and Rd in a
two-reservoir R ESERVOIR M ANAGEMENT problem. Here,
the “diff” reward Rd is an extra penalty for being below a
desired water-level, which is far simpler than the individual
rewards. This simplification is a also common occurrence in
practical applications, such as in robotics, where tasks often
include a complex smoothness penalty alongside a straightforward goal-conditioned reward. For different tasks with
varied goals, the smoothness penalty would remain consistent, resulting in a diff reward that can be expressed in a
much simpler analytic form. This scenario raises a pivotal
research question: how can we effectively leverage the reward difference for efficient transfer learning?
To address this challenge, we introduce ModelDiff, a
novel TL framework designed to utilize analytically available models for efficient policy transfer from a single source
to a target domain. We use a compact symbolic representation of the underlying MDPs using Extended Algebraic Decision Diagrams (XADDs) (Sanner, Delgado, and de Barros
2011). Central to ModelDiff is the exploitation of the simpler difference MDP, which can be calculated directly via

Despite significant recent advances in the field of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), such methods typically incur
high cost of training to learn effective policies, thus posing
cost and safety challenges in many practical applications. To
improve the learning efficiency of (D)RL methods, transfer
learning (TL) has emerged as a promising approach to leverage prior experience on a source domain to speed learning
on a new, but related, target domain. In this paper, we take
a novel model-informed approach to TL in DRL by assuming that we have knowledge of both the source and target
domain models (which would be the case in the prevalent
setting of DRL with simulators). While directly solving either the source or target MDP via solution methods like value
iteration is computationally prohibitive, we exploit the fact
that if the target and source MDPs differ only due to a small
structural change in their rewards, we can apply structured
value iteration methods in a procedure we term ModelDiff
to solve the much smaller target−source “Diff” MDP for a
reasonable horizon. This ModelDiff approach can then be
integrated into extensions of standard DRL algorithms like
ModelDiff (MD) DQN, where it provides enhanced provable
lower bound guidance to DQN that often speeds convergence
for the positive transfer case while critically avoiding decelerated learning in the negative transfer case. Experiments show
that MD-DQN matches or outperforms existing TL methods
and baselines in both positive and negative transfer settings.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms typically
require extensive agent experience to develop effective policies (Mnih et al. 2015; Zhu, Lin, and Zhou 2020), thus posing cost and safety challenges in many practical applications
(Gu et al. 2022). To tackle the efficiency problem inherent in
(D)RL, transfer learning (TL) has (Taylor and Stone 2009;
Zhu, Lin, and Zhou 2020) emerged as a promising approach
aiming to leverage prior knowledge for learning new tasks.
TL capitalizes on the idea that an agent equipped with prior
knowledge from a previously learned task can rapidly adapt
and learn on a new task.
Ideally, transfer learning (TL) techniques should transfer
only knowledge that is beneficial (positive transfer) while
avoiding knowledge that could hinder learning (negative
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26623

