The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TabGLM: Tabular Graph Language Model for Learning
Transferable Representations Through Multi-Modal Consistency Minimization
Anay Majee* 1, 2 † , Maria Xenochristou* 1 , Wei-Peng Chen1
1

Fujitsu Research of America
The University of Texas at Dallas
anay.majee@utdallas.edu, mxenochristou@fujitsu.com, wchen@fujitsu.com
2

Abstract
Handling heterogeneous data in tabular datasets poses a significant challenge for deep learning models. While attentionbased architectures and self-supervised learning have
achieved notable success, their application to tabular data remains less effective over linear and tree based models. Although several breakthroughs have been achieved by models
which transform tables into uni-modal transformations like
image, language and graph, these models often underperform
in the presence of feature heterogeneity. To address this gap,
we introduce TabGLM (Tabular Graph Language Model), a
novel multi-modal architecture designed to model both structural and semantic information from a table. TabGLM transforms each row of a table into a fully connected graph and
serialized text, which are then encoded using a graph neural
network (GNN) and a text encoder, respectively. By aligning these representations through a joint, multi-modal, selfsupervised learning objective, TabGLM leverages complementary information from both modalities, thereby enhancing feature learning. TabGLM’s flexible graph-text pipeline
efficiently processes heterogeneous datasets with significantly fewer parameters over existing Deep Learning approaches. Evaluations across 25 benchmark datasets demonstrate substantial performance gains, with TabGLM achieving an average AUC-ROC improvement of up to 5.56% over
State-of-the-Art (SoTA) tabular learning methods.

1

Figure 1: Semi-Supervised Multi-Modal Tabular Deep
Learning in TabGLM. We propose a joint graph-language
method that can effectively learn from heterogeneous,
real-world tabular datasets by integrating structural and
semantic information.

tabular to image (Sharma et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019),
text (Hegselmann et al. 2023; Arik and Pfister 2021), or
graph (Alkhatib et al. 2024; Guo et al. 2021), modeling either semantic or structural relationships. These transformations aim to exploit the strengths of established models in
vision, language, and graph domains to enhance the representation learning of tabular data. Unfortunately, modeling
a single type of relationship through uni-modal transformation limits the ability of DL models in this domain to perform well on heterogeneous datasets. In addition, DL models are often prone to overfitting, especially on datasets with
high dimensionality or limited samples. Thus, such models frequently struggle to outperform simple linear and tree
based models. This discrepancy highlights a fundamental
challenge: effectively integrating the diverse types of information within tabular data, while preserving the rich semantic and structural nuances.
We bridge this gap by introducing TabGLM (Tabular
Graph Language Model), a novel multi-modal architecture
designed to effectively capture both structural and semantic information in tabular data. This is achieved by transforming each row of a tabular dataset into a graph and serialized text, and encoding it using a graph neural network
(GNN) and a pretrained text encoder, respectively (Fig-

Introduction

Real-world applications ranging from predicting sales in
e-commerce to diagnosing diseases in healthcare rely
on tabular data. These datasets are oftentimes a mix
of numerical, categorical, and text values, presenting a
unique challenge for machine learning models. Traditional approaches (Breiman 2001; Chen and Guestrin 2016;
Prokhorenkova et al. 2018) as well as some early Deep
Learning (DL) models (Yoon et al. 2020; Arik and Pfister
2021; Gorishniy et al. 2021; Hollmann et al. 2023) convert textual data into numerical encodings modeling only
structural features from an input table, leading to loss of
semantic information. Recent trends in tabular DL indicate
an increase in approaches attempting modality switch from
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done as an intern at Fujitsu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19387

