The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LiteSearch: Efficient Tree Search with Dynamic Exploration Budget
for Math Reasoning
Ante Wang1,3 , Linfeng Song2 * , Ye Tian2 , Baolin Peng2 , Dian Yu2 , Haitao Mi2 ,
Jinsong Su1,3,4 * , Dong Yu2
1 School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2 Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA
3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China
4 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,

Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
wangante@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lfsong@global.tencent.com, jssu@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
0.85

Recent research suggests that tree search algorithms (e.g.
Monte Carlo Tree Search) can dramatically boost LLM performance on complex mathematical reasoning tasks. However, they often require more than 10 times the computational
resources of greedy decoding due to wasteful search strategies, making them difficult to be deployed in practical applications. This study introduces a novel guided tree search algorithm with a goal-directed heuristic function and node-level
exploration budget (maximum number of children) calculation to tackle this issue. By considering the search progress
towards the final answer (history) and the guidance from a
value network (future) trained without any step-wise annotations, our algorithm iteratively selects the most promising
tree node before expanding it within the boundaries of the
allocated computational budget. Experiments conducted on
the GSM8K, TabMWP, and MATH datasets demonstrate that
our method not only offers competitive performance but also
enjoys significantly lower computational costs compared to
baseline methods.

1

LiteSearch

Accuracy

0.8
0.75
0.7

Hard Voting
Soft Voting
ToT-DFS
ToT-BFS
MCTS

0.65
0.6
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

#Tokens (𝑘) ↓

Figure 1: Comparison among ours and typical methods on
GSM8K, where DFS, BFS, MCTS1 , and LiteSearch are
only guided by the same value network. Hard Voting is
also known as Self-Consistency (Wang et al. 2022) and Soft
Voting additionally weights each trajectory using its value
score. We measure the number of generated tokens (#Tokens
(k)) by the LLM as computation costs.

Introduction

Mathematical reasoning tasks (Amini et al. 2019; Cobbe
et al. 2021; Hendrycks et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2022) have
long been acknowledged as challenging. These tasks require
transforming a question into a sequence of reasoning steps,
which are subsequently executed to derive the correct answer. Recently, large language models (LLMs, Achiam et al.
2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2024) have demonstrated remarkable potential in addressing them. A pivotal
approach is the employment of Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
prompting (Wei et al. 2022; Kojima et al. 2022), which
prompts LLMs to break down a question solution into a sequence of reasoning steps before reaching an answer.
Despite their impressive capabilities, LLMs still face
challenges when tackling problems with increasing reasoning steps due to the nature of auto-regressive decoding. This

can be analogous to the “System 1” mode of thought in psychology (Daniel 2017), which is characterized by fast, intuitive, but error-prone thinking. Much of recent work has focused on enhancing the “System 1” capability of LLMs by
prompt-engineering, such as hierarchical prompting (Suzgun and Kalai 2024; Zeng et al. 2023) and automatic prompt
refinement (Madaan et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024; Zhou et al.
2024). On the other hand, growing research attention is being paid to promote the “System 2” mode of thought (Daniel
2017) for LLMs. It is characterized by deliberative thinking
steps with back-and-forth refinements, which can be essential for solving complex math reasoning tasks. Particularly,
prior efforts have studied enhancing LLMs both at inference
time and through self-improvement using tree search algo-

* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1 The MCTS implemented here does not utilize simulation for
fair comparison and efficiency.

25318

