The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Compressing Streamable Free-Viewpoint Videos to 0.1 MB per Frame
Luyang Tang1,2 , Jiayu Yang2 , Rui Peng1,2 , Yongqi Zhai1,2 , Shihe Shen1 , Ronggang Wang1,2 *
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive
Media Technology, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, China
tly926@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) in static scenes
has inspired numerous attempts to construct Free-Viewpoint
Videos (FVVs) of dynamic scenes from multi-view videos.
Despite advancements in current techniques, simultaneously
achieving photo-realistic view synthesis results, fast on-thefly training, real-time rendering, and low storage costs remains a formidable problem. To address these challenges, we
propose the first Gaussian-based streamable FVV intelligent
compression framework named iFVC. Specifically, we utilize
an anchor-based Gaussian representation to model the scene.
To achieve on-the-fly training, we propose a Binary Transformation Cache (BTC) to model the dynamic changes between
adjacent timesteps, which not only ensures compactness but
also supports precise bit rate estimation. Furthermore, we
carefully design a high-resolution transformation tri-plane assisted by a saliency grid as our BTC, allowing for accurate
dynamic capture. The entire pipeline is regarded as a joint
optimization of rate and distortion to achieve optimal compression performance. Experiments on widely used datasets
demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our framework in both synthesis quality and efficiency, i.e., achieving
per-frame training in 13 seconds with a storage cost of 0.1
MB and real-time rendering at 120 FPS.

Figure 1: Rate-distortion performance compared with other
methods on the N3DV dataset. □ represents offline training methods that require complete video sequences, and △
signifies online training on multi-view video streams. Our
method achieves high-quality rendering with relatively low
storage costs, while also supporting online training.

Code — https://github.com/Pomelomm/iFVC

1

for volume rendering, which greatly limits rendering speed
and hinders practical applications.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al.
2023) has emerged as an alternative scene representation
method due to its fast training, real-time rendering, and highfidelity synthesis results. 3DGS leverages learnable Gaussians with various properties to represent 3D space and introduces an efficient rasterization-based scheme for rendering. However, it requires a substantial number of Gaussians
to maintain high-quality rendering, which poses challenges
for storage and transmission. Dynamic scenes contain information in both spatial and temporal domains, facing more
severe storage challenges. Although some existing methods
(Wu et al. 2024a; Li et al. 2024b) achieve compact dynamic
scene representation by training a single model that combines all the frames, they necessitate complete video sequences for offline training and only support replaying dynamic scenes, thus unable to tackle online scenarios. A recent work 3DGStream (Sun et al. 2024) proposes a novel

Introduction

Constructing Free-Viewpoints Videos (FVVs) from multiview videos plays a critically important role in various applications such as virtual reality, telepresence, sports broadcasting and so on. It allows users to freely select their viewing angles of dynamic scenes, thus providing a unique and
immersive exploration experience.
In recent years, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) has demonstrated remarkable potential
in novel view synthesis and promotes the development of
FVV generation for dynamic scenes. However, despite these
NeRF-based methods (Li et al. 2022a; Song et al. 2023)
achieve photo-realistic synthesis results, they rely on costly
sampling and evaluation at multiple points along each ray
* The corresponding author (rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7257

