The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VQA4CIR: Boosting Composed Image Retrieval with Visual Question Answering
Chun-Mei Feng1 , Yang Bai1 * , Tao Luo1 , Zhen Li2 , Salman Khan3,4
Wangmeng Zuo5 , Rick Siow Mong Goh1 , Yong Liu1
1
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
SSE, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK), China
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), UAE
4
Australian National University, Canberra ACT, Australia
5
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
fengcm.ai@gmail.com

Abstract
Albeit progress has been made in Composed Image Retrieval
(CIR), we empirically find that a certain percentage of failure
retrieval results are not consistent with their relative captions.
To address this issue, this work provides a Visual Question
Answering (VQA) perspective to boost the performance of
CIR. The resulting VQA4CIR is a post-processing approach
and can be directly plugged into existing CIR methods. Given
the top-C retrieved images by a CIR method, VQA4CIR
aims to decrease the adverse effect of the failure retrieval
results being inconsistent with the relative caption. To find
the retrieved images inconsistent with the relative caption,
we resort to the ”QA generation → VQA” self-verification
pipeline. For QA generation, we suggest fine-tuning LLM
(e.g., LLaMA) to generate several pairs of questions and answers from each relative caption. We then fine-tune LVLM
(e.g., LLaVA) to obtain the VQA model. By feeding the retrieved image and question to the VQA model, one can find
the images inconsistent with relative caption when the answer
by VQA is inconsistent with the answer in the QA pair. Consequently, the CIR performance can be boosted by modifying
the ranks of inconsistently retrieved images. Experimental results show that our proposed method outperforms state-ofthe-art CIR methods on the CIRR and Fashion-IQ datasets.

Is a larger dog
with pointier ears
layer in the grass
with its tongue out.

tongue out

tongue out

tongue out

tongue out

tongue out

pointier ears

pointier ears

pointier ears

pointier ears

pointier ears

layer in grass

layer in grass

layer in grass

layer in grass

layer in grass

(a) Examples of failed retrieval that can be identified by simply comparing the relative
caption with candidate images.
CIRR

Fashion-IQ

BLIP4CIR+Bi [36]

CIRR

Fashion-IQ

CLIP4CIR [3]

Percentage of failures can be rescued by an ideal VQA model

CIRR

Fashion-IQ

SPRC [2]

Other failures

(b) Statistical analysis on the failure cases for BLIP4CIR+Bi [36], CLIP4CIR [3], and
SPRC [2].

Figure 1: Failure cases analysis. (a) Examples of failure retrieval results of SPRC (Bai et al. 2024) on CIRR dataset,
which one can see that they can be identified by comparing with relative caption, (b) is the statistical analysis of
the percentage of failures from BLIP4CIR+Bi (Liu et al.
2023b), CLIP4CIR (Baldrati et al. 2022a), and SPRC (Bai
et al. 2024) on the CIRR and Fashion-IQ datasets, where
one can see that a certain percentage of failure cases can be
ascribed to the inconsistency between retrieved images and
relative captions.

Code — https://github.com/chunmeifeng/VQA4CIR

Introduction
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) (Liu et al. 2021; Vo et al.
2019; Baldrati et al. 2022b) is a challenging retrieval task,
where a reference image together with a relative caption are
combined to retrieve the desired target image. Benefiting
from its dual-modal query nature, CIR can offer a nuanced
depiction of the desired image, allowing for interactive refinements by tweaking the reference image and description.
Such capabilities make CIR especially suited for applications like e-commerce and digital search (Feng et al. 2020).
In the recent few years, considerable progress has been
made in CIR. For example, many late fusion methods (Anwaar, Labintcev, and Kleinsteuber 2021; Dodds et al. 2020;

Liu et al. 2021; Vo et al. 2019) have been developed to integrate the information from reference image and relative
caption. Pseudo-word embedding (Gal et al. 2022; Baldrati
et al. 2022b) is shown to convert reference image into description embedding for combining with the relative caption
to retrieve the target image. Taking both reference images
and relative captions into account, sentence-level prompts
have also been proposed to enhance CIR (Bai et al. 2024).
However, for most existing CIR methods, we empirically
find that a certain percentage of retrieval results are not
consistent with their relative captions. For example, in
Fig. 1 (a), given the relative caption “Is a larger dog
with pointier ears laying in the grass
with its tongue out”, the rank-1 image retrieved
by SPRC (Bai et al. 2024) does not satisfy the attributes

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2942

