The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On Effects of Steering Latent Representation for
Large Language Model Unlearning
Dang Huu-Tien1 , Tin Pham1 , Hoang Thanh-Tung2 , and Naoya Inoue1,3
1

Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
VNU University of Engineering and Technology, Vietnam
3
RIKEN
1
{s2310417, tinpham, naoya-i}@jaist.ac.jp, 2 htt210@gmail.com
2

Abstract

only slightly affecting the performance on retain-tasks and
demonstrates stronger robustness against adversarial jailbreak attacks. However, the reason for RMU’s effectiveness
is not well understood, hindering the development of better
unlearning algorithms. In this paper, we make the following
contributions:

Representation Misdirection for Unlearning (RMU), which
steers model representation in the intermediate layer to a target random representation, is an effective method for large
language model (LLM) unlearning. Despite its high performance, the underlying cause and explanation remain underexplored. In this paper, we theoretically demonstrate that
steering forget representations in the intermediate layer reduces token confidence, causing LLMs to generate wrong or
nonsense responses. We investigate how the coefficient influences the alignment of forget-sample representations with
the random direction and hint at the optimal coefficient values for effective unlearning across different network layers.
We show that RMU unlearned models are robust against adversarial jailbreak attacks. Furthermore, our empirical analysis shows that RMU is less effective when applied to the
middle and later layers in LLMs. To resolve this drawback,
we propose Adaptive RMU—a simple yet effective alternative method that makes unlearning effective with most layers.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that Adaptive RMU significantly improves the unlearning performance compared to
prior art while incurring no additional computational cost.

1

• We theoretically analyze the impact of the RMU method
on LLM unlearning.
• We investigate the connection between RMU and adversarial robustness. We demonstrate that RMU impedes the
adversary’s ability to determine optimal updates for generating adversarial samples, thus improving the adversarial robustness of the unlearned model.
• We empirically show that the RMU forget loss, which
minimizes the mean squared error (MSE) between forget
representation and a fixed scaled random vector, fails to
converge when the norm of the forget representation is
larger than the scaling coefficient, making RMU less effective when applied to middle and last layers in LLMs.
• To overcome RMU’s limitation, we introduce Adaptive
RMU—a variant that adaptively adjusts the coefficient
value based on the norm of the forget representation.
Experimental results show that Adaptive RMU achieves
higher drop-in-accuracy for forget knowledge, maintaining high performance on general knowledge, and enables
effective unlearning for most layers without incurring additional computational overhead.

Introduction

LLMs achieved remarkable performance through pretraining on large amounts of internet texts and rigorous
alignment processes for safety enhancement. Despite the immense effort in safety research, LLMs are still vulnerable to
adversarial jailbreak attacks and can exhibit unwanted behaviors (Shah et al. 2023; Zou et al. 2023b; Jones et al. 2023;
Yuan et al. 2024; Wei, Haghtalab, and Steinhardt 2024).
Machine Unlearning (Cao and Yang 2015; Bourtoule
et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2024c) has emerged as a promising method for mitigating unforeseen risks in LLMs before deployment. Li et al.
(2024b) introduced Representation Misdirection for Unlearning (RMU)—an unlearning method that steers the representations of forget-samples (i.e. samples that the model
should forget) toward a random representation while keeping the representations of retain-samples (i.e. samples that
the model should remember) unchanged. RMU significantly degrades models’ accuracy on forget-tasks, while

2

Background and Related Work

Machine Unlearning. A natural unlearning approach is
leave-some-out retraining: retraining the model from scratch
without the forget samples. However, this method becomes
more computationally expensive as the size of datasets and
modern deep networks grows. Existing works focus on approximating unlearning (Warnecke et al. 2021; Izzo et al.
2021; Sekhari et al. 2021; Isonuma and Titov 2024) using influence function (Koh and Liang 2017; Grosse et al.
2023), gradient ascent (Thudi et al. 2022), second-order approximation (Jia et al. 2024), negative preference optimization (Zhang et al. 2024b), and embedding corrupted (Liu
et al. 2024a). Other views on the landscape of machine unlearning include: unlearning in text classification (Ma et al.
2022), image classification and recognition (Ginart et al.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23733

