The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Measuring Fine-Grained Urban Air Temperature with Satellite Imagery
Minhyuk Song1 , Sungwon Han1 , Seungeon Lee1 , Donhyun Ahn2 , Jihee Kim1 , Meeyoung Cha2,1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
2
Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy (MPI-SP), Bochum, Germany

Abstract

However, it is difficult to obtain air temperature data at
a high spatial resolution that is needed to accurately understand urban microclimates and the impacts of UHI effects. The traditional approach to gathering weather data involves the use of automatic weather stations (AWS). However, weather stations often lack comprehensive regional
coverage (Menne et al. 2012; Muller et al. 2013), and their
spatial resolution cannot be used for fine-grained measurements. This limitation is further exacerbated by factors such
as funding constraints and geographical accessibility, making it even more challenging to obtain high-quality measurements in developing countries. Moreover, although land surface temperature (LST) data from infrared channel of satellite imagery provides high-resolution insights into extreme
heat emissions from industrial activities (Portela et al. 2020),
its scale often differs significantly from air temperature due
to complex air dynamics influenced by human-made structures and traffic. Therefore, LST data requires adjustment or
supplementation to accurately study urban heat conditions.
At the macro level, global climate datasets (GCD) have
been constructed to approximate air temperature at an arbitrary point, either by combining observational weather
data with climate models or by simulating global climate
by physical processes of the atmosphere and ocean. However, the resolution of GCD is often low: commonly used
global climate data (Hersbach et al. 2020; Eyring et al. 2016)
are at resolutions lower than 0.25◦ (i.e., 27.75km at the
equator), which are insufficient to capture regional characteristics essential for policy-making. Moreover, while there
is extensive literature on producing high-resolution climate
datasets, a field often referred to as climate downscaling,
these approaches are less suitable for studying urban microclimates because they do not fully incorporate the humanmade changes prevalent in urban regions.
This work introduces UrbanHeat, a framework that predicts air temperature at a fine-grained resolution, enabling
urban heat measurement at the scale of human activities
and artifacts like buildings. By combining daytime satellite imagery at multiple resolutions with LST data, our approach offers four key advantages: capturing rich visual
information about land cover and human activities, analyzing interactions between core and surrounding areas of
regions by utilizing multiple-resolution images, achieving
high-resolution predictions with the aid of LST, and provid-

Recent studies on the urban heat island phenomenon reveal
how rapid urbanization intensifies temperature disparities in
urban cores, highlighting the need for sustainable urban planning solutions. Analyzing the problems caused by these effects requires high-resolution climate data; however, physical
weather stations often lack sufficient regional coverage and
resolution. Proposals for alternative methods have attempted
to bridge this gap, but they fall short in capturing regional
characteristics adequately or necessitate obtaining difficultto-get input data. This research proposes to use satellite data,
where the visual spectrum provides rich information about
the degree of human development and is easy to obtain, to
measure urban air temperature. Our model, UrbanHeat, uses
multi-resolution satellite imagery and employs land surface
temperature and global climate data as proxy labels to predict
air temperature at a granular scale. The results show that the
model provides predictions at a much finer scale while showing superior performance in measuring ordinal relationships
between points by capturing both local and broad land cover
details of the region. Our case studies demonstrate how predictions at high resolution can help protect vulnerable populations from extreme heat (e.g., elders or developing countries)
and contribute to sustainable urban development worldwide.

Introduction
With rapid urbanization, more cities worldwide are filled
with complex human-made structures like high-rise buildings and roads that can change airflow dynamics and environmental impact within urban cores. The term urban microclimate is being used to investigate and address the diverse effects resulting from the growing complexity of urban climates. In addition to the heat generated by human activities and built environments, urban areas retain heat for
substantially longer periods than natural areas, leading to
the urban heat island (UHI) phenomenon (Rizwan, Dennis,
and Chunho 2008). Abnormally high temperatures due to
the UHI effect contribute to burdening public health systems
and increasing energy consumption in the urban core. These
issues significantly threaten sustainable urban growth, particularly in developing countries, which is highlighted in the
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) #11.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28397

