The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ChatTime: A Unified Multimodal Time Series Foundation Model Bridging
Numerical and Textual Data
Chengsen Wang1 * , Qi Qi1 * , Jingyu Wang1,2† ,
Haifeng Sun1 , Zirui Zhuang1 , Jinming Wu1 , Lei Zhang3 , Jianxin Liao1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
China Unicom Network Communications Corporation Limited, Beijing, China
cswang@bupt.edu.cn, qiqi8266@bupt.edu.cn, wangjingyu@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract
Human experts typically integrate numerical and textual multimodal information to analyze time series. However, most
traditional deep learning predictors rely solely on unimodal
numerical data, using a fixed-length window for training and
prediction on a single dataset, and cannot adapt to different
scenarios. The powered pre-trained large language model has
introduced new opportunities for time series analysis. Yet,
existing methods are either inefficient in training, incapable
of handling textual information, or lack zero-shot forecasting capability. In this paper, we innovatively model time series as a foreign language and construct ChatTime, a unified
framework for time series and text processing. As an outof-the-box multimodal time series foundation model, ChatTime provides zero-shot forecasting capability and supports
bimodal input/output for both time series and text. We design
a series of experiments to verify the superior performance of
ChatTime across multiple tasks and scenarios, and create four
multimodal datasets to address data gaps. The experimental
results demonstrate the potential and utility of ChatTime.

Zero-Shot
Forecast

Missing
Support

Training
Token

Trainable
Parameter

TimesFM
Moirai
TimeGPT
MOMENT
Timer
Chronos
ChatTime

✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓

✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓

3T
150B
100B
100B
50B
25B
1B

200M
300M
Unknown
300M
50M
700M
350M

Table 1: The comparison between pre-trained time series
foundation models.

2023; Li et al. 2023b) often rival the performance of stateof-the-art (SOTA) complex models, indicating that current
unimodal approaches may be nearing a saturation point.
Meanwhile, the rapid advancement of pre-trained large
language models (LLM) has garnered significant attention (Touvron et al. 2023a,b). Through autoregressive pretraining on vast amounts of text, these robust tools are capable of performing a wide array of tasks in a zero-shot
learning paradigm. This has spurred interest in incorporating
LLMs into time series analysis. Some works (Ansari et al.
2024; Das et al. 2024) have utilized extensive time series
data to construct time series foundational models, which can
handle the forecasting task across any scenario with a single
model. However, the training-from-scratch strategy renders
them highly inefficient and forfeits the ability to process textual information. Other research (Jin et al. 2024; Xu et al.
2024) has attempted to integrate the weights of pre-trained
LLMs into a new time series forecasting framework. They
fine-tune additional input and output layers to consider both
time series and textual information. Nevertheless, these additional layers are incapable of zero-shot learning and require re-fine-tuning for each dataset. Furthermore, the inability to output text hindered the aforementioned paradigms
in addressing scenarios such as time series question answering and summarization. This motivates the question: Is it
possible to construct a multimodal time series foundation
model that allows for zero-shot inference and supports both
time series and textual bimodal inputs and outputs?
Linguistic models for predicting the next word and time
series models for predicting the next value fundamentally

Code — https://github.com/ForestsKing/ChatTime

1

Method

Introduction

Time series data is common in various fields, and its accurate forecasts are vital for decision support in industries
such as finance (He, Siu, and Si 2023), transportation (He
et al. 2022), energy (Pinto et al. 2021), healthcare (Puri
et al. 2022), and climate (Du et al. 2021). Human experts
frequently integrate multimodal information for time series
forecasting. For instance, economists combine historical financial series with policy reports to predict future market
trends. Due to their remarkable performance, deep learning
predictors (Nie et al. 2023; Cai et al. 2024) have become the
mainstream method in recent years. However, most current
deep paradigms train and predict on a single dataset based on
fixed history and prediction windows, lacking adaptability to
different scenarios or datasets. Additionally, most existing
methods utilize only unimodal numerical data. Recent studies have demonstrated that simple linear models (Zeng et al.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12694

