The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MCGAN: Enhancing GAN Training with
Regression-Based Generator Loss
Baoren Xiao1 , Hao Ni1 , Weixin Yang2 *
1

University College London
2
University of Oxford
baoren.xiao.18@ucl.ac.uk, h.ni@ucl.ac.uk, wxy1290g@gmail.com

Abstract

suffers gradient vanishing and instability due to the singularity of the denominator showed in the gradient when the
discriminator becomes accurate. To address this issue, some
work has been done to develop better adversarial loss (Lim
and Ye 2017; Mao et al. 2017; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017). As a variant of GAN, conditional GAN (cGAN)
(Mirza and Osindero 2014) is designed to learn the conditional distribution of target variable given conditioning information. It improves the GAN performance by incorporating conditional information to both the discriminator and
generator, we hence have better control over the generated
samples (Zhou et al. 2021; Odena, Olah, and Shlens 2017).
Unlike these works on the regularization method and adversarial loss, our work focuses on the generative loss function to enhance the performance of GAN training. In this paper, we propose a novel generative loss, termed as the regression loss LR , which reformulates the generator training as
the least-square optimization task. This regression loss underpins our proposed MCGAN, an enhancement of existing
GAN models achieved by replacing the original generative
loss with our regression loss. This approach leverages the
expected discriminator Dϕ under the fake measure induced
by the generator. Benefiting from the strong supervision lying in the regression loss, our approach enables the generator to learn the target distribution with a relatively weak
discriminator in a more efficient and stable manner.
The main contributions of our paper are three folds:

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have emerged as a
powerful tool for generating high-fidelity data. However, the
main bottleneck of existing approaches is the lack of supervision on the generator training, which often results in undamped oscillation and unsatisfactory performance. To address this issue, we propose an algorithm called Monte Carlo
GAN (MCGAN). This approach, utilizing an innovative generative loss function, termed the regression loss, reformulates
the generator training as a regression task and enables the
generator training by minimizing the mean squared error between the discriminator’s output of real data and the expected
discriminator of fake data. We demonstrate the desirable analytic properties of the regression loss, including discriminability and optimality, and show that our method requires a
weaker condition on the discriminator for effective generator
training. These properties justify the strength of this approach
to improve the training stability while retaining the optimality of GAN by leveraging strong supervision of the regression
loss. Extensive experiments on diverse datasets, including image data (CIFAR-10/100, FFHQ256, ImageNet, and LSUN
Bedroom), time series data (VAR and stock data), and video
data, are conducted to demonstrate the flexibility and effectiveness of our proposed MCGAN. Numerical results show
that the proposed MCGAN is versatile in enhancing a variety
of backbone GAN models and achieves consistent and significant improvement in terms of quality, accuracy, training
stability, and learned latent space.

Code — https://github.com/DeepIntoStreams/MCGAN
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17191

• We propose the MCGAN methodology for enhancing
both unconditional and conditional GAN training.
• We establish the theoretical foundation of the proposed
regression loss, e.g., the discriminability, optimality,
and improved training stability. A simple but effective
toy example of Dirac-GAN is provided to show that
our proposed MCGAN successfully mitigates the nonconvergence issues of conventional GANs by incorporating regression loss.
• We empirically validate the consistent improvements of
MCGAN over various GANs across diverse data types
(i.e., images, time series, and videos). Our approach improves quality, accuracy, training stability, and learned latent space, showing its generality and flexibility.

Introduction
In recent years, Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014) has become one of the most powerful tools for realistic image synthesis. However, the instability of the GAN training and unsatisfying performance remains a challenge. To combat it, much effort has been put
into developing regularization methods, see (Gulrajani et al.
2017; Mescheder, Geiger, and Nowozin 2018; Miyato et al.
2018; Kang, Shin, and Park 2022). Additionally, as (Arjovsky and Bottou 2017) pointed out, the generator usually
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related work GANs have demonstrated their capacity to
simulate high-fidelity synthetic data, facilitating data shar21644

