The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Uncertainty Modeling with Semantic Graph for Hallucination
Detection
Kedi Chen1 * † , Qin Chen1 * ‡ , Jie Zhou1 , Xinqi Tao2 , Bowen Ding2 , Jingwen Xie2 , Mingchen Xie2 ,
Peilong Li2 , Feng Zheng2
1

East China Normal University
2
Xiaohongshu Inc.
kdchen@stu.ecnu.edu.cn {qchen, jzhou}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
{yifan5, faming, qingliang, shenzong, liaofan, yemu}@xiaohongshu.com
Passage to be detected:
Gaulle was born in the Paris. She was died of meningitis. …

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are prone to hallucination
with non-factual or unfaithful statements, which undermines
the applications in real-world scenarios. Recent researches
focus on uncertainty-based hallucination detection, which
utilizes the output probability of LLMs for uncertainty calculation and does not rely on external knowledge or frequent
sampling from LLMs. Whereas, most approaches merely
consider the uncertainty of each independent token, while
the intricate semantic relations among tokens and sentences
are not well studied, which limits the detection of hallucination that spans over multiple tokens and sentences in the
passage. In this paper, we propose a method to enhance uncertainty modeling with semantic graph for hallucination detection. Specifically, we first construct a semantic graph that
well captures the relations among entity tokens and sentences.
Then, we incorporate the relations between two entities for
uncertainty propagation to enhance sentence-level hallucination detection. Given that hallucination occurs due to the conflict between sentences, we further present a graph-based uncertainty calibration method that integrates the contradiction
probability of the sentence with its neighbors in the semantic graph for uncertainty calculation. Extensive experiments
on two datasets show the great advantages of our proposed
approach. In particular, we obtain substantial improvements
with 19.78% in passage-level hallucination detection.

sentence1

(a)

Fact

Gaulle was born in the

Paris

0.72

0.94
NonFact

She was died of

meningitis

……

0.83

AVE
0.81 predict score

sentence2

0.63

passage

NonFact

NonFact

0.95

0.79

0.50 labeled score
Huge Gap

Passage to be detected:
Gaulle was born in the Paris. She was died of meningitis. …
Fact

sentence1

Gaulle was

born in the

NonFact

sentence2

She was

(b)

Paris

died of

meningitis

Fact
0.32
NonFact

0.57 predict score

0.88

0.50 labeled score

……
entity words

passage
graph passage

Good Match
predicate words

relation path

Figure 1: (a) Previous works only concern independent tokens and use their average scores as the metrics, resulting
in errors in sentence and passage-level detection. (b) Our
method captures more complex semantic dependencies with
a semantic graph for uncertainty modeling, such as the relations between entities, and the relations with neighbor sentences in the passage-level semantic graph.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Zhao et al. 2023a),
with large-scale parameters and advanced training methods,
achieve excellent performance in many downstream tasks
of natural language processing (NLP) (Aracena et al. 2024;
Chen et al. 2024c; Lai and Nissim 2024; Zhang et al. 2024).
Despite the many benefits of large language models, hallucination remains an issue that cannot be ignored. Hallucination indicates that some non-factual or untruthful contents
are generated (Wang et al. 2023a). Therefore, hallucination
detection is critically an essential task, which provides a preliminary review of the contents generated by large language

models, reducing their potential harm in real-world scenarios (Lee et al. 2024; Cui et al. 2023; Yan et al. 2024), such
as education, economics, science, and so on.
Current hallucination detection methods can be roughly
divided into three categories. (i) Retrieval-based method
(Wang et al. 2023c; Zhang et al. 2023b) usually retrieve evidence from external resources for fact verification (Chen
et al. 2024a). This approach exceedingly depends on the
quality of external resources, which is not always available.
In addition, it needs various validation steps towards the retrieved knowledge, which are complicated and inefficient.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

This work was done during the internship at Xiaohongshu Inc.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

23586

