The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Parallel-Learning of Invariant and Tempo-variant Attributes of Single-Lead
Cardiac Signals: PLITA
Adrian Atienza, Jakob E. Bardram, Sadasivan Puthusserypady
Technical University of Denmark
{adar, jakba, sapu}@dtu.dk

Abstract

Learning (SSL) framework particularly well-suited for
addressing this clinical challenge.

Wearable sensing devices, such as Holter monitors, will play a
crucial role in the future of digital health. Unsupervised learning frameworks such as Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) are
essential to map these single-lead electrocardiogram (ECG)
signals with their anticipated clinical outcomes. These signals
are characterized by a tempo-variant component whose patterns evolve through the recording and an invariant component
with patterns that remain unchanged. However, existing SSL
methods only drive the model to encode the invariant attributes,
leading the model to neglect tempo-variant information which
reflects subject-state changes through time. In this paper, we
present Parallel-Learning of Invariant and Tempo-variant Attributes (PLITA), a novel SSL method designed for capturing
both invariant and tempo-variant ECG attributes. The latter
are captured by mandating closer representations in space for
closer inputs on time. We evaluate both the capability of the
method to learn the attributes of these two distinct kinds, as
well as PLITA’s performance compared to existing SSL methods for ECG analysis. PLITA performs significantly better in
the set-ups where tempo-variant attributes play a major role.

Figure 1: A pair ECG strips from distinct subjects are shown.
The signal morphology accommodates a strong stationary
component with visible differences between the subjects.

Introduction
The wearable sensing field has seen remarkable advancements in recent years. By enabling real-time data collection
on physiological parameters, these devices will play a crucial
role in the future of digital health. Among these wearable
sensors, the Holter monitor captures the cardiac machinery as
single-lead ECG signals. Leveraging the information that is
accommodated in these signals has the potential of providing
outstanding benefits: (i) Facilitating the early identification
of irregular heart rhythms, such as Atrial Fibrillation (AFib),
(ii) Simplifying the diagnostic process and minimizing
the necessity for comprehensive testing (Himmelreich
et al. 2019), and (iii) Enabling users to engage proactively
in tracking their heart health by offering instant access
to health data and insights (Abdou and Krishnan 2022).
Generic models are mandated to map these data with their
anticipated clinical outcomes. These models should compute
informative single-lead ECG representations applicable to
several downstream tasks and be optimized using large
volumes of unlabelled data. This makes Self-Supervised
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15427

To ensure blood reaches the entire body, each heart periodically repeats a sequence of actions, i.e., contractions,
relaxations, and repolarizations, involving its different
chambers with clockwise precision. This unique execution
of actions results in signals that exhibit a strong stationary
component which is distinctive among hearts, as shown
in Figure 1. These stationary attributes accommodate
meaningful information such as the subject‘s gender (Attia
et al. 2019b) or tendency to cardiac arrhythmia (Attia et al.
2019a). In parallel, the functioning of the heart evolves,
since it has to adapt to the individual’s temporary needs or it
may fall into arrhythmias. This evolution, also captured in
the recordings, adds a non-stationary component to the data.
Therefore, single-lead ECG signals are characterized by two
components of distinct kinds. The stationary component remains unchanging over time. Conversely, the non-stationary
component is time-sensitive and its patterns evolve through
the recording. This paper will refer to these components as
invariant and tempo-variant attributes, respectively.
Current SSL techniques designed for single-lead ECG
processing (Diamant et al. 2022; Kiyasseh, Zhu, and
Clifton 2021; Wickstrøm et al. 2022) enforce the model
to understand and encode the signal invariant patterns
following a Contrastive Learning (Chen et al. 2020)
approach. Despite each having its uniqueness, they all

