The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Content-free Logical Modification of Large Language Model by Disentangling and
Modifying Logic Representation
Xin Wu1,2 , Yuqi Bu1,2 , Yifei Chen1 , Yi Cai1,2 *
1

2

South China University of Technology, Guangdong, China
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (South China University of Technology) Ministry of Education
ycai@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite extensive training on diverse datasets and alignment with human values, large language models (LLMs) can
still generate fallacious outputs. Additionally, the validity of
LLM’s outputs varies significantly depending on the content.
It is crucial to ensure LLMs’ logical consistency across different contexts. Drawing inspiration from cognitive psychology studies, we propose a Logic Control Framework (LCF)
that disentangles LLMs’ hidden representations into separate content and logic spaces. Within the logic space, we use
logically valid and invalid samples to construct distinct regions through contrastive learning. By moving logic representations to logically valid regions and fusing them with unchanged content representations, we significantly reduce logical fallacies in LLM outputs while maintaining content coherence. We demonstrate the effectiveness of LCF through
experiments on conclusion generation and fallacy identification tasks, showing a significant improvement in logical validity and a reduction in fallacious outputs.

Figure 1: (a) Llama2 generates logically invalid conclusions.
(b) Modifying Llama2’s hidden representations improves
validity but generates unrelated content. (c) Our content and
logic decoupling framework improves logical validity while
maintaining content consistency.

Introduction
Logical fallacies (Jason 1989; Tindale 2007), which are
errors in reasoning that undermine the logic of an argument, can lead to misinformation (Musi and Reed 2022) and
flawed decision-making processes (Bregant 2014; HaitaFalah 2017). To be trusted and effective, large language
models (LLMs) are expected to produce coherent, rational, and logically sound outputs (Liu et al. 2023; Naveed
et al. 2024), particularly in sensitive fields such as healthcare (Goyal et al. 2024) and legal advice (Sun et al. 2024).
Despite being trained on extensive datasets and aligned
with human values, LLMs can still produce fallacious outputs (Naveed et al. 2024). For instance, as shown in Figure
1(a), the premise indicates that feeling well is a sufficient
condition for going to work. However, Llama2 incorrectly
infers that not feeling well is also a sufficient condition for
not going to work. This conclusion is invalid without additional information about what occurs when one does not feel
well. In our experiments, nearly half of the conclusions generated by the Llama2-7b-chat model exhibit logical fallacies
including false causality and deductive fallacies.

Additionally, the hidden representations of LLMs are
content-dependent, which causes them to exhibit contententangled reasoning patterns. i.e., the validity of their outputs varies with content, even if the logical structure remains
similar (Dasgupta et al. 2024). Consequently, modifications
to representations can simultaneously impact logical validity
and content. For instance, Figure 1(b) illustrates that adjusting Llama2’s representation toward regions associated with
logically valid samples improves the validity of its conclusions but introduces unrelated content. This demonstrates
that altering the hidden representation of LLMs affects both
logical validity and content, hindering the ability to enhance
logical validity while maintaining content consistency.
In contrast, humans can separate content from logical
structure during reasoning, maintaining logical validity regardless of the content (Wason and Johnson-Laird 1972;
Cheng and Holyoak 1985). Moreover, research in cognitive
psychology (Monti and Osherson 2012) shows that the hu-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25507

