The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking and Improving Student Learning and Forgetting Processes for
Attention Based Knowledge Tracing Models
Youheng Bai1 , Xueyi Li1 , Zitao Liu1 * , Yaying Huang1 , Mi Tian2 , Weiqi Luo1
1

Guangdong Institute of Smart Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510632, China
2
TAL Education Group, Beijing, 102206, China
baiyouheng@outlook.com, lixueyi@stu2021.jnu.edu.cn, {liuzitao, huangyaying, lwq}@jnu.edu.cn, tianmi@tal.com

Abstract
Knowledge tracing (KT) models students’ knowledge states
and predicts their future performance based on their historical interaction data. However, attention based KT models
struggle to accurately capture diverse forgetting behaviors
in ever-growing interaction sequences. First, existing models
use uniform time decay matrices, conflating forgetting representations with problem relevance. Second, the fixed-length
window prediction paradigm fails to model continuous forgetting processes in expanding sequences. To address these
challenges, this paper introduces LefoKT, a unified architecture that enhances attention based KT models by incorporating proposed relative forgetting attention. LefoKT improves
forgetting modeling through relative forgetting attention to
decouple forgetting patterns from problem relevance. It also
enhances attention based KT models’ length extrapolation
capability for capturing continuous forgetting processes in
ever-growing interaction sequences. Extensive experimental
results on three datasets validate the effectiveness of LefoKT.

Figure 1: An illustration of the KT task.

attention mechanisms to model learning and forgetting processes in student interaction sequences. For example, AKT
(Ghosh, Heffernan, and Lan 2020) and RKT (Pandey and
Srivastava 2020) combine attention mechanisms with forgetting modeling by incorporating time decay matrices into
attention scores.
Although these attention based KT models have made
progress in capturing students’ forgetting behavior, challenges remain in accurately modeling the complex learning and forgetting processes. First, using time-decay matrices to model students’ forgetting processes oversimplifies
complex forgetting patterns associated with different learning habits and conflates forgetting patterns with problem relevance. Second, existing KT models that use fixed-length
windows during prediction truncate longer interaction sequences, which fails to trace students’ knowledge forgetting
over ever-growing learning sequences, as they lose crucial
information about students’ long-term knowledge retention
and gradual forgetting over time.
Taking the aforementioned challenges into account, we
propose the LefoKT framework to rethink the learning and
forgetting processes in attention based KT models. LefoKT
enhances the modeling of diverse forgetting behaviors and
improves prediction performance for ever-growing learning
sequences, enabling more accurate modeling of students’
long-term forgetting processes. Specifically, LefoKT integrates relative forgetting attention (RFA) to capture chronological order and model multiple forgetting behaviors by
leveraging various temporal decay biases of relative positional encodings (RPEs). Furthermore, RFA can improve the
length extrapolation capability of LefoKT, which allows the

Code — https://pykt.org/

Introduction
Knowledge tracing (KT) aims to model and trace students’
knowledge states by analyzing their historical interaction
data to predict their performance on new questions (Corbett
and Anderson 1994; Piech et al. 2015; Abdelrahman, Wang,
and Nunes 2023), as illustrated in Figure 1. Such capabilities
play a key role in facilitating personalized instruction and
enhancing learning experiences, both of which are crucial to
next-generation intelligent education systems (Shehata et al.
2023).
Recently, attention mechanisms have achieved significant
success in natural language processing and graph analytics
(Vaswani et al. 2017; Luo et al. 2024) due to their capability
to capture long-term dependencies. This capability is crucial
in the KT task and has contributed to the development of
many attention based KT models. Furthermore, effectively
modeling students’ forgetting behaviors in educational settings is crucial for KT task, as it implicitly affects the estimation of student knowledge states. Some KT models leverage
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27822

