The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Collaborative Evolution: Multi-Round Learning Between Large and Small
Language Models for Emergent Fake News Detection
Ziyi Zhou, Xiaoming Zhang* , Shenghan Tan, Litian Zhang, Chaozhuo Li
Beihang University,
{ziyizhou, yolixs, tsh21371459, litianzhang}@buaa.edu.cn, lichaozhuo1991@gmail.com

Abstract

news events occur frequently (Olan et al. 2022). Manual annotation of data is both time-consuming and costly, leading
to insufficient data for supervised training of models (Yin
et al. 2024; Gangireddy et al. 2020). Moreover, the continuous evolution of news results in differences between the
distribution of emergent events and manually annotated data
as Figure 1(a) illustrates. These factors collectively lead to
traditional SLMs being unable to adapt well to emergent
events, thus failing to demonstrate satisfactory performance
in practical applications as Figure 1(b) presented.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable
abilities on various NLP applications due to their robust zeroshot capabilities (Gruver et al. 2024; Kojima et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2024a). However, experiments in Figure 1(b)
have shown that LLMs do not exhibit strong detection capabilities for fake news in zero-shot and few-shot scenarios.
This might be attributed to two main reasons: Firstly, while
LLMs demonstrate strong task adaptation abilities, the potential of LLMs for fake news detection remains inactive due
to the lack of suitable demonstrations in zero-shot environments. Secondly, news events are continually evolving while
frozen-parameters LLMs lack external dynamic knowledge
to assist in judging emerging events.
Due to the limitations of LLMs in fake news detection,
recent researches (Su, Cardie, and Nakov 2023; Wan et al.
2024; Chen and Shu 2023) have opted to utilize LLMs to
provide additional assistance to SLMs for more accurate
detection. Dell (Wan et al. 2024) utilizes LLMs as agents
to form a social network by generating user comments and
employ LLMs to extract additional information such as sentiment and knowledge to aid SLMs in fake news detection.
ARG leverages LLMs to analyze news content and provide
rationales to help SLMs in detection (Hu et al. 2024). Recent
studies also leverage LLMs to extract more effective external
knowledge to assist in assessing the authenticity of news (Liu
et al. 2024). Although the utilization of LLMs have shown
improved detection capabilities, these methods still rely on a
substantial amount of data for training the SLMs as they only
use LLMs as an auxiliary to SLMs. Furthermore, they neglect
the fact that LLMs possess strong learning and generalization
capabilities for detecting fake news.
To address the dependency on data in current methods
and the issue of current models’ inability to accurately
detect emergent events, we propose a novel Multi-Round

The proliferation of fake news on social media platforms
has exerted a substantial influence on society, leading to discernible impacts and deleterious consequences. Conventional
deep learning methodologies employing small language models (SLMs) suffer from the necessity for extensive supervised
training and the challenge of adapting to rapidly evolving
circumstances. Large language models (LLMs), despite their
robust zero-shot capabilities, have fallen short in effectively
identifying fake news due to a lack of pertinent demonstrations
and the dynamic nature of knowledge. In this paper, a novel
framework Multi-Round Collaboration Detection (MRCD) is
proposed to address these aforementioned limitations. The
MRCD framework is capable of enjoying the merits from both
LLMs and SLMs by integrating their generalization abilities
and specialized functionalities, respectively. Our approach features a two-stage retrieval module that selects relevant and upto-date demonstrations and knowledge, enhancing in-context
learning for better detection of emerging news events. We further design a multi-round learning framework to ensure more
reliable detection results. Our framework MRCD achieves
SOTA results on two real-world datasets Pheme and Twitter16,
with accuracy improvements of 7.4% and 12.8% compared to
using only SLMs, which effectively addresses the limitations
of current models and improves the detection of emergent fake
news detection.

Introduction
The proliferation of fake news on social networks has caused
significant impact and harm to society (Zhou and Zafarani
2020). In order to achieve automated detection of fake news,
numerous deep learning-based approaches have been proposed (Zhang et al. 2024c; Wu and Hooi 2023; Hu et al.
2021). The traditional methods primarily utilize small language models (SLMs) like BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) to
extract features from news content or propagation paths in
social networks to accomplish the classification task, demonstrating promising performance across multiple fake news
detection datasets.
Despite the satisfactory performance of current methods
on specific datasets, these methods are mainly based on supervised training, whereas in reality, a large number of emergent
*Xiaoming Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1210

