The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mechanism Design for Connecting Regions Under Disruptions
Hau Chan1 , Jianan Lin2 , Zining Qin3 , Chenhao Wang4,3 *
1

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3
Guangdong Provincial/Zhuhai Key Laboratory of IRADS, BNU-HKBU United International College
4
Beijing Normal University-Zhuhai
2

Abstract
Man-made and natural disruptions such as planned constructions on roads, suspensions of bridges, and blocked roads by
trees/mudslides/floods can often create obstacles that separate two connected regions. As a result, the traveling and
reachability of agents from their respective regions to other
regions can be affected. To minimize the impact of the obstacles and maintain agent accessibility, we initiate the problem
of constructing a new pathway (e.g., a detour or new bridge)
connecting the regions disconnected by obstacles from the
mechanism design perspective. In the problem, each agent in
their region has a private location and is required to access
the other region. The cost of an agent is the distance from
their location to the other region via the pathway. Our goal is
to design strategyproof mechanisms that elicit truthful locations from the agents and approximately optimize the social
or maximum cost of agents by determining locations in the
regions for building a pathway. We provide a characterization
of all strategyproof and anonymous mechanisms. For the social and maximum costs, we provide upper and lower bounds
on the approximation ratios of strategyproof mechanisms.

1

Figure 1: An obstacle o disconnects the agents (denoted as
solid points) in two regions, and a new pathway (a, b) connects them.
temporary markets, or sporting events). In addition, natural
disruptions can be in the form of the aftermath of disasters
(e.g., earthquakes and storms), where roads and bridges are
damaged or blocked by large trees, mudslides, or floods.
These disruptions can often result in obstacles that disconnect any two regions and affect the traveling and reachability
of agents. Therefore, our goal is to determine the best way to
construct new routes/pathways connecting the disconnected
regions in order to minimize the impact of the obstacles and
maintain the accessibility of the agents. In temporary disruptions with obstacles (e.g., road constructions, public events,
or large trees on roads), the new pathways can be viewed as
detours connecting the regions so that agents can continue to
access other regions before the removal of the obstacles. In
permanent disruptions with obstacles (e.g., the suspensions
of bridges or roads), the new pathways can be regarded as
part of newly added roads or bridges connecting the regions.
With the new pathways, the agents from their corresponding
regions can still travel and reach the other regions, overcoming the obstacles due to disruptions.
In Figure 1, we provide an example of the suspension of a
structurally deficient bridge (modeled simply as a line with
an obstacle on it). The bridge originally connected Region L
and Region R. With the bridge suspension, the bridge now
becomes an obstacle (denoted by o on the line), and the two
regions are now disconnected. Each agent located in their
respective region needs to access (e.g., for work, school, or
other daily routine) the other region divided by the obstacle.
As agents cannot cross the obstacle directly, our goal is to
maintain the accessibility of the agents to the regions (e.g.,
from Region L to Region R) by building a pathway or new
bridge (denoted as a green line with endpoints a and b in
Figure 1) connecting Region L and Region R.
Existing optimization literature has considered building
optimal pathways between two disconnected regions, aim-

Introduction

In modern societies, various types of infrastructures are
constructed to connect regions to facilitate the traveling or
reachability of agents from their corresponding regions to
other regions (Amekudzi, Thomas-Mobley, and Ross 2007;
Forkenbrock and Foster 1990; Narayanaswami 2017). These
types of infrastructures include highways, streets, roads,
bridges, and transportation systems. For instance, using the
road infrastructure, an agent from a region can drive to reach
another region effectively.
Unfortunately, these infrastructures can sometimes be interrupted either temporarily or permanently due to manmade or natural disruptions (Boakye et al. 2022; Faturechi
and Miller-Hooks 2015; Gu et al. 2020; Serdar, Koç, and
Al-Ghamdi 2022). For example, man-made disruptions can
refer to the planned large construction project of a road, the
construction of a transportation hub (e.g., a subway station),
the suspension of bridges (e.g., due to accidents), or the interruption of an area due to public activities (e.g., parades,
* Corresponding author. chenhwang@bnu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13691

