The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ProtCLIP: Function-Informed Protein Multi-Modal Learning
Hanjing Zhou1,2,3 * Mingze Yin1,2 * , Wei Wu4 , Mingyang Li3 , Kun Fu3 ,
Jintai Chen5† , Jian Wu2,6† , Zheng Wang3†
2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University,
State Key Laboratory of Transvascular Implantation Devices of The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University,
3
Alibaba Cloud Computing,
4
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China,
5
AI Thrust, Information Hub, HKUST(Guangzhou),
6
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Medical Imaging Artificial Intelligence
{zhj85393, mzyin256, jtchen721}@gmail.com, wujian2000@zju.edu.cn,
{sangheng.lmy, fukun.fu, wz388779}@alibaba-inc.com, urara@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

training paradigm towards powerful and unified vision representations (Radford et al. 2021; Ramesh et al. 2022; Girdhar et al. 2023; Junnan et al. 2023), previous work has explored in the pre-training of multi-modality Protein Language Models (PLMs) by aligning protein sequences with
textual function descriptions to achieve function-centric protein representations (Zhang et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2023; Wu,
Chang, and Zou 2024; Yin et al. 2024). However, these
works were still unable to replicate the extraordinary success
of image-text foundation models, and have shown to discard
fine-grained protein functional information (Wu, Chang, and
Zou 2024), which results in the suboptimal performance on
cross-modal transformation (Wang et al. 2024) and localization prediction (Xu et al. 2023). Literature has summarized
that the success of visual foundation models primarily stems
from the efficient utilization of large-scale data (Radford
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2024) and a holistic multi-modal
pre-training framework (Zhang et al. 2023; Pujin et al.
2023), which points to two inherent obstacles that hinder
further progress in multi-modal protein-biotext pre-training:

Multi-modality pre-training paradigm that aligns protein sequences and biological descriptions has learned general protein representations and achieved promising performance in
various downstream applications. However, these works were
still unable to replicate the extraordinary success of languagesupervised visual foundation models due to the ineffective
usage of aligned protein-text paired data and the lack of
an effective function-informed pre-training paradigm. To address these issues, this paper curates a large-scale protein-text
paired dataset called ProtAnno with a property-driven sampling strategy, and introduces a novel function-informed protein pre-training paradigm. Specifically, the sampling strategy
determines selecting probability based on the sample confidence and property coverage, balancing the data quality and
data quantity in face of large-scale noisy data. Furthermore,
motivated by significance of the protein specific functional
mechanism, the proposed paradigm explicitly model protein
static and dynamic functional segments by two segmentwise pre-training objectives, injecting fine-grained information in a function-informed manner. Leveraging all these innovations, we develop ProtCLIP, a multi-modality foundation
model that comprehensively represents function-aware protein embeddings. On 22 different protein benchmarks within
5 types, including protein functionality classification, mutation effect prediction, cross-modal transformation, semantic
similarity inference and protein-protein interaction prediction, our ProtCLIP consistently achieves SOTA performance,
with remarkable improvements of 75% on average in five
cross-modal transformation benchmarks, 59.9% in GO-CC
and 39.7% in GO-BP protein function prediction. The experimental results verify the extraordinary potential of ProtCLIP
serving as the protein multi-modality foundation model.

1

(i) Absence of large-scale datasets and ineffective data
usage. Large-scale aligned dataset is an indispensable part
of obtaining powerful multi-modality foundation models.
However, biotexts describing protein functions are much
harder to construct than image captions, as often requiring detailed annotated process including manual review by
experts or computational analysis by machines. This highlights the pressing need of large-scale multi-modal datasets
containing protein sequences with high-quality functional
annotations across multiple attribute domains. Even with
large-scale protein-biotext pairs, it is non-trivial to effectively inject biological property information into PLMs
during multi-modal pre-training. This is primarily because
the machine-analyzed process leads to numerous noisy labels (i.e., less accurate annotations) (Bairoch and Apweiler
2000). Currently, there is still a lack of efficient learning
techniques to effectively utilize large-scale proteins with
noisy annotations for protein-biotext pre-training.

Introduction

Proteins are essential functional units of cells, responsible
for performing a wide range of vital and versatile functions crucial to life. Mirroring the language-supervised pre* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(ii) Lack of a function-informed pre-training paradigm.
Unlike the alignment of natural image-text pairs, the under22937

