The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Foreground-Covering Prototype Generation and Matching
for SAM-Aided Few-Shot Segmentation
Suho Park* , SuBeen Lee* , Hyun Seok Seong, Jaejoon Yoo, Jae-Pil Heo†
Sungkyunkwan University
{shpa06972, leesb7426, gustjrdl95, ujaejoon, jaepilheo}@gmail.com

+
Frequency

Abstract
We propose Foreground-Covering Prototype Generation and
Matching to resolve Few-Shot Segmentation (FSS), which
aims to segment target regions in unlabeled query images
based on labeled support images. Unlike previous research,
which typically estimates target regions in the query using
support prototypes and query pixels, we utilize the relationship between support and query prototypes. To achieve this,
we utilize two complementary features: SAM Image Encoder
features for pixel aggregation and ResNet features for class
consistency. Specifically, we construct support and query prototypes with SAM features and distinguish query prototypes
of target regions based on ResNet features. For the query
prototype construction, we begin by roughly guiding foreground regions within SAM features using the conventional
pseudo-mask, then employ iterative cross-attention to aggregate foreground features into learnable tokens. Here, we discover that the cross-attention weights can effectively alternate
the conventional pseudo-mask. Therefore, we use the attentionbased pseudo-mask to guide ResNet features to focus on the
foreground, then infuse the guided ResNet feature into the
learnable tokens to generate class-consistent query prototypes.
The generation of the support prototype is conducted symmetrically to that of the query one, with the pseudo-mask
replaced by the ground-truth mask. Finally, we compare these
query prototypes with support ones to generate prompts, which
subsequently produce object masks through the SAM Mask
Decoder. Our state-of-the-art performances on various datasets
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method for FSS.

VRP-SAM

Ours

−

VRP-SAM Ours
(0.130) (0.435)

Sum of foreground scores

Frequency

(a) Comparison between two matching strategies

Conventional
Pseudo-mask

Attention-based
Pseudo-mask

Conventional Attention-based
(0.243)
(0.572)

IoU

(b) Comparison between two types of pseudo-masks

Figure 1: Comparison between VRP-SAM and Ours. (a) (left)
We visualize pixel-wise attention maps of query image compared to support prototype. (right) Summing the scores corresponding to the foreground, our prototype-to-prototype
matching achieves a higher average score than prototypeto-pixel matching (VRP-SAM). (b) We compare the conventional and attention-based pseudo masks generated by
VRP-SAM and our method. The visualizations and IoU distribution with query foreground validate the effectiveness of
our attention-based pseudo-mask.

known as the query image, using a small number of labeled
images, referred to as the support image.
The Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al. 2023)
has demonstrated remarkable versatility across various segmentation tasks. Although SAM excels at generating object
masks with appropriate prompts within an image, effectively
utilizing SAM for FSS remains challenging. This limitation
arises from the absence of class consistency across images in
SAM, which means it cannot classify the foreground regions
of the query image based on the support images.
Recently, VRP-SAM (Sun et al. 2024) introduced an alternative approach to leverage SAM for FSS by generating
visual reference prompts that encode query foreground pixels
corresponding to support foreground pixels, and producing an
object mask via the SAM Mask Decoder. Specifically, VRPSAM encapsulates support foreground pixels into learnable
tokens, which serve as support prototypes. It then generates

Introduction
Semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable advancements in recent years (Chen et al. 2015; Badrinarayanan,
Kendall, and Cipolla 2017; Strudel et al. 2021; Cheng et al.
2022; Xie et al. 2021). However, these successes heavily rely
on large amounts of labeled data, which require significant
human effort. To reduce this burden, Few-Shot Segmentation (FSS) has been introduced (Shaban et al. 2017a; Shi
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2023; Wang, Sun,
and Zhang 2023). FSS aims to segment an unlabeled image,
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6425

