The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Modelling of Constraints with Tractable Logical Operators
Ruiwei Wang and Roland H.C. Yap
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
wangruiwei@u.nus.edu, ryap@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

It is natural to combine constraints into more complex
ones by using logical operators (Bacchus and Walsh 2005;
Jefferson et al. 2010). Modelling languages such as Minizinc (Nethercote et al. 2007), Essence (Frisch et al. 2008) and
CPMpy (Guns 2019) also provide logical operators for modelling constraints. To express all logical operators, a minimal set of logical connectives can be {∨, ¬} or {∧, ¬}
where negation is a key operator for expressivity. However, we can see that tractable negation operator is generally not supported by many useful ad-hoc constraint representations (Wang and Yap 2023). This creates a dilemma,
on the one hand, we want more expressiveness in modelling
through logical combinations of constraint representations,
but on the other hand, how to do so while logical operations
are still tractable. Given that there are many constraint representations on which certain logical operators are intractable,
care is needed to find the cases where we can have both expressiveness and tractability.

Solving a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) usually requires a model typically using existing basic constraints. The
most flexible form of constraint, ad-hoc (generic) constraints
defined with certain constraint representations, such as binary
constraint tree (BCT) and decision diagrams, have been proposed where basic constraints in intensional form are insufficient. A modeller may wish to combine basic constraints
using logic operators (∧, ∨, ¬). However, negation, a key logical operator for expressivity is not tractable in many existing
constraint representations. This creates a dilemma, for modelling, we would desire more flexibility, but a model whose
operations are intractable may in turn be impractical.
In this paper, we give a framework which allows for a
tractable negation operator on constraint representations. We
apply the framework on the BCT and ordered decision diagram constraints, giving new subforms. These subforms can
be strictly more succinct than ordered multi-valued decision
diagrams (OMDD), while being as tractable as OMDD for
logical combinations. We give applications to show effective
propagators from logical combinations and in building large
constraint models for configuration problems.

1

In this paper, we propose a framework, called constraint
representation pair, to investigate tractable negation on constraint representations, taking into account the importance
of representation size. We study representation size through
the notion of succinctness (Darwiche and Marquis 2002;
Wang and Yap 2023) which measures the worst-case size.
Constraint representation pair gives a way to identify the
most succinct representations (i.e. subforms) supporting
tractable negation. The ordered multi-valued decision diagram (OMDD) is one of the few existing constraint representations with tractable negation. We identify two subforms of BCT (binary constraint tree) and OMVD (ordered
multi-valued variable diagram, a non-deterministic OMDD),
respectively called op-BCT and op-OMVD, which can be
strictly more succinct than OMDD, while having the same
power as OMDD for tractable logical operations. We also
close some open questions discussed in (Amilhastre et al.
2014; Wang and Yap 2023). We then show the results can
be applied in two problems. Firstly, by using tractable logical operators, we can use op-BCT to model reified constraints. We show that the resulting model is more efficient
than one using OMDD constraints. Configuration problems
create large models and logical operations occur naturally,
typically with OMDD representations. We show that a product configuration benchmark can be modelled much more
compactly with op-BCT.

Introduction

Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) is a general way of
modelling and solving a wide range of combinatorial problems. Like writing programs, to solve a CSP, one has to first
model the CSP and it is natural to construct models using
logical operators between constraints. In this paper, we focus on ad-hoc constraints (also called generic constraints) as
the building blocks of models, because they can easily express any discrete constraint.
Many constraint representations and propagators have
been proposed, such as table-like representations (Yap, Xia,
and Wang 2020), decision diagrams (Cheng and Yap 2010;
Gange, Stuckey, and Szymanek 2011; Perez and Régin
2014) and binary constraint trees (Wang and Yap 2022b).
A reason for various representations of ad-hoc constraints is
that different representations are natural/efficient for modelling different problems. Indeed when it comes to tractability and representation size (succinctness), the representations can vary considerably (Wang and Yap 2023) and can
have practical impact on effective solving and model size.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11381

