The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Advancing Audio-Based Text Generation with Imbalanced
Preference Optimization
Zhenghao Zhou1 , Yongjie Liu1 , Chen Cao2 *
1

National Supercomputing Center in Wuxi, China
2
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
zhenghaozhou183@gmail.com, ccao5@Sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract
Human feedback in generative systems is a highly active frontier of research that aims to improve the quality of generated content and align it with subjective preferences. Existing efforts predominantly focus on text-only large language
models (LLMs) or text-based image generation, while crossmodal generation between audio and text remains largely unexplored. Moreover, there is currently no open-source preference dataset to support the deployment of alignment algorithms in this domain. In this work, we take audio speech
translation (AST) and audio captioning (AAC) tasks as examples to explore how to enhance the performance of mainstream audio-based text generation models with limited human feedback. Specifically, we propose an novel framework
named imbalanced preference optimization (IPO) that includes a model adversarial sampling concept–human annotators act as referees to determine model outcomes, using
these results as pseudo-labels for the corresponding beam
search hypotheses. Given these imbalanced win-loss results,
IPO effectively enable the two models to update interactively to win the next round of adversarial sampling. We
conduct both subjective and objective evaluations to demonstrate the alignment benefits of IPO and its enhancement on
model perception and generation capacities. On both AAC
and AST, a few hundreds of annotations significantly enhance
the weak model, and the strong model can also be encouraged
to achieve new state-of-the-art results in terms of objective
metrics. Additionally, we show the extensibility of IPO by
applying it to the reverse task of text-to-speech generation,
improving system robustness on unseen reference speaker.

1

Figure 1: Left: text-based preference annotation, where language model generates desired/undesired samples annotated
by human. Right: audio-text adversarial annotations. Due to
lack of diversity, annotator serves as referee to determine the
win-loss results of two models based on the same audio input. Additionally, Beam search algorithm is utilized for extending data with pseudo-preference.
tasks, e.g., music generation (Cideron et al. 2024) and textto-images synthesis (Wu et al. 2023; Liang et al. 2024).
In addition to preference alignment, RLHF-based methods have also been reported in existing works to optimize
model performance evaluated by objective evaluation metric (Liu et al. 2020; Steenhoek et al. 2023), particularly in
autoregressive sequence prediction (Chen et al. 2024a). A
underlying reason is that the sampling process in RLHF can
effectively mitigate the exposure bias problem caused by
the mismatch between teacher-forcing training and autoregressive inference (Rennie et al. 2017). Meanwhile, these
self-generated samples, after annotated by humans, can provide high-level supervised information to the neural model
through gradient descent. This is certainly beneficial for
tasks where the ground truth is not unique, such as machine
translation (Xu et al. 2024; He et al. 2024) and image captioning (Xu et al. 2023; Verma et al. 2023).
Unlike aforementioned text-only and vision-based generation tasks, which have widely optimized by RLHF, we find
that there is a considerable research gap in audio-based generation tasks when predicting the natural language consuming a segment of audio signal or human speech. Specifically,
in relative speech translation and audio captioning tasks, few
prior work incorporates subjective feedback into the learn-

Introduction

In the wave of AI-Generated Content (AIGC), learning from
human feedback plays a crucial role that aims to align
the generated content of AI systems with human preference (MacGlashan et al. 2017; Stiennon et al. 2020; Dubois
et al. 2024). For example, large language models (LLMs)
undergo calibration through Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) to become helpful and powerful
assistant systems like ChatGPT (Bai et al. 2022; Achiam
et al. 2023). Additionally, recent efforts have demonstrated
the efficacy of RLHF in high-dimensional data generation
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26120

