The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ADELA: Accelerating Evolutionary Design of Machine Learning Pipelines with the
Accompanying Surrogate Model
Yang Gu1 , Jian Cao1 * , Hengyu You1 , Nengjun Zhu2 * , Shiyou Qian1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai University
{gu yang, cao-jian, virusyou, qshiyou}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhu nj@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
The end-to-end automated design of machine learning (ML)
pipelines significantly reduces the workload for data scientists and democratizes ML for non-experts. Evolutionary algorithm (EA)-based automated ML (AutoML) systems, a prominent category of AutoML, often face inefficiencies due to
the costly fitness evaluation of candidate ML pipelines. Although surrogate models have been employed to approximate
the true performance of pipelines more quickly, a key challenge remains in effectively bridging the semantic gap between the heterogeneous features of datasets and pipelines.
To address this issue, we propose ADELA, a novel accompanying surrogate-based optimization strategy that accelerates
EA-based AutoML while retaining the performance of the
resulting pipelines. ADELA operates in two phases: Offline,
leveraging a high-quality curated pipeline corpus to meta-learn
an accompanying surrogate model; and Online, selecting the
accompanying pipeline and using the learned model to predict
the performance of evaluation pipelines instead of executing
them. The accompanying mechanism effectively mitigates
the semantic gap between datasets and pipelines, enabling
ADELA to reduce computation times by an average of 73.66%
while retaining 98.78% of the final pipeline performance, as
demonstrated in extensive experimental evaluations.

Code — https://github.com/t-harden/ADELA

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) applications in data management
typically require a comprehensive approach encompassing
the entire ML pipeline (Wu et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2019),
including data preprocessing, feature engineering, and model
selection. Designing task-specific pipelines manually is timeconsuming and error-prone (Lazebnik, Somech, and Weinberg 2022). Automated ML (AutoML) addresses this by automating ML processes to create optimal pipelines (Hutter,
Kotthoff, and Vanschoren 2019; Gu et al. 2024).
Existing AutoML systems use various optimization techniques, like Bayesian Optimization (BO), Evolutionary Algorithms (EA), and Reinforcement Learning to automatically
synthesize pipelines (Feurer et al. 2022; Olson and Moore
2016; Drori et al. 2021). However, they often suffer from
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16915

inefficiencies due to large search spaces and costly pipeline
evaluations (Zhang et al. 2023), leading to high energy consumption and low efficiency (Tornede et al. 2023), emphasizing the need for improvement.
EA-based AutoML uses evolutionary algorithms to iteratively evolve and evaluate candidate ML pipelines. We focus
on accelerating EA-based ML pipeline design for two main
reasons: EAs excel in optimizing complex ML pipelines,
including large-scale and multi-objective requirements (Parmentier et al. 2019; Olson and Moore 2016), and they offer substantial flexibility, easily adapting to new conditions
through innovative evolutionary operations (Nikitin et al.
2022). A primary time constraint in EA-based AutoML is the
costly fitness evaluation of candidate pipelines, requiring extensive training and testing across the entire dataset (Gijsbers,
Vanschoren, and Olson 2018; Li et al. 2020).
To address this issue, some methods utilize subsets of data,
such as LTPOT (Gijsbers, Vanschoren, and Olson 2018),
which evaluates pipelines on smaller subsets before testing promising configurations on the full dataset. Others rely
on surrogate models, like AVATAR (Nguyen et al. 2020),
which employs Petri nets to eliminate infeasible candidates,
and MetaTPOT (Laadan et al. 2020), which predicts and
ranks performance using meta-surrogate models to optimize
resource usage. Subset-based methods improve efficiency
but risk losing data information, potentially affecting precision (Lazebnik, Somech, and Weinberg 2022). In contrast,
surrogate-based methods predict pipeline performance on
original datasets, reducing evaluation time with minimal accuracy loss compared to direct pipeline execution. Previous
surrogate-based approaches (Laadan et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2023) directly concatenate dataset and pipeline features, using multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) for coarse feature fusion.
However, these two heterogeneous features exist in different
semantic subspaces, creating a semantic gap that complicates
accurate prediction. Indeed, during the same evolutionary
process, the evaluated ML pipeline with known performance
(i.e., accompanying pipeline) that is similar to the pipeline
being evaluated (i.e., evaluation pipeline) can naturally serve
as a semantic bridge for more precise performance prediction
on the same dataset.
Consequently, we propose ADELA, a novel strategy
for Accelerating evolutionary DEsign of machine Learning
pipelines with the Accompanying surrogate model for tabular

