The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Component-Level Segmentation for Oracle Bone Inscription Decipherment
Zhikai Hu1 , Yiu-ming Cheung1 * , Yonggang Zhang1 , Zhang Peiying2 , Tang Pui Ling2
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Schoole of Chinese, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
{cszkhu, ymc, csygzhang}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, {zhangpy, tangpl}@hku.hk

Abstract
Oracle Bone Inscriptions (OBIs), as the earliest systematically organized pictographic script in China, hold significant
importance in the study of the origins of Chinese civilization.
Of the approximately 4,500 excavated OBI characters, only
about one-third have been deciphered, leaving the remaining
characters shrouded in mystery. Over the past decade, an increasing number of researchers have attempted to leverage
artificial intelligence to assist in deciphering OBIs, but these
efforts have not yet fully met the demands of this challenging
objective. In this paper, we identify a key task—ComponentLevel OBI Segmentation—based on a successful deciphering case from 2018. This task aims to help experts quickly
identify specific components within OBIs, thereby accelerating the deciphering process. Accordingly, we propose a new
model to accomplish this task. Our model leverages a small
amount of annotated data and a large amount of weakly annotated data and incorporates expert-provided prior knowledge, i.e., stroke rules, to automatically segment OBI components. Additionally, we train a series of auxiliary classifiers
to evaluate the segmentation results during the test stage. We
also invite experts to conduct a professional assessment of
the results, which we cross-validated against our proposed
evaluation metrics. Experimental results demonstrate that our
method can accurately and clearly present the segmented
components to experts.

Figure 1: Deciphering process of OBI tumultuous proposed
by Jiang (2018).

in mystery, preventing us further understanding the Shang
civilization (Ochiai 2008).
With remarkable achievements of artificial intelligence
(AI) across various domains, such as AlphaGo (Silver et al.
2016), AlphaFold (Jumper et al. 2021), and Ithaca (Assael et al. 2022), an increasing number of researchers are
now leveraging AI technologies to study OBIs (Wang et al.
2024a; Qiao et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024b). These efforts
broadly fall into three main directions: OBI rubbing denoising (Shi et al. 2022a,b; Jiang et al. 2023), OBI optical character recognition (OCR) (Fujikawa et al. 2023; Diao et al.
2023a,b), and OBI classification (Fu et al. 2022; Huang et al.
2019). Although these studies have, to some extent, accelerated OBI research, most of them are focused on the already
deciphered OBIs and are far from achieving the ultimate
goal of understanding and deciphering unknown OBIs.
Some approaches (Chang et al. 2022; Guan et al. 2024b,a)
have innovatively attempted to decipher unknown OBIs by
leveraging the structural relationships between modern Chinese characters and OBI glyph. For instance, Chang et al.
(2022) proposed a cascade generative adversarial networks
framework that incorporates bronze script and small seal
script to simulate the evolutionary path of Chinese characters, ultimately predicting OBIs. Similarly, Guan et al.

Code — https://github.com/hutt94/Component-Level-OBISegmentation

Introduction
The study of ancient scripts plays a fundamental role in archaeology and history (Keightley 1997; Flad 2008), yet understanding them poses significant challenges due to their
antiquity. An exemplary case is Oracle Bone Inscriptions
(OBIs), an ancient Chinese pictographic script dating back
3000 years, which serve as a valuable source for studying ancient Chinese civilizations, particularly the Shang civilization (Han 2012; Cheung 2018). However, despite extensive
excavations yielding a large number of instinct OBIs (Cheung 2018), only approximately one-third have been fully deciphered by paleographers, leaving the remainder shrouded
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28116

