The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Autonomous Goal Detection and Cessation in Reinforcement Learning: A Case
Study on Source Term Estimation
Yiwei Shi1 * , Muning Wen2 , Qi Zhang3† , Weinan Zhang2† , Cunjia Liu4† , Weiru Liu1†
1

School of Engineering Mathematics and Technology, University of Bristol
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
4
Department of Aeronautical and Automotive Engineering, Loughborough University
yiwei.shi@bristol.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning has revolutionized decision-making
processes in dynamic environments, yet it often struggles
with autonomously detecting and achieving goals without
clear feedback signals. For example, in a Source Term Estimation problem, the lack of precise environmental information makes it challenging to provide clear feedback signals
and to define and evaluate how the source’s location is determined. To address this challenge, the Autonomous Goal
Detection and Cessation (AGDC) module was developed,
enhancing various RL algorithms by incorporating a selffeedback mechanism for autonomous goal detection and cessation upon task completion. Our method effectively identifies and ceases undefined goals by approximating the agent’s
belief, significantly enhancing the capabilities of RL algorithms in environments with limited feedback. To validate effectiveness of our approach, we integrated AGDC with deep
Q-Network, proximal policy optimization, and deep deterministic policy gradient algorithms, and evaluated its performance on the Source Term Estimation problem. The experimental results showed that AGDC-enhanced RL algorithms significantly outperformed traditional statistical methods such as infotaxis, entrotaxis, and dual control for exploitation and exploration, as well as a non-statistical random
action selection method. These improvements were evident
in terms of success rate, mean traveled distance, and search
time, highlighting AGDC’s effectiveness and efficiency in
complex, real-world scenarios.

Figure 1: AGDC Structure Diagram for Solving the STE

However, in real-world applications like the Source Term
Estimation (STE) problem (Steiner and Bushe 2001), the environment often lacks clear signals for the end of an episode
or direct rewards, making it difficult for the agent to determine task completion.
Source Term Estimation involves identifying the location and characteristics (such as release rate) of hazardous
gas emissions in the atmosphere, which is crucial for environmental monitoring and emergency response. However,
this task presents several challenges. Firstly, the environment often does not provide clear cessation signals, and gas
releases are typically invisible. Secondly, atmospheric turbulence results in sensor data that is sparse, intermittent, and
time-varying. Additionally, direct measurements within the
hazardous material dispersion area are often dangerous. Furthermore, sensor measurements are highly affected by noise
and discontinuity. Consequently, agents must rapidly adjust
their strategies in response to environmental changes and accurately estimate the source term despite unclear feedback.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) optimizes decision-making
and behavior in dynamic environments through trial and error and reward mechanisms. It is widely used in fields such
as gaming (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2017), robotic control (Levine et al. 2016), autonomous driving (Feng et al.
2023), industrial automation (Degrave et al. 2022) and Preference Alignment (Liu et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2023, 2024). RL
involves agents interacting with the environment, learning
through exploration and exploitation to achieve their goals.
* This work is sponsored by University of Bristol Scholarship.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

738

