The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Clean-Label Graph Backdoor Attack in the Node Classification Task
Hui Xia, Xiangwei Zhao, Rui Zhang, Shuo Xu, Luming Wang
Ocean University of China
{xiahui@,zhaoxiangwei@stu.,zhangrui0504@stu.,xushuo@stu.,wangluming@stu.}ouc.edu.cn

Abstract

2023). The exploration of GNNs backdoor attacks is essential for uncovering potential vulnerabilities in GNNs, providing crucial insights and guidance for constructing more
secure GNNs models in the future.
The standard backdoor attack (termed dirty-label backdoor attacks hereinafter) (Chen et al. 2017) involves attaching triggers to poisoned samples during the training phase
and assigning a target label to them, thereby associating the
trigger with the target class. However, this method has a significant weakness: the poisoned samples with attached triggers are conspicuously mislabeled, making it relatively easy
to classify these samples as outliers through simple filtering
during the model inference phase, prompting further investigation of the attack (Xu and Picek 2022). To overcome this
limitation, (Turner, Tsipras, and Madry 2018) introduced the
concept of a clean-label backdoor attack. In this form of attack, only a small number of inputs from the target class are
poisoned, without any modification to their labels, making
it considerably more challenging to detect the presence of
poisoned samples. Despite the effectiveness of clean-label
backdoor attacks, there is currently no such attack specifically designed for GNNs node classification tasks. To address this gap, we propose a solution in this study.
The implementation of clean-label backdoor attacks is
more challenging compared to dirty-label backdoor attacks.
Firstly, existing GNNs dirty-label backdoor attacks often
involve randomly poisoning a larger number of non-target
class nodes, requiring a larger attack budget (Xu, Xue, and
Picek 2021; Chen et al. 2023). In contrast, clean-label backdoor attacks can only select a small number of nodes within
the target class for the attack. Secondly, existing GNNs
dirty-label backdoor attacks mostly use random triggers
(Zhang et al. 2021; Xu, Xue, and Picek 2021) and rely on
the modification of labels of the poisoned samples to establish a strong association between the triggers and the target
label. However, clean-label attacks cannot modify the labels
of the poisoned samples. In summary, we face the following
challenges: (1) Choosing which nodes to designate as poisoned nodes under a lower budget. (2) The need to establish
a firm connection between triggers and the target label under
clean-label conditions.
To address the challenges mentioned earlier, we present
the Clean-Label Graph Backdoor Attack (CGBA). In response to challenge (1), we’ve developed a tailored strategy

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved impressive results in various graph learning tasks. Backdoor attacks pose a
significant threat to GNNs, with a focus on dirty-label attacks.
However, these attacks often necessitate the inclusion of blatantly incorrect inputs into the training set, rendering them
easily detectable through simple filtering. In response to this
challenge, we introduce Clean-Label Graph Backdoor Attack
(CGBA). The majority of features in the generated poisoned
nodes align with their true labels, significantly enhancing the
difficulty of detecting the attack. Firstly, leveraging the uncertainty inherent in the GNNs, we develop a low-budget strategy for selecting poisoned nodes. This approach focuses on
nodes in the target class with uncertain and low-degree classifications, allowing for efficient attacks within a limited budget while mitigating the impact on other clean nodes. Secondly, we present an innovative strategy for generating feature triggers. By boosting the confidence of poisoned samples in the target class, this tactic establishes a robust association between the trigger and the target class, even without
modifying the labels of poisoned nodes. Additionally, we incorporate two constraints to reduce disruption to the graph
structure. In conclusion, comprehensive experimental results
unequivocally showcase CGBA’s exceptional attack performance across three benchmark datasets and four GNNs models. Notably, the attack targeting the GraphSAGE model attains a 100% success rate, accompanied by a marginal benign
accuracy drop of no more than 0.5%.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable success in processing graph-structured data (Kipf
and Welling 2016a; Velickovic et al. 2017), demonstrating
widespread applications across various domains, e.g., drug
design (Wu et al. 2022), recommendation systems (Wu et al.
2019), and the financial sector (Wang et al. 2019). GNNs,
specifically, aggregate information from neighbors based on
graph features and topology to update node representations,
enabling predictions and classifications for nodes or entire
graphs (Kipf and Welling 2016a). However, akin to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Cheng et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2022), GNNs are vulnerable to backdoor attacks (Xi
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021; Xu and Picek 2022; Dai et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21626

