The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learned Image Transmission with Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder
Guangyi Zhang* , Hanlei Li* , Yunlong Cai, Qiyu Hu, Guanding Yu, Runmin Zhang
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
{zhangguangyi, hanleili, ylcai, qiyhu, yuguanding, runmin zhang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

(Kingma and Welling 2022; Razavi, van den Oord, and
Vinyals 2019), a novel design paradigm for JSCC, called
learned image transmission (LIT), has been conceived by
formulating the communication pipeline as an end-to-end
deep learning model (Bourtsoulatze et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2024; Sun et al. 2023). Specifically, these methods leverage
powerful neural networks to implement the encoding and
decoding processes. In this approach, the whole system is
viewed as an autoencoder (AE), which can be jointly learned
in a data-driven manner. A notable method proposed by
(Bourtsoulatze et al. 2019) employed CNNs to construct the
source and channel codecs for wireless image transmission,
achieving great performance by mapping the input image directly into channel symbols. Moreover, Kurka and Gündüz;
Wu et al. investigate the JSCC with feedback. In this context, the transmission of these representations is divided into
multiple phases, with the transmitter receiving the channel
symbol vector after each phase, which simplifies the encoding process and improves the overall performance.
Beyond deterministic AEs, some studies have employed
variational autoencoders (VAE) to design JSCC systems
(Choi et al. 2019; Bo et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2023), where
the channel symbols are generated through sampling. Part of
these VAE-based methods show superior performance compared to deterministic AE-based methods, particularly under severe channel conditions. Though VAE-based methods
have demonstrated remarkable performance, they experience significant performance degradation on high-resolution
images. Furthermore, most existing methods only support
fixed-rate coding, which contrasts with emerging works on
transform coding-based image compression (Ballé et al.
2018), where the compression rate for each image is determined by the estimated entropy of its feature representation
and varies with different samples. Consequently, these methods are less flexible and adaptive, potentially leading to performance penalties.
In this work, we aim to overcome the limitations of previous methods while enhancing performance. Specifically, we
develop a hierarchical JSCC (HJSCC) framework based on
a powerful hierarchical VAE architecture (Child 2020). Our
transmitter employs both bottom-up and top-down paths to
autoregressively generate multiple hierarchical representations of the original image. These representations are then
mapped to channel symbols using multiple JSCC encoder

In this paper, we introduce an innovative hierarchical joint
source-channel coding (HJSCC) framework for image transmission, utilizing a hierarchical variational autoencoder
(VAE). Our approach leverages a combination of bottom-up
and top-down paths at the transmitter to autoregressively generate multiple hierarchical representations of the original image. These representations are then directly mapped to channel symbols for transmission by the JSCC encoder. We extend
this framework to scenarios with a feedback link, modeling
transmission over a noisy channel as a probabilistic sampling
process and deriving a novel generative formulation for JSCC
with feedback. Compared with existing approaches, our proposed HJSCC provides enhanced adaptability by dynamically
adjusting transmission bandwidth, encoding these representations into varying amounts of channel symbols. Additionally,
we introduce a rate attention module to guide the JSCC encoder in optimizing its encoding strategy based on prior information. Extensive experiments on images of varying resolutions demonstrate that our proposed model outperforms existing baselines in rate-distortion performance and maintains
robustness against channel noise.

Introduction
To meet the transmission requirements of heavy data traffic in future sixth-generation (6G) networks, wireless edge
devices need to be equipped with higher transmission efficiency. Most contemporary systems employ a two-step strategy for data transmission: first, the raw data is compressed
using a source codec, such as JPEG (Wallace 1992) and BPG
(Lainema et al. 2012). Then, the encoded bits are protected
with redundancy introduced by a carefully designed channel codec, such as LDPC and Polar codes (Arikan 2009).
However, in many practical applications, the bit length is
generally finite, making it impossible to guarantee optimality. In this context, joint source-channel coding (JSCC) has
emerged as a potential solution, offering higher coding gains
than the traditional separation-based coding paradigm.
With the revolutionary progress of deep learning in various fields, such as image compression (Ballé et al. 2018;
He et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022b) and generative models
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13215

