The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Quantitative Predictive Monitoring and Control
for Safe Human-Machine Interaction
Shuyang Dong1 , Meiyi Ma2 , Josephine Lamp3 , Sebastian Elbaum1 , Matthew B. Dwyer1 , Lu Feng1
1

University of Virginia
Vanderbilt University
3
DexCom
{sd3mn, se4ja, md3cn, lf9u}@virginia.edu, meiyi.ma@vanderbilt.edu, josephine.lamp@dexcom.com
2

Abstract
There is a growing trend toward AI systems interacting with
humans to revolutionize a range of application domains such
as healthcare and transportation. However, unsafe humanmachine interaction can lead to catastrophic failures. We
propose a novel approach that predicts future states by accounting for the uncertainty of human interaction, monitors
whether predictions satisfy or violate safety requirements,
and adapts control actions based on the predictive monitoring
results. Specifically, we develop a new quantitative predictive
monitor based on Signal Temporal Logic with Uncertainty
(STL-U) to compute a robustness degree interval, which indicates the extent to which a sequence of uncertain predictions
satisfies or violates an STL-U requirement. We also develop
a new loss function to guide the uncertainty calibration of
Bayesian deep learning and a new adaptive control method,
both of which leverage STL-U quantitative predictive monitoring results. We apply the proposed approach to two case
studies: Type 1 Diabetes management and semi-autonomous
driving. Experiments show that the proposed approach improves safety and effectiveness in both case studies.

1

Figure 1: Proposed approach applied to T1D management.

hyperglycemia (BG above 180 mg/dL), which over time can
lead to serious damage to organs such as the kidneys and
heart. Over the past decades, advanced technologies such as
continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) sensors and insulin
pumps have been developed to reduce the need for patients
to check BG via finger-pricking and self-injections of insulin. Recently, there have been promising breakthroughs
in the development of Artificial Pancreas Systems (APS),
which are automated or semi-automated closed-loop insulin
delivery systems to regulate BG levels. A typical APS controller calculates insulin dosages based on CGM sensor
readings and user input (e.g., meal carbohydrates). There
has been increasing interest in using machine learning techniques to predict future BG levels, which are then fed into an
APS controller. To guarantee a safety requirement, such as
“BG levels should be regulated within the range of 70-180
mg/dL to avoid hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia”, it is not
sufficient to only check APS control actions. Instead, it is
necessary to reason about the behavior of the entire closedloop system of APS, including the insulin pump, CGM sensor, as well as patient physiology (e.g., glucose metabolism)
and behavior (e.g., eating).
To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel logicbased quantitative predictive monitoring and control approach, as illustrated in Figure 1. We adopt Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), which are well-suited to time series
data (Bengio, Goodfellow, and Courville 2017), for making
sequential predictions about future BG levels. Commonly
used RNNs, such as long short-term memory (LSTM) networks, are deterministic models that generate the same predictions with the same input (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber

Introduction

There is a growing trend toward AI systems interacting with
humans to revolutionize a range of application domains such
as healthcare and transportation. However, unsafe humanmachine interaction can lead to catastrophic failures (e.g.,
crashes of automated vehicles (Banks, Plant, and Stanton
2018) and robot-caused fatalities (Yang et al. 2022). Ensuring the safety of human-machine interaction poses significant challenges. First, safety is an emergent property that
requires holistic reasoning about AI systems and human operators (Ma, Stankovic, and Feng 2021). Second, modeling
human-machine interaction should account for the inherent
uncertainty of human behavior. Moreover, safe and prompt
decision-making under uncertainty entails predictive monitoring, i.e., making predictions about future states and monitoring if safety requirements would be violated. We concretize these challenges using a motivating example below.
Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) is a chronic disease that affects
millions of patients whose pancreas produces little to no
insulin to regulate blood glucose (BG). Uncontrolled diabetes may cause hypoglycemia (BG below 70 mg/dL) or
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26203

