The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Context-aware Graph Neural Network for Graph-based Fraud Detection with
Extremely Limited Labels
Pengbo Li * , Hang Yu * , Xiangfeng Luo †
The School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
{lpb, yuhang, luoxf}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph-based fraud detection is crucial in identifying illegal activities in social networks, finance, and other sectors.
Despite recent progress in this area, most of current researches typically require a large amount of annotated data
to demonstrate its benefits. In practice, obtaining sufficient
high-quality annotated data is challenging, limiting the effectiveness of model training. Therefore, leveraging extremely
limited label information is crucial to enhance model performance. We propose a context-aware graph neural network
(CGNN) to address this. CGNN performs category semantic decomposition on the contextual neighbor features of the
center node to enrich the category semantics. In the neighbor message aggregation stage, the denoising attention mechanism enables the center node to adaptively aggregate heterophilic and homophilic information from neighbors. Particularly for unlabeled data, feature augmentation within the
category subspace and consistency regularization driven by
entropy minimization ensure that such data can further enhance model performance under explicit semantic guidance.
We demonstrate on four real-world datasets that CGNN significantly outperforms other baseline methods with extremely
limited labels.

1

Figure 1: Improper use of unlabeled gray samples can adversely affect the model. For example, assigning pseudo labels to gray samples or assuming that gray samples are normal can introduce errors.

2022) have demonstrated promising results in graph-based
fraud detection tasks. However, these methods typically require a substantial amount of labeled data to achieve optimal
model performance. In practice, the availability of labeled
data is often extremely limited, and most of the samples are
unknown to their labels, called the gray samples. Hence, recent research has increasingly focused on improving fraud
detection performance with few labeled data. For instance,
GTAN (Xiang et al. 2023) and ConsisGAD (Chen et al.
2024) leverage label propagation and learnable data augmentation techniques to enhance model performance with
limited labeled data.

Introduction

Fraud detection has been widely studied as a risk control
method, but initial research primarily focused on structured
data, such as tabular data (Zhou et al. 2020; Kurshan, Shen,
and Yu 2020). However, tabular data is insufficient in reflecting the interactions between entities. For example, financial
fraud often involves interactive transactions between bank
cards or between bank cards and merchants. Therefore, it is
necessary to use unstructured data, such as graph-structured
data, to improve fraud detection.
With the emergence of graph neural networks, there has
been a growing interest among researchers in graph-based
fraud detection. GADBench (Tang et al. 2024) introduces a
benchmark for graph anomaly detection tasks and provides a
comprehensive analysis of current graph anomaly detection
algorithms. Notable works such as CARE-GNN (Dou et al.
2020), BWGNN (Tang et al. 2022), and AMNet (Chai et al.

Motivation. However, the aforementioned methods have
shown success primarily stems from the efficient use of the
label data, and overlooking the information from gray samples. Even the latest work ConsisGAD (Chen et al. 2024)
proposes a learnable data augmentation module to utilize
gray samples explicitly, this method lacks explicit semantic information guidance. In fact, as shown in Figure 1, the
unreasonable use of gray samples will have a huge impact
on the accuracy of the detection results. Hence, effectively
leveraging a small number of labeled samples alongside a
large number of gray samples for fraud detection is our research motivation.

* These authors contributed equally.

Challenges. This is nontrivial due to the following challenges: (1) Effective utilization of gray samples. Existing
self-supervised or semi-supervised learning methods for un-

†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12112

