The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Lottery Ticket Hypothesis Approach with Sparse Fine-tuning and MAE for
Image Forgery Detection and Localization
Jiaying Zhu∗ , Dong Li* , Xueyang Fu, Gege Shi, Jie Xiao, Aiping Liu, Zheng-Jun Zha†
University of Science and Technology of China
{zhujy53, dongli6, shigg, ustchbxj}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu, aipingl, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The rise in sophisticated image forgery techniques, driven
by advancements in image editing and generation, has posed
new security challenges. Traditional methods, designed for
specific tampering artifacts, struggle with out-of-distribution
image forgery detection. In this paper, we propose a shift in
paradigm, placing greater emphasis on the universal characteristics of authentic images, as opposed to solely focusing
on specific forgery signals. We introduce an enhancement to
the Masked Autoencoder (MAE), aptly termed the Forgery
MAE (FMAE). This modification retains the inherent characteristics of natural images while integrating multi-source
forgery information. Our implementation involves applying
the lottery ticket hypothesis during pre-training to identify
forgery-sensitive parameters, followed by their sparse finetuning to target the forgery detection and localization task.
Concurrently, we develop a ‘mixture of experts’ noise extractor to compile multi-source forgery data. Our FMAE effectively extracts forgery features and shows strong resilience
against unseen forgeries. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets confirm our method’s superior accuracy and generalization capability over existing techniques.

(a) Previous methods.

(b) Our proposed paradigm.

Figure 1: Comparison between previous methods and our
proposed paradigm. Previous methods typically only use
knowledge from the training data to extract tampering artifacts, resulting in poor out-of-distribution performance. Our
paradigm retains natural image priors through sparse finetuning, allowing it to generalize to unseen forgeries.

Code — https://github.com/JulietChoo/FMAE

Introduction
The increasing accessibility and prevalence of image
forgery, facilitated by advancements in image editing and
generation techniques, have incited concern among the public due to the potential security and privacy threats they pose
to individuals and society. For instance, advanced image
forgery technology enables malicious users to manipulate
images, fabricate fake news (Zhang et al. 2023, 2024), and
even create false evidence in court (Lin et al. 2023). Simultaneously, the emergence of rapidly evolving technologies,
such as diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020), has
given rise to increasingly sophisticated methods of image
forgery, which present obstacles to media security. Consequently, the development of effective and widely applicable image forgery detection and localization (IFDL) methods has become critical.

Forensic techniques have made strides in recent years
in combating forgery. These advancements include the exploitation of well-defined low-level features such as traces of
JPEG compression, demosaicking, and interpolation (Kwon
et al. 2022). Progress has also been made in specific areas of image tampering, such as splicing, with some studies
achieving promising results (Yu et al. 2024). Furthermore,
advancements have been made in the broader field of image
tampering detection and localization. For example, RGBN (Zhou et al. 2018) leverages noise features to model the
inconsistencies between tampered and untouched regions
while MVSS-Net (Chen et al. 2021c) utilizes both noise
views and boundary artifacts to learn multi-view features.
CAT-Net (Kwon et al. 2022) uses discrete cosine transform
(DCT) coefficients, where compression artifacts remain, to
localize image manipulation. However, as shown in Figure
1, the primary focus of most of these methods is the de-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence
(www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Co-first authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author.

10968

