The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MSAmba: Exploring Multimodal Sentiment Analysis with State Space Models
Xilin He1 * , Haijian Liang1 * , Boyi Peng1 , Weicheng Xie1,2,3† , Muhammad Haris Khan4 ,
Siyang Song5 , Zitong Yu6
1

Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University,
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen,
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence,
5
University of Exeter,
6
Great Bay University
Abstract

ysis (MSA), which aims to learn a model to process multiple modalities simultaneously and predict a sentiment value
(Cambria et al. 2013; Kaur and Kautish 2022).

Multimodal sentiment analysis, which learns a model to
process multiple modalities simultaneously and predict a
sentiment value, is an important area of affective computing. Modeling sequential intra-modal information and enhancing cross-modal interactions are crucial to multimodal
sentiment analysis. In this paper, we propose MSAmba, a
novel hybrid Mamba-based architecture for multimodal sentiment analysis, consisting of two core blocks: Intra-Modal
Sequential Mamba (ISM) block and Cross-Modal Hybrid
Mamba (CHM) block, to comprehensively address the abovementioned challenges with hybrid state space models. Firstly,
the ISM block models the sequential information within each
modality in a bi-directional manner with the assistance of
global information. Subsequently, the CHM blocks explicitly model centralized cross-modal interaction with a hybrid
combination of Mamba and attention mechanism to facilitate
information fusion across modalities. Finally, joint learning
of the intra-modal tokens and cross-modal tokens is utilized
to predict the sentiment values. This paper serves as one of
the pioneering works to unravel the outstanding performances
and great research potential of Mamba-based methods in
the task of multimodal sentiment analysis. Experiments on
CMU-MOSI, CMU-MOSEI and CH-SIMS demonstrate the
superior performance of the proposed MSAmba over prior
Transformer-based and CNN-based methods.

Most recent MSA methods can be categorized into two
categories: representation learning methods (Hazarika, Zimmermann, and Poria 2020; Yang et al. 2022; Li, Wang, and
Cui 2023; Li et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023; Yang, Dong, and
Qiang 2024) and multimodal fusion methods (Zadeh et al.
2017; Liu et al. 2018; Tsai et al. 2019a; Huang et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2023). Representation learning methods (Hazarika, Zimmermann, and Poria 2020; Yang et al. 2022, 2023;
Yang, Dong, and Qiang 2024) concentrate on extracting refined modality semantics that is rich in human sentiment
clues, which enhances the efficiency of multimodal fusion,
thereby improving relationship modeling. On the other hand,
the multimodal fusion methods (Huang et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2023) explore the design of sophisticated fusion mechanisms to achieve a joint representation of multimodal data.
Despite the prior methods demonstrating the importance of
sequential modeling and cross-modal interaction for MSA,
from a model designing perspective, the above-mentioned
two types of methods mainly rely on the abundant utilization
of Transformers or convolution neural networks to achieve
either long-range sequential modeling or cross-modal interaction, leading to an excessive number of parameters and
low inference speed.

Introduction

Recently, Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023), a novel architecture
and low-cost operator based on state space models (SSMs)
(Gu et al. 2021; Gu, Goel, and Ré 2022), has emerged as
a promising alternative to the Transformer model, exhibiting better long-range dependencies modeling capacity and
superior performance over Transformer models in various
domains, including language modeling (Gu and Dao 2023;
Grazzi et al. 2024; Lieber et al. 2024), point cloud analysis
(Zhang et al. 2024; Liang et al. 2024), video understanding
(Li et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024), medical image processing
(Ruan and Xiang 2024; Xing et al. 2024; Ma, Li, and Wang
2024) and graph reasoning (Behrouz and Hashemi 2024;
Wang et al. 2024). However, existing research on Mamba
has primarily focused on single-modality learning, leaving
multimodal fusion with Mamba unexplored, which is crucial for the task of MSA. Meanwhile, a general paradigm of

Sentiment analysis is an important area of affective computing, which focuses on recognizing the sentiment values
of humans from input data, and has a wide range of applications in human-computer interaction and health care services (Jiang et al. 2020; Ezzameli and Mahersia 2023). With
the widespread popularity of online social media platforms
such as Instagram, TikTok, and Facebook, videos containing multiple modalities have become major carriers of information. This development introduces new challenges for
processing and analyzing such diverse data, thereby raising
research attention on the topic of multimodal sentiment anal* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1309

