The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IPVTON: Image-based 3D Virtual Try-on with Image Prompt Adapter
Xiaojing Zhong1,2 , Zhonghua Wu3 , Xiaofeng Yang2 , Guosheng Lin 2 * , Qingyao Wu 1,4 *
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
SenseTime Research, Singapore
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
vzxj12@gmail.com, gslin@ntu.edu.sg, qyw@scut.edu.cn
(a) 2D virtual try-on

Abstract
Given a pair of images depicting a person and a garment separately, image-based 3D virtual try-on methods aim to reconstruct a 3D human model that realistically portrays the person
wearing the desired garment. In this paper, we present IPVTON, a novel image-based 3D virtual try-on framework. IPVTON employs score distillation sampling with image prompts
to optimize a hybrid 3D human representation, integrating
target garment features into diffusion priors through an image prompt adapter. To avoid interference with non-target
areas, we leverage mask-guided image prompt embeddings
to focus the image features on the try-on regions. Moreover, we impose geometric constraints on the 3D model with
a pseudo silhouette generated by ControlNet, ensuring that
the clothed 3D human model retains the shape of the source
identity while accurately wearing the target garments. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that
IPVTON outperforms previous methods in image-based 3D
virtual try-on tasks, excelling in both geometry and texture.

(b) 3D virtual try-on

StableVITON
DiffAvatar
(c) Image-based 3D virtual try-on

IPVTON

Figure 1: Compared to 2D virtual try-on (Kim et al. 2024)
with its fixed viewpoint and 3D virtual try-on (Li et al. 2024)
that require complex processes, IPVTON can generate 3D
try-on results from just a human image and a garment image.

Introduction
Human generation has been a prominent task in the AIGC
field, with virtual try-on attracting widespread attention
due to its significant commercial and entertainment value.
Image-based 2D virtual try-on technology, which generates
a realistic photo of a person wearing a desired garment by
combining the person’s image with the garment’s image, is
valued for its user-friendliness and resource efficiency. However, this method is limited by its reliance on a fixed viewpoint (see Fig. 1 (a)), which poses challenges in real-world
applications where users often need to assess the garment
from multiple angles. On the other hand, the traditional 3D
virtual try-on method provides the advantage of multi-angle
views but requires complex processes such as garment-body
registration and physics simulations (see Fig. 1 (b)), making
it labor-intensive. The challenge of reconstructing accurate
3D models from 2D images, an inherently ill-posed problem, further complicates efforts to integrate image-based and
3D-based virtual try-on techniques.
Owing to the remarkable progress in diffusion models
for Text-to-Image (T2I) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; SohlDickstein et al. 2015; Song and Ermon 2019), the field of

3D content generation has seen significant advancements.
Recent works (Chen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024; Qian
et al. 2023; Zhong et al. 2025) leverage 2D generative priors from pre-trained T2I models (e.g., StableDiffusion (SD))
combined with the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss
(Poole et al. 2022) to optimize 3D representations, resulting
in high-quality 3D objects. Despite the success in synthesizing images with specific concepts (Ruiz et al. 2023; Kumari et al. 2023), extending these techniques to customized
3D object generation remains challenging. For instance, incorporating personalized modules such as LoRAs (Hu et al.
2021) into the SD model diminishes its ability to generate
consistent multi-view images (Xie et al. 2024). Additionally, fine-tuning with only a few images struggles to capture
the complex features of garments necessary for 3D virtual
try-on.
Image prompt adapter (IP-Adapter) (Ye et al. 2023) introduces a cross-attention layer for image prompts in diffusion
models, enabling controllable generation based on provided

* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10671

