The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revelations: A Decidable Class of POMDPs with Omega-Regular Objectives
Marius Belly1 , Nathanaël Fijalkow1 , Hugo Gimbert1 ,
Florian Horn2 , Guillermo A. Pérez3 , Pierre Vandenhove1 *
1

CNRS, LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, France
2
CNRS, IRIF, Université de Paris, France
3
University of Antwerp – Flanders Make, Antwerp, Belgium

with probability 1. We consider the class of omega-regular
objectives (all expressible as parity objectives), which is a
robust class including properties expressible in Linear Temporal Logic (Pnueli 1977; Giacomo and Vardi 2013). Determining whether there exists an almost-sure strategy against
the subclass of CoBüchi objectives (requiring to avoid a target from some point onwards) is undecidable (Chatterjee,
Chmelik, and Tracol 2016; Bertrand, Genest, and Gimbert
2017). There is a vast body of work towards approximate
and practical solutions: for instance, using interpolation in
the belief space (Lovejoy 1991), approximation of the value
function (Hauskrecht 2000), or Monte Carlo tree search approaches (Silver and Veness 2010). This is orthogonal to the
current paper since we focus on exact algorithms.

Abstract
Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
form a prominent model for uncertainty in sequential decision making. We are interested in constructing algorithms
with theoretical guarantees to determine whether the agent
has a strategy ensuring a given specification with probability 1. This well-studied problem is known to be undecidable
already for very simple omega-regular objectives, because
of the difficulty of reasoning on uncertain events. We introduce a revelation mechanism which restricts information loss
by requiring that almost surely the agent has eventually full
information of the current state. Our main technical results
are to construct exact algorithms for two classes of POMDPs
called weakly and strongly revealing. Importantly, the decidable cases reduce to the analysis of a finite belief-support
Markov decision process. This yields a conceptually simple
and exact algorithm for a large class of POMDPs.

Our starting point is a simple approach to construct
almost-sure strategies: from the POMDP, we build a Markov
decision process (MDP) whose states are supports of the
beliefs of the POMDP. In other words, we store information about which states we can be in, but abstract away the
probabilities. The belief-support MDP serves as a finite abstraction of the POMDP; one could expect that there exists
an almost-sure strategy in the POMDP if and only if there
exists one in the corresponding belief-support MDP. Unfortunately, this abstraction is neither sound nor complete; we
present a simple counterexample in Figure 1.

Code — https://github.com/gaperez64/pomdps-reveal
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12063

1

Introduction

Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
form a prominent model for uncertainty in sequential decision making. They were defined in the 1960s (Åström 1965)
for operations research and introduced in artificial intelligence by the seminal paper of Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra (1998). We consider POMDPs from a model-based
point of view common in planning and in formal methods.
Our goal is to construct exact (as opposed to approximate)
algorithms that take as an input a complete description of the
POMDP and construct a strategy ensuring a given specification. A long line of work has established that most formulations of this problem are undecidable. For instance, even
in the extreme case where the agent has no information and
the goal is to reach a target state with arbitrarily high probability, complex convergence phenomena occur, implying
strong undecidability results (Madani, Hanks, and Condon
2003; Gimbert and Oualhadj 2010; Fijalkow 2017).
In this work, we are interested in constructing almost-sure
strategies, meaning strategies ensuring their specifications

The fundamental question we ask is whether there are
natural sufficient conditions making the belief-support
abstraction correct. Conceptually, the failure of this abstraction is due to the accumulation of information loss over
time.
We introduce a revelation mechanism which restricts information loss by requiring that, almost surely, the agent has
eventually full information of the current state. Intuitively,
by forbidding information loss from accumulating for an unbounded amount of time, the revelation mechanism removes
the convergence issues leading to undecidability. Practically,
we conjecture that revelation is a commonly occurring phenomenon in partial observability; a canonical example is
systems with a small probability of resetting infinitely often, and where this reset is observable. We leave to future
work to investigate this question further. Other approaches
to restrict information loss have been proposed; we refer to
the related works (Section 6) for an additional discussion.

* Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26454

