The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GaussianPainter: Painting Point Cloud into 3D Gaussians with Normal Guidance
Jingqiu Zhou2 * , Lue Fan2,3,4 * , Xuesong Chen2 , Linjiang Huang1† , Si Liu1 , Hongsheng Li2,4
2

1
Beihang University
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence

Abstract

transform a point cloud into a 3D Gaussian field in an efficient feed-forward manner? Here the point clouds can be
obtained from the existing 3D assets or point cloud generative models, such as Point-E (Nichol et al. 2022), PointFlow (Yang et al. 2019), and PointGrow (Sun et al. 2020). In
this way, we try to take advantage of numerous existing 3D
assets and the mature point cloud generators, and then efficiently paint point clouds into 3D Gaussians, as indicated by
the paper title.
Compared with our method, existing methods (Chen,
Wang, and Liu 2023; Tang et al. 2024; Haque et al. 2023)
for 3D Gaussian generation are based on multi-step optimization or denoising, instead of a feed-forward paradigm.
These methods are inefficient due to their multiple forward
and backward iterations. Although the feed-forward Gaussian painting is more efficient, it is quite challenging for
the following reason. 3D Gaussians are designed with a
relatively large parameter space, unlike the previous pointbased rendering methods (Lassner and Zollhofer 2021; Yifan et al. 2019) only utilizing spheres without rotations and
anisotropic scales. Although such a large parameter space
leads to the non-uniqueness of Gaussian fields. In other
words, similar images can be rendered from totally different Gaussian fields, making it ambiguous for feed-forward
models to predict Gaussian parameters in a single forward
pass. This issue is also observed by recent work AGG (Xu
et al. 2024), which turns to isotropic Gaussians (i.e., ignore
rotations) to constrain the parameter space for more stable
training and easier prediction. However, this solution weakens the capacity of 3D Gaussian and rendering quality.
In this paper, we propose GaussianPainter, which takes a
point cloud and a reference image as input, generating 3DGaussian parameters for each point in a single forward pass.
GaussianPainter contains two major components including
(1) Normal-guided Gaussian Painting (Sec. 4.1) and (2)
Triplane-based Multiscale Appearance Injection (Sec. 4.2).
The first normal-guided Gaussian painting part addresses the
issue of non-unique Gaussian fields by introducing normal
guidance, where surface normals are treated as guidance to
constrain the parameter space of Gaussians. More specifically, we first propose Isotropic Normal Rendering module
to estimate a surface normal for each input point. The estimated normal is leveraged to define the rotations of the
Gaussian centered at the point. After obtaining the rotations,
the space of Gaussian parameters is compressed and constrained. It is much easier for the neural network to predict

In this paper, we present GaussianPainter, the first method to
paint a point cloud into 3D Gaussians given a reference image. GaussianPainter introduces an innovative feed-forward
approach to overcome the limitations of time-consuming testtime optimization in 3D Gaussian splatting. Our method addresses a critical challenge in the field: the non-uniqueness
problem inherent in the large parameter space of 3D Gaussian splatting. This space, encompassing rotation, anisotropic
scales, and spherical harmonic coefficients, introduces the
challenge of rendering similar images from substantially different Gaussian fields. As a result, feed-forward networks
face instability when attempting to directly predict highquality Gaussian fields, struggling to converge on consistent
parameters for a given output. To address this issue, we propose to estimate a surface normal for each point to determine
its Gaussian rotation. This strategy enables the network to
effectively predict the remaining Gaussian parameters in the
constrained space. We further enhance our approach with an
appearance injection module, incorporating reference image
appearance into Gaussian fields via a multiscale triplane representation. Our method successfully balances efficiency and
fidelity in 3D Gaussian generation, achieving high-quality, diverse, and robust 3D content creation from point clouds in a
single forward pass. A video is provided in our supplementary material for a more detailed explanation of our method.

1

Introduction

3D object generation has attracted increasing attention due
to the potential to reduce human labor and professional software in the game, VR, and animation industries.
Over the past few years, implicit representations such
as NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022b; Kondo
et al. 2021) and Signed Distance Function(SDF) (Lionar
et al. 2024; Park et al. 2019) have played major roles in
this field. Recently, the emerging 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023) has become a hot trend because
of its impressive rendering quality and efficiency. Different
from implicit representations, 3D Gaussians can be viewed
as a special type of point cloud with each point being decorated by rotation, scales, and colors. Such affinity between
the Gaussians and point clouds raises a natural question:
Given reference information (e.g., reference images), can we
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10788

