The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Qsco: A Quantum Scoring Module for Open-Set Supervised Anomaly Detection
Yifeng Peng1 , Xinyi Li1 , Zhiding Liang2 , Ying Wang1 *
1

Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ, USA
2
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
{ypeng21, xli215, ywang6}@stevens.edu, liangz9@rpi.edu

Abstract
Open set anomaly detection (OSAD) is a crucial task that
aims to identify abnormal patterns or behaviors in data sets,
especially when the anomalies observed during training do
not represent all possible classes of anomalies. The recent
advances in quantum computing in handling complex data
structures and improving machine learning models herald
a paradigm shift in anomaly detection methodologies. This
study proposes a Quantum Scoring Module (Qsco), embedding quantum variational circuits into neural networks to enhance the model’s processing capabilities in handling uncertainty and unlabeled data. Extensive experiments conducted
across eight real-world anomaly detection datasets demonstrate our model’s superior performance in detecting anomalies across varied settings and reveal that integrating quantum simulators does not result in prohibitive time complexities. At the same time, the experimental results under different noise models also prove that Qsco is a noise-resilient
algorithm. Our study validates the feasibility of quantumenhanced anomaly detection methods in practical applications.

Figure 1: Visualization of the anomalies and normal data
predicted by DRA (Ding, Pang, and Shen 2022) and Qsco
(Ours) in the MVTec AD (Bergmann et al. 2019) dataset
(carpet subset). The parameter ℓ controls the depth of the
variational circuit in Qsco. With the correct ℓ level, Qsco
enhances DRA’s ability to distinguish boundaries between
anomalies and normal data. However, if ℓ is too high (ℓ = 3),
it results in over-fitting, as shown in the last graph, while if
ℓ is too low (ℓ = 1), it leads to under-fitting.

high-dimensional data spaces prevalent in anomaly detection tasks. The synergy of quantum computing with machine learning, commonly referred to as quantum machine
learning (QML) (Farhi and Neven 2018; Alchieri et al.
2021; Peng et al. 2024), introduces innovative approaches
that may surmount some of the fundamental limitations of
classical methodologies, including scalability, complexity,
and uncertainty. With advancements in quantum hardware,
QML is poised for revolutionary applications in AI domains
like quantum natural language processing (QNLP) (Abbaszade et al. 2021), quantum computer vision (QCV) (Wei
et al. 2023), and quantum anomaly detection (QAD)(Liu and
Rebentrost 2018).
This research introduces the Quantum Scoring Module
(Qsco), a state-of-the-art quantum model of quantum variational circuits with different rotation and CNOT gates. This
model aims to exploit the quantum-enhanced computational
power to refine the detection of obscure patterns and anomalies in open-set contexts. With the help of entanglement
characteristics in quantum computing, we can discover the
distribution of unknown anomalies and solve distribution
problems that classical computing cannot simulate. We provide initial findings that indicate the Qsco model’s enhanced

Introduction
Precisely identifying anomalous patterns within extensive
and intricate datasets is paramount, especially when data
labels are nonexistent, or the underlying data distributions
remain undefined. Such conditions delineate the open set
anomaly detection (OSAD) field, characterized by its necessity to function robustly across varied and often unforeseen data landscapes. Historically, the challenges inherent
in OSAD have been addressed through conventional machine learning strategies (Ding, Pang, and Shen 2022; Li
et al. 2021a; Liznerski et al. 2020; Pang et al. 2021; Pang,
Shen, and Van Den Hengel 2019). While these methods have
proven effective, they increasingly encounter constraints related to data’s escalating scale and complexity.
The advent of quantum computing has foreboded new
prospects for augmenting machine learning architectures
(Pan et al. 2023; Caro et al. 2022). Quantum computing offers substantial enhancements in computational efficiency and capacity, particularly adept at managing the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19884

