The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Accurate Nucleic Acid-Binding Residue Identification based Domain-Adaptive
Protein Language Model and Explainable Geometric Deep Learning
Wenwu Zeng, Liangrui Pan, Boya Ji, Liwen Xu, Shaoliang Peng*
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China
{wwz_cs, panlr, byj, xuliwen, slpeng}@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract

magnetic resonance, and X-ray crystallography, have significantly advanced the study of protein-nucleic acid interactions. However, these methods are limited by high costs and
long lead times, making it impractical to determine all NBSs
across the vast number of protein sequences in the post-genomic era. As of 5 March 2024, there are 664,681,050 protein sequences recorded in the UniParc database (Leinonen,
et al., 2004), while the number of resolved protein-DNA (or
RNA) complex structures recorded in the Nucleic Acid Database (Narayanan, et al., 2014) is only 6,296 (or 2,846).
Although recent methods like AlphaFold3 (Abramson, et al.,
2024) and RoseTTAFold All-Atom (Krishna, et al., 2024)
attempted to directly predict the 3D structure of protein-nucleic acid complexes, the accuracy remains suboptimal due
to the limited number of known complex structures that they
heavily depend on. Accurate binding sites can further assist
in modeling protein-nucleic acid complexes. Consequently,
the development of rapid and accurate method for predicting
NBS remains essential. Numerous computational methods
have been proposed to address this challenge. In the early
days, researchers used statistical and machine learningbased methods to capture conserved information of NBS for
prediction. Despite the progress made, these methods generally suffered from poor accuracy and generalizability. In
the past decade, deep learning-based methods have gained
significant attention. These methods capture the intricate
non-linear relationships between the sequence, structure,
and function of proteins, enabling highly accurate NBS prediction. Depending on the feature sources employed, these
methods can be broadly classified into two categories: sequence-driven methods, e.g., DNApred (Y. H. Zhu, et al.,
2019), Pprint2 (Patiyal, et al., 2022), DRNAPred (Yan and
Kurgan, 2017), iDRNA-ITF (N. Wang, et al., 2022), ESMNBR (Zeng, et al., 2023), ULDNA (Y.-H. Zhu, et al., 2024),
CLAPE (Liu and Tian, 2024), hybridRNAbind (F. Zhang, et

Protein-nucleic acid interactions play a fundamental and critical role in a wide range of life activities. Accurate identification of nucleic acid-binding residues helps to understand
the intrinsic mechanisms of the interactions. However, the accuracy and interpretability of existing computational methods
for recognizing nucleic acid-binding residues need to be further improved. Here, we propose a novel method called
GeSite based the domain-adaptive protein language model
and E(3)-equivariant graph neural network. Prediction results
across multiple benchmark test sets demonstrate that GeSite
is superior or comparable to state-of-the-art prediction methods. The MCC values of GeSite are 0.522 and 0.326 for the
one DNA-binding residue test set and one RNA-binding residue test set, which are 0.57 and 38.14% higher than that of
the second-best method, respectively. Detailed experimental
results suggest that the advanced performance of GeSite lies
in the well-designed nucleic acid-binding protein adaptive
language model. Additionally, interpretability analysis exposes the perception of the prediction model on various remote and close functional domains, which is the source of its
discernment ability.

Code — https://github.com/pengsl-lab/GeSite
Datasets — https://huggingface.co/zengwenwu/GeSite
Extended version — https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.12.11.628078v1

Introduction
Protein-nucleic acid interactions serve as a fundamental role
in various biological processes like gene regulation and expression in organisms (Lambert, et al., 2018). Understanding these interactions is crucial for studying protein function
and facilitating drug development. Accurate identification
of nucleic acid-binding residue (NBS) is a key step in elucidating the underlying mechanisms of these interactions. Traditional biological wet-lab experimental methods, including
chromatin immunoprecipitation on microarrays, nuclear
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1004

