The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Does Your AI Agent Get You? A Personalizable Framework for Approximating
Human Models from Argumentation-based Dialogue Traces
Yinxu Tang, Stylianos Loukas Vasileiou, William Yeoh
Washington University in St. Louis
{t.yinxu, v.stylianos, wyeoh}@wustl.edu

Abstract

to significant misalignments between AI agents and human
users (Russell 2019), as the AI agent might base its decisions
or explanations on an inaccurate or incomplete understanding of the human.
As a step towards addressing this issue, in this paper, we
propose a novel approach that enables AI agents to adapt
their decisions and explanations based on a dynamic understanding of human mental states. Our method represents
human models as probability distributions that are continuously refined through ongoing argumentative interactions,
building upon established frameworks in computational argumentation (Gordon 1994; Parsons, Wooldridge, and Amgoud 2003; Prakken 2006; Hunter 2015, 2016; Rago, Li, and
Toni 2023; Vasileiou et al. 2024). Our proposed framework,
Personalized Human Model Approximations (Persona), integrates two key components to achieve this goal. First, it
employs a Bayesian belief update mechanism that systematically refines the human model based on observed interaction patterns. Second, it incorporates a probability weighting
function derived from prospect theory (Tversky and Kahneman 1992), which accounts for human tendencies to overweight low probabilities and underweight high probabilities in decision-making contexts. This dual approach enables
Persona to offer personalized interactions by capturing individual differences in how users evaluate probabilistic information during argumentative exchanges.
Furthermore, we conduct an extensive evaluation of our
approach using real argumentation-based dialogue traces
collected via a human-subject study. Our results show that
Persona not only effectively captures and updates human
models, but it also outperforms existing state-of-the-art
argumentation-based methods.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

Explainable AI is increasingly employing argumentation
methods to facilitate interactive explanations between AI
agents and human users. While existing approaches typically
rely on predetermined human user models, there remains a
critical gap in dynamically learning and updating these models during interactions. In this paper, we present a framework
that enables AI agents to adapt their understanding of human
users through argumentation-based dialogues. Our approach,
called Persona, draws on prospect theory and integrates a
probability weighting function with a Bayesian belief update
mechanism that refines a probability distribution over possible human models based on exchanged arguments. Through
empirical evaluations with human users in an applied argumentation setting, we demonstrate that Persona effectively
captures evolving human beliefs, facilitates personalized interactions, and outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Resources — https://github.com/YODA-Lab/Persona

Introduction
As AI systems become more integrated into real-world applications, the need for transparency and trust in humanAI interactions grows. Explainable AI (XAI) addresses this
need by focusing on generating understandable explanations
for human users that foster trust and accountability (Gunning and Aha 2019). A key paradigm within XAI is argumentation (Čyras et al. 2021), which enables interactive,
dialogue-based explanation processes between AI agents
and human users. These processes offer improved clarity and
foster stronger human-AI interactions.
A core assumption in most existing argumentation-based
XAI work is that the AI agent has a static, deterministic
model of the human user that it uses in its deliberative processes. While assuming the AI agent has access to an a-priori
human model has its advantages (Sreedharan, Chakraborti,
and Kambhampati 2021; Vasileiou, Previti, and Yeoh 2021),
this approach often falls short of capturing the intricate complexities of real-world interactions. It is not only likely that
humans hold beliefs at different levels of granularity and
with varying degrees of certainty, but also that their beliefs
evolve dynamically over time. Such simplifications can lead

• We introduce Persona, a novel framework for approxi-

mating and updating a probabilistic human model through
argumentation-based dialogue traces. Our framework incorporates a prospect-theory-inspired probability weighting function with a Bayesian belief update mechanism.
• We conduct a human-subject study on an argumentation-

based dialogue scenario and collect dialogue traces involving human users. We empirically evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on these traces and demonstrate
its ability to capture evolving human models and facilitate

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14405

