The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TextToucher: Fine-Grained Text-to-Touch Generation
Jiahang Tu1 , Hao Fu1 , Fengyu Yang2, 3 , Hanbin Zhao* 1 , Chao Zhang1 , Hui Qian1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Yale University
3
UniX AI
{tujiahang, haof.pizazz, zhaohanbin, zczju, qianhui}@zju.edu.cn, fengyu.yang@yale.edu

Abstract
Grainy, Firm

Tactile sensation plays a crucial role in the development of
multi-modal large models and embodied intelligence. To collect tactile data with minimal cost as possible, a series of studies have attempted to generate tactile images by vision-totouch image translation. However, compared to text modality,
visual modality-driven tactile generation cannot accurately
depict human tactile sensation. In this work, we analyze the
characteristics of tactile images in detail from two granularities: object-level (tactile texture, tactile shape), and sensorlevel (gel status). We model these granularities of information
through text descriptions and propose a fine-grained Textto-Touch generation method (TextToucher) to generate highquality tactile samples. Specifically, we introduce a multimodal large language model to build the text sentences about
object-level tactile information and employ a set of learnable text prompts to represent the sensor-level tactile information. To better guide the tactile generation process with
the built text information, we fuse the dual grains of text information and explore various dual-grain text conditioning
methods within the diffusion transformer architecture. Furthermore, we propose a Contrastive Text-Touch Pre-training
(CTTP) metric to precisely evaluate the quality of text-driven
generated tactile data. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of our TextToucher method.

Tactile

Smooth, Polished Texture

Pencil

Tactile
Shape

Gel Status

Bumpy, Rubbery Tactile
Textured, Firm

Basketball

Tactile Data

Texture

Tactile
Shape

Gel Status

Types of Information

Figure 1: We present tactile images captured by sensors under different gel statuses. In our opinion, each tactile image
contains three types of information: tactile texture, tactile
shape, and gel status.
large volume of high-quality tactile data is required; however, obtaining tactile data is not straightforward. On the
one hand, manual collection (Yang et al. 2022; Fu et al.
2024; Song et al. 2020a; Sundaram et al. 2019; Owens et al.
2016) is quite labor-intensive and time-consuming; on the
other hand, robotic collection(Calandra et al. 2018; Li et al.
2019; Murali et al. 2018; Kerr et al. 2022) limits the ways
of interacting with objects, lacking flexibility and diversity.
Therefore, high-quality generation of tactile data(Yang et al.
2024; Yang, Zhang, and Owens 2023; Gao, Yuan, and Zhu
2023) is becoming a frontier research area.
In recent years, as large-scale generative models (Ramesh
et al. 2022) have demonstrated outstanding generative capabilities, some vision-conditioned methods attempt to utilize these models to generate tactile images by visual-totactile image translation (Yang, Zhang, and Owens 2023;
Gao, Yuan, and Zhu 2023; Yang et al. 2024; Dou et al.
2024). Nevertheless, we believe these methods have two fatal shortcomings. 1) Humans tend to describe tactile sensation using text rather than visual images. Consequently,
text-conditioned generation methods can utilize more accurate information descriptions to produce data that align
closely with tactile experiences (Obrist, Seah, and Subrama-

Code — https://github.com/TtuHamg/TextToucher

Introduction
Tactile sensation is one of the earliest developed senses in
humans (Ackerman, Nocera, and Bargh 2010). Infants begin to explore the world by touching objects, which enables
them to build up their cognition of texture and shape. In the
field of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLM), researchers recognize the importance of tactile sensation in
physical reasoning (Yu et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023) and
tactile sensation is regarded as an important component in
multimodal learning (Fu et al. 2024; Zambelli et al. 2021;
Rodriguez et al. 2024b,a; Li et al. 2024). It also plays a
fundamental role in embodied intelligence to interact with
the environments (Wu et al. 2024; Barreiros et al. 2022).
To construct effective tactile-based multimodal models, a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7455

