The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PlanLLM: Video Procedure Planning with Refinable Large Language Models
Dejie Yang1 , Zijing Zhao1 , Yang Liu1,2 *
1

2

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{ydj,zijingzhao}@stu.pku.edu.cn, yangliu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Close-set
Step Labels

One-hot
Vectors

Start State

1: Peel garlics

Video procedure planning, i.e., planning a sequence of action steps given the video frames of start and goal states,
is an essential ability for embodied AI. Recent works utilize Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate enriched
action step description texts to guide action step decoding.
Although LLMs are introduced, these methods decode the
action steps into a closed-set of one-hot vectors, limiting the
model’s capability of generalizing to new steps or tasks. Additionally, fixed action step descriptions based on world-level
commonsense may contain noise in specific instances of visual states. In this paper, we propose PlanLLM, a cross-modal
joint learning framework with LLMs for video procedure
planning. We propose an LLM-Enhanced Planning module
which fully uses the generalization ability of LLMs to produce free-form planning output and to enhance action step
decoding. We also propose Mutual Information Maximization module to connect world-level commonsense of step descriptions and sample-specific information of visual states,
enabling LLMs to employ the reasoning ability to generate
step sequences. With the assistance of LLMs, our method
can both closed-set and open vocabulary procedure planning
tasks. Our PlanLLM achieves superior performance on three
benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our designs.

Step
Decoder

2: Add to crusher
3: Crush food

Text
Enhance

Goal State
Frozen
LLM
Step Labels

Step Descriptions

(a) Language As Supervision
One-hot
Vectors

Start State
Step
Decoder
Goal State
Cross-Modal
Interaction
Step Description

Trainable
LLM

Close-set
Step Labels
1: Peel garlics
2: Add to crusher

3: Crush food
Prior
Enhance
Open Vocabulary Outputs
Prior
Tokens

First peel the garlics.
Then add the garlics …

(b) Cross-Modal Joint Learning (Ours)

Figure 1: Language As Supervision methods use a frozen
LLM to enhance the textual description of step labels, and
are limited to closed-set one-hot vector predictions. In contrast, our Cross-Modal Joint Learning framework utilizes a
trainable LLM that allows our model to output both onehot vectors and free-form open-vocabulary step descriptions, providing stronger generalization for predicting new
steps in new datasets.

Code — https://github.com/idejie/PlanLLM

Introduction
Mastering procedure planning is of great importance for
building artificial intelligence systems capable of comprehending and imitating human actions, and eventually assisting humans in solving goal-directed problems (Tellex
et al. 2011; Jansen 2020; Ahn et al. 2022; Mishra et al.
2018; Mysore et al. 2019). Previous research (Chang et al.
2020) has pointed out that instructional videos are natural resources for acquiring the skill of procedure planning,
proposing the problem of video procedure planning. For example, given the visual frames of start state “raw food”
and goal states “hummus”, the model is expected to produce a sequence of action steps to achieve the goal, i.e.,
first “peel garlics”, then “add to crusher”, and
finally “crush food”.

Early works employ both visual keyframes and textual labels of action steps to train the video procedure planning
model (fully-supervised), which requires labor-intensive annotations. Recent weakly-supervised methods rely only on
the textual step sequences during training, and have gained
more attention.
Existing weakly supervised video procedure planning
methods (Chang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2023b; Li et al.
2023c) use an encoder-decoder structure, first learning a latent visual space and then decoding action step labels from
this space. These methods primarily treat video procedure
planning as a visual-based action classification task on a

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9166

