The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TinyFoA: Memory Efficient Forward-Only Algorithm for On-Device Learning
Baichuan Huang, Amir Aminifar
Department of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, Sweden
{baichuan.huang, amir.aminifar}@eit.lth.se

Abstract
Forward-only algorithms offer a promising memory-efficient
alternative to Backpropagation (BP) for on-device training. However, state-of-the-art forward-only algorithms, e.g.,
Forward-Forward (FF), still require a substantial amount of
memory during the training process, often exceeding the limits of mobile edge and Internet of Things (IoT) devices. At
the same time, existing memory-optimization techniques, e.g.,
binarizing parameters and activations, are mainly designed
for BP, hence significantly degrading the classification performance when applied to state-of-the-art forward-only algorithms. In this paper, we propose a memory-efficient forwardonly algorithm called TinyFoA, to reduce dynamic memory
overhead in the training process. Our TinyFoA optimizes the
memory efficiency not only by layer-wise training but also
by partially updating each layer, as well as by binarizing the
weights and the activations. We extensively evaluate our proposed TinyFoA against BP and other forward-only algorithms
and demonstrate its effectiveness and superiority compared to
state-of-the-art forward-only algorithms in terms of classification performance and training memory overhead, reducing the
memory overheads by an order of magnitude.

Figure 1: An overview of memory overheads is presented
for (a) training between BP and TinyFoA with joint horizontal and vertical layer-wise training and binary weights; (b)
sequential training steps, including forward pass, gradient
calculation, and parameter update.

Code — https://github.com/whubaichuan/TinyFoA

1

Introduction

Today, the majority of the state-of-the-art Artificial Neural Networks s (ANNs)/Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
are trained based on the Backpropagation (BP) algorithm.
However, BP is known to be computationally, memory, and
energy-hungry (Patterson et al. 2021, 2022; Niu et al. 2024;
Pau and Aymone 2023), which is often attributed to its biologically implausible nature (Lillicrap et al. 2016). This is
particularly relevant in the context of Internet of Things (IoT)
and mobile devices, which are limited in terms of resources,
namely computing power, memory storage, and battery/energy budget (Shi et al. 2016; Sopic, Aminifar, and Atienza
2018; Sabry et al. 2022). In this work, we focus mainly on
memory efficiency, which is also known to be connected to
energy/power consumption (Bi, Duan, and Gniady 2010; Bi,
Chandrasekharan, and Gniady 2013; Seo 2022).
As alternatives to BP, forward-only algorithms, such as
Present the Error to Perturb the Input To modulate Activity
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17377

(PEPITA) (Dellaferrera et al. 2022) and Forward-Forward
(FF) (Hinton 2022), are proposed (Srinivasan et al. 2023) to
replace the backward pass of BP with only forward passes.
These forward-only algorithms represent the next generation
of training schemes inspired by the learning process in the
cortex, often adopting the local learning principle without
the need to retain the entire neural network in the memory,
hence potentially more memory efficient than BP. However,
these state-of-the-art forward-only algorithms still impose
substantial training memory overhead, generally beyond the
limits of mobile edge and IoT devices.
In this paper, we propose a memory-efficient forward-only
algorithm, called TinyFoA, which reduces the dynamic training memory overheads compared to BP, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
Fig. 1 (b) shows the breakdown of the memory overheads
into the forward pass, gradient calculation, and parameter
update. Here, BP consumes ∼48 Megabyte (MB) in forward
pass while requiring ∼96 MB in gradient calculation and
parameter update. Due to end-to-end training, the error in
BP propagates across the entire network (Srinivasan et al.
2023) and all layers update their parameters. Consequently,
BP needs to store all the layers in the aforementioned three
sequential training steps, as shown in Fig. 2 (a).
In contrast, our TinyFoA is built on joint horizontal and
vertical layer-wise training, where it focuses on training only
parts of a single layer. As such, TinyFoA only requires storing

