The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Uncertainty-Aware Global-View Reconstruction for
Multi-View Multi-Label Feature Selection
1,2

Pingting Hao

3

Kunpeng Liu , Wanfu Gao

1,2 *

1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97201 USA
haopingting@jlu.edu.cn, kunpeng@pdx.edu, gaowf@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract

the defined consistency rules between views (Xu, Tao, and
Xu 2013; Sun 2013). Typically, the consensus part is derived
from the features (Zhang et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2023c; Yin
and Zhang 2023; Liu et al. 2015), as depicted in Figure 1a.
However, the distinctive part is often overlooked, resulting
in a deficiency of information and subsequent performance
degradation of the model.
Given the increasing recognition of the significance of the
distinctive part within each view, it is imperative to acknowledge the exploration of individual information. Noteworthy
works, such as (Liu et al. 2023a; Li and Chen 2021), operate under the assumption of label matrix consistency for
each view and establish mappings between each view and
the label matrix, as depicted in Figure 1b. Alternatively, Tan
et al. (Tan et al. 2019) construct separate mappings for
common and individual views, thereby addressing both aspects. In reality, the hypothesis of an inconsistent label matrix based on each view, as illustrated in Figure 1c, can also
be considered. Zhao et al. (Zhao et al. 2022) partition the
original label matrix into multiple matrices corresponding
to each view to preserve the distinctive information within
each view. Nonetheless, the accuracy of the process for solving feature weights is compromised due to biased grounds
or incomplete constraints. This is primarily because the perspective is not grounded on the ground-truth of the entire
view to avoid unclear segmentation.
Although some works such as (Zhu et al. 2020) assume
that the label matrix for the whole dataset and each view are
observed, and subsequently establish mappings between features and labels for both. However, they often overlook the
view relationship and fail to consider the sample-level relationship, as depicted in Figure 1d. Thus, there most likely
exists noise and redundancy in direct concatenating matrix.
How to utilize effective information to reconstruct the whole
dataset becomes challenging.
Indeed, it is important to acknowledge that the label information inherently encompasses valuable comprehensive
information. This distinguishes it from the unsupervised
multi-view scenario. The effective utilization of this information significantly impacts the performance of feature selection models. Recent works, such as (Zhu, Li, and Zhang
2015) and (Zhang et al. 2020b), leverage the inherent integrity property of the label matrix to establish a mapping relationship between multiple views and a single label matrix.

In recent years, multi-view multi-label learning (MVML) has
gained popularity due to its close resemblance to real-world
scenarios. However, the challenge of selecting informative
features to ensure both performance and efficiency remains
a significant question in MVML. Existing methods often extract information separately from the consistency part and the
complementary part, which may result in noise due to unclear
segmentation. In this paper, we propose a unified model constructed from the perspective of global-view reconstruction.
Additionally, while feature selection methods can discern the
importance of features, they typically overlook the uncertainty of samples, which is prevalent in realistic scenarios. To
address this, we incorporate the perception of sample uncertainty during the reconstruction process to enhance trustworthiness. Thus, the global-view is reconstructed through the
graph structure between samples, sample confidence, and the
view relationship. The accurate mapping is established between the reconstructed view and the label matrix. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of our
method on multi-view datasets.

Introduction
Feature selection plays a vital role in various domains, including healthcare (Bharati, Mondal, and Podder 2023),
anomaly detection (Zhang, Xu, and Zhou 2024), and transportation (Wang et al. 2023). It has been applied in different scenarios, such as unsupervised (Zhang et al. 2024),
single-label (Cohen et al. 2023), and multi-label (Klonecki,
Teisseyre, and Lee 2023) scenarios, based on specific requirements. The challenge of selecting the optimal subset
of features is particularly daunting in the presence of highdimensional data. However, the multi-view setting offers the
advantage of rich semantics combined with more comprehensive data, which in turn introduces additional complexities for feature selection in MVML.
Differentiating from the single-view multi-label scenario,
effectively managing the view relationship and integrating
information from multiple views is a fundamental aspect in
multi-view scenario (Lyu et al. 2024a,b). Previous works in
the multi-view scenario primarily focus on identifying commonality across views as an initial step, in accordance with
*

correponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17068

