The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhanced Density Peak Clustering for High-Dimensional Data
Zhongli Wang1* , Jie Yang2 * , Junyi Guan1 , Chenglong Zhang1 , Xinyan Liang3 , Bingbing Jiang1 ,
Weiguo Sheng1†
1
Hangzhou Normal University,
University of Technology Sydney,
3
Shanxi University
wangzhongli1@stu.hznu.edu.cn, jie.yang-1@uts.edu.cn, jonnyguan73@163.com,clzhang123@163.com,
liangxinyan48@163.com, jiangbb@hznu.edu.cn, w.sheng@ieee.org.
2

Abstract

(Xue et al. 2019). Among these clustering techniques, Density Peak Clustering (DPC) (Rodriguez and Laio 2014) focuses on finding appropriate density peaks without prior
knowledge, exhibiting better performance than other clustering paradigms in tackling non-spherical cluster problems (Wei et al. 2023). In comparison with other clustering paradigms (e.g., graph-based clustering), DPC can directly achieve final clustering labels without additional postprocessing, since it can build a cluster tree for data based on
the density-to-distance linkage and then cuts the cluster tree
into clusters via a decision graph.

As a foundational clustering paradigm, Density Peak Clustering (DPC) partitions samples into clusters based on their
density peaks, garnering widespread attention. However, traditional DPC methods usually focus on high-density regions,
neglecting representative peaks in relatively low-density areas, particularly in datasets with varying densities and multiple peaks. Moreover, existing DPC variants struggle to identify clusters correctly in high-dimensional spaces due to the
indistinct distance differences among samples and sparse
data distributions. Additionally, existing methods typically
adopt a one-step label assignment strategy, making them
prone to cascading errors when initial misassignments occur. To address these challenges, we propose an Enhanced
Density Peak Clustering (EDPC) method, which creatively
incorporates multilayer perceptron (MLP)-based dimensionality reduction and a hierarchical label assignment strategy to significantly improve clustering performance in highdimensional scenarios. Specifically, we introduce an effective selection condition that combines average densities and
density-related distances to generate potential cluster centers, ensuring that peaks across different density regions are
considered simultaneously. Furthermore, an MLP, guided by
pseudo-labels from sub-clusters, is designed to learn lowdimensional embeddings for high-dimensional data, preserving data locality while enhancing clusterability. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of
EDPC against state-of-the-art DPC methods.

From the perspective of selecting cluster centers, DPC assumes that cluster centers are density peaks with higher densities than their surrounding neighbors and are far from regions of higher density. (Xie et al. 2016) also proposed to
identify density peaks as cluster centers, using a density estimation method based on the distance of each sample to its
K-nearest neighbors (KNN). (Zhang et al. 2022) applied linear regression and residual analysis to select candidate centers, from which the final cluster centers were determined by
using a validity index. Considering that the performance of
DPC relies highly on cluster centers, these traditional DPC
methods tend to select cluster centers as density peaks from
high-density regions, yet overlook representative peaks in
relatively low-density regions, leading to suboptimal results.
Consequently, it is a critical challenge to guarantee the effectiveness of selected cluster centers especially when there
exist varying density and multiple peaks in data distribution.

Introduction

To address these challenges, various DPC variants have
been proposed to improve the selection process of cluster
centers. (Liu, Wang, and Yu 2018) redefined densities and
density-related distances using shared neighbors to capture
data attributes, while (Guan et al. 2023) introduced a graphbased approach to assign non-peak and density peaks labels, accounting for multiple peaks within clusters. However, these improved DPC methods still struggle to accurately identify representative cluster centers in low-density
regions. Additionally, most DPC methods assign cluster labels in a single step, making them susceptible to cascading errors if initial label assignments are incorrect. To mitigate this, (Lotfi, Moradi, and Beigy 2020) proposed identifying high-density samples to form cluster backbones, with
other samples assigned to their nearest backbones. (Qin

Clustering, as a fundamental unsupervised learning technique, aims to divide data samples into different clusters
based on the intrinsic structures or relationships within
data. With the exponential growth of unlabeled samples in
practical applications, numerous clustering paradigms have
been proposed, such as K-means (Yang et al. 2017), fuzzy
clustering, hierarchical clustering, spectral clustering (Hu
et al. 2022; Gan et al. 2022), and density-based clustering (Saxena et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2024). Recently, deep
network-based clustering also attracted extensive attention
* Zhongli Wang and Jie Yang contributed equally to this work.
†

The corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21411

