The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PEARL: Input-Agnostic Prompt Enhancement with Negative Feedback
Regulation for Class-Incremental Learning
Yongchun Qin1,2 , Pengfei Fang1,2∗ , Hui Xue1,2 *
1
2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artifcial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{ycqin, fangpengfei, hxue}@seu.edu.cn
Knowledge in Task 1

Abstract
Class-incremental learning (CIL) aims to continuously introduce novel categories into a classification system without
forgetting previously learned ones, thus adapting to evolving data distributions. Researchers are currently focusing on
leveraging the rich semantic information of pre-trained models (PTMs) in CIL tasks. Prompt learning has been adopted
in CIL for its ability to adjust data distribution to better align
with pre-trained knowledge. This paper critically examines
the limitations of existing methods from the perspective of
prompt learning, which heavily rely on input information.
To address this issue, we propose a novel PTM-based CIL
method called Input-Agnostic Prompt Enhancement with
NegAtive Feedback ReguLation (PEARL). In PEARL, we
implement an input-agnostic global prompt coupled with an
adaptive momentum update strategy to reduce the model’s dependency on data distribution, thereby effectively mitigating
catastrophic forgetting. Guided by negative feedback regulation, this adaptive momentum update addresses the parameter sensitivity inherent in fixed-weight momentum updates.
Furthermore, it fosters the continuous enhancement of the
prompt for new tasks by harnessing correlations between different tasks in CIL. Experiments on six benchmarks demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Task 2

Task 3

Task 4

Task 6

Image Patch

Input
“query”
best match

Task 5

“select”

Prompt Pool

ViT

(a) Input-dependent Prompt

Prompt
Encoder

Image Patch

Prompt Pool

ViT

(b) Input-agnostic Prompt

Figure 1: The comparison of (a) input-dependent prompt and
(b) input-independent prompt. L2P and DualPrompt following the paradigm in (a), select the best matched prompts,
while CODA-Prompt assemble the prompt pool with learnable components during the “select” phase.

Code — https://github.com/qinyongchun/PEARL
posed by real-world environments, merely fine-tuning PTMs
proves inadequate. Fine-tuning on new classes may lead to
catastrophic forgetting, a phenomenon where a model’s performance on old classes deteriorates significantly as new
information overwrites existing representations (McCloskey
and Cohen 1989).
To address the challenges inherent in incremental learning, prompt learning has been introduced as a groundbreaking approach (Wang et al. 2022b,a; Wang, Huang, and Hong
2022; Smith et al. 2023). Prompts serve as task-specific
instructions or contextual guides that help the model process input data (Li and Liang 2021; Lester, Al-Rfou, and
Constant 2021). In the realm of Class-Incremental Learning (CIL), prompts are dynamically evolved to accommodate new tasks. To prevent the erasure of previous knowledge by subsequent tasks, current strategies typically involve selective sampling from the prompt pool based on input data (Wang et al. 2022b,a; Smith et al. 2023; Gao, Cen,
and Chang 2024). This approach ensures that only a subset
of the prompt pool is updated at any time, thus reducing the

Introduction
In the fields of computer vision and machine learning, ClassIncremental Learning (CIL) ) (Rebuffi et al. 2017a; Castro et al. 2018a; Hou et al. 2019a) has become a pivotal
paradigm, designed to enable models to acquire new tasks
over time without forgetting previously learned information. This approach differs from traditional batch learning,
which processes the entire dataset in one go; instead, CIL
gradually introduces new categories, allowing the model to
adjust to changing data distributions and real-world conditions where new categories may appear dynamically. Integrating Pre-Trained Models (PTMs) into CIL capitalizes on
their extensive feature representations, which can speed up
convergence and enhance initial performance (Wang et al.
2022b,a). However, in the face of the dynamic challenges
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20051

