The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mining In-distribution Attributes in Outliers for Out-of-distribution Detection
Yutian Lei, Luping Ji* , Pei Liu
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
ytlei823@gmail.com, jiluping@uestc.edu.cn, yuukilp@std.uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

logits (i.e., pre-softmax output) on specific known categories
than others when their inputs are out-of-distribution. This
finding implies that outliers could contain ID attributes, although they are often believed to be semantically distinct
from in-distribution (Bai et al. 2023). However, previous approaches, e.g., outlier exposure (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and
Dietterich 2019), and energy-regularized learning (Liu et al.
2020), usually ignore those intrinsic ID attributes. Specifically, they treat these attributes as entirely random noise and
attempt to suppress models’ responses to them blindly. Such
behavior indicates unreasonable use of auxiliary outliers and
may degrade the detection performance. The above discrepancy naturally motivates the following question: how can we
rationally handle the intrinsic ID attributes in auxiliary outlier data for OOD detection?
To address this question, we propose a structured
multi-view-based out-of-distribution learning framework
(MVOL) in Figure 1 (d) — tackling OOD detection via mining ID attributes in outliers. In data level, this framework involves an extended multi-view data model. It establishes ID
and OOD data in a unified perspective, revealing intrinsic
in-distribution attributes in outliers. In model level, MVOL
employs maximum logit (MaxLogit) as the OOD score with
new insight, which naturally adapts to our data model. To
calibrate unexpected high MaxLogit produced for outlier input, MVOL involves a multi-view-based learning objective
to rationally utilize ID attributes in auxiliary outliers.
Extended Multi-view Data Model (MVDM). The original MVDM (Allen-Zhu and Li 2023) posits that in a natural dataset, a data point comprises main features, minor
features, and noise 1 . To formally study the correlations between ID and OOD data, we extend the original MVDM to
the context of out-of-distribution detection by assuming that
outliers mainly consist of minor ID features and noise. This
new assumption originates from our two empirical findings.
(1) Outliers contain ID attributes, as indicated by Figure 1(a)
and analyzed above. (2) These ID attributes generally have
lower magnitudes than those in ID data. As shown in Figure 1 (b), by comparing averages of maximum logit on ID

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is indispensable for deploying reliable machine learning systems in real-world scenarios. Recent works, using auxiliary outliers in training,
have shown good potential. However, they seldom concern
the intrinsic correlations between in-distribution (ID) and
OOD data. In this work, we discover an obvious correlation that OOD data usually possesses significant ID attributes.
These attributes should be factored into the training process,
rather than blindly suppressed as in previous approaches.
Based on this insight, we propose a structured multi-viewbased out-of-distribution detection learning (MVOL) framework, which facilitates rational handling of the intrinsic indistribution attributes in outliers. We provide theoretical insights on the effectiveness of MVOL for OOD detection. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our framework to others. MVOL effectively utilizes both auxiliary
OOD datasets and even wild datasets with noisy ID data.

Code — https://github.com/UESTC-nnLab/MVOL

Introduction
Modern deep neural networks could produce overconfident
and unreliable predictions when their test inputs are outof-distribution (OOD) (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015).
This presents a crucial challenge, especially for deploying
deep learning models in the real world. To tackle this challenge, recent studies have explored outlier exposure (OE)based training strategies (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019). They utilize an auxiliary outlier dataset in
training to suppress the model’s response to outliers, i.e.,
out-of-distribution data, thus detecting those inputs far away
from in-distribution (ID) data (Chen et al. 2021; Ming, Fan,
and Li 2022; Zhu et al. 2023). These strategies have achieved
considerable success and often perform better than those
without auxiliary data (Du et al. 2022; Djurisic et al. 2023).
Despite the promising results, existing OE-based methods
pay limited attention to what underlying correlations exist
between ID and OOD data, still suffering from the irrational
use of auxiliary outliers. As shown in Figure 1(a), for models
trained solely on ID data, we find they tend to present higher

1

In a vision dataset featuring car and cat categories, a car image
typically comprises headlights, wheels, or windows, termed main
features. Additionally, some cars might have headlights resembling
cat eyes, which can also be recognized as a small fraction of “cat
features”, termed minor features.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18181

