The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploit Gradient Skewness
to Circumvent Byzantine Defenses for Federated Learning
Yuchen Liu12 * † , Chen Chen3 * , Lingjuan Lyu3‡ , Yaochu Jin4 , Gang Chen12
1

The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Sony AI
4
Westlake University, China
yuchen.liu.a@gmail.com, {ChenA.Chen, lingjuan.lv}@sony.com, jinyaochu@westlake.edu.cn, cg@zju.edu.cn,
2

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is notorious for its vulnerability to
Byzantine attacks. Most current Byzantine defenses share a
common inductive bias: among all the gradients, the densely
distributed ones are more likely to be honest. However, such
a bias is a poison to Byzantine robustness due to a newly
discovered phenomenon in this paper – gradient skew. We
discover that a group of densely distributed honest gradients
skew away from the optimal gradient (the average of honest gradients) due to heterogeneous data. This gradient skew
phenomenon allows Byzantine gradients to hide within the
densely distributed skewed gradients. As a result, Byzantine
defenses are confused into believing that Byzantine gradients are honest. Motivated by this observation, we propose a
novel skew-aware attack called STRIKE: first, we search for
the skewed gradients; then, we construct Byzantine gradients
within the skewed gradients. Experiments on three benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness of our attack.

Figure 1: The LLE visualization of honest gradients in the
non-IID setting on CIFAR-10. Substantial honest gradients
(blue circles) are skewed away from the optimal gradient
(green star). In this case, we can hide Byzantine gradients
(pink crosses) within the skewed honest gradients to circumvent defenses.

Code — https://github.com/YuchenLiu-a/byzantine skew

1

2017; Pillutla, Kakade, and Harchaoui 2019; Shejwalkar and
Houmansadr 2021) have been proposed to defend against
Byzantine attacks in FL. They aim to estimate the optimal
gradient, i.e., the average of gradients from honest clients,
in the presence of Byzantine clients.
Most existing defenses (Blanchard et al. 2017; Shejwalkar
and Houmansadr 2021; Karimireddy, He, and Jaggi 2022)
share a common inductive bias: the densely distributed gradients are more likely to be honest. Generally, they assign
higher weights to the densely distributed gradients. Then
they compute the global gradient and use it to update the
global model. As a result, the output global gradient of defenses is biased towards the densely distributed of gradients.

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al.
2020) emerged as a privacy-aware learning paradigm, in
which data owners, i.e., clients, repeatedly use their private
data to compute local gradients and upload them to a central server. The central server collects the uploaded gradients from clients and aggregates these gradients to update
the global model. In this way, clients can collaborate to train
a model without exposing their private data.
Unfortunately, FL is susceptible to Byzantine attacks due
to its distributed nature (Blanchard et al. 2017; Guerraoui,
Rouault et al. 2018). A malicious party can control a small
subset of clients, i.e., Byzantine clients, to degrade the utility
of the global model. During the training phase, Byzantine
clients can send arbitrary messages to the central server to
bias the global model. A wealth of defenses (Blanchard et al.

However, this inductive bias of Byzantine defenses is
harmful to Byzantine robustness in FL due to the presence of
gradient skew. In practical FL, data across different clients
is non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID),
which gives rise to heterogeneous honest gradients (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020; Karimireddy, He, and Jaggi
2022). On closer inspection, we find that the distribution
these heterogenous honest gradients are highly skewed. In

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during an internship at Sony AI.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

19024

