The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Guaranteeing Out-Of-Distribution Detection in Deep RL via Transition
Estimation
Mohit Prashant, Arvind Easwaran, Suman Das, Michael Yuhas
Nanyang Technological University
{ mohit010@e., arvinde@, suman.das@, michaelj004@e. } ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

to detect uncertainty to supplement training (or avoid completely in safety-critical settings), it is necessary to identify
OOD execution.
The absence of a concrete definition for OOD execution
within the RL context is due to a number of reasons. Though
they contribute to a difference between the training environment and the real-life environment, there are many potential
causes of uncertainty in policy execution. Prior works identify some causes of OOD execution as the following: environment stochasticity (Sedlmeier et al. 2019); perturbation
to observed data (Haider et al. 2023); encountering unfamiliar states during execution (Mai, Mani, and Paull 2022); domain shifts and shifts in environmental factors (Haider et al.
2021, 2024).
Due to the number of independent underlying causes of
OOD execution identified within the RL context by prior
studies and the absence of a comprehensive definition for
OOD detection, a limitation of existing studies is that they
are unable to comprehensively address this issue. For instance, the methods of quantifying value uncertainty are able
to address environment stochasticity, but are unable to detect
perturbations as OOD (Mai, Mani, and Paull 2022). Similarly, the detection of transition perturbations proposed to
address domain shifts is unable to identify unfamiliar states
as a cause of OOD execution (Haider et al. 2023).

An issue concerning the use of deep reinforcement learning
(RL) agents is whether they can be trusted to perform reliably
when deployed, as training environments may not reflect reallife environments. Anticipating instances outside their training scope, learning-enabled systems are often equipped with
out-of-distribution (OOD) detectors that alert when a trained
system encounters a state it does not recognize or in which it
exhibits uncertainty. There exists limited work conducted on
the problem of OOD detection within RL, with prior studies
being unable to achieve a consensus on the definition of OOD
execution within the context of RL. By framing our problem
using a Markov Decision Process, we assume there is a transition distribution mapping each state-action pair to another
state with some probability. Based on this, we consider the
following definition of OOD execution within RL: A transition is OOD if its probability during real-life deployment differs from the transition distribution encountered during training. As such, we utilize conditional variational autoencoders
(CVAE) to approximate the transition dynamics of the training environment and implement a conformity-based detector
using reconstruction loss that is able to guarantee OOD detection with a pre-determined confidence level. We evaluate
our detector by adapting existing benchmarks and compare it
with existing OOD detection models for RL.

Introduction

Contribution: Defining OOD Execution We propose
two possible types of OOD execution: (1) state-based OOD
execution, when an agent reaches a state which was insufficiently encountered during training; and (2) environmentbased OOD execution, when an agent is deployed in an environment with a transition function that differs from that
of the training environment. In doing so, we build upon the
definition introduced in (Haider et al. 2023).

Ideally, an RL agent is trained to synthesize a policy based
on a training environment that closely resembles its real-life
use case. However, rare events/states may be encountered
during deployment that are outside of the distribution of data
encountered during the training process. Furthermore, due
to rarity, sufficient training using exploration (i.e. without
a generative simulator) is insufficient to guarantee the outcome of policy execution over these states. We refer to the
execution of a learned policy over an unfamiliar/uncertain
environment as out-of-distribution (OOD) with respect to
the data encountered during the training process (Sedlmeier
et al. 2019). If a learned policy is applied to an environment
that is significantly different to the training environment, it
is expected that the policy will yield unpredictable outcomes
(Mohammed and Valdenegro-Toro 2021). As it is desirable

Contribution: Guaranteeing OOD Detection We characterize OOD execution by learning the transition dynamics of the underlying environment using a variational autoencoder that is conditioned upon the occurring transition
(Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015). We apply a conformal prediction method upon the reconstruction error, also conditioned on the transition, which allows us to guarantee a true
positive rate for OOD detection. We demonstrate the efficacy of our technique in detecting OOD execution by utilizing benchmarks previously established by (Mohammed and

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12452

