The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OpenVIS: Open-vocabulary Video Instance Segmentation
Pinxue Guo1,2 * , Hao Huang2 , Peiyang He2 , Xuefeng Liu2 , Tianjun Xiao2 , Wenqiang Zhang1,3†
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
2
Amazon Web Services
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
pxguo21@m.fudan.edu.cn, tonyhh@aws.com, wqzhang@fudan.edu.cn

Inference Categories = { little girl, cat }

Abstract
Open-vocabulary Video Instance Segmentation (OpenVIS)
can simultaneously detect, segment, and track arbitrary object categories in a video, without being constrained to categories seen during training. In this work, we propose InstFormer, a carefully designed framework for the OpenVIS task that achieves powerful open-vocabulary capabilities through lightweight fine-tuning with limited-category
data. InstFormer begins with the open-world mask proposal network, encouraged to propose all potential instance
class-agnostic masks by the contrastive instance margin loss.
Next, we introduce InstCLIP, adapted from pre-trained CLIP
with Instance Guidance Attention, which encodes openvocabulary instance tokens efficiently. These instance tokens
not only enable open-vocabulary classification but also offer strong universal tracking capabilities. Furthermore, to
prevent the tracking module from being constrained by the
training data with limited categories, we propose the universal rollout association, which transforms the tracking problem into predicting the next frame’s instance tracking token. The experimental results demonstrate the proposed InstFormer achieve state-of-the-art capabilities on a comprehensive OpenVIS evaluation benchmark, while also achieves
competitive performance in fully supervised VIS task.

Inference Categories = { bride, bridegoom }

Inference Categories = { bride, bow-tie }

Figure 1: OpenVIS simultaneously segments, detects, and
tracks arbitrary objects in a video according to their corresponding text description. The proposed InstFormer can accurately identify various objects based on their respective
category names in a video, irrespective of whether the category is included in the training set.

only segment objects within the boundaries of their training data, meaning they are unable to identify objects beyond
the categories present in the training set. Consequently, their
video understanding remains restricted. Moreover, identifying new categories requires retraining with additional annotated data, leading to substantial time and resource investment. To address the limitation, we investigate a novel computer vision task called Open-vocabulary Video Instance
Segmentation (OpenVIS). This task focuses on detecting,
segmenting, and tracking instances in videos based on the
category names of target objects, regardless of whether those
categories have been seen during the training stage.
Although recent pre-trained Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) (Radford et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2021) have shown
promising results in zero-shot classification and provide
good foundation for open-vocabulary video instance segmentation, significant challenges still remain in leveraging
these static, image-level VLMs for this video, instancelevel task. To eliminate this gap, we propose InstFormer,
a carefully designed framework tailored for the OpenVIS task that achieves robust open-vocabulary capabilities
through lightweight fine-tuning on a limited-category labeled dataset. Firstly, since any object, rather than fixed
categories, might be selected for identification by the end

Code — https://github.com/PinxueGuo/OpenVIS

Introduction
Video understanding (Bertasius, Wang, and Torresani 2021;
Li et al. 2023) is a challenging yet significant computer
vision task that requires specialized algorithms and techniques, surpassing the difficulty of image understanding.
To achieve a more thorough understanding, Video Instance
Segmentation (VIS) (Yang, Fan, and Xu 2019) has been
proposed, which can simultaneously detect, segment (Hong
et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2022; Hong et al. 2023; Guo et al.
2024b; Li et al. 2025; Guo et al. 2024a), and track (Zhou
et al. 2024; Hong et al. 2024) instances in a given video, becoming a new research hotspot. Despite significant progress,
current VIS models possess an inherent limitation. They can
* Work done during internship at AWS.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3275

