The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging Knowledge Gap Between Image Inpainting and Large-Area Visible
Watermark Removal
Yicheng Leng1, 2 , Chaowei Fang1 * , Junye Chen3 , Yixiang Fang2 , Sheng Li4 , Guanbin Li3, 5
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Research Institute of Sun Yat-sen University in Shenzhen, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China
4
Afirstsoft, Shenzhen, China
5
GuangDong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
2

Abstract

termark mask segmentation, watermark decomposition, and
background content restoration. Notable models like (Hertz
et al. 2019; Cun and Pun 2021; Liang et al. 2021; Sun,
Su, and Wu 2023) are instrumental in this approach. However, existing methods still face two challenges: 1) In realworld images, areas of watermarks can be very large. Those
large-area watermarks inevitably accentuate the complexity
of background content recovery, especially when they are
overlaid on regions with intricate visual content. Due to insufficient representation modeling ability, the performance
of existing models still have substantial improvement room
when coping with large-area watermarks. 2) Since DNNbased models can usually overfit the training data, they are
able to generate high-quality watermark masks on training
images. This makes the learned models dependent to quality of the predicted watermark masks on real-world images.
Missed detection leaves discernible watermark traces, while
too many false alarms cause confusion to the background
content recovery process.

Visible watermark removal which involves watermark cleaning and background content restoration is pivotal to evaluate the resilience of watermarks. Existing deep neural network (DNN)-based models still struggle with large-area watermarks and are overly dependent on the quality of watermark mask prediction. To overcome these challenges, we introduce a novel feature adapting framework that leverages
the representation modeling capacity of a pre-trained image
inpainting model. Our approach bridges the knowledge gap
between image inpainting and watermark removal by fusing
information of the residual background content beneath watermarks into the inpainting backbone model. We establish a
dual-branch system to capture and embed features from the
residual background content, which are merged into intermediate features of the inpainting backbone model via gated feature fusion modules. Moreover, for relieving the dependence
on high-quality watermark masks, we introduce a new training paradigm by utilizing coarse watermark masks to guide
the inference process. This contributes to a visible image removal model which is insensitive to the quality of watermark
mask during testing. Extensive experiments on both a largescale synthesized dataset and a real-world dataset demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods. The source code is available in the
supplementary materials.

In light of these challenges, we are dedicated in borrowing the rich knowledge of the image inpainting model to address the visible watermark removal task. Recent advances
in the image inpainting field demonstrate that DNN models are able to fill in missing regions of images with plausible visual content. Employing the knowledge of the image inpainting model to foster visible watermark removal
model is a direction worth exploring. However, distinct to
the image inpainting task, the residual background content
beneath watermarks can provide valuable prompts for background content restoration. To bridge the knowledge gap
between visible watermark removal and image inpainting,
we propose a feature adapting framework which can effectively fuse the information of residual background content
into intermediate features of a pre-trained image inpainting model, as depicted in Figure 1 (b). First, to capture the
information of the residual background content residing in
the watermarked input, we set up a watermark component
cleaning branch which directly predicts an image precluding the watermark information from the input image. Moreover, we construct the other branch to further embed the
background content. The intermediate features of the above
two branches can provide valuable prompt information for

Introduction
Visible watermarks serve a pivotal role in asserting image
ownership and copyright. Yet, they can obscure vital content, especially during image editing or in situations where
tampered information within images plays a crucial role.
Studying on visible watermark removal contributes to evaluating the resilience of watermarks. This paper aims to develop a deep neural networks (DNN) based model which revolves around two objectives: watermark cleaning and background content restoration.
Prior visible watermark removal works, depicted in Figure 1 (a), embrace a multi-task framework that employs various decoder branches to implement sub-tasks such as wa* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4589

