The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PointDGMamba: Domain Generalization of Point Cloud Classification
via Generalized State Space Model
Hao Yang1 * , Qianyu Zhou1 * , Haijia Sun2 * , Xiangtai Li3,5 , Fengqi Liu1 , Xuequan Lu4 ,
Lizhuang Ma1† , Shuicheng Yan3,5
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Information Management, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
Skywork AI, Singapore
4
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia, Australia
5
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{yanghao.cs, zhouqianyu, liufengqi, lzma}@sjtu.edu.cn, 522023140081@smail.nju.edu.cn
Abstract

Some methods such as PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a), PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b), and DGCNN (Phan et al. 2018)
have made great progress in point cloud classification. However, existing methods typically excel only on seen datasets
and may encounter performance degradation on unseen domains. This is mainly due to domain shifts, e.g., differences
caused by sensor types, scanning angles, and environmental
conditions, across different domains.
To address this issue, domain generalization (DG) techniques have been recently introduced into point cloud classification (PCC) (Huang et al. 2021) to learn domain-invariant
features, thereby improving the model’s generalizability.
The mainstream methods include data augmentation (Xiao
et al. 2023), adversarial training (Lehner et al. 2022), and
consistency learning (Kim et al. 2023). Nevertheless, most
of them are based on CNNs and inherently suffer from a
limited receptive field, making it difficult to capture global
information. As a result, the model may struggle to fully
understand the overall structure of the data, leading to suboptimal classification performance. One solution is to use
a Vision Transformer (Han et al. 2022), but its internal attention layer inevitably introduces higher quadratic computational complexity with increased input points. Therefore,
how to effectively model global information while keeping
low computational complexity is a key issue in DG PCC.
Recently, Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023), as an emerging
State Space Model (SSM) model, has been demonstrated
to be effective in capturing long-range dependencies and
global information (Xing et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024).
More importantly, they can accomplish some tasks with linear complexity, which solves the problem of a limited receptive field and avoids quadratic complexity. The representative work, Point Mamba (Liang et al. 2024) and Point Cloud
Mamba (PCM) (Zhang et al. 2025) propose several serialization methods to scan 3D point cloud data into specific
sequences. Nonetheless, these methods often produce less
desirable performance in unseen domains because they do
not adequately account for domain shifts or do not include
any tailored designs. As shown in Figure 1, there exist noticeable performance gaps between PCM and state-of-theart DG PCC methods. Thus, and understanding the barriers

Domain Generalization (DG) has been recently explored
to improve the generalizability of point cloud classification
(PCC) models toward unseen domains. However, they often
suffer from limited receptive fields or quadratic complexity
due to using convolution neural networks or vision Transformers. In this paper, we present the first work that studies the generalizability of state space models (SSMs) in DG
PCC and find that directly applying SSMs into DG PCC will
encounter several challenges: the inherent topology of the
point cloud tends to be disrupted and leads to noise accumulation during the serialization stage. Besides, the lack of
designs in domain-agnostic feature learning and data scanning will introduce unanticipated domain-specific information into the 3D sequence data. To this end, we propose
a novel framework, PointDGMamba, that excels in strong
generalizability toward unseen domains and has the advantages of global receptive fields and efficient linear complexity. PointDGMamba consists of three innovative components:
Masked Sequence Denoising (MSD), Sequence-wise Crossdomain Feature Aggregation (SCFA), and Dual-level Domain
Scanning (DDS). In particular, MSD selectively masks out
the noised point tokens of the point cloud sequences, SCFA
introduces cross-domain but same-class point cloud features
to encourage the model to learn how to extract more generalized features. DDS includes intra-domain scanning and
cross-domain scanning to facilitate information exchange between features. In addition, we propose a new and more challenging benchmark PointDG-3to1 for multi-domain generalization. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
and state-of-the-art performance of PointDGMamba.

Code — https://github.com/yxltya/PointDGMamba

Introduction
3D point cloud learning is a fundamental 3D vision task that
has applications in many fields, such as autonomous driving, robot navigation, virtual reality, and urban modeling.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9193

