The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Maintaining Fairness in Logit-based Knowledge Distillation
for Class-Incremental Learning
Zijian Gao1,2∗ , Shanhao Han1 * , Xingxing Zhang 3 , Kele Xu1,2† , Dulan Zhou1,2 ,
Xinjun Mao1,2 , Yong Dou1 , Huaimin Wang1,2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China.
2
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Changsha, China.
3
School of Computer Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
{gaozijian19, hanshanhao5205, dulan zhou, xukelele, xjmao, yongdou, hmwang}@nudt.edu.cn,
xxzhang1993@gmail.com
Abstract

Logit-based knowledge distillation (KD) is commonly used
to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in class-incremental learning (CIL) caused by data distribution shifts. However, the
strict match of logit values between student and teacher models conflicts with the cross-entropy (CE) loss objective of
learning new classes, leading to significant recency bias (i.e.
unfairness). To address this issue, we rethink the overlooked
limitations of KD-based methods through empirical analysis.
Inspired by our findings, we introduce a plug-and-play preprocess method that normalizes the logits of both the student
and teacher across all classes, rather than just the old classes,
before distillation. This approach allows the student to focus
on both old and new classes, capturing intrinsic inter-class
relations from the teacher. By doing so, our method avoids
the inherent conflict between KD and CE, maintaining fairness between old and new classes. Additionally, recognizing
that overconfident teacher predictions can hinder the transfer
of inter-class relations (i.e., dark knowledge), we extend our
method to capture intra-class relations among different instances, ensuring fairness within old classes. Our method integrates seamlessly with existing logit-based KD approaches,
consistently enhancing their performance across multiple CIL
benchmarks without incurring additional training costs.

Figure 1: Vanilla KD paradigm in CIL.

model’s performance on old classes significantly degrades
after learning new ones due to data distribution shifts.
Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton et al. 2015) is a way
to alleviate forgetting, where the old model (teacher) consolidates knowledge into the new model (student). This approach has been extensively adopted in CIL (Castro et al.
2018; Li and Hoiem 2017; Dhar et al. 2019). As depicted in
Figure 1, the vanilla KD-based method (e.g., LwF (Li and
Hoiem 2017)) optimizes both the KD loss and the crossentropy (CE) loss simultaneously. However, KD enforces
an exact match between the teacher’s and student’s logits
for old classes, both in terms of value range and variance.
For example, if the ground truth label for the second class is
0, but the teacher’s prediction probability is 0.9, these optimization goals conflict, making reconciliation difficult. This
conflict diminishes the positive impact of KD (Zhao et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2024) and results in recency bias (Masana
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024), where the model increasingly
favors classifying instances into new classes.
To investigate this limitation, we conducted empirical
studies on the model’s stability in vanilla KD through continual evaluation at every iteration. We observed a significant transient forgetting during task transitions, followed by
a recovery phase, as shown in Figure 2 (b), also referred
to as the stability gap (Lange, van de Ven, and Tuytelaars
2023). We analyzed this phenomenon in two aspects: temporary forgetting and partial recovery, using gradient-based
and empirical analyses. Our findings revealed two critical

Code — https://github.com/Zi-Jian-Gao/MaintainingFairness-in-LKD-for-CIL

Introduction
Class-incremental learning (CIL) (Masana et al. 2022) aims
to enable a network to incrementally learn new classes while
accurately classifying all previously encountered classes.
Unlike conventional training paradigms, CIL requires deep
neural networks to incorporate new data without losing
historical knowledge, eliminating the need for retraining
from scratch—an essential feature for practical applications.
The primary challenge in CIL is overcoming catastrophic
forgetting (CF) (McCloskey and Cohen 1989), where the
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16763

