The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Vietnamese Words Are Not Constructed from Syllables: Rethinking the Role of
Word Segmentation in Natural Language Processing for Vietnamese Texts
Nghia Hieu Nguyen1,3,4 , Dat Tien Nguyen2,3,4 , Ngan Luu-Thuy Nguyen1,3,4
1

Faculty of Information Science and Engineering
2
Faculty of Computer Science
3
University of Information Technology
4
Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh city, Vietnam
nghiangh@uit.edu.vn, 21521944@gm.uit.edu.vn, ngannlt@uit.edu.vn
Abstract

đến từ nhóm nghiên cứu xử_lý ngôn_ngữ tự_nhiên cho tiếng
Việt", while it keeps the original version for the syllablebased approach.
Vietnamese linguists follow the study of American Distributionalism (Bloomfield 1933) to define that in Vietnamese, morpheme is the most fundamental lexical unit that
is meaningful, each morpheme has one syllable and is written in a sequence of continuous characters. In a sentence,
morphemes are written from left to right and separated by
spaces. For instance, "Hà Nội là thủ đô của Việt Nam"
(Hanoi is the capital of Vietnam) has eight morphemes.
According to former linguists (Thản 1997; Lê 2003; Châu
2007), Vietnamese words are constructed from morphemes,
each word may have one or more morphemes. Accordingly,
in "Hà Nội là thủ đô của Việt Nam" (Hanoi is the capital of
Vietnam), there are five words: "Hà Nội" (Hanoi), "là" (is),
"thủ đô" (capital), "của" (of), "Việt Nam" (Vietnam). In this
study, we name this view of Vietnamese word definition as
morpheme-based linguistic view.
However, later linguists (Cẩn 1996; Giáp 2008, 2011) define that, in Vietnamese, words and morphemes are identical
(Hạo 1998; Cẩn 1996; Giáp 2011; Thản 1997). In our study,
this view is named word-based linguistic view. According
to this linguistic view, there are eight words in the sentence
"Hà Nội là thủ đô của Việt Nam" (Hanoi is the capital of
Vietnam). By this definition, the word-based linguistic view
can uncover many linguistic ambiguities introduced by the
morpheme-based linguistic view. In the following sections,
we will analyze how the word-based linguistic view tackles
unsolved problems of the morpheme-based linguistic view.
From these two linguistic views, the syllable-based approach in Vietnamese NLP follows the word-based linguistic
view, while the word-based approach follows the morphemebased linguistic view.
In Vietnamese NLP, modeling word segmentation actually concentrates only on describing complex words (including compound words and reduplicative words). However, according to word-based linguistic view, we should
model the phrasal lexeme - the more abstract lexical unit
of complex word in Vietnamese. To this end, we propose
ViWordFormer, a Transformer-based method that describes
the phrasal lexemes in Vietnamese.
Our experimental results indicate that baseline methods
that follow the word-based linguistic view to represent Viet-

The definition of words is the fundamental and crucial linguistic concept. Any changes in word definition lead to
changes in the theoretical system of the respective language.
Traditionally, researchers in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) for Vietnamese texts believe Vietnamese words are
constructed from syllables. However, their works did not explicitly mention which linguistic theory they followed for
this assumption. Although there are no theoretical guarantees, most NLP studies in Vietnamese accept this assumption.
Consequently, word segmentation is recognized as one of the
essential stages in NLP for Vietnamese texts. In this study,
we address the role of word segmentation for Vietnamese
texts from linguistic perspectives. Through our extensive experiments, we show that, based on linguistic theories, performing word segmentation is not appropriate for Vietnamese
text understanding. Moreover, we present a novel method,
Vietnamese Word TransFormer (ViWordFormer), for modeling Vietnamese word formation. Experimental results indicate that our method is appropriate for modeling Vietnamese
word formation from both theoretical and experimental aspects and embark on a novel approach to Vietnamese word
representation.

Introduction
Word segmentation has been known as one of the features of
Vietnamese texts for a long time, and many studies were constructed particularly for word segmentation tasks (Nguyen
et al. 2006; Nguyen and Le 2016; Hong Phuong et al. 2008;
Nguyen et al. 2019). Typically, research in NLP for Vietnamese texts can be categorized into syllable-based and
word-based approaches.
In the syllable-based approach, texts are segmented into
syllables by spaces. While in the word-based version, texts
are segmented into words, each word can have one or more
syllables (Đinh Điền 2005). These syllables are connected
by the underscore "_". For instance, given the sentence
"chúng tôi là nghiên cứu sinh nhóm Nghiên cứu Xử lý Ngôn
ngữ Tự nhiên trên tiếng Việt (we are the students from
the natural language processing research group for Vietnamese)", following the word-based approach, this sentence
must be pre-preprocessed as "chúng_tôi là nghiên_cứu_sinh
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24069

