The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Salient Object Detection with Adder Neural Networks
Bo-Wen Yin1 , Zheng Lin2 * ,
1

2

VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
bowenyin@mail.nankai.edu.cn, frazer.linzheng@gmail.com

Abstract

and consume tremendous energy, making them difficult to be
deployed into mobile or edge devices. Thus, how to reduce
the computation and energy cost of popular salient object
detection models has been drawing significant attention.
Our work also focuses on studying how to reduce the energy cost for popular salient object detection models. Different from most previous works that reduce the computations
and energy cost via model compression (Bucilu, Caruana,
and Niculescu-Mizil 2006; Cheng et al. 2017; Nan et al.
2019), knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015; Romero et al. 2014; Tung and Mori 2019), or channel
pruning (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017; Zhuang et al. 2018; Gao
et al. 2019), we attempt to investigate building models based
on energy-efficient adder neural networks (ANNs) (Chen
et al. 2020). ANNs, as described in (Chen et al. 2020), replace the multiplication operations in convolutions with additions, significantly decreasing the energy cost. However,
unlike CNN-based methods, whose design practice has been
extensively explored, ANNs are new and the design principle needs special attention (Chen et al. 2021). Therefore,
how to develop strong ANNs for salient object detection deserves deep study.
In this paper, we select a representative CNN-based
model, named PoolNet (Liu et al. 2019), as our exemplar
and explore how to make the adder layers suit popular CNNbased architectures. We empirically found that directly replacing the convolutions with the adder layers in the PoolNet (Liu et al. 2019) with an ImageNet pretrained backbone
still leads to a significant performance drop. We visualize
the decoder part and observe that only a small number of the
neurons are activated, while most channels within the same
layer share nearly the same pattern. Consequently, the diversity of the feature maps cannot be guaranteed, which is
essential for building robust networks.
To overcome the aforementioned issues brought in by the
adder layers in the decoder, we present a simple scheme for
ANN-based salient object detection models. Our method introduces a differential merging strategy to augment the diversity of the output feature maps of the adder layers. Specifically, we first split an adder layer into two separate branches
and then compute the differences between the two branches.
This allows us to adjust the statistics of the output feature
maps and avoid the case in which most of the feature values
are negative in the decoder part. In addition, regarding the

In this paper, we explore how to develop salient object detection models using adder neural networks (ANNs), which
are more energy efficient than convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), especially for real-world applications. Based on our
empirical studies, we show that directly replacing the convolutions in CNN-based models with adder layers leads to a
substantial loss of activations in the decoder part. This makes
the feature maps learned in the decoder lack pattern diversity
and hence results in a significant performance drop. To alleviate this issue, by investigating the statistics of the feature
maps produced by adder layers, we introduce a simple yet effective differential merging strategy to augment the feature
representations learned by adder layers and present a simple baseline for SOD using ANNs. Experiments on popular
salient object detection benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed method with a simple feature pyramid network (FPN)
architecture achieves comparable performance to previous
state-of-the-art CNN-based models and consumes much less
energy. We hope this work could facilitate the development
of ANNs in binary segmentation tasks.

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD), as one of the essential tasks
in computer vision, has attracted tremendous interest from
both academic and industrial communities over the past two
decades. Because of the ability to detect the most salient
and attention-grabbing objects in a scene (Cheng et al. 2014;
Borji et al. 2019), SOD plays a significant role in intelligent
cameras, content-aware image editing (Avidan and Shamir
2007; Achanta and Süsstrunk 2009; Pritch, Kav-Venaki, and
Peleg 2009), visual tracking (Hong et al. 2015; Mahadevan
and Vasconcelos 2009; Smeulders et al. 2013), segmentation (Sun 2024), etc. With the in-depth study of deep learning techniques (Wang et al. 2023; Cheng and Sun 2024; Liu
et al. 2022, 2024), fully convolutional networks have dominated the area of salient object detection and have been
the mainstream in recent years (Hou et al. 2019; Yin et al.
2024b; Zhang et al. 2018; Qin et al. 2019; Wu, Su, and
Huang 2019; Wang et al. 2019). Despite the excellent performance, most of these models require massive computations
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9490

