The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

C3oT: Generating Shorter Chain-of-Thought Without Compromising Effectiveness
Yu Kang, Xianghui Sun, Liangyu Chen * , Wei Zou
Beike Inc., Beijing, China
{kangyu009, sunxianghui002, chenliangyu003, zouwei026}@ke.com

Abstract
Generating Chain-of-Thought (CoT) before deriving the answer can effectively improve the reasoning capabilities of
large language models (LLMs) and significantly improve the
accuracy of the generated answer. However, in most cases,
the length of the generated CoT is much longer than the desired final answer, which results in additional decoding costs.
Furthermore, existing research has discovered that shortening
the reasoning steps in CoT, even while preserving the key
information, diminishes LLMs’ abilities. These phenomena
make it difficult to use LLMs and CoT in many real-world
applications that only require the final answer and are sensitive to latency, such as search and recommendation. To reduce
the costs of model decoding and shorten the length of the
generated CoT, this paper presents Conditioned Compressed
Chain-of-Thought (C3oT), a CoT compression framework
that involves a compressor to compress an original longer
CoT into a shorter CoT while maintaining key information
and interpretability, a conditioned training method to train
LLMs with both longer CoT and shorter CoT simultaneously
to learn the corresponding relationships between them, and
a conditioned inference method to gain the reasoning ability learned from longer CoT by generating shorter CoT. We
conduct experiments over four datasets from arithmetic and
commonsense scenarios, showing that the proposed method is
capable of compressing the length of generated CoT by up to
more than 50% without compromising its effectiveness.

Introduction
The Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Nye et al. 2021; Marasović
et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2022; Kojima et al. 2022; Lampinen
et al. 2022) methodology significantly augments the reasoning abilities of large language models (LLMs), providing critical capabilities for sub-task decomposition in complex problem-solving scenarios. Furthermore, models trained
with rich signals, including reasoning processes; explanation
traces; and step-by-step thought processes, generally exhibit
superior performance (Mukherjee et al. 2023; Mitra et al.
2023). While answering after thinking can elicit highly effective generations by activating LLMs’ reasoning abilities,
the intermediate reasoning steps in model outputs are often
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24312

much longer than the desired final answers, notably increasing the cost during the inference phase, and hindering the
model’s employment in many real-world applications, such
as search and recommendation, which usually focus only on
the final answer and is sensitive to latency. Therefore, striking
a balance between the demand for fast decoding in LLMs applications and the need for long reasoning steps has become
an urgent issue.
However, recent studies indicate that lengthening the reasoning steps in CoT considerably enhances LLMs’ reasoning
abilities across multiple tasks. Alternatively, shortening the
reasoning steps, even while preserving the key information,
significantly diminishes the reasoning abilities of models (Jin
et al. 2024). Fu et al. (2022) propose a complexity-based
method for CoT selection and find that CoT with higher
reasoning complexity, i.e., chains with more reasoning steps,
achieve substantially better performance on multi-step reasoning tasks. Similar conclusions have been drawn from Merrill
and Sabharwal (2023)’s work, which explores the relationship between the capabilities of LLMs and the number of
CoTs’ reasoning steps, varying from logarithmic, linear, to
polynomial, based on input length. They also found that the
increase in LLMs’ computational power depends crucially
on the amount of intermediate reasoning steps added.
There has been little work (Deng et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2024) focused on compressing the length of generated CoT
without sacrificing model performance. Implicit-CoT (Deng
et al. 2023) attempted to use LLMs’ internal hidden states
to perform implicit reasoning, replacing explicitly producing
the CoT reasoning steps, but the results of this method is still
significantly falling behind the explicit CoT method.
Based on these results, we ask: Is there a method that
can significantly reduce the length of intermediate reasoning
steps in generated CoT without compromising effectiveness?
The answer is yes, we propose Conditioned Compressed
Chain-of-Thought (C3oT), a CoT compression framework,
to achieve this goal. Specifically, we first present a CoT
compressor to condense the original complex CoT into their
shortest form while retaining essential information and interpretability, now we have pairs of longer CoT and shorter
CoT. We further introduce a conditioned training method to
train LLMs with both longer CoT and shorter CoT simultaneously, and by conditioning longer CoT and shorter CoT using
distinct initial prompt tokens before instructions, LLMs can

