The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Accelerated Methods with Compressed Communications for Distributed
Optimization Problems Under Data Similarity
Dmitry Bylinkin1,2 , Aleksandr Beznosikov2, 1, 3, 4
2

1
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Ivannikov Institute for System Programming of the Russian Academy of Sciences
3
Sber AI Lab
4
Skoltech
da.bylinkin@gmail.com, anbeznosikov@gmail.com
nm
1 X
ℓ(x, zjm ),
with fm (x) =
nm j=1

Abstract
In recent years, as data and problem sizes have increased, distributed learning has become an essential tool for training highperformance models. However, the communication bottleneck,
especially for high-dimensional data, is a challenge. Several
techniques have been developed to overcome this problem.
These include communication compression and implementation of local steps, which work particularly well when there is
similarity of local data samples. In this paper, we study the synergy of these approaches for efficient distributed optimization.
We propose the first theoretically grounded accelerated algorithms utilizing unbiased and biased compression under data
similarity, leveraging variance reduction and error feedback
frameworks.
time our theory gives

h In terms of communication
ip 
1
1
δ/µ complexity for unbiased
Õ 1 + M − /4 + ω − /2

p 
1
compressors and Õ 1 + β /4 δ/µ for biased ones, where
M is the number of computational nodes, β is the compression power, δ is the similarity measure and µ is the parameter
of strong convexity of the objective. Our theoretical results are
of record and confirmed by experiments on different average
losses and datasets.

1

Introduction

Conventional machine/deep learning algorithms often struggle to handle the scale and complexity of modern datasets,
resulting in long training times and limited scalability. Distributed optimization (Verbraeken et al. 2020) has witnessed
remarkable progress, driven by rising demand for efficient
methods across diverse applications such as medical image analysis (Wu et al. 2022), chemical physics (Zhu, Luo,
and White 2022), predictive maintenance (Bidollahkhani
and Kunkel 2024) and natural language processing (Bai
2022). Distributed learning addresses emerging challenges by
spreading the training process across multiple nodes, allowing scientists and engineers to process and analyze data that
would be impractical to handle on a single machine (Alqahtani and Demirbas 2019). In terms of optimization, we have
the following problem statement:
"
#
M
1 X
min f (x) =
fm (x)
(1)
M m=1
x∈Rd
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15632

where M refers to the number of nodes/devices/clients/agents/machines, nm is the size of the local dataset on m-th
machine, x is the vector representation of the model using
d features, zjm is the j-th data point on the m-th node and
ℓ is the loss function. zjm is an ordered pair of feature description aij and label bm
j . We consider an architecture with
a star-network topology, that is, a server, represented by f1 ,
plays a crucial role as the main computational hub. The other
nodes act as users that can communicate with the server but
not directly with each other. This hierarchical structure allows for easy coordination through the first node within the
system.
When training modern distributed models, the bottleneck
is often the cost of communicating information (Konečnỳ
et al. 2016; Jordan, Lee, and Yang 2019). It is a known fact
that client-to-server communication is much more resourceintensive than server-to-client (Mishchenko et al. 2019;
Kairouz et al. 2021). As a result, considerable effort has been
devoted to development of distributed optimization methods
that would be efficient in terms of nodes to server communication. Significant success has been achieved with the development of compression techniques, that help to reduce the
amount of data transferred between nodes during training. In
this paper, we deal with two main classes of compressors:
unbiased and biased (Beznosikov et al. 2023).
Definition 1. We call the mapping Q : Rd → Rd an unbiased
compressor, if there exists a constant ω > 1 such that


EQ [Q(x)] = x, EQ ∥Q(x) − x∥2 ≤ ω∥x∥2 , ∀x ∈ Rd .
Definition 2. We call the mapping C : Rd → Rd a biased
compressor, if there exists a constant β > 1 such that




1
EC ∥C(x) − x∥2 ≤ 1 −
∥x∥2 , ∀x ∈ Rd .
β
Let us denote by γω the value showing how much the operator Q(z) compresses the input vector on average. Let b be the
number of bits needed to represent a single float, and ∥ · ∥bits
be the number of bits needed to represent the input vector. We
1
define γω−1 = bd
E∥Q(z)∥bits . Similarly, we introduce the
compressive force γβ for C(z). For practical compressors,

