The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Trust-GRS: A Trustworthy Training Framework for Graph Neural Network
Based Recommender Systems Against Shilling Attacks
Lingyu Mu1,2 , Zhengxiao Liu1,2 * , Zhitong Zhu1,2 , Zheng Lin1,2 *
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{mulingyu, liuzhengxiao, zhuzhitong, linzheng}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

target items. Recent studies (You et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2023) have shown that neighborhood
aggregation (NA) (Kipf and Welling 2016) and contrastive
learning (CL) (Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006) exacerbate the impact of fake users, making GNN-based RSs more
susceptible to shilling attacks compared to traditional RSs.
Existing defenses (Yu et al. 2021) against shilling attacks
overlook this aspect and the majority of these methods are
only applicable in white-box scenarios. Therefore, we consider developing a black-box universal training framework
for GNN-based RSs. To achieve this goal, we aim to address
two research problems: (i) In the black-box scenarios, how
to precisely identify fake data? (ii) When not all malicious
samples can be detected, how to mitigate the impact of fake
data while preserving benefits of GNN?

Graph neural network (GNN) based recommender systems
have been widely used in diverse service platforms as they
can more effectively capture users’ interests. Nevertheless,
recent investigations have revealed that the neighborhood aggregation and contrastive learning mechanisms render GNNbased recommender systems more vulnerable to fake profile injection attacks, i.e., shilling attacks. Despite numerous
defenses against shilling attacks having emerged, these approaches still face certain challenges, such as the demand for
prior knowledge and the difficulty in defending against multiple attacks. Therefore, this paper proposes a two-stage trustworthy GNN-based recommender systems training framework (Trust-GRS), which models the probability of data
being fake in a zero-knowledge scenario and establishes a
trustworthy neighborhood aggregation and contrastive learning mechanisms. Through extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets against 12 state-of-the-art shilling attacks, we demonstrate that Trust-GRS substantially mitigates
the influence of fake data in all attacks, up to 100%, while
preserving the original recommendation performance. Benefiting from the absence of a requirement for prior knowledge,
Trust-GRS holds significant application value for real-world
recommendation platforms.

To address the aforementioned problems, we investigated
the inherent differences between real and fake data in the
black-box scenarios based on model training dynamics approaches (Saxe, McClelland, and Ganguli 2013; Li et al.
2021) and found that the average training loss of fake data
rapidly converges to 0 than real data. Based on this observation, the users with the lowest loss during the early stages
of training can form a subset, which consists mainly of fake
users. Note not all the losses of fake users are lower than real
users, this subset cannot accurately include all fake users.
However, since the number of fake items is small and fake
users often share fixed common targets (Si and Li 2020), it
is possible to identify target items via this subset and subsequently recognize all potential malicious user files in the
training set. Building on the above findings, we propose
a two-stage training framework for the GNN-based RSs,
namely Trust-GRS, which consists of two stages: (i) fake
data identification stage and (ii) trustworthy GNN-based
RSs training stage. In the first stage, we take a certain percentage of users with the lowest loss as a subset in the early
stages of training. In this subset, fake users in the majority
frequently interact with target items due to their structural
similarity, resulting in interaction frequencies of fake items
far exceeding those of real items. Since PageRank (Page
et al. 1999) can compute rankings based on node interaction counts, we devise an algorithm named Shilling-Rank.
Shilling-Rank can map the probability of items being the
target of shilling attacks and further calculate the probability of users being fake in the entire training set. In the sec-

Code — https://github.com/IIE-MLY/Trsut-GRS

Introduction
Recommender systems (RSs) as one of the solutions to alleviate the problem of information overload are widely applied
in various service platforms (Wang et al. 2021), such as ecommerce, social media, and search engines. In recent years,
GNN-based RSs (He et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021b) represent
data as user-item graphs, effectively capturing users’ interests and item characteristics by explicitly encoding higherorder neighbor information from interaction behavior. Consequently, GNN-based RSs have emerged as one of the
mainstream recommendation architectures.
However, GNN-based RSs are vulnerable to attacks from
malicious profiles or fake data injection, i.e., shilling attacks,
which is accomplished by injecting a set of fake profiles to
the training set of the RSs to maliciously alter the ranking of
* Corresponding authors: Zhengxiao Liu, Zheng Lin.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12408

