The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Modality-Aware Shot Relating and Comparing for Video Scene Detection
Jiawei Tan1, 2 , Hongxing Wang1, 2 * , Kang Dang3 , Jiaxin Li1, 2 , Zhilong Ou1, 2
1

Key Laboratory of Dependable Service Computing in Cyber Physical Society (Chongqing University), Ministry of
Education, China
2
School of Big Data and Software Engineering, Chongqing University, China
3
School of AI and Advanced Computing, XJTLU Entrepreneur College (Taicang), Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University,
Suzhou, China
{jwtan, ihwang}@cqu.edu.cn, Kang.Dang@xjtlu.edu.cn, jiaxin li@cqu.edu.cn, zlou@stu.edu.cn
Same entity (e.g., T-shirt man) can appear intermittently

Abstract
Video scene detection involves assessing whether each shot
and its surroundings belong to the same scene. Achieving this
requires meticulously correlating multi-modal cues, e.g. visual entity and place modalities, among shots and comparing
semantic changes around each shot. However, most methods
treat multi-modal semantics equally and do not examine contextual differences between the two sides of a shot, leading to
sub-optimal detection performance. In this paper, we propose
the Modality-Aware Shot Relating and Comparing approach
(MASRC), which enables relating shots per their own characteristics of visual entity and place modalities, as well as
comparing multi-shots similarities to have scene changes explicitly encoded. Specifically, to fully harness the potential of
visual entity and place modalities in modeling shot relations,
we mine long-term shot correlations from entity semantics
while simultaneously revealing short-term shot correlations
from place semantics. In this way, we can learn distinctive
shot features that consolidate coherence within scenes and
amplify distinguishability across scenes. Once equipped with
distinctive shot features, we further encode the relations between preceding and succeeding shots of each target shot by
similarity convolution, aiding in the identification of scene
ending shots. We validate the broad applicability of the proposed components in MASRC. Extensive experimental results on public benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed MASRC significantly advances video scene detection.

T

Same place (e.g., golf course) keeps appearing continuously
(a) Relating
Scene 1 to be detected

Ending shot?
Non-ending
shot

Consistent
contexts

Ending
shot?

T

Compare
Different
contexts

Ending
shot

(b) Comparing

Figure 1: Intuition behind our proposed modality-aware shot
relating and comparing. (a) Relating: We capture long-term
shot relations by linking intermittently appearing identical
entities and short-term shot relations by relating consecutive
shots depicting the same place. (b) Comparing: Consistency
drawn from comparisons between fore-and-aft contexts is an
indicator to classify whether a target shot is an ending shot.

This process requires associating shared semantics between
shots for each modality to model shot relations. As shown
in Fig. 1a, we need to intermittently link shots featuring the
same entity for capturing long-term shot relations, while relating consecutive shots depicting the same place for the
short-term shot relations. Common methods (2020; 2023;
2024b) handle different modalities in indiscriminate manner
for shot relations modeling. However, this modality-agnostic
strategy fails to capture the diverse temporal relations exhibited by different modalities. To address this issue, we shift
temporal relation modeling from modality-agnostic recipes
to modality-aware scheme. As presented in Fig. 2, we design
Modality-Aware Shot Relating (MASR) to enable capturing long-range and short-range temporal relations between
shots respectively in entity and place modalities. In the entity modality, we construct an Entity Jumping Graph (EJG)
to correlate shots with similar entities by which a long-term
dependencies can be caught for similar but distant shots.
With the place modality, we design a Place Continuity Graph
(PCG) to connect time-continuous shots depicting the same
place, modeling short-term dependencies between shots.

Code — https://github.com/ExMorgan-Alter/MASRC

1

Compare

Scene 2 to be detected

Introduction

Video scene detection involves identifying whether a shot
is at the scene ending or not. Upon detection, the video is
segmented into coherent sets of scenes. Temporal scenes
provide structured information that serves as the foundation for downstream applications such as text-to-video retrieval (Bain et al. 2020) and human-centric storyline construction (Vicol et al. 2018).
Before determining whether a shot is an ending shot, one
needs to examine the surrounding shots to grasp the context of the target shot from different visual modalities, especially in terms of imaging entities and places, in the video.
* Corresponding author: Hongxing Wang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7193

