The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Guided and Variance-Corrected Fusion with One-shot Style Alignment for
Large-Content Image Generation
Shoukun Sun1 , Min Xian1 , Tiankai Yao2 , Fei Xu2 , Luca Capriotti2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Idaho
2
Idaho National Laboratory
sun5322@vandals.uidaho.edu, mxian@uidaho.edu, {tiankai.yao, fei.xu, luca.capriotti}@inl.gov

Abstract

a month on 256 A100 GPUs. The core U-Net model of it
comprises 865 million parameters. The larger SDXL (Podell
et al. 2023) model, which can generate 10242 images and
contains 2.6 billion parameters, demands a longer training
period.
Recent progress has been made by using pre-trained
smaller models to jointly generate a series of overlapped
small patches, which are then combined to form images
of arbitrary sizes. A notable work is MultiDiffusion (BarTal et al. 2023), which generates large images by averaging
overlapped areas of patches at each denoising step. SyncDiffusion (Lee et al. 2023) achieves more coherent largecontent images by ensuring consistent styles across each
small patch during the joint denoising process. However, existing methods exhibit three major drawbacks: 1) noticeable
seams at overlapped areas, 2) generation of discontinuous
objects, and 3) low-quality content.
Each patch derives different values in the overlapped regions at each denoising step. Resolving discrepancies by
averaging to achieve uniformity values can interfere with
the denoising of individual patches. This interference occurs
because diffusion models, during training, assume that the
whole denoising process is completed with all intermediate results undisturbed. Persistent changes to the values in
certain regions can have unknown impacts on the denoising
process, typically resulting in adverse effects.
We propose a method termed Guided Fusion (GF), which
assigns a guidance map to each small patch to perform
weighted averaging in the overlapped regions. This allows
the denoising process to be dominated by patches close to
the center (i.e., higher weights). Additionally, we discovered
that averaging the overlapped regions while using Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) samplers, such as Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020), produces highly blurred results. This occurs
because the SDE samplers usually introduce a Gaussiandistributed random term during the denoising process, and
averaging multiple variables sampled from Gaussian distributions results in a variance lower than expected, leading to
blurred images that lack details. To address this, we introduce Variance-Corrected Fusion (VCF) to adjust the variance and generate higher-quality images. Furthermore, we
observed that significant differences in the initial noise each
patch uses make it more challenging to produce coherent

Producing large images using small diffusion models is gaining increasing popularity, as the cost of training large models
could be prohibitive. A common approach involves jointly
generating a series of overlapped image patches and obtaining large images by merging adjacent patches. However, results from existing methods often exhibit noticeable artifacts,
e.g., seams and inconsistent objects and styles. To address
the issues, we proposed Guided Fusion (GF), which mitigates
the negative impact from distant image regions by applying
a weighted average to the overlapping regions. Moreover,
we proposed Variance-Corrected Fusion (VCF), which corrects data variance at post-averaging, generating more accurate fusion for the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model.
Furthermore, we proposed a one-shot Style Alignment (SA),
which generates a coherent style for large images by adjusting
the initial input noise without adding extra computational burden. Extensive experiments demonstrated that the proposed
fusion methods improved the quality of the generated image
significantly. The proposed method can be widely applied as
a plug-and-play module to enhance other fusion-based methods for large image generation.

Code — https://github.com/TitorX/GVCFDiffusion

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advancements in
text-to-image generation models, which can produce realistic and diverse images based on textual prompts. Among
them, the Diffusion models, specifically the Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al. 2022), have emerged as one of
the mainstream methods for image generation.
There is a significant demand for producing large images.
The pursuit of generating larger images involves 1) producing images with higher resolution that exhibit ultra-fine details and 2) creating images that encompass more content,
such as panorama images. To differentiate between these aspects, we refer to them as High-Resolution image generation
and Large-Content image generation, respectively. However,
training models capable of generating large images requires
a substantial investment in hardware and data. For instance,
training the SD v2 model to generate 5122 images took over
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7114

