The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust Logit Adjustment for Learning with Long-Tailed Noisy Data
MingCai Chen1,2∗ , Yuntao Du3 , Wenyu Jiang4 , Baoming Zhang4 , Shuai Feng4 , Yi Xin4 , Chongjun
Wang4 *
1

Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
The State Key Laboratory of Tibetan Intelligence
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGA
4
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University, Nanjing University
chenmc@njupt.edu.cn, duyuntao@bigai.ai, {lygjwy,zhangbm,shuaifeng,xinyi}@smail.nju.edu.cn, chjwang@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

out is those that leverage the memorization effect (Arpit
et al. 2017; Li, Soltanolkotabi, and Oymak 2020) to identify
noise. The memorization effect refers to the phenomenon
where deep networks learn from correctly labeled samples
with common patterns faster than mislabeled samples with
unique mapping relationships. Consequently, the model’s
fitting status on individual samples can serve as an indicator to detect mislabeled ones. For example, DivideMix (Li,
Socher, and Hoi 2020) removes labels from samples with
higher loss values and only retains possible clean supervision signals. Although such LNL methods have demonstrated superior performance on class-balanced datasets,
they have not been thoroughly evaluated on more realistic data, which often exhibit a long-tailed (LT) distribution
characterized by a few classes containing the majority of
samples. When the trained models biased toward majority
classes, LNL methods relying on the memorization effect
would fail. As depicted in Fig. 1 (a), the model tends to
exhibit higher loss values on both noisy data and clean tail
classes. Consequently, LNL methods that remove the given
labels for data with higher loss values would have poor generalization ability, especially on tail classes. On the other
hand, directly adding LT techniques on top of LNL methods is suboptimal, as most of them depend on the true label frequencies. For example, re-weighting methods (Cui
et al. 2019; Park et al. 2021) balance the proportion of different classes in the training objective by assigning different weights to the losses of head and tail classes, while resampling (Kang et al. 2020; Chawla et al. 2002) methods
ensure that each class has an equal probability of being sampled. However, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), there is a discrepancy
between the frequencies of observed labels and ground-truth
labels under the coexistence of realistic label noise and class
imbalance. The incorrect label frequency hinders LT techniques in achieving class balance. In conclusion, previous
LNL and LT methods both fail to function properly under
the disturbance of long-tailed noisy data.

Learning with noisy labels (LNL) methods have enabled
the deployment of machine learning systems with imperfectly labeled data. However, these methods often struggle
to identify noise in the presence of long-tailed (LT) class
distributions, where the memorization effect becomes classdependent. Conversely, LT methods are suboptimal under label noise, as it hinders access to accurate label frequency
statistics. This study aims to address the long-tailed noisy
data by bridging the methodological gap between LNL and
LT approaches. We propose a direct solution, termed Robust Logit Adjustment, which estimates ground-truth labels
through label refurbishment, thereby mitigating the impact
of label noise. Simultaneously, our method incorporates the
distribution of training-time corrected target labels into the
LT method logit adjustment, providing class-rebalanced supervision. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and realworld long-tailed noisy datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our method.

Introduction
The training of deep models heavily relies on high-quality
labeled datasets. However, manual data annotation is timeconsuming, labor-intensive, error-prone, and subject to domain knowledge or privacy restrictions (Roh, Heo, and
Whang 2021; Van Engelen and Hoos 2020; Algan and Ulusoy 2021). Moreover, billion-level data has been utilized
in training recent large-scale vision and multi-modal models (Oquab et al. 2024; Li et al. 2022). Manually annotating such massive volumes of data is nearly impossible.
In the absence of high-quality and large-scale annotated
datasets, weakly supervised data, e.g., noisily labeled data,
is readily available. For example, Li et al. (2022, 2023) constructed a dataset containing millions of samples using noisy
text-image pairs from web pages and successfully trained
the large-scale multi-modal vision-language model BLIP.
Therefore, effectively leveraging noisy data becomes crucial
when acquiring high-quality annotated data is challenging.
Recently, significant research has been conducted in the
field of learning with noisy labels (LNL) (Han et al. 2020;
Song et al. 2020). One category of methods that stands

In this work, we propose that the label correction framework can bridge the LNL and LT problems: Firstly, it allows the model to effectively mitigate the disturbance of label noise by learning from more accurate supervision signals. Secondly, the corrected labels provide a more reliable basis for label frequency statistics, thereby enabling the
proper functioning of class re-balancing techniques. To ac-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15830

