The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revisiting Graph Contrastive Learning on Anomaly Detection: A Structural
Imbalance Perspective
Yiming Xu1,2 , Zhen Peng1,2 * , Bin Shi1,2 , Xu Hua1,2 , Bo Dong2,3 , Song Wang4 , Chen Chen4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Shaanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
School of Distance Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
{xym0924, huaxu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhenpeng27@outlook.com, {shibin, dong.bo}@xjtu.edu.cn, {sw3wv,
zrh6du}@virginia.edu
2

Abstract

events (Ma et al. 2021). Traditional anomaly detection methods are mainly based on feature space to uncover anomalies, neglecting the relational information inherent in realworld data. On the other hand, labeling anomalous samples
usually requires domain experts and is undoubtedly timeconsuming and expensive. Fortunately, graph contrastive
learning (GCL) has demonstrated its superiority in mining
graph structural information from unlabeled data in the wild,
which has led to extensive research on contrastive learningbased unsupervised graph anomaly detection (GAD) in recent years (Liu et al. 2021b; Duan et al. 2023).

The superiority of graph contrastive learning (GCL) has
prompted its application to anomaly detection tasks for more
powerful risk warning systems. Unfortunately, existing GCLbased models tend to excessively prioritize overall detection
performance while neglecting robustness to structural imbalance, which can be problematic for many real-world networks
following power-law degree distributions. Particularly, GCLbased methods may fail to capture tail anomalies (abnormal
nodes with low degrees). This raises concerns about the security and robustness of current anomaly detection algorithms
and therefore hinders their applicability in a variety of realistic high-risk scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, research on the robustness of graph anomaly detection to structural imbalance has received little scrutiny. To address the
above issues, this paper presents a novel GCL-based framework named AD-GCL. It devises the neighbor pruning strategy to filter noisy edges for head nodes and facilitate the detection of genuine tail nodes by aligning from head nodes to
forged tail nodes. Moreover, AD-GCL actively explores potential neighbors to enlarge the receptive field of tail nodes
through anomaly-guided neighbor completion. We further introduce intra- and inter-view consistency loss of the original and augmentation graph for enhanced representation. The
performance evaluation of the whole, head, and tail nodes on
multiple datasets validates the comprehensive superiority of
the proposed AD-GCL in detecting both head anomalies and
tail anomalies.

Existing GAD techniques are predominantly designed
to optimize overall detection performance, without paying
much attention to the algorithm’s robustness over structural imbalance (Duan et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024). However, such structural imbalance commonly exists in most
real-world graphs that follow the power-law degree distribution, where a substantial fraction of nodes have low degrees, termed as tail nodes while the rest are referred to as
head nodes (see Appendix for statistical analysis on the degree distribution). So it naturally raises a concern: can GCLbased anomaly detection models that combine the advantages of both graph neural networks (GNNs) and contrastive
learning meet the challenge of structural imbalance? To figure this out, we choose three representative models for empirical study. As illustrated in Figure 1, the detection performance notably drops as the node degree decreases. It reveals
a nonnegligible finding that existing GCL-based anomaly
detection methods struggle to effectively capture tail anomalies as we expected. This disparity has raised concerns regarding the security and robustness of current anomaly detection methods in identifying tail anomalies, which severely
impair their application in several high-impact detection scenarios. For instance, in social networks, most identity impersonation attacks are not targeted at celebrities (usually with
very high node degrees) but involve cloning ordinary individuals (with low degrees) within the network to engage in
malicious activities (Goga, Venkatadri, and Gummadi 2015;
Hooi et al. 2017). Similarly, in transaction networks, fraudsters often establish multiple shell companies hidden within
complex networks to commit one-time financial fraud and
then shut down the business (Pacini et al. 2018), resulting in

Code — https://github.com/yimingxu24/AD-GCL

Introduction
Graph anomaly detection plays a crucial role in various domains including cybersecurity (Ye et al. 2021), finance (Zheng et al. 2023), and distributed systems (Pazho
et al. 2023). Its primary objective is to identify rare, unexpected, and suspicious observations that significantly deviate from the patterns of the majority in datasets, which helps
minimize the considerable damage caused by detrimental
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12972

