The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mind the Uncertainty in Human Disagreement: Evaluating Discrepancies
Between Model Predictions and Human Responses in VQA
Jian Lan1,2 , Diego Frassinelli1 , Barbara Plank1, 2
1

2

Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany
{lan}@dbs.ifi.lmu.de
{frassinelli, bplank}@cis.lmu.de

Abstract

Peterson et al. 2019), especially for cases with high human
disagreement. We here refer to human uncertainty in human disagreement (HUD) as a two-part observation: a) for
each sample, different individuals may have different knowledge, and thus it may lead to different (valid) responses (also
known as human label variation (Plank 2022)); b) the same
humans may also have their own degree of uncertainty in
responding. HUD is a huge challenge that makes it difficult for models to align with humans (Peterson et al. 2019),
as many samples may not have a single ground truth with
human agreement and high confidence. This issue is particularly pronounced in visual question answering (VQA),
where humans frequently have different opinions, and show
uncertainty in their responses. To illustrate the problem, Figure 1 illustrates the task and the responses generated by four
human annotators (R). It also provides the confidence (C)
of each annotator in the given answer. In the example, the
two responses in gray are the same (“blue and gray”) but
with different human confidence labels (1.0 vs. 0.5), while
those in green and blue have different response labels with
the same human confidence labels.
Traditionally, a model would predict the response with the
highest probability among the prediction distribution (e.g.,
“blue and gray” in Figure 1) but it would miss the effect
that human confidence plays on the prediction distribution. It
will also ignore the existence of multiple valid responses to
the same question. For example, “blue” (0.22) is less probable in the model prediction than “blue and gray” (0.72), but,
in reality, it has a higher human confidence (0.36 vs. 0.27)
and is indeed a highly possible answer. Therefore, training a
model to predict the most probable correct answer, while ignoring HUD, does not allow the model to accurately reflect
human behavior and distributions in real-world scenarios. It
also makes models struggle to assign reliable probabilities to
other equally valid answers. Most of the previous studies on
VQA have not explicitly addressed HUD, and have predominantly evaluated models based on the accuracy of a single
prediction of each sample alone.
This study examines how well state-of-the-art VQA models align with human confidence distributions when HUD
exists. Unlike previous work on VQA, we propose to explicitly utilize HUD information when evaluating the discrepancies between model predictions and human responses.
Specifically, we use VQA 2.0 (Goyal et al. 2017), a dataset

Large vision-language models struggle to accurately predict
responses provided by multiple human annotators, particularly when those responses exhibit high uncertainty. In this
study, we focus on a Visual Question Answering (VQA) task
and comprehensively evaluate how well the output of the
state-of-the-art vision-language model correlates with the distribution of human responses. To do so, we categorize our
samples based on their levels (low, medium, high) of human
uncertainty in disagreement (HUD) and employ, not only accuracy, but also three new human-correlated metrics for the
first time in VQA, to investigate the impact of HUD. We also
verify the effect of common calibration and human calibration (Baan et al. 2022) on the alignment of models and humans. Our results show that even BEiT3, currently the best
model for this task, struggles to capture the multi-label distribution inherent in diverse human responses. Additionally,
we observe that the commonly used accuracy-oriented calibration technique adversely affects BEiT3’s ability to capture
HUD, further widening the gap between model predictions
and human distributions. In contrast, we show the benefits of
calibrating models towards human distributions for VQA, to
better align model confidence with human uncertainty. Our
findings highlight that for VQA, the alignment between human responses and model predictions is understudied and is
an important target for future studies.

Code, project page — https://github.com/mainlp/vqa-hud
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.02773

Introduction
To strengthen human trust in the task of visual question answering (VQA), large vision-language models should exhibit reliable confidence in their predictions. Regardless of
high model accuracy, poor confidence would indicate that
“a model does not know when it does not know” (Baan
et al. 2022; Pavlick and Kwiatkowski 2019; Yang, Yoo,
and Lee 2024). Addressing the importance of model confidence has drawn increasing attention in recent years (Naeini,
Cooper, and Hauskrecht 2015; Guo et al. 2017), aiming to
make models more reliable and capable of mirroring humans’ uncertainty (Collins et al. 2023; Ilia and Aziz 2024;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4446

