The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decoupling Metacognition from Cognition: A Framework for Quantifying
Metacognitive Ability in LLMs
Guoqing Wang1 , Wen Wu1, 2 * , Guangze Ye1, 3, 4 , Zhenxiao Cheng1 , Xi Chen2 , Hong Zheng5
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Mental Health and Psychological Crisis Intervention, School of Psychology and Cognitive
Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Lab of Artificial Intelligence for Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
4
Shanghai Institute of Artificial Intelligence for Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
5
Shanghai Changning Mental Health Center, Shanghai, China
{wgq, gzye, 51255901012}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, wwu@cc.ecnu.edu.cn, xchen@psy.ecnu.edu.cn, zhhmm2@163.com
Abstract

Coupled

Large Language Models (LLMs) are known to hallucinate
facts and make non-factual statements which can undermine
trust in their output. The essence of hallucination lies in the
absence of metacognition in LLMs, namely the understanding of their own cognitive processes. However, there has been
limited research on quantitatively measuring metacognition
within LLMs. Drawing inspiration from cognitive psychology theories, we first quantify the metacognitive ability of
LLMs as their ability to evaluate the correctness of responses
through confidence. Subsequently, we introduce a general
framework called DMC designed to decouple metacognitive ability and cognitive ability. This framework tackles
the challenge of noisy quantification caused by the coupling
of metacognition and cognition in current research, such as
calibration-based metrics. Specifically, the DMC framework
comprises two key steps. Initially, the framework tasks the
LLM with failure prediction, aiming to evaluate the model’s
performance in predicting failures, a performance jointly determined by both cognitive and metacognitive abilities of the
LLM. Following this, the framework disentangles metacognitive ability and cognitive ability based on the failure prediction performance, providing a quantification of the LLM’s
metacognitive ability independent of cognitive influences.
Experiments conducted on eight datasets across five domains
reveal that (1) Our proposed DMC framework effectively separates the metacognition and cognition of LLMs; (2) Various confidence elicitation methods impact the quantification
of metacognitve ability differently; (3) Stronger metacognitive ability are exhibited by LLMs with better overall performance; (4) Enhancing metacognition holds promise for alleviating hallucination issues.

has bad metacognition
Hard Task

Bad FP-P

Easy Task

Good FP-P

has good metacognition

Decoupled
Hard Task

Bad Cognitive Performance
Bad FP-P
has good metacognition
Good Metacognitive
Performance
Good Cognitive Performance

Easy Task

Good FP-P

Figure 1: Illustration of Metacognitive Ability Quantification in LLMs: (top) Coupled; (bottom) Decoupled. (“FP-P”
stands for “Failure Prediction Performance”.)
text (Yu et al. 2023). However, alongside their advantages,
LLMs also exhibit certain limitations that warrant attention.
Hallucination (Guan et al. 2024; Gunjal, Yin, and Bas 2024;
Chen et al. 2024a,b) is one significant issue of concern as
it can impact LLMs’ performance and the practical applications of downstream tasks by generating fictitious information or responses not grounded in the input data, challenging the reliability and trustworthiness of LLM outputs. An
emerging consensus among experts in Artificial Intelligence
(AI) suggests that the root cause of hallucination in LLMs
lies in the lack of understanding of their own cognitive processes (Gekhman et al. 2024; Mielke et al. 2020; Dubey et al.
2024), a concept well-established in cognitive psychology as
metacognition (Fleming and Lau 2014). While efforts have
been made to introduce the concept of metacognition to address hallucination and enhance the performance of downstream tasks (Zhou et al. 2024; Dubey et al. 2024; Li et al.
2024), current research lacks a definitive quantitative framework for measuring LLMs’ metacognitive ability. This gap
continues to result in opacity regarding the mechanisms be-

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3.5 (OpenAI
2021), GPT-4 (Achiam et al. 2023) and Llama (Touvron
et al. 2023) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
various natural language processing tasks, owing to their capacity for learning complex patterns and generating coherent
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25353

