The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TimePFN: Effective Multivariate Time Series Forecasting with Synthetic Data
Ege Onur Taga, Muhammed Emrullah Ildiz, Samet Oymak
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
egetaga@umich.edu, eildiz@umich.edu, oymak@umich.edu

ECL
0.2

Abstract
ETTm2
0.2

The diversity of time series applications and scarcity of
domain-specific data highlight the need for time-series models with strong few-shot learning capabilities. In this work,
we propose a novel training scheme and a transformer-based
architecture, collectively referred to as TimePFN, for multivariate time-series (MTS) forecasting. TimePFN is based on
the concept of Prior-data Fitted Networks (PFN), which aims
to approximate Bayesian inference. Our approach consists of
(1) generating synthetic MTS data through diverse Gaussian
process kernels and the linear coregionalization method, and
(2) a novel MTS architecture capable of utilizing both temporal and cross-channel dependencies across all input patches.
We evaluate TimePFN on several benchmark datasets and
demonstrate that it outperforms the existing state-of-the-art
models for MTS forecasting in both zero-shot and few-shot
settings. Notably, fine-tuning TimePFN with as few as 500
data points nearly matches full dataset training error, and even
50 data points yield competitive results. We also find that
TimePFN exhibits strong univariate forecasting performance,
attesting to its generalization ability. Overall, this work unlocks the power of synthetic data priors for MTS forecasting
and facilitates strong zero- and few-shot forecasting performance.

0.6

0.3

0.6
0.4

1.1
ETTm1 0.4

0.7

1.0

1.5

0.8

0.5
1.3

1.3

1.0

0.8

0.8

ETTh2 0.3

0.6
0.4
ETTh1

1.1

0.8

0.9

1.8
1.3

1.4

0.7
0.5

1.0

0.5 Traffic
TimePFN
iTransformer
PatchTST
DLinear
FEDformer
Informer
Autoformer
0.3 Solar

0.5
0.1
Exchange

Figure 1: Average forecasting performance (MSE) of
TimePFN. MSE values are averaged over all data budgets.

(Zeng et al. 2023), even simple linear models are shown to
outperform most existing transformer-based models in univariate and multivariate time-series forecasting. This could
be attributed to the heterogeneous nature of time-series data
and relatively naive tokenization methods, underscoring the
need for richer datasets as well as more effective architectures that can capture both temporal and cross-channel dependencies.
In language models, the discrete nature of the problem
makes the tokenization fairly straightforward, which is in
contrast to the continuous time series data. Additionally, the
scalar value of a time series datapoint have no clear meaning, unlike words, where vector embeddings can capture
semantic similarity. To address these problems, PatchTST
(Nie et al. 2023) proposed using patching with overlapping
strides and demonstrated its benefit for univariate forecasting. While PatchTST treats multivariate forecasting as multiple univariate problems, iTransformer (Liu et al. 2023) proposes representing each channel as a single token, resulting
in an architecture that intuitively augments simple linear layers with a transformer architecture.
In this work, we approach MTS forecasting from a data-

Code — https://github.com/egetaga/TimePFN

1

Weather
0.2

0.4

Introduction

Natural language processing has achieved remarkable success driven by advances in neural architectures and data
pipelines. These advances underlie modern language and
vision-language models that exhibit remarkable zero-shot
and few-shot learning capabilities. Inspired by these, researchers have started exploring whether such methods and
ideas could be extended to time series forecasting. For instance, a notable line of work (Zhou et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2021; Zhou et al. 2022; Zhang and Yan 2023) examine the
use of transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) in timeseries forecasting. More recently, there is also a push toward
building foundation models for time series tasks (Ansari
et al. 2024). However, the heterogeneous nature of time
series data brings additional complications. As shown by
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20761

