The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OAC: Output-adaptive Calibration for Accurate Post-training Quantization
Ali Edalati1 , Alireza Ghaffari1,2 , Mahsa Ghazvini Nejad1 ,
Lu Hou1 , Boxing Chen1 , Masoud Asgharian2 , Vahid Partovi Nia1
1

2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University
vahid.partovinia@huawei.com

Abstract

reducing the precision of the model weights or activations
while maintaining the performance without extra training
(Xiao et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2022; Frantar et al. 2023;
Lin et al. 2024; Kim et al. 2024; Dettmers et al. 2024;
Huang et al. 2024). PTQ techniques eliminate the necessity of Quantization-aware Training (QAT) methods (Kim
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024; Shao et al. 2024; Du et al. 2024)
that are computationally demanding for LLMs. PTQ methods are one of the main techniques for efficient deployment
of LLMs, enabling near loss-less compression up to 4 bits
(Dettmers et al. 2024). However, extremely low-precision
(2-bit or binary) PTQ is still an open challenge, which is the
main focus of our proposed method.
To recover the performance of the quantized model, most
novel PTQ methods (Frantar et al. 2023; Chee et al. 2023;
Dettmers et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024) perform a layerwise calibration to reduce the quantization error. These
methods measure the quantization error by the ℓ2 loss between the output of the original and quantized layers over
a small calibration set as shown in Figure 1:a). We refer to
such approaches as output-agnostic calibration because they
only consider the output of the individual linear layers and
ignore the model output. The output-agnostic methods compute the second derivative of the ℓ2 loss for the weights of
each layer to formulate a layer-wise Hessian. The Hessian
is used to measure the saliency of weights in order to detect the most salient ones as outliers (Dettmers et al. 2024;
Kim et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024). Also, according to the
Hessian, the weights are updated toward minimizing the ℓ2
error (Frantar et al. 2023; Chee et al. 2023; Dettmers et al.
2024; Huang et al. 2024). Given their output-agnostic nature, they are deemed inadequate to recover the performance
of the original model at extreme low-precision quantization.
We introduce Output-adaptive Calibration (OAC) to
directly minimize the distortion of the model output after
quantization, as shown in Figure 1:b). OAC reduces the
quantization error of the model output and significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art PTQ methods at extreme lowprecision quantization such as 2-bit and binary PTQ.
OAC follows the layer-by-layer recipe to quantize and
calibrate the linear layers of LLMs. Our proposed method,
however, employs the second derivative of the output crossentropy loss to compute the output-adaptive Hessian in contrast to the existing PTQ methods that use the Hessian of

Deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs) has major computational costs, due to their rapidly expanding size.
Compression of LLMs reduces the memory footprint, latency,
and energy required for their inference. Post-training Quantization (PTQ) techniques have been developed to compress
LLMs while avoiding expensive re-training. Most PTQ approaches formulate the quantization error based on a layerwise Euclidean loss, ignoring the model output. Then, each
layer is calibrated using its layer-wise Hessian to update
the weights towards minimizing the quantization error. The
Hessian is also used for detecting the most salient weights
to quantization. Such PTQ approaches are prone to accuracy drop in low-precision quantization. We propose Outputadaptive Calibration (OAC) to incorporate the model output
in the calibration process. We formulate the quantization error
based on the distortion of the output cross-entropy loss. OAC
approximates the output-adaptive Hessian for each layer under reasonable assumptions to reduce the computational complexity. The output-adaptive Hessians are used to update the
weight matrices and detect the salient weights towards maintaining the model output. Our proposed method outperforms
the state-of-the-art baselines such as SpQR and BiLLM, especially, at extreme low-precision (2-bit and binary) quantization.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.15025

1

Introduction

The development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has
sparked a revolution in natural language processing, leading
to remarkable advancements in various tasks, including but
not limited to reasoning, question answering, text generation, and few-shot learning (Radford et al. 2019; Brown et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2022; Touvron et al. 2023a,b; Achiam
et al. 2023). LLMs comprise a huge number of parameters,
exceeding tens and even hundreds of billions, which is considered one of the key factors to their success (Brown et al.
2020). Their large size, however, is associated with major
computational complexities and deployment barriers, especially, on resource-limited machines.
Post-training Quantization (PTQ) approaches have been
introduced to overcome LLMs deployment challenges by
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16453

