The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SymmCompletion: High-Fidelity and High-Consistency Point Cloud Completion
with Symmetry Guidance
Hongyu Yan1 * , Zijun Li2 * , Kunming Luo1 , Li Lu2† , Ping Tan1†
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Sichuan University
{hyanar, kluoad}@connect.ust.hk, lzj020524@gmail.com
luli@scu.edu.cn, pingtan@ust.hk
Abstract

Existing point cloud completion methods generally follow two distinct strategies: reconstructing either the entire
point cloud or only the missing regions. The former strategy typically begins by predicting a coarse but complete
point skeleton, which is then refined using an upsampling
method. However, these methods often struggle to generate
high-fidelity results. The extremely sparse point skeletons
predicted from global features face challenges in preserving
the original geometric structures, making it difficult for the
refinement network to recover detailed point clouds. As a
result, even certain geometries present in the partial inputs
may not be reconstructed. To avoid the loss of original geometries, other methods (Huang et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2023b) that follow the latter strategy focus on recovering only the geometries of the missing regions. Although
this approach ensures completion fidelity by shifting the
learning goal, it struggles to produce consistent results due
to the lack of global optimization. Additionally, these methods often suffer from uneven distribution between the existing regions and the missing ones. Recent methods (Mendoza et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2023a) have introduced a refining process to globally optimize the combination of partial
point clouds and missing regions. However, they still face
issues with insufficient consistency because their simplistic
approaches to global optimization fail to capture precise geometric information necessary for effective refinement.
In this paper, we propose a novel method called SymmCompletion to enhance completion fidelity and consistency.
As illustrated in Figure 1, following the latter strategy,
SymmCompletion first reconstructs the missing parts and
then applies a global optimization network to refine the initial point cloud. Our core solution involves two key approaches: first, enhancing the geometric consistency of the
predicted missing parts; and second, providing explicit geometric guidance for global optimization to improve the capabilities of geometric preservation and restoration.
Specifically, we found that the symmetry of 3D models
is beneficial for obtaining high-consistency missing parts.
However, previous symmetry-based methods struggle to
produce accurate missing regions because the global transformations they apply fail to achieve symmetry in local regions. To address this, we propose a Local Symmetry Transformation Network (LSTNet) to leverage local symmetry information for constructing high-quality missing parts. The

Point cloud completion aims to recover a complete point
shape from a partial point cloud. Although existing methods can form satisfactory point clouds in global completeness, they often lose the original geometry details and face
the problem of geometric inconsistency between existing
point clouds and reconstructed missing parts. To tackle this
problem, we introduce SymmCompletion, a highly effective completion method based on symmetry guidance. Our
method comprises two primary components: a Local Symmetry Transformation Network (LSTNet) and a SymmetryGuidance Transformer (SGFormer). First, LSTNet efficiently
estimates point-wise local symmetry transformation to transform key geometries of partial inputs into missing regions,
thereby generating geometry-align partial-missing pairs and
initial point clouds. Second, SGFormer leverages the geometric features of partial-missing pairs as the explicit symmetric
guidance that can constrain the refinement process for initial point clouds. As a result, SGFormer can exploit provided
priors to form high-fidelity and geometry-consistency final
point clouds. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations on several benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art completion networks.

Code —
https://github.com/HongyuYann/SymmCompletion.git

Introduction
As a fundamental 3D representation, point clouds are widely
used in fields such as autonomous driving, augmented reality, and robotics. However, due to occlusion and resolution
limitations of devices, point clouds captured by LiDAR and
depth cameras are often sparse and incomplete. These lowquality point clouds hinder the research and development of
upstream tasks, such as point cloud classification (Qi et al.
2017a), segmentation (Qi et al. 2017b), and detection (Wu,
Qi, and Fuxin 2019). Consequently, point cloud completion
has become a crucial task aimed at improving data quality
by reconstructing complete and detailed point clouds from
partial observations.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9094

