The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Apartment Rent Division
Ariel D. Procaccia, Benjamin Schiffer, Shirley Zhang
Harvard University

Abstract

solution can be found in polynomial time (Aragones 1995),
and it is possible to optimize linear objectives over envyfree solutions in polynomial time as well (Gal et al. 2017).
Therefore, envy-freeness is both a compelling and computationally tractable fairness notion in the rent division setting.

Rent division is the well-studied problem of fairly assigning
rooms and dividing rent among a set of roommates within a
single apartment. A shortcoming of existing solutions is that
renters are assumed to be considering apartments in isolation,
whereas in reality, renters can choose among multiple apartments. In this paper, we generalize the rent division problem
to the multi-apartment setting, where the goal is to both fairly
choose an apartment among a set of alternatives and fairly assign rooms and rents within the chosen apartment. Our main
contribution is a generalization of envy-freeness called negotiated envy-freeness. We show that a solution satisfying negotiated envy-freeness is guaranteed to exist and that it is
possible to optimize over all negotiated envy-free solutions
in polynomial time. We also define an even stronger fairness
notion called universal envy-freeness and study its existence
when values are drawn randomly.

1

The study of rent division is not driven merely by theoretical interest — it is a poster child for applications of fair division more broadly. In particular, the not-for-profit fair division website Spliddit (Goldman and Procaccia 2014) operated between 2014 and 2022 and offered “provably fair solutions to everyday problems.” Its rent division application
implemented the algorithm of Gal et al. (2017); among the
five applications on Spliddit, it was the most popular, with
more than 30,000 instances solved (Peters, Procaccia, and
Zhu 2022).
A shortcoming of the prevalent approach to fair rent division, however, is that it assumes that the players have already
chosen an apartment, and the only question remaining is how
to divide the rooms and rent. By contrast, groups looking for
an apartment are often not considering each potential apartment separately. Rather, many groups can further optimize
by choosing among a set of available apartments which fit
their budget and location constraints. This setting gives rise
to new sources of complexity as the players are required not
only to assign rooms and prices in the chosen apartment, but
also to collectively decide on which apartment to rent. Such
a decision can be contentious. Imagine, for instance, three
players whose apartment hunting priorities are a short commute, proximity to green spaces, and an exciting neighborhood, respectively. Suppose further that current apartment
options include one apartment that is close to player 1’s
workplace, one which neighbors the largest park in the city,
and one in the center of Restaurant Row. The rooms in each
apartment may be asymmetric as well. Given all of these factors, how should the players decide which apartment to rent
and who gets which room?

Introduction

Rent division is a classic and intuitive problem within the
space of fair division, in which a number of roommates are
faced with the joint decision of how to assign rooms and split
the total rent in a shared apartment. The problem is complicated by the fact that the rooms may vary widely and that
players may have very different values for different rooms;
for example, one room may have a better view, or one player
may derive higher utility from having larger closets. Preferences over prices may also be complex, but it is commonly
assumed that players’ utilities are quasi-linear: utility equals
value minus price. The goal is to find an assignment of players and prices to rooms that takes such player preferences
into account and satisfies a rigorous notion of fairness.
The gold standard for fairness in rent division is envyfreeness, which guarantees that each player has higher utility
for their own room than for any other room, given the prices
assigned to each room. In other words, in an envy-free allocation, no roommate would want to trade their room for any
other room. Along with being easily justifiable (Procaccia
2019), a solution which satisfies envy-freeness is also guaranteed to exist for the rent division problem (Svensson 1983)
under the assumption of quasi-linearity. Furthermore, such a

Crucially, it does not suffice to merely compute an envy-free
solution in each individual apartment. Consider the following example:
Example 1.1. There are two players and two apartments.
Each apartment has total rent 300 and contains two symmetric rooms. The value of each player (rows) for each room

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14054

