The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cauchy Diffusion: A Heavy-tailed Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model for
Speech Synthesis
Qi Lian1 , Yu Qi2,3,1,4 * , Yueming Wang1
2

1
The College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration, Zhejiang University, China
3
Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital, Zhejiang University, China
4
State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China
{lianqi, qiyu, ymingwang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

exhibit completely different prosodies, which leads to an imbalance in speech data (Nooteboom et al. 1997). The positions of silent pauses and pitch variations could be unclear, and the waveforms of identical words or sentences
may vary greatly (McPherson and McDermott 2018). Existing DDPM-based neural vocoders struggle to handle the
diversity of prosodies.
To address these issues, we explore the viability of employing the Cauchy distribution as a substitute for DDPMbased neural vocoders. Unlike the Gaussian distribution, the
Cauchy distribution has heavier tails, making it more tolerant of imbalanced distributions (Feller 1991; Foss et al.
2011; Qi et al. 2014). Previous studies have revealed that utilizing a heavy-tailed distribution in deep generative models
helps improve the diversity of synthesized samples (YOON
et al. 2023; Han et al. 2024). By incorporating Cauchy noise
into the DDPM, we anticipate potential improvements in the
prosody diversities of synthesized speeches.
Designing a DDPM with Cauchy distribution requires the
implementation of diffusion and generative processes using
Cauchy noises. Furthermore, since stochastic sampling provides better diversity than deterministic sampling, we aim
to devise a DDPM that supports stochastic sampling by utilizing noise and its scale at each diffusion step to maximize
prosody diversities. The main challenge is that the Cauchy
distribution does not adhere to the Kolmogorov equations.
Inspired by the definition of ratio distribution, we represent the Cauchy distribution using two Gaussian distributions (Marsaglia 1965). Two Gaussian distributions and
one Cauchy distribution are unified under the same locationscale parameterization. The scales of the Cauchy noises in
the diffusion and generative processes can be determined
through ratio distribution. An optimization objective function that minimizes the differences between the Cauchy
noises and their scales can then be defined. Lastly, we discovered that the sampling methodology introduced in (Song,
Meng, and Ermon 2020) performs well for our model, owing
to the similarity between the Gaussian and Cauchy distributions. Using this methodology, our model supports deterministic and stochastic sampling processes. The resulting denoising diffusion probabilistic model incorporating Cauchy
noises is termed as Cauchy Diffusion.
The experimental results on the LJSpeech and VCTK
datasets confirmed the effectiveness of our approach. Our

Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) have
gained popularity in devising neural vocoders and obtained
outstanding performance. However, existing DDPM-based
neural vocoders struggle to handle the prosody diversities
due to their susceptibility to mode-collapse issues confronted
with imbalanced data. We introduced Cauchy Diffusion, a
model incorporating the Cauchy noises to address this challenge. The heavy-tailed Cauchy distribution exhibits better
resilience to imbalanced speech data, potentially improving
prosody modeling. Our experiments on the LJSpeech and
VCTK datasets demonstrate that Cauchy Diffusion achieved
state-of-the-art speech synthesis performance. Compared to
existing neural vocoders, our Cauchy Diffusion notably improved speech diversity while maintaining superior speech
quality. Remarkably, Cauchy Diffusion surpassed neural
vocoders based on generative adversarial networks (GANs)
that are explicitly optimized to improve diversity.

Introduction
Speech synthesis is a comprehensive technique that enables
machines to produce authentic speech, drawing from various disciplines within natural language processing, such
as acoustics and linguistics (Ning et al. 2019). Deep generative models have recently made significant advancements in speech synthesis, encompassing flow-based models
(Prenger, Valle, and Catanzaro 2019), GAN-based models
(Kong, Kim, and Bae 2020; Jang et al. 2021), and DDPMs
(Chen et al. 2020; Kong et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2022). Current generative models for speech synthesis typically comprise two components: an encoder that extracts acoustic or
linguistic features from the input text and a neural vocoder
that converts these features into raw waveforms (Wang et al.
2017). DDPMs have attracted notable attention among these
models for their exceptional generative capabilities in devising neural vocoders (Yang et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2024).
However, DDPMs are susceptible to mode-collapse issuses when dealing with imbalanced data (Qin et al. 2023).
The diversity of prosodies arising from various physical conditions and environments make the same spoken sentence
* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24549

