The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Method for Enhancing Generalization of Adam by Multiple Integrations
Long Jin* , Han Nong, Liangming Chen, Zhenming Su
School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China
{jinlongsysu, nonghan0017, lmchen}@foxmail.com, suzhm@lzu.edu.cn

Abstract
The insufficient generalization of adaptive moment estimation (Adam) has hindered its broader application. Recent
studies have shown that flat minima in loss landscapes
are highly associated with improved generalization. Inspired
by the filtering effect of integration operations on highfrequency signals, we propose multiple integral Adam (MIAdam), a novel optimizer that integrates a multiple integral
term into Adam. This multiple integral term effectively filters
out sharp minima encountered during optimization, guiding
the optimizer towards flatter regions and thereby enhancing
generalization capability. We provide a theoretical explanation for the improvement in generalization through the diffusion theory framework and analyze the impact of the multiple
integral term on the optimizer’s convergence. Experimental
results demonstrate that MIAdam not only enhances generalization and robustness against label noise but also maintains
the rapid convergence characteristic of Adam, outperforming
Adam and its variants in state-of-the-art benchmarks.

Figure 1: The idea of this work and the filtering effect of integrations on optimizer trajectories. The blue integrated trajectory represents an equivalent path that does not actually
exist on the original loss landscape.

Code — https://github.com/LongJin-lab/MIAdam
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12473
2015) is currently one of the most popular adaptive learning
optimizers for its rapid convergence and efficient handling of
sparse gradients. The combination of first-order and secondorder moments in Adam enables the effective incorporation
of momentum-based optimization and adaptive learning rate
methods, thereby enhancing its overall efficiency and applicability in various neural network training contexts. Despite
being widely used, Adam also exhibits certain limitations,
such as the inferior generalization capabilities compared to
SGD in some scenarios (Wilson et al. 2017; Luo et al. 2019;
Zou et al. 2021). Therefore, several enhanced variants of
Adam are developed to alleviate the issue of poor generalization. Switching from Adam to SGD (SWATS) (Keskar and
Socher 2017) is designed to start training with the Adam
optimizer, then automatically switch to SGD, aiming to
improve the model’s generalization performance. However,
this method can not maintain the original convergence rate
of Adam to some extent. ND-Adam (normalized directionpreserving Adam) (Zhang 2018) meticulously preserves the
direction of gradients for each parameter and produces the
regularization effect akin to L2 weight decay. Despite this,
its ability to enhance generalization is quite limited. AdaBound (Luo et al. 2019) employs dynamic constraints on

Introduction
An appropriate optimizer is essential to train a deep neural network (DNN), as it directly affects the training convergence and performance of a model (Yao et al. 2021).
The goal of optimizers is usually to minimize (or maximize) a certain objective function, typically a loss function, which measures the gap between the predictions and
ground-truth values. As a traditional optimizer, stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) is a commonly used optimizer for
training DNNs (Deng et al. 2023). However, SGD suffers
from certain limitations, such as the need to precisely tune
the learning rate, the uniform scaling of gradients in all directions, and the risk of being trapped in saddle points (Johnson et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021). In order to address these
challenges, adaptive learning rate optimizers are developed,
offering more nuanced control over learning rates and improved convergence in diverse training scenarios. Among
them, adaptive moment estimation (Adam) (Kingma and Ba
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4147

