The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Like an Ophthalmologist: Dynamic Selection Driven Multi-View Learning for
Diabetic Retinopathy Grading
Xiaoling Luo1 , Qihao Xu2 , Huisi Wu1 , Chengliang Liu3 , Zhihui Lai1 , Linlin Shen1,4,5 *
1

Computer Vision Institute, College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
5
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, China
xiaolingluoo@outlook.com, xqh51199597@outlook.com, hswu@szu.edu.cn, liucl1996@163.com, laizhihui@szu.edu.cn,
llshen@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
Diabetic retinopathy (DR), with its large patient population,
has become a formidable threat to human visual health. In the
clinical diagnosis of DR, multi-view fundus images are considered to be more suitable for DR diagnosis because of the
wide coverage of the field of view. Therefore, different from
the previous single-view DR grading methods, we design a
dynamic selection-driven multi-view DR grading method to
fit clinical scenarios better. Since lesion information plays a
key role in DR diagnosis, previous methods usually boost the
model performance by enhancing the lesion feature. However, during the actual diagnosis, ophthalmologists not only
focus on the crucial parts, but also exclude irrelevant features
to ensure the accuracy of judgment. To this end, we introduce
the idea of dynamic selection and design a series of selection mechanisms from fine granularity to coarse granularity.
In this work, we first introduce an Ophthalmic Image Reader
(OIR) agent to provide the model with pixel-level prompts
of suspected lesion areas. Moreover, we design a Multi-View
Token Selection Module (MVTSM) that prunes redundant
feature tokens and dynamically selects key information. In
the final decision stage, we dynamically fuse multi-view features through the novel Multi-View Mixture of Experts Module (MVMoEM), to enhance key views and reduce the impact
of conflicting views. Extensive experiments on a large multiview fundus image dataset with 34,452 images prove that our
method performs favorably against state-of-the-art models.

Figure 1: Our approach simulates the process of clinical
diagnosis by ophthalmologists, with a coherent diagnostic
train of thought from the discovery of suspected areas to the
DR grading.

2003) as an example, the severity of DR is diagnosed based
on a series of DR lesions and can be divided into five levels
(grade 0-4): normal, mild, moderate, severe and Proliferative
Diabetic Retinopathy (PDR).
With the development of computer vision (Fang et al.
2024b, 2023, 2024a), researchers have discovered the great
potential of artificial intelligence algorithms to work in DR
Diagnosis. Although some DR Diagnosis algorithms have
been proposed (Dai et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2021), they are still
below the level of ophthalmologist diagnosis. According to
previous works (Wu et al. 2021), we found that the defects
of existing DR Diagnosis methods lie in the following aspects. First of all, most previous works are trained on singleview databases with a field of view (FOV) of only 45◦ - 50◦
(e.g. MESSIDOR (Decenciere et al. 2014), EyePACS (EyePACS 2015)). The observable FOV of the human retina can
reach 230◦ , which means that single-view data is at risk of
losing most of the pathological features on the retina. Meanwhile, clinical medical research (Hu et al. 2019) also shows
that 45◦ single-view mydriatic fundus photography does not
meet the technical requirements of DR screening, and fundus multi-view imaging has a better performance in DR clinical diagnosis (Srihatrai and Hlowchitsieng 2018).

Code — https://github.com/xqh180110910537/SMVDR

Introduction
According to the 10th edition of the Diabetes Atlas published by the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) (Federation 2021), 537 million adults worldwide were living
with diabetes in 2021, accounting for roughly one in every
ten adults globally. Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is the most
common complication of diabetes and is considered to be
one of the leading causes of blindness (Dai et al. 2024). Taking the international DR Grading standard (Wilkinson et al.
* Corresponding Author: Linlin Shen
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19224

