The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

All-in-One: Transferring Vision Foundation Models into Stereo Matching
Jingyi Zhou1 * , Haoyu Zhang1 * , Jiakang Yuan1 * , Peng Ye1,3,4† , Tao Chen1† , Hao Jiang2 , Meiya
Chen2 , Yangyang Zhang2
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University, China
2
Xiaomi Inc., Beijing, China
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Selective
Features

As a fundamental vision task, stereo matching has made remarkable progress. While recent iterative optimization-based
methods have achieved promising performance, their feature
extraction capabilities still have room for improvement. Inspired by the ability of vision foundation models (VFMs)
to extract general representations, in this work, we propose
AIO-Stereo which can flexibly select and transfer knowledge
from multiple heterogeneous VFMs to a single stereo matching model. To better reconcile features between heterogeneous VFMs and the stereo matching model and fully exploit
prior knowledge from VFMs, we proposed a dual-level feature utilization mechanism that aligns heterogeneous features
and transfers multi-level knowledge. Based on the mechanism, a dual-level selective knowledge transfer module is designed to selectively transfer knowledge and integrate the advantages of multiple VFMs. Experimental results show that
AIO-Stereo achieves start-of-the-art performance on multiple
datasets and ranks 1st on the Middlebury dataset and outperforms all the published work on the ETH3D benchmark.

CNN
Feature
Distillation

Dual-Level Selective
Knowledge Transfer
Module

Abstract

DINO

SAM

Depth
Anything

(a)
Low Texture Area
Dark Area

(b)

Selective-IGEV

Ours

Figure 1: (a) The overview of AIO-Stereo which transfers
selected knowledge from multiple VFMs to a single stereo
matching model. (b) Comparisons between Selective-IGEV
and our AIO-Stereo in dark and low texture areas.

selective recurrent unit and contextual spatial attention module to further improve the ability to predict detailed areas.
Despite the great improvement in performance, the general feature extraction capabilities of the existing models
are relatively weak which can be attributed as follows:
(1) Recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) works (e.g., SelectiveStereo (Wang et al. 2024)) mainly focus on refining iterative update mechanisms while partially ignoring the quality
of encoded features. Meanwhile, the task-oriented optimization objectives also make it difficult for the encoder to learn
global and contextual information. (2) The amount of stereo
matching data is relatively small and most of them are synthetic data. It is difficult for models to learn general representations from insufficient data. For example, as shown in
Fig. 1 (b), previous methods (e.g., Selective-IGEV (Wang
et al. 2024)) fail to predict the depth information in dark
areas with vague texture features since features in these areas are highly similar. As a result, disparity prediction based
on feature matching between pixels is prone to have large
mismatches. Recently, vision foundation models (VFMs)
have emerged and shown promising performance on various tasks. These VFMs are trained on large-scale datasets
and can extract general representations which motivates us
to consider injecting the general feature extraction capabili-

Introduction
With the development of 3D vision tasks and their applications such as robotics and autonomous driving, stereo
matching (Li et al. 2022; Chang and Chen 2018a) becomes a
fundamental vision task since it can provide depth information in the real 3D world. Stereo matching models typically
predict the pixel-wise displacement (i.e., disparity) between
a pair of rectified images and further decode the depth information with the camera calibration.
Benefiting from the success of deep learning, some works
begin to explore learning-based methods (Kendall et al.
2017; Xu and Zhang 2020). As a milestone, PSMNet (Chang
and Chen 2018a) utilizes 3D convolution to regularize a
4D cost volume and boost the performance. However, such
learning-based methods need large computational costs. Recently, iterative optimization-based methods (Li et al. 2022;
Xu et al. 2023a; Zhao et al. 2023) have shown great potential on stereo matching tasks by progressively updating the
disparity map. Selective-Stereo (Wang et al. 2024) proposes
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10797

