The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mixture of Experts Based Multi-Task Supervise Learning from Crowds
Tao Han, Huaixuan Shi, Xinyi Ding, Xi-Ao Ma, Huamao Gu, Yili Fang*
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou 310018, China
{hantao, xding, mxa, ghmsjq, fangyl}@zjgsu.edu.cn, 22020100076@pop.zjgsu.edu.cn

Abstract

Skene 1979), and HDS (Karger, Oh, and Shah 2011; Li and
Yu 2014), do not incorporate item features. In contrast, deep
learning methods like Training Deep Neural Nets (Gaunt,
Borsa, and Bachrach 2016) take item features into account.
In the supervised approach, a classifier model is first constructed with item features as the input and ground truth as
the output. Then, a worker behavior model is created based
on a confusion matrix that establishes the relationship between one item’s ground truth and the worker labels. On this
basis, supervised learning is implemented using the classifier model and the worker behavior model by treating the
worker labels as supervisory information. Finally, the output
of the classifier model is used as the inferred ground truth. In
recent years, various learning-from-crowds methods based
on supervised learning have been proposed, such as Crowdlayer(Rodrigues and Pereira 2018), CoNAL(Chu, Ma, and
Wang 2021), and UnionNet(Wei et al. 2022). However, the
worker behavior model based on the confusion matrix faces
challenges in effectively capturing variations in feature characteristics across different items. Neglecting these variations
in worker behavior under different conditions can result in
inaccurate representations of worker behavior, consequently
impacting the quality of truth inference. For example, in
handwritten digit recognition, workers generally have high
accuracy. Suppose there are two items: one closely resembles the digit “1,” but its ground truth is actually “7,” and the
other is a normal “7.” The former receives many labels as
“1,” while the latter rarely gets labeled as “1.” Under the
worker behavior model based on the confusion matrix, it
is difficult to model the labeling behavior of such difficult
items accurately. Therefore, there is a high probability that
the model will interpret the former with “1” as the ground
truth, leading to incorrect judgments. The quality of aggregation strategies is influenced by uncertainty from hidden
variables, the method’s data adaptability, and the accuracy
in characterizing worker behavior. The purpose of this paper is to develop a supervised model that can achieve highquality truth inference with a worker behavior model at the
item feature level.

Existing learning-from-crowds methods aim to design proper
aggregation strategies to infer the unknown true labels from
noisy labels provided by crowdsourcing. They treat the
ground truth as hidden variables and use statistical or deep
learning based worker behavior models to infer the ground
truth. However, worker behavior models that rely on ground
truth hidden variables overlook workers’ behavior at the item
feature level, leading to imprecise characterizations and negatively impacting the quality of learning-from-crowds. This
paper proposes a new paradigm of multi-task supervised
learning-from-crowds, which eliminates the need for modeling of items’s ground truth in worker behavior models. Within
this paradigm, we propose a worker behavior model at the
item feature level called Mixture of Experts based Multi-task
Supervised Learning-from-Crowds (MMLC), then, two aggregation strategies are proposed within MMLC. The first
strategy, named MMLC-owf, utilizes clustering methods in
the worker spectral space to identify the projection vector of the oracle worker. Subsequently, the labels generated
based on this vector are regarded as the items’s ground truth
The second strategy, called MMLC-df, employs the MMLC
model to fill the crowdsourced data, which can enhance the
effectiveness of existing aggregation strategies . Experimental results demonstrate that MMLC-owf outperforms state-ofthe-art methods and MMLC-df enhances the quality of existing learning-from-crowds methods.

Introduction
Existing learning-from-crowdsmethods can be broadly classified into two categories: weakly supervised and supervised
approaches. In the weakly supervised approach, unknown
ground truth are treated as hidden variables. This involves
utilizing statistics from workers’ noisy answers to calculate
results directly. Alternatively, it entails creating worker behavior models and employing unsupervised learning methods such as the EM algorithm to estimate unknown parameters and infer the ground truth. The weakly supervised
approach can further be classified into statistical learning
and deep learning methods based on whether considering
the features of items. Statistical learning methods, such as
MV (Imamura, Sato, and Sugiyama 2018), DS (Dawid and

In this paper, we propose Multi-task Supervised Learningfrom-crowds (MLC), a novel paradigm for crowdsourcing
learning. Unlike the traditional paradigm, MLC does not
rely on the ground truth of the items but instead focuses
on understanding the unique behavior of individual work-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14256

