The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SpotDiff: Spatial Gene Expression Imputation Diffusion with Single-Cell RNA
Sequencing Data Integration
Tianyi Chen1 , Yunfei Zhang2 , Lianxin Xie2 , Wenjun Shen3 , Si Wu2 * , Hau-San Wong1 *
1

City University of Hong Kong
South China University of Technology
3
Shantou University Medical College
tychen.cs@gmail.com, {cszhangyunfei, cslianxin.xie}@mail.scut.edu.cn, wjshen@stu.edu.cn
cswusi@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
The advent of Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) has revolutionized understanding of tissue architecture by creating highresolution maps of gene expression patterns. However, the
low capture rate of ST leads to significant sparsity. The aim
of imputation is to recover biological signals by imputing the
dropouts in ST data to approximate the true expression values. In this paper, we introduce a Spatial Gene Expression Imputation Diffusion model to facilitate ST data imputation, and
our model is referred to as SpotDiff. Specifically, we incorporate a spot-gene prompt learning module to capture the association between spots and genes. Further, SpotDiff integrates
single-cell RNA sequencing data to impute gene expression
at each spot. The proposed approach is able to reduce the uncertainty in the imputation process, since the aggregation of
multiple single-cell measurements yield a stable representation of the corresponding spot expression profile. Extensive
experiments have been performed to demonstrate that SpotDiff outperforms existing imputation methods across multiple
benchmarks in terms of yielding more accurate and biologically relevant gene expression profiles, particularly in highly
sparse scenarios.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the imputation process for ST data using (a) traditional models versus the (b)
proposed SpotDiff approach.
Variational Autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2013), Diffusion Models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020), Matrix Factorization (MF) (Lan et al. 2024) and K-Nearest Neighbors
(KNN) (Luo 2022) have been applied to biological data imputation, aiming to generate realistic data that aligns with the
target distribution. By learning the complex distributions of
data, these generative models can partially recover missing
gene expression values (Hu et al. 2021; Bergenstråhle et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2023). However, they can only replicate
observed distributions and are unable to infer unobserved biological signals, which restricts their capacity to detect novel
or rare biological phenomena. Further, several methods attempt to utilize single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq)
data for imputation, but these approaches encounter two primary challenges: scRNA-seq data is highly sparse, making
it an unreliable source for imputation; second, they often neglect the potential advantages of incorporating multi-modal
data to enhance the imputation process. These methods typically rely on one modal data source and fail to fully exploit
the complementary between different data types. In Figure
1, we briefly contrast the traditional models of imputation
methods with the imputed multi-modal information aggregated by SpotDiff.
In this paper, we propose a multi-modal conditional diffusion model (SpotDiff) for the imputation of ST data. To

Introduction
The emergence of spatial transcriptomics (ST) has revolutionized our understanding of gene expression by revealing its spatial organization within tissues (Marx 2021; Yuan
et al. 2024). This technology preserves the spatial context
of gene expression data, offering crucial insights into cellular micro environments and tissue architecture. Nonetheless,
the low capture rate of ST data frequently result in data sparsity, presenting substantial challenges to accurate imputation
tasks (Li et al. 2024a; Qiao and Huang 2024). A significant
challenge in these imputation tasks is the lack of true corresponding data, complicating the recovery of biological signals by imputing the dropouts in ST data to approximate the
true gene expression profiles.
In recent years, generative models have made remarkable strides across various domains (Karras, Laine, and Aila
2019; Gao et al. 2023; Sargsyan et al. 2023). Models such as
Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014),
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15848

