The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Capability Instruction Tuning
Yi-Kai Zhang, De-Chuan Zhan, Han-Jia Ye*
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{zhangyk, zhandc, yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

: Test instruction

Abstract

: GPT-4o’s correct

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated humanlike instruction-following abilities, particularly those exceeding 100 billion parameters. The combined capability of some
smaller, resource-friendly LLMs can address most of the instructions that larger LLMs excel at. In this work, we explore how to route the best-performing LLM for each instruction to achieve better overall performance. We develop a new
paradigm, constructing capability instructions with model
capability representation, user instruction, and performance
inquiry prompts to assess the performance. To learn from capability instructions, we introduce a new end-to-end framework
called Model Selection with Aptitude Test (M ODEL -SAT),
which generates positive and negative samples based on what
different models perform well or struggle with. M ODEL -SAT
uses a model capability encoder that extends its model representation to a lightweight LLM. Our experiments show that
M ODEL -SAT understands the performance dimensions of candidate models and provides the probabilities of their capability
to handle various instructions. Additionally, during deployment, a new model can quickly infer its aptitude test results
across 50 tasks, each with 20 shots. M ODEL -SAT performs
state-of-the-art model routing without candidate inference and
in real-world new model-released scenarios. The code is available at https://github.com/Now-Join-Us/CIT-LLM-Routing.

: GPT-4o’s incorrect
: Following 5 LLMs’
correct instructions,
respectively

2023/06

2023/06

2023/08

Phi-1 +ChatGLM2 +Zephyr

2023/11

2024/01

+Yi

+InternLM

Coverage Ratio of GPT-4o Corrects

27%

45%

80%

88%

90%
Release Time

(Phi-1+ChatGLM2+Zephyr) covers 80% of the GPT-4o’s correct instructions.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI 2022; Du et al.
2022; Touvron et al. 2023a; Chiang et al. 2023; Jiang et al.
2023) rapidly evolve, demonstrating near-human general capabilities, especially in understanding, reasoning, and creative tasks related to instruction-response scenarios. Recent
advancements have even enabled these LLMs to be trained
in multilingual (Yang et al. 2024; Dubey et al. 2024), multidomain (Zhou et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024), and multimodal (Chen et al. 2015, 2023; Reid et al. 2024) environments, allowing them to tackle complex instructions such as
“What is the relationship between Fourier series and Hilbert
space?” or to interpret images by identifying, “What are the
basis vectors of the Hilbert space?”
The rise of LLMs and their extensions has incredibly energized community applications. However, achiev* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25958

Figure 1: Illustration of Coverage Observation: The combined capabilities of the earlier-released model zoo effectively address most of the instructions that GPT-4o excels at.
The union of samples managed accurately by Phi-1, ChatGLM2, and Zephyr covers 80% of GPT-4o’s correct instructions. The smaller-scale model zoo can enhance overall performance by selecting a suitable model for each instruction.

ing more comprehensive capabilities often requires LLMs
of a larger scale. According to the Open LLM Leaderboard (Aidar Myrzakhan 2024), 60% of the top 50 LLMs
have around 70 billion (B) parameters or more, with only
three LLMs under 10B. Additionally, some closed-source
LLMs consistently dominate performance rankings over extended periods. Consequently, optimizing LLM applications
often hinges on substantial computational resources or costly
token purchases. A natural idea arises: Can we utilize multiple smaller LLMs, which are more resource-friendly and have
below one-tenth of the parameters of their larger counterparts,

