The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TTE: Two Tokens are Enough to Improve Parameter-Efficient Tuning
Jiacheng Ruan, Mingye Xie, Jingsheng Gao, Xian Gao, Suncheng Xiang, Ting Liu, Yuzhuo Fu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
jackchenruan@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

pre-trained model remains frozen, and only a small portion of parameters is introduced or adjusted to acquire the
downstream knowledge. Benefiting from large-scale, pretrained datasets and the diversity of downstream tasks, this
fine-tuning paradigm has been extensively developed in various fields, including computer vision (Zhong et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022), natural
language processing (Houlsby et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2021;
Zaken, Ravfogel, and Goldberg 2021), and multimodal domains (Gao et al. 2021; Khattak et al. 2023; Gao et al. 2024).
However, both fine-tuning paradigms are afflicted by
overfitting issues (Zheng et al. 2023; Zhuang et al. 2020),
which detrimentally affect the fine-tuning performance on
downstream tasks. In FPT, a variety of regularization frameworks have been proposed to mitigate this issue (Zhong
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; You et al. 2020; Zhou, Chen,
and Huang 2023). For instance, DR-Tune (Zhou, Chen, and
Huang 2023), the leading FPT framework, integrates distribution regularization and semantic calibration techniques
to avoid overfitting and improve performance. In PET, although considerable research has focused on optimizing performance via well-designed modules (Zhang, Zhou, and Liu
2022; Lian et al. 2022; Jie and Deng 2022; Luo et al. 2023a;
Dong et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023), the overfitting issues
and regularization frameworks remains underexplored.
In this paper, we conduct a pioneering study on the overfitting phenomena in PET, as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, we examine the performance of three classic PET architectures: VPT (Jia et al. 2022), Adapter/AdaptFormer1
(Houlsby et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2022), and LoRA (Hu et al.
2021), on the VTAB-1K benchmark (Zhai et al. 2019). The
results reveal that all these PET structures exhibit significant
overfitting issues. In (Han et al. 2024), the authors addressed
the overfitting of VPT by increasing the number of training
samples. Correspondingly, we intuitively reduced the number of parameters introduced by PET while maintaining a
fixed number of samples; however, this approach failed to
significantly mitigate overfitting and led to decreased performance. Furthermore, we explored the use of various regularization strategies to mitigate the overfitting problem in

Existing fine-tuning paradigms are predominantly characterized by Full Parameter Tuning (FPT) and Parameter-Efficient
Tuning (PET). FPT fine-tunes all parameters of a pre-trained
model on downstream tasks, whereas PET freezes the pretrained model and employs only a minimal number of learnable parameters for fine-tuning. However, both approaches
face issues of overfitting, especially in scenarios where downstream samples are limited. This issue has been thoroughly
explored in FPT, but less so in PET. To this end, this paper investigates overfitting in PET, representing a pioneering study in the field. Specifically, across 19 image classification datasets, we employ three classic PET methods (e.g.,
VPT, Adapter/Adaptformer, and LoRA) and explore various
regularization techniques to mitigate overfitting. Regrettably,
the results suggest that existing regularization techniques are
incompatible with the PET process and may even lead to
performance degradation. Consequently, we introduce a new
framework named TTE (Two Tokens are Enough), which effectively alleviates overfitting in PET through a novel constraint function based on the learnable tokens. Experiments
conducted on 24 datasets across image and few-shot classification tasks demonstrate that our fine-tuning framework
not only mitigates overfitting but also significantly enhances
PET’s performance. Notably, our TTE framework surpasses
the highest-performing FPT framework (DR-Tune), utilizing significantly fewer parameters (0.15M vs. 85.84M) and
achieving an improvement of 1%.

Code — https://github.com/JCruan519/TTE

Introduction
The fine-tuning paradigm utilizes parameters learned during the pre-training phase as the initialization for the finetuning process, leveraging prior knowledge for enhanced
downstream adaptation. Existing fine-tuning paradigms can
be categorized into Full Parameter Tuning (FPT) and
Parameter-Efficient Tuning (PET) based on whether the
model’s pre-trained parameters are frozen. In FPT, the pretrained parameters serve as the initialization, and all model
parameters are fine-tuned to accommodate the distribution
changes of downstream tasks. In PET, the backbone of the

1
Because Adapter and Adaptformer incorporate bottleneck
modules in serial and parallel configurations, respectively, in this
paper, we refer to Adapter as S-Ada. and Adaptformer as P-Ada.
for simplicity.

* Corresponding Author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20209

