The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Vacant Classes in Label-Skewed Federated Learning
Kuangpu Guo1,2 , Yuhe Ding3 , Jian Liang2,4 * , Zilei Wang1 , Ran He2,4 , Tieniu Tan5,2,4
1

University of Science and Technology of China
NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Anhui University
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Nanjing University
gkp@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {madao3c, liangjian92}@gmail.com, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn, {rhe, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract

that severely undermine the performance of federated learning (Hsu, Qi, and Brown 2019; Yang, Fang, and Liu 2021;
Reguieg et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023).
Typically, the local data often consists of majority classes
and minority classes, which refer to classes with a large
amount of data a small amount of data, respectively (Zhang
et al. 2022, 2023). As evidenced in prior studies (Zhang et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2022), the accuracy of minority classes notably decreases after local updates, signaling that the client
model is overfitting to local imbalanced data. Consequently,
this results in substantial performance degradation of the
global model (Yeganeh et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2022). To address the issue of lower accuracy in minority
classes, previous methods often incorporate class-balanced
learning techniques during local training (Zhang et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023b; Shen, Wang, and Lv
2023). Some works (Zhang et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022;
Shen, Wang, and Lv 2023; Wang et al. 2023b) advocate for
calibrating logits according to the client data distribution
to balance minority and majority classes. However, previous methods have overlooked vacant classes, which refer to
classes without data but have highly versatile applications.
For instance, in landmark detection (Weyand et al. 2020),
most contributors possess only a subset of landmark categories from places they have lived or traveled. More importantly, these vacant classes can significantly compromise the
model’s performance, particularly in scenarios with highly
skewed label distributions.
For example, we compare the class-wise accuracy of the
initial global model and updated local models using both
the classic method FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) and one
SOTA method FedLC (Zhang et al. 2022). As depicted in
Figure 1 (b) and (c), the updated local model exhibits a notable decline in accuracy for vacant classes (e.g., categories
0, 1, 2, 4, 6, and 7) compared to the class-wise accuracy
of the initial global model. In extreme cases, the accuracy
even decreases close to zero (e.g., category 6). We posit
this severe decline is attributed to the loss of information
about vacant classes in the updated local models. By the
way, although FedLC (Zhang et al. 2022) partially alleviates
the performance decline for minority classes, particularly in
classes 3, a substantial gap remains compared to the global
model. These results indicate that ignoring vacant classes
can lead to a sharp decline in accuracy for those classes, and

Label skews, characterized by disparities in local label distribution across clients, pose a significant challenge in federated
learning. As minority classes suffer from worse accuracy due
to overfitting on local imbalanced data, prior methods often
incorporate class-balanced learning techniques during local
training. Although these methods improve the mean accuracy
across all classes, we observe that vacant classes—referring
to categories absent from a client’s data distribution—remain
poorly recognized. Besides, there is still a gap in the accuracy of local models on minority classes compared to
the global model. This paper introduces FedVLS, a novel
approach to label-skewed federated learning that integrates
both vacant-class distillation and logit suppression simultaneously. Specifically, vacant-class distillation leverages knowledge distillation during local training on each client to retain
essential information related to vacant classes from the global
model. Moreover, logit suppression directly penalizes network logits for non-label classes, effectively addressing misclassifications in minority classes that may be biased toward
majority classes. Extensive experiments validate the efficacy
of FedVLS, demonstrating superior performance compared
to previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods across diverse
datasets with varying degrees of label skews.

Code — https://github.com/krumpguo/FedVLS

Introduction
Federated learning has emerged as a prominent distributed
learning paradigm, lauded for its capability to train a global
model without direct access to raw data (Konečnỳ et al.
2016; Li et al. 2020; Kairouz et al. 2021). The traditional
federated learning (FL) algorithm, FedAvg (McMahan et al.
2017), follows an iterative process of refining the global
model by aggregating parameters from local models, which
are initialized with the latest global model parameters and
trained across diverse client devices (Sheller et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2020; Chai et al. 2024; Luo et al. 2022). In real-world
scenarios, local client data often originate from diverse populations or organizations, displaying significant label skews
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16960

