The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revisiting Interpolation for Noisy Label Correction
Yuanzhuo Xu1 , Xiaoguang Niu1 * , Jie Yang1 , Ruiyi Su1 , Jian Zhang1 , Shubo Liu1 , Steve Drew2
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
Department of Electrical and Software Engineering, University of Calgary, Canada
{xyzxyz, xgniu, csyangjie, ruiyisu, jzhang, liu.shubo}@whu.edu.cn, steve.drew@ucalgary.ca
2

Abstract

Liu, Cheng, and Zhang 2023; Wei et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2021) have been proposed for learning with noisy labels.
These approaches focus on label correction. Part representative group of methods (Patrini et al. 2017; Hendrycks
et al. 2018; Liu, Cheng, and Zhang 2023) propose to reverses noisy labels to clean ones with estimation of the noise
transition matrix, which is challenging for high numbers of
classes and in high noise scenarios. Another group of labelcorrection-based methods (Reed et al. 2014; Arazo et al.
2019; Lu and He 2022) propose to generate soft targets by
performing a convex combination of noisy labels and predictions according to interpolation weight. The core of these
methods lies in the construction of the weight for interpolation. Bootstrapping (Reed et al. 2014) employs a static
weight without accounting for sample differences. In subsequent works (Arazo et al. 2019; Lu and He 2022), dynamic
weights are introduced to evaluate different samples. These
dynamic weights are usually formulated based on loss criteria (e.g., CE loss) and, as a result, may be non-uniform
by differences in the distribution of losses between easy and
hard classes (Karim et al. 2022).
The design of interpolation weights lacking dynamic and
class uniformity is susceptible to false corrections as the
hard samples and classes are less likely to be corrected.
Consequently, label correction methods have gradually lost
their competitiveness against semi-supervised methods relying on the clean sample selection (Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020;
Karim et al. 2022; Lu and He 2022; Li et al. 2022; Hu et al.
2023; Feng, Ren, and Xie 2023). Then the questions naturally arise: Can carefully designed dynamic weights rejuvenate interpolation schemes?
In this paper, we first revisit the interpolation scheme
in label correction from the perspective of gradient scaling. The core idea behind gradient scaling is to promote
the memorization of true classes and diminish the impact
of mislabeled samples on gradients. The theoretical analysis demonstrates that the interpolation weight should adhere to two properties in order to prevent memorization of
the mislabeled samples: i) sample-wise dynamic that indicates the weight is dynamic for each sample and aligned
with its label cleanliness; ii) the class-wise uniformity, emphasizing that the weight of samples from different classes
should be aligned to reduce the inconsistent gradients caused
by class difficulty. Besides, we provide theoretical evidence

Label correction methods are popular for their simple architecture in learning with noisy labels. However, they suffer severely from false label correction and achieve subpar
performance compared with state-of-the-art methods. In this
paper, we revisit the label correction methods through theoretical analysis of gradient scaling and demonstrate that the
sample-wise dynamic and class-wise uniformity of interpolation weight prevents memorization of the mislabeled samples. We then propose DULC, a simple yet effective label
correction method that uses the normalized Jensen-Shannon
divergence (JSD) metric as the interpolation weight to promote sample-wise dynamic and class-wise uniformity. Additionally, we provide theoretical evidence that sharpening
predictions in label correction facilitates the memorization
of true class, and we achieve it by employing the augmentation strategy along with the sharpening function. Extensive
experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, TinyImageNet, WebVision and Clothing1M datasets demonstrate substantial improvements over state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/kovelxyz/DULC.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have proven effective in various tasks (He et al. 2016; Song, Kim, and Lee 2019; Wang
et al. 2021; Srinivas et al. 2021; Song et al. 2021). The effectiveness relies heavily on the collection of datasets with
high-quality annotations. However, collections of datasets
and manual annotations are challenging and expensive. As
an alternative, most large-scale datasets focus on opensource data that can be automatically annotated by inexpensive strategies, such as adopting web crawling and leveraging search engines (Le and Yang 2015; Li et al. 2017).
These alternative methods inevitably introduce numerous
noisy samples. Prior art (Arpit et al. 2017) has revealed that
deep networks suffer from dramatic degradation in the generalization due to the tendency to overfit to noisy labels.
To tackle this problem, numerous methods (Arpit et al.
2017; Han et al. 2018; Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Wei et al.
2020; Li et al. 2022; Lu and He 2022; Karim et al. 2022;
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21833

