The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Portuguese Variety Identification with Cross-Domain Approaches
Hugo Sousa1,3 * , Rúben Almeida2,3,4 * , Purificação Silvano5,6 ,
Inês Cantante5,6 , Ricardo Campos3, 7,8 , Alı́pio Jorge1,3
1
Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
3
INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal
4
Innovation Point - dst group, Braga, Portugal
5
Faculty of Arts and Humanities, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
6
Centre of Linguistics, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
7
Department of Informatics, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal
8
Ci2 - Smart Cities Research Center, Tomar, Portugal
hugo.o.sousa@inesctec.pt, ruben.f.almeida@inesctec.pt
2

Abstract

wards non-linguistic factors, such as named entities and thematic content (Diwersy, Evert, and Neumann 2014). Consequently, these classifiers exhibit limited transfer capabilities
to domains not represented in the training set, significantly
restricting their utility in multi-domain applications (Lui and
Baldwin 2011; Nguyen et al. 2021).
A language in which variety identification is particularly
challenging is Portuguese. It is spoken by more than 200
million people worldwide and serves as the official language of eight nations on five continents, each with its own
variety. However, 70% of Portuguese speakers are Brazilian citizens1 , which implies that resources labeled as Portuguese are dominated by this language variety. Another
important characteristic of Portuguese is that, unlike languages where differences are predominantly phonological,
such as those of the North Germanic family (Holmberg and
Platzack 2008), the widespread of Portuguese has fostered
considerable phonological, morphological, lexical, syntactic
and semantic variations between Portuguese varieties (Brito
and Lopes 2016). In the development of language models,
for example, this variety divergence has practical implications; models trained in Brazilian Portuguese generate texts
that are markedly distinct from those trained in other Portuguese varieties (Rodrigues et al. 2023). This fact restrains
the adoption of these models outside of Brazil in domains
where formal non-Brazilian text is required, as is the case of
legal and medical applications. This underscores the practical importance of developing effective LVI systems that can
be deployed in production.
In this study, we describe the development of a crossdomain LVI classifier that discriminates between Brazilian
and European Portuguese. To accomplish that, we start with
a comprehensive listing of Portuguese LVI resources. The
lack of multi-domain corpora motivated us to compile our
own dataset. This corpus was then used in the development
of our LVI classifier. For the training procedure we devised
a training protocol that takes into account the cross-domain

Recent advances in natural language processing have raised
expectations for generative models to produce coherent text
across diverse language varieties. In the particular case of
the Portuguese language, the predominance of Brazilian Portuguese corpora online introduces linguistic biases in these
models, limiting their applicability outside of Brazil. To address this gap and promote the creation of European Portuguese resources, we developed a cross-domain language
variety identifier (LVI) to discriminate between European
and Brazilian Portuguese. Motivated by the findings of
our literature review, we compiled the PtBrVarId corpus,
a cross-domain LVI dataset, and study the effectiveness of
transformer-based LVI classifiers for cross-domain scenarios.
Although this research focuses on two Portuguese varieties,
our contribution can be extended to other varieties and languages. We open source the code, corpus, and models to foster further research in this task.

1

Introduction

Discriminating between varieties of a given language is an
important natural language processing (NLP) task (Joshi
et al. 2024). Over time, populations that share a common language can evolve distinctive speech traits due to
geographical and cultural factors, including migration and
the influence of other languages (Raposo, Vicente, and
Veloso 2021). Recently, this importance became even more
pronounced with the advent of variety-specific large language models, where variety discrimination plays a pivotal
role (Rodrigues et al. 2023). Whether in the pre-training,
fine-tuning, or evaluation phase, having a highly effective
system to discriminate between varieties reduces the amount
of human supervision required, accelerating the production of curated mono-variety datasets (Öhman et al. 2023).
However, developing such a system presents considerable
challenges. Classifiers often struggle to identify linguistically relevant features, showing a tendency to be biased to* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Statistic inferred form Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Portuguese language#Lusophone countries

25192

