The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training Deep Neural Networks with Virtual Smoothing Classes
Zhiyang Zhou1,2 , Siwei Wei1,2 , Xudong Zhang1,2 , Wensheng Dou1,2,3 , Muzi Qu1,2 , Yan Cai1,2 *
1

Key Laboratory of System Software (Chinese Academy of Sciences) and State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Nanjing Institute of Software Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, China
{zhouzy, weisw, zhangxd20}@ios.ac.cn, {wsdou, qumuzi18}@otcaix.iscas.ac.cn, yancai@ios.ac.cn
Abstract

It is widely recognized that DNNs are susceptible to
yielding confidently erroneous predictions for adversarial
samples with imperceptible perturbations (Szegedy et al.
2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014). Among various defenses, adversarial training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014; Madry et al. 2017), which treats adversarial samples as a form of data regularization, effectively enhances the robustness of DNNs (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018). Its successful variants (Zhang et al. 2019; Carmon et al. 2019; Goldblum et al. 2020) introduce more regularization, e.g., weight perturbation (Wu, Xia, and Wang
2020), to further improve robustness. On the other hand,
DNNs also tend to be overconfident on unseen Out-OfDistribution (OOD) samples (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016),
and semi-supervised training using diverse auxiliary outliers (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2018; Mohseni
et al. 2020) significantly improves and achieves state-of-theart performance in OOD detection. These methods all improve DNNs by introducing increased regularization. However, they rely on one-hot labels and fail to consider the regularization from a label perspective.
As a label considering regularization, Label Smoothing
(LS) (Szegedy et al. 2016) effectively improve DNN performance by redistributing some confidence from the correct
class to other incorrect classes:

Learning with softmax cross-entropy on one-hot labels often leads to overconfidence on the correct class. While label smoothing regulates this overconfidence by redistributing some confidence from the correct class to other incorrect
classes, it compromises the representation in the logits about
the similarity between samples of different classes and may
hurt calibration if higher confidence is required for high accuracy. To overcome these limitations, we propose a Virtual
Smoothing (VS) label that redistributes certain confidence
from the correct class to additional VS classes to regularize
overconfidence. In VS labels, the VS class nodes act as adversaries to the original class nodes, enforcing regularization by
clustering samples across all classes. The zero confidence assigned to each incorrect class also allows the incorrect logits
to be different from each other without erasing information
about sample similarities. The prediction probability can still
approach 1 when applying softmax to the logits of the original
real classes, which avoids harming but consistently improves
calibration. Experiments show that VS labels consistently improve accuracy and calibration while providing better logits
for improved knowledge distillation. Additionally, VS labels
exhibit effectiveness in improving adversarial training, robust
distillation, and out-of-distribution detection.

Code — https://github.com/zhiyang3344/virtual-smoothing

1

y LS = (1 − α) · y + α/K

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown impressive performance in various tasks. Training DNN classifiers with
one-hot labels is a widely adopted norm in the classification
task. One-hot labels enable DNNs to extract class-specific
information (Yang et al. 2021) from input samples and learn
knowledge in the logits about the similarity between samples
of different classes (Müller, Kornblith, and Hinton 2019).
The well-known knowledge distillation (Hinton et al. 2015)
further uses soft labels from teacher models to improve student model performance. However, training with one-hot labels easily causes overconfidence on the correct class, as
minimizing the cross-entropy loss encourages the correct
class node to extract any information unavailable in the samples of other classes as its predictive information.

(1)

where K is the number of sample classes, and α ∈ [0,1] controls the smoothness. However, due to the non-zero supervisory signals applied on incorrect classes, LS hurts the representation in the logits about sample similarities, which further impairs the downstream knowledge distillation (Müller,
Kornblith, and Hinton 2019). Moreover, as shown in our
later experiments (Sec 4.1), LS may lead to a trade-off between accuracy and calibration (Guo et al. 2017) when a
model requires a larger α to achieve higher accuracy. With
the model’s accuracy increases (up to 1), the prediction confidence of the correct class decreases (up to 1-α), which is
detrimental to calibration.
In this work, we propose a Virtual Smoothing (VS) label to help regularize overconfidence but eliminate the limitations in LS. Similar to the philosophy of GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2020) and adversarial training, VS labels use
additional virtual classes (named VS classes) as adversaries

* Corresponding Author: Yan Cai
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23036

