The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Why AI Is WEIRD and Shouldn’t Be This Way:
Towards AI For Everyone, With Everyone, By Everyone
Rada Mihalcea1 * , Oana Ignat2 * , Longju Bai1 , Angana Borah1 , Luis Chiruzzo3 , Zhijing Jin4 ,
Claude Kwizera5 , Joan Nwatu1 , Soujanya Poria6 ,Thamar Solorio7
1

University of Michigan USA,
Santa Clara University USA,
3
Universidad de la Republica Uruguay,
4
Max Plank Institute Germany,
5
CMU Africa,
6
SUTD Singapore,
7
MBZUAI United Arab Emirates
2

Abstract
This paper presents a vision for creating AI systems that are
inclusive at every stage of development, from data collection
to model design and evaluation. We address key limitations
in the current AI pipeline and its WEIRD1 representation,
such as lack of data diversity, biases in model performance,
and narrow evaluation metrics. We also focus on the need for
diverse representation among the developers of these systems,
as well as incentives that are not skewed toward certain groups.
We highlight opportunities to develop AI systems that are for
everyone (with diverse stakeholders in mind), with everyone
(inclusive of diverse data and annotators), and by everyone
(designed and developed by a globally diverse workforce).

Data

Models

Evaluations

Sources

Design

Benchmarks

Annotations

Performance

Metrics

Diverse & reflective
of the world

Aligned (-able) to
different groups

Tailored to specific
group values

People

Incentives

From a wide variety
of backgrounds

With global socioeconomic impact

Figure 1: Desiderata and areas of research to expand the reach and

1

impact of AI to everyone.

Introduction

AI, and especially Large Language and Multimodal Models
(LLMs and LMMs), have taken the world by storm, and yet
much of the world is not represented in the data, models,
and evaluations used in their development (Hershcovich et al.
2022; Moayeri, Tabassi, and Feizi 2024; Nayak et al. 2024).
This lack of representation has two major implications. First,
it can lead to numerous mistakes, misconceptions, and even
harms, which can propagate to the growing number of applications powered by these models, and can limit the ability of
AI systems to effectively serve diverse groups and contexts.
Second, as anthropologists have pointed out, our success as
a human species is not as much due to our intelligence, as it is
to our “collective cultural brains” that allow us to learn from
* Equal contributions. All other authors are listed alphabetically.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
WEIRD, an acronym coined by (Henrich, Heine, and Norenzayan 2010) to highlight the coverage limitations of many psychological studies, refers to populations that are Western, Educated,
Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic. While we do not fully adopt
this term for AI, as its current scope does not perfectly align with
the WEIRD dimensions, we believe that today’s AI has a similarly
“weird” coverage, particularly in terms of who is involved in its
development and who benefits from it.

28657

one another over generations and across cultures (Henrich
2015). Cultural evolution has led to many innovations and
entire bodies of knowledge – a form of collective intelligence
that explains our species’ uniqueness and success.
With the rapid growth of AI, we are now facing an evolution dilemma. On one side, we have our “recipe for success”
learned over tens of thousands of years, where our collective
cultural brains lead to innovation and evolution. On the other
side, we have these very large AI models which, despite encompassing enormous bodies of information, act as a single
“super-human” that homogenizes and erases entire bodies of
cultural knowledge (Schwöbel et al. 2023; McVeety 2024;
Byrd 2023; Perez et al. 2024; Naous et al. 2024).
The goal of this paper is to present a vision for addressing
limitations throughout the entire AI pipeline, including data,
models, and evaluations, as well as the people driving this
process and the incentives that shape its development. The
aim is to ensure that these AI systems are: (1) For Everyone:
AI systems that represent everyone (§1), with models with
even performance across groups (§3.2), inclusive evaluation
metrics (§4.1) and culturally diverse benchmarks (§4.2), and
incentives that promote inclusive AI and balance profits and
social impact (§5); (2) With Everyone: relying on diverse

