The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attribute Inference Attacks for Federated Regression Tasks
Francesco Diana1, 2 , Othmane Marfoq3 , Chuan Xu1, 2, 4, 5 , Giovanni Neglia1, 2 , Frédéric
Giroire1, 2, 4, 5 , Eoin Thomas6
1

Université Côte d’Azur
2
Inria
3
Meta
4
CNRS
5
I3S
6
Amadeus
{francesco.diana, chuan.xu, giovanni.neglia, frederic.giroire}@inria.fr, omarfoq@meta.com, eoin.thomas@amadeus.com
Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) enables multiple clients, such as mobile phones and IoT devices, to collaboratively train a global
machine learning model while keeping their data localized.
However, recent studies have revealed that the training phase
of FL is vulnerable to reconstruction attacks, such as attribute
inference attacks (AIA), where adversaries exploit exchanged
messages and auxiliary public information to uncover sensitive attributes of targeted clients. While these attacks have
been extensively studied in the context of classification tasks,
their impact on regression tasks remains largely unexplored.
In this paper, we address this gap by proposing novel modelbased AIAs specifically designed for regression tasks in FL
environments. Our approach considers scenarios where adversaries can either eavesdrop on exchanged messages or
directly interfere with the training process. We benchmark
our proposed attacks against state-of-the-art methods using
real-world datasets. The results demonstrate a significant increase in reconstruction accuracy, particularly in heterogeneous client datasets, a common scenario in FL. The efficacy
of our model-based AIAs makes them better candidates for
empirically quantifying privacy leakage for federated regression tasks.

Figure 1: Average performance of different AIAs when four
clients train a neural network through FedAvg with 1 local
epoch and batch size 32. Each client stores Sc data points
randomly sampled from ACS Income dataset (Ding et al.
2024). The adversary infers the gender attribute of every data
sample held by the client given access to the released (public) information.

client’s training samples such as images (Geiping et al.
2020; Yin et al. 2021).
However, these reconstruction attacks for FL have primarily been tested on classification tasks and have not been
explored for regression tasks, which are, needless to say,
equally important for practical applications. Quite surprisingly, our experiments, as shown in Fig. 1, demonstrate that
the accuracy of state-of-the-art gradient-based AIA under
a honest-but-curious adversary (Lyu and Chen 2021; Chen
et al. 2022) (referred to as passive) drops significantly from
71% on a classification task to 50% (random guess) on a regression task once the targeted client holds more than 256
data points. Furthermore, even a more powerful (active) adversary capable of forging the messages to the targeted client
to extract more information (Lyu and Chen 2021; Chen et al.
2022) offers only limited improvement to the AIA performance on regression tasks. Detailed information about this
experiment is in (Diana et al. 2024, Appendix B.4).
In this paper, we show that federated training of regression
tasks does not inherently enjoy higher privacy, but it is simply more vulnerable to other forms of attacks. While existing

Code — https://github.com/francescodiana99/fedkit-learn

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) enables multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model (McMahan et al. 2017; Lian
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020). Since clients’ data is not collected by a third party, FL naturally offers a certain level of
privacy. Nevertheless, FL alone does not provide formal privacy guarantees, and recent works have demonstrated that
clients’ private information can still be easily leaked (Lyu
et al. 2020; Liu, Xu, and Wang 2022). For instance, an adversary with access to the exchanged messages and knowledge of some public information (e.g., client’s provided ratings) (Lyu and Chen 2021; Chen et al. 2022; Feng et al.
2021) can reconstruct a client’s sensitive attributes (e.g.,
gender/religion) in an attack known as attribute inference
attack (AIA). Additionally, the adversary can reconstruct
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16271

