The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MIMTrack: In-Context Tracking via Masked Image Modeling
Xingmei Wang1 , Guohao Nie1 * , Jiaxiang Meng1 * , Zining Yan2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University
2
College of Design and Engineering, National University of Singapore
{wangxingmei, nieguhao, mjxwjy}@hrbeu.edu.cn, zn yan@nus.edu.sg

Classification

Abstract
Template
Search area

Current Siamese and Transformer trackers commonly use
various subtask branches like regression and classification
to predict object states. Despite the demonstrated success,
these subtask branches might introduce location and scale
offsets due to discrepancies and misalignment in the respective predictions. To address this, we propose a novel generative tracker, MIMTrack, which defines tracking as a Masked
Image Modeling (MIM) process combined with in-context
learning (ICL). MIMTrack begins with building the visual
prompt image, which consists of a template, a search area,
and two target images associated with them. The target image
transforms the bounding box into a unified RGB image space
as other tracking image. All states prediction are naturally
aligned by pixels generation of search target image. In light
of this, we perform a MIM process within the visual prompt
to reconstruct a masked search target image using the context from other parts. MIM with ICL makes use of implicit
cross-relations between template and search area. A singlestream generative framework reduces the offset in the estimation. Furthermore, a latent memory module is introduced
as a plugin to enhance pixel generation by leveraging various target appearances over time. The advanced performance
observed on leading benchmark datasets highlights the simplicity and effectiveness of our MIMTrack framework.

Classification
Backbone
Regression
Regression
(a) Classification regression trackers

Output

Visual

Mask Prompt MIM
Target Image.
Template, target image, search area, ？
ICL
In-context example
New query
(b) Our Masked Image Modeling tracker
Classification
Figure 1: Different pipelines. (a) The bounding
box is acquired through classification and
regression
branches.
(b)
Classification
Template
We treat
the template
and its target image as an in-context
Backbone
Search area
example,
and the search area with
the masked target image
Regression
Output
as a new query. Together, they form a visual Regression
prompt that allows MIM to predict
masked pixels
withtrackers
ICL.
(a) Classification
regression
Visual

MIM

Prompt
process, potentially affecting the
performance
of each indiMask
vidual subtask. These optimization discrepancies hinder acTemplate,
image, search
?
curate target
understanding
ofarea,
tracked objects.
(2) ICL
Because of
theImage.
Target
independent
operation
of
multiple
branches,
varying
predicIn-context example
New query
tion accuracies
to misalignment
issues.
A predicted
(b)can
Ourlead
Masked
Image Modeling
tracker
box with high classification confidence may still suffer from
poor regression accuracy. Although the offset branch has attempted to align the accuracy (Danelljan et al. 2019), the
separation of branches still hinder the effective correction of
misalignment (Peng et al. 2021).
To address these issues, we reformulate VOT as an image generation task based on Mask Image Modeling (MIM)
(He et al. 2022). MIM is originally proposed as a visual
pre-training technique (He et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2022), involving randomly occluding parts of an image and training
the model to reconstruct the missing pixels. Building on this
concept, we convert the target box into a target image. Our
tracking model uses tracking images, such as templates and
search areas, as context to reconstruct the masked pixels of
the target image. This pixel-to-pixel approach mimics the
ability of human vision to recognize objects from examples. Unlike axis-aligned bounding box-based trackers, our
model performs execution of in-context tracking using the

Introduction
Visual object tracking (VOT) aims to estimate the state of
an object in subsequent video frames according to its initial
position and scale (Han et al. 2022; Javed et al. 2023). Traditional methods, including Siamese (Li et al. 2019; Bhat et al.
2019) and Transformer (Chen et al. 2021; Ye et al. 2022)
trackers, typically formulate VOT as a template-matching
task, as shown in Figure 1(a). Multiple subtasks are used
to predict various properties of the target—such as location,
scale, corner points, and offsets—on a fused search feature
(Gao et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2022). Despite their success,
these approaches face two significant challenges: (1) Each
branch has a distinct goal but shares the same parameters for
feature extraction. This can result in difficulties in synchronizinge location and scale estimations during the learning
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7979

