The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

THGNets: Constrained Temporal Hypergraphs and Graph Neural Networks in
Hyperbolic Space for Information Diffusion Prediction
Yanchao Liu, Pengzhou Zhang, Wenchao Song, Yao Zheng, Deyu Li, Lei Shi* , Junpeng Gong* †
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, Communication University of China, China
{yanchaoliu, zhangpengzhou, Songwenchao, zhengyao, ldy, leiky shi, jpgong}@cuc.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2023), recommendation systems (Chen et al. 2024a,b),
and so forth.
Recently, information diffusion prediction has gained
considerable attention, generally divided into three categories: independent cascades-based methods, embeddingbased methods, and deep learning representation methods.
Independent cascades-based methods (Saito et al. 2009) are
predefined models that are not in line with the complex realworld environment. Embedding-based methods (Bourigault,
Lamprier, and Gallinari 2016) parameterize user features
and apply the distance or similarity between the embedding
vectors of the user to predict the next infected users. Afterward, deep learning representation methods became mainstream methods with their powerful implicit feature extraction capabilities. Researchers first focus primarily on the
sequence (Li et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017; Islam et al.
2018), and recurrent neural networks are employed to learn
the evolution patterns. However, such methods tend to ignore the significant topological structure, which undoubtedly potentially limits the models performance. To address
this dilemma, researchers utilize graph neural networks to
capture topological structures (Yang et al. 2021a; Yuan et al.
2021; Jiao et al. 2024), which achieve remarkable results.
Although existing approaches have achieved notable performance, they still suffer from some limitations: Distortion
of user features. Recent studies (Meng and Zhou 2023)
show that real information cascade graphs and social networks have complex structures, including hierarchical and
power-law structures. RotDiff (Qiao et al. 2023) learns the
hierarchical structure or the power-law structure by calculating the distance between directly connected users in a hyperbolic space, but it focuses only on low-order interaction
patterns and ignores high-order interaction patterns between
users. Thus, the distortion of user features has not been fully
addressed. Instability and non-smoothness of user features. Information diffusion is a dynamic process in which
user preferences evolve over time, so the position of user
features may undergo significant changes in the latent space.
However, existing work (Jiao et al. 2024) ignores this important phenomenon, leading to instability and nonsmoothness
of user features with no difficulty. The above limitations are
an urgent problem that needs to be solved due to limiting the
ability of user feature expression.
To resolve above limitations, we propose an innova-

Information diffusion prediction aims to predict the next infected user in the information diffusion, which is a critical
task to understand how information spreads on social platforms. Existing methods mainly focus on the sequences or
topology structure in euclidean space. However, they fail to
sufficiently consider the hierarchical structure or power-law
structure of the underlying topology of information cascade
graphs and social networks, resulting in distortion of user features. To tackle above issue, we propose an innovative Constrained Temporal Hypergraphs and Graph Neural Networks
(THGNets) framework that is tailored for information diffusion prediction. Specifically, we introduce hyperbolic temporal hypergraphs neural network to alleviate the distortion
of user features by hyperbolic hierarchical learning in information cascades. Additionally, it also captures high-order
dynamic interaction patterns between users and further integrates the time-consistency constraint mechanism to mitigate the instability and non-smoothness of user features in
latent space. In parallel, we apply the hyperbolic graph neural network to investigate the hierarchical structure and user
homogeneity on social networks, enhancing our understanding of social relationships. Moreover, hyperbolic gated recurrent units are employed to capture the potential dependency relationships between contextual users. Experiments
conducted on four public datasets demonstrate that the proposed THGNets significantly outperform the existing methods, thereby validating the superiority and rationality of our
approach.

Introduction
Online social media platforms (Weibo, Twitter, etc.) produce a large amount of information every day, providing
great convenience for our lives, work, and study. Information diffusion formed by users forwarding information, aka
information cascades, is ubiquitous on social networks. Information diffusion prediction, aiming to predict the next infected user, is urgently needed to understand how information spreads. It has attracted great attention in both academia
and industry with a wide range of real-world applications in
user discovery (Oro et al. 2017), influence maximization (He
* Corresponding author
†

Senior author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12220

