The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalized Class Discovery in Instance Segmentation
Cuong Manh Hoang1 , Yeejin Lee1 , Byeongkeun Kang2 *
1

Seoul National University of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
2
Chung-Ang University, Republic of Korea
{cuonghoang, yeejinlee}@seoultech.ac.kr, byeongkeunkang@cau.ac.kr

Abstract

data include novel categories. Recently, generalized (novel)
category discovery (GCD) (Vaze et al. 2022; Cao, Brbic,
and Leskovec 2022) was introduced, further relaxing the assumptions on the unlabeled data. It assumes that the unlabeled data may contain both known and novel classes, making the problem more challenging and realistic. Given labeled and unlabeled data, GCD aims to train a model capable
of recognizing both the known classes (e.g., person and car)
in the labeled data and the novel categories (e.g., unknown1
and unknown2 ) discovered from the unlabeled data.
Most previous works have investigated GCD for curated and balanced image classification datasets (Vaze et al.
2022; An et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Pu, Zhong, and
Sebe 2023; Wen, Zhao, and Qi 2023). Recently, researchers
have explored GCD for image classification on imbalanced
datasets (Bai et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023; Li, Meinel, and Yang
2023), semantic segmentation (Zhao et al. 2022), 3D point
cloud semantic segmentation (Riz et al. 2023), and instance
segmentation (Fomenko et al. 2022; Weng et al. 2021). Most
of these works leverage semi-supervised contrastive learning
and pseudo-label generation regardless of tasks.
In this work, we also investigate GCD in instance segmentation. It is worth noting that because the real world
contains numerous objects with long-tailed distributions, the
instance distribution for each class in instance segmentation
datasets is inherently imbalanced. For example, a ‘car’ appears more frequently than an ‘ashtray’. (1) To address this
imbalanced distribution, we propose an instance-wise temperature assignment method for contrastive learning. While
typical contrastive learning losses treat samples from head
and tail classes equally, we aim to emphasize group-wise
discrimination for head class samples while focusing on
instance-wise discrimination for tail class samples, inspired
by (Kukleva et al. 2023). (2) Although relying on reliable
pseudo-labels is important (Yang et al. 2022), applying fixed
and global reliability criteria to imbalanced data tends to exclude most pseudo-labels for tail classes. Therefore, we propose to utilize class-wise reliability criteria to apply varying thresholds for head and tail classes. Additionally, we dynamically adjust the reliability criteria throughout training
to leverage diverse samples in the early stages while focusing on reliable pseudo-labels in later stages. (3) Finally, we
introduce an efficient soft attention module based on spatial pooling and depth reduction to effectively encode repre-

This work addresses the task of generalized class discovery (GCD) in instance segmentation. The goal is to discover
novel classes and obtain a model capable of segmenting instances of both known and novel categories, given labeled and
unlabeled data. Since the real world contains numerous objects with long-tailed distributions, the instance distribution
for each class is inherently imbalanced. To address the imbalanced distributions, we propose an instance-wise temperature
assignment (ITA) method for contrastive learning and classwise reliability criteria for pseudo-labels. The ITA method relaxes instance discrimination for samples belonging to head
classes to enhance GCD. The reliability criteria are to avoid
excluding most pseudo-labels for tail classes when training
an instance segmentation network using pseudo-labels from
GCD. Additionally, we propose dynamically adjusting the
criteria to leverage diverse samples in the early stages while
relying only on reliable pseudo-labels in the later stages. We
also introduce an efficient soft attention module to encode
object-specific representations for GCD. Finally, we evaluate
our proposed method by conducting experiments on two settings: COCOhalf + LVIS and LVIS + Visual Genome. The
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

While supervised instance segmentation methods (He et al.
2017; Cheng et al. 2022; Jain et al. 2023) have achieved
impressive performance, they require large-scale datasets
with expensive human annotations. To reduce annotation
costs, researchers have investigated semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods (Bellver et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2023;
Berrada et al. 2024) that utilize unlabeled images along with
small-scale labeled data, as well as weakly-supervised methods (Lan et al. 2021) relying on weak annotations. However,
all these methods rely on the closed-world assumption and
can recognize only the objects belonging to the classes (i.e.,
known classes) in the labeled dataset.
To address this limitation, researchers have introduced
novel category discovery (NCD) (Han, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2019). Unlike SSL, where the unlabeled images contain only known classes, NCD assumes that the unlabeled
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3491

