The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mapping from Meaning: Addressing the Miscalibration of Prompt-Sensitive
Language Models
Kyle Cox1 , Jiawei Xu1 , Yikun Han2 , Rong Xu1 , Tianhao Li1 , Chi-Yang Hsu1 , Tianlong Chen3 ,
Walter Gerych4 , Ying Ding1
1
University of Texas at Austin
University of Michigan-Ann Arbor
3
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
4
MIT
{kylecox, jiaweixu, rongxu, tianhao, ch52669}@utexas.edu, yikunhan@umich.edu, tianlong@cs.unc.edu, wgerych@mit.edu,
ying.ding@ischool.utexas.edu
2

Abstract

physical intuition through in-context learning, but struggle in zero-shot settings, suggesting a dependence on pattern recognition. As new capabilities emerge, the nature
of each advancement—whether it represents true reasoning ability or increasingly sophisticated forms of memorization—remains a fundamental question in AI research.
A relevant phenomenon in large language models is
prompt sensitivity (Sclar et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2023). Simply reformatting prompts
by turning uppercase characters to lowercase or modifying
spaces between input fields can result in dramatic differences in responses (Sclar et al. 2023). Further, changing the
order of examples in few-shot learning can lead to substantial variance in accuracy, even in very large models (Lu et al.
2022). We consider whether prompt sensitivity in LLMs also
indicates a failure of general reasoning: Is the model’s response a function of the meaning of a prompt, or merely the
sequence of tokens that convey it?
We address this question with an uncertainty quantification framework, analyzing how distributional properties
of LLM outputs vary under meaning-preserving perturbations. While models exhibiting true general reasoning
should maintain consistent distributions across semantically
equivalent inputs, memorization-based models may produce
distributions that reflect surface-level statistical patterns in
their training data rather than deeper semantic understanding. This distinction results in differences in calibration,
even when accuracy is held constant across both types of
models. We leverage this insight to develop a calibrationbased measure of general reasoning performance. Uncertainty calibration offers a unique way to assess a model’s
general reasoning performance on in-domain tasks.
To this end, we develop a framework of semanticinvariant perturbations, transforming input questions while
preserving their meaning. We introduce a new uncertainty
quantification metric that captures semantic continuities in
language and can be decomposed into epistemic uncertainty
(reflecting uncertainty about meaning) and aleatoric uncertainty (reflecting uncertainty about token sequences). We
show that sampling with our perturbation framework and
measuring uncertainty with our total variance metric yields
superior calibration on question-answering (QA) tasks, sup-

An interesting behavior in large language models (LLMs) is
prompt sensitivity. When provided with different but semantically equivalent versions of the same prompt, models may
produce very different distributions of answers. This suggests
that the uncertainty reflected in a model’s output distribution for one prompt may not reflect the model’s uncertainty
about the meaning of the prompt. We model prompt sensitivity as a type of generalization error, and show that sampling across the semantic “concept space” with paraphrasing
perturbations improves uncertainty calibration without compromising accuracy. Additionally, we introduce a new metric
for uncertainty decomposition in black-box LLMs that improves upon entropy-based decomposition by modeling semantic continuities in natural language generation. We show
that this decomposition metric can be used to quantify how
much LLM uncertainty is attributed to prompt sensitivity. Our
work introduces a new way to improve uncertainty calibration
in prompt-sensitive language models, and provides evidence
that some LLMs fail to exhibit consistent general reasoning
about the meanings of their inputs.

Code — https://github.com/xocelyk/paraphrase-uncertainty

1

Introduction

As the size of large language models (LLMs) has scaled,
so has their performance across benchmark tasks (OpenAI
2023; Kaplan et al. 2020). Such gains have led many to
question whether LLMs are exhibiting early signs of general intelligence (Bubeck et al. 2023). However, recent work
has shown that the distinction between reasoning and memorization is nuanced. Many of the behaviors that appear to
indicate general reasoning ability in LLMs in fact represent modes of memorization. For instance, GPT-4’s ability
to decode ROT13 ciphers but not less common variants like
ROT2 raises questions about how LLMs acquire and generalize skills (McCoy et al. 2023). Similar patterns emerge
in other capabilities. Lu et al. (2024) observe that some
LLMs can solve arithmetic word problems and demonstrate
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23696

