The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Label Ranking Loss Minimization for Matrix Completion
Jiaxuan Li, Xiaoyan Zhu* , Hongrui Wang, Yu Zhang, Xin Lai, Jiayin Wang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
lijiaxuan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zhu.xy@xjtu.edu.cn, wanghongrui@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yuzhang990825@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
laixin@xjtu.edu.cn, wangjiayin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

known entries, and RΩ (·) is an observation operator:

Y ij , (i, j) ∈ Ω
RΩ (Y ij ) =
0,
(i, j) ∈
/Ω

Abstract
The common matrix completion methods minimize the rank
of the matrix to be completed in addition to the Hamming
loss between the incomplete and completed matrices. The
rank of matrix measures the linear relation among the vectors
of matrix, which may introduce ambiguity for data recovery.
To cope with this issue, we extend multi-label ranking loss
into matrix completion, and employ multi-label ranking loss
minimization (MLRM) in this paper to exploit the relative
correlation among matrix vectors. In MLRM, the original incomplete matrix is converted into a pairwise ranking matrix,
and the approximation on this newly generated matrix can be
viewed as a surrogate of multi-label ranking loss to replace
the Hamming loss pattern in the existing methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MLRM outperforms the
state-of-the-art matrix completion methods in varies of applications, including movie recommendation, drug-target interaction prediction and multi-label learning.

1

and I(·) is an indicator function returning 1 if true and 0
otherwise.
Matrix dependency implies that the completed matrix X
should be low-rank. Simply put, matrices in the real world
are redundant, meaning that the vectors in the completed
matrix should be linearly correlated. And such matrix-wise
pattern can be formulated as:
min r(X)

(3)

X

where r(·) is the rank function of the given matrix.
Matrix consistency assumption fundamentally ensures the
accuracy of matrix completion, and matrix dependency assumption provides the feasible manner for matrix completion. Unfortunately, given an incomplete matrix, different
completed matrices may have the same rank; that is, minimization on matrix rank can cause data recovery ambiguity,
and the completed matrix with low-rank property inevitably
loses information. An example of this phenomenon is shown
in Tab. 1, where 3 users contributes their willingness to 4
movies with 1, −1, 0, ∗ representing positive, negative, neutral and unknown attitudes, respectively. To fill the unknown

Introduction

Matrix completion addresses the data recovery problem
where only a few entries can be observed in a low-rank matrix. It has wide applications in recommendation systems
(Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Jannach et al. 2016), computer vision (Cabral et al. 2011), signal processing (Chiang,
Hsieh, and Dhillon 2015), bioinformatics (Cai, Zhang, and
Wan 2011; Luo et al. 2018), etc.
The common matrix completion methods (Recht 2011;
Goldberg et al. 2010; Cai, Candès, and Shen 2010; Xu, Jin,
and Zhou 2013) focus on the assumptions of consistency and
dependency of the matrix to be completed. Matrix consistency assumes that the completed matrix X should be as
close as possible to the original incomplete matrix Y in positions those are observed. Such element-wise pattern can be
formulated as the Hamming loss between X and Y :
X
min
I(RΩ (X ij ) ̸= RΩ (Y ij ))
(1)
X

(2)

Table 1: An example for matrix completion, where ui , mj
represent i-th user and j-th movie, and X ij denotes the favorability of ui towards mj .

u1
u2
u3

m1
(action)
1
-1
1

m2
(drama)
-1
1
-1

m3
(comedy)
-1
0
e1

m4
(fiction)
1
-1
e2

entries, matrix completion methods based on low-rank assumption consider two strategies for filling the missing values, i.e., f1 : u3 = u1 or f2 : u3 = −u2 . Both strategies
complete e2 = 1; but conflict occurs that e1 = −1 under f1
while e1 = 0 under f2 . This is the matrix completion ambiguity under low-rank assumption. To cope with this issue,
the ranking of user’s preference on different movies can be

ij

where Ω ⊂ {(1, · · · , n) × (1, · · · , m)} is the index set of
* indicates the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18333

