The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiCA: Disambiguated Contrastive Alignment for Cross-Modal Retrieval with
Partial Labels
Chao Su 1 , Huiming Zheng 2 , Dezhong Peng 1,2 , Xu Wang 1 *
1

The College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
Sichuan National Innovation New Vision UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu, China
suchao@stu.scu.edu.cn, michaelzheng@uptcsc.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn, wangxu.scu@gmail.com
2

input sample pair

Abstract

walf
lynx
cat
tiger
lion
leopard

...

...

A large feline
creature with
yellow fur.

tiger
leopard
lion

...

...

Cross-modal retrieval aims to retrieve relevant data across
different modalities. Driven by costly massive labeled data,
existing cross-modal retrieval methods achieve encouraging
results. To reduce annotation costs while maintaining performance, this paper focuses on an untouched but challenging problem, i.e., cross-modal retrieval with partial labels
(PLCMR). PLCMR faces the dual challenges of annotation
ambiguity and modality gap. To address these challenges, we
propose a novel method termed disambiguated contrastive
alignment (DiCA) for cross-modal retrieval with partial labels. Specifically, DiCA proposes a novel non-candidate
boosted disambiguation learning mechanism (NBDL), which
elaborately balances the trade-off between the losses on candidate and non-candidate labels that eliminate label ambiguity and narrow the modality gap. Moreover, DiCA
presents an instance-prototype representation learning mechanism (IPRL) to enhance the model by further eliminating
the modality gap at both the instance and prototype levels. Thanks to NBDL and IPRL, our DiCA effectively addresses the issues of annotation ambiguity and modality gap
for cross-modal retrieval with partial labels. Experiments on
four benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, which demonstrates enhanced performance over existing state-of-the-art methods.

candidate label selection probability

walf
lynx
cat

candidate labels
{ tiger, leopard, lion }

{ tiger, lion, leopard }

Figure 1: An input sample pair with three candidate labels,
where the ground truth is tiger.

formidable obstacles to data collection. Additionally, data
annotation in the real world can be naturally subject to inherent label ambiguity and noise. To the end, numerous unsupervised cross-modal retrieval methods (Hardoon, Szedmak,
and Shawe-Taylor 2004; Andrew et al. 2013; Wang et al.
2015; Liu et al. 2023) have been proposed, which project
data from different modalities into a common space by maximizing the correlation. Although these methods can reduce
annotation costs, the modality gap still has significant room
for improvement, primarily due to the challenges posed by
the lack of label information.
To reduce the costs of annotation while maintaining the
performance of cross-modal retrieval, we propose a novel
paradigm named cross-modal retrieval with partial labels
(PLCMR). In PLCMR, annotators only need to provide a
set of candidate labels and ensure that the ground truth label is included. As a result, the annotation costs can be
significantly reduced. This paradigm can effectively handle
difficult-to-distinguish sample pairs, such as in Fig. 1, where
annotators are uncertain whether to label the image and text
as a tiger, lion, or leopard. In such case, annotators can provide a candidate label set including all these three labels for
training. Compared to supervised and unsupervised counterparts, the challenges of PLCMR lie in learning discriminative representations from partial labels with ambiguity while
eliminating heterogeneous gap across modalities.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel method
termed disambiguated contrastive alignment (DiCA), which
can learn cross-modal invariant features when trained solely

Code — https://github.com/Rose-bud/DiCA.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of multimedia data on the Internet (Wang et al. 2019, 2020, 2023a,b; Su et al. 2023),
the limitations of single-modal retrieval systems becoming
increasingly apparent. Consequently, cross-modal retrieval
has garnered significant interest due to its ability to facilitate
flexible searches across different data modalities (Cao et al.
2022, 2023, 2024). Existing methods can be divided into
two broad categories: supervised and unsupervised crossmodal retrieval. The supervised cross-modal retrieval methods (Zhen et al. 2019; Wang and Peng 2021; Sun et al.
2023, 2024a,b) learn modality-invariant features by leveraging the correct label information. However, all of the above
methods typically require massive labeled data, which pose
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20610

