The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Langevin Monte Carlo Beyond Lipschitz Gradient Continuity
Matej Benko1 , Iwona Chlebicka2 , Jørgen Endal3 , Błażej Miasojedow2
1

Institute of Mathematics, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Brno University of Technology
Technická 2896/2, 616 69 Brno, Czech Republic
2
Institute of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, University of Warsaw
ul. Banacha 2, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU)
N-7491 Trondheim, Norway
matej.benko@vutbr.cz, i.chlebicka@mimuw.edu.pl, jorgen.endal@ntnu.no, b.miasojedow@mimuw.edu.pl
One of the most efficient solutions to the problem of
generating a sample from µ∗ is Langevin Monte Carlo
(LMC), which was designed via discretization of Overdamped Langevin Equation
√
dYt = −∇V (Yt )dt + 2 dBt
(1)

Abstract
We present a significant advancement in the field of Langevin
Monte Carlo (LMC) methods by introducing the Inexact
Proximal Langevin Algorithm (IPLA). This novel algorithm
broadens the scope of problems that LMC can effectively
address while maintaining controlled computational costs.
IPLA extends LMC’s applicability to potentials that are convex, strongly convex in the tails, and exhibit polynomial
growth, beyond the conventional L-smoothness assumption.
Moreover, we extend LMC’s applicability to super-quadratic
potentials and offer improved convergence rates over existing
algorithms. Additionally, we provide bounds on all moments
of the Markov chain generated by IPLA, enhancing its analytical robustness.

where Bt is a d-dimensional Brownian motion. Classically LMC is derived by Euler–Maruyama discretization of
the above diffusion process. Namely, we iteratively define
Markov Chains such that for a given X
√0 and all k ≥ 0
we have Xk+1 = Xk − τk ∇V (Xk ) + 2τk Z k+1 , where
{τk }k≥0 is sequence of stepsizes and {Z k+1 }k≥0 are i.i.d
standard d-dimensional Gaussian random variables which
are independent of X0 . In the recent years the LMC algorithm has been intensively investigated see (Dalalyan and
Tsybakov 2012; Chewi et al. 2022; Dalalyan 2017a,b; Durmus, Majewski, and Miasojedow 2019; Dalalyan, Karagulyan, and Riou-Durand 2022; Durmus and Moulines 2017,
2019; Erdogdu and Hosseinzadeh 2021; Erdogdu, Hosseinzadeh, and Zhang 2022; Mousavi-Hosseini et al. 2023; Vempala and Wibisono 2019). Efficiently scaling with dimension ensures that machine learning models remain computationally feasible and accurate as the complexity of the data
increases. To the best of our knowledge, the overall complexity of generating one sample from µ∗ with given precision ε scales linearly with dimension, see (Durmus, Majewski, and Miasojedow 2019). More precisely, it is proven
therein that in the case of a convex potential V an error in
the Kullback–Leibler divergence scales linearly with dimension. The same dependence on dimension is shown therein
for error expressed in the Wasserstein distance when V is
strongly convex.
The abovementioned studies and related research are typically conducted under the assumption that V is L-smooth,
i.e., ∇V is L-Lipschitz. A particular consequence of such
an assumption is that a quadratic function majorizes V .
This narrows the scope of possible applications excluding
many classical potentials behaving like polynomials with
higher power than 2, such as the one generating the processes of Ginzburg–Landau, cf. (Brosse et al. 2019; Goldenfeld 1992). Henceforth, aiming at capturing the natural potentials we relax the L-smoothness condition trading it with
λ-convexity outside a ball.
We stress that it is necessary to assume that ∇V is L-

Code — https://github.com/192459/lmc-beyond-lipschitzgradient-continuity

Introduction
Langevin Monte Carlo methods are powerful tools for
sampling and optimization in complex, high-dimensional
problems across various fields, including machine learning,
statistics, physics, and beyond. When the exact form of a distribution is unknown or difficult to compute, efficient sampling is essential for high-dimensional data, where traditional sampling methods often become computationally prohibitive. The ability of such algorithms to scale efficiently
with dimensionality and manage non-smooth elements enhances their applicability in various machine learning tasks,
including regression, classification, and clustering, providing a powerful tool for developing robust and accurate models. Given the potential V : Rd → R and associated density
(x))
µ∗ (x) = R d exp(−V
exp(−V (y)) dy
R

our goal is to generate samples X1 , . . . , Xn approximately
from µ∗ . The ability to perform effective sampling from
a distribution with a density known up to a constant is crucial
in Bayesian statistical inference (Gelman et al. 2014; Robert
and Casella 2004), machine learning (Andrieu et al. 2003),
ill-posed inverse problems (Stuart 2010), and computational
physics (Krauth 2006).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
15541

