The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Graphic Design with Large Multimodal Model
Yutao Cheng1 * , Zhao Zhang1 * , Maoke Yang1 * ,
Hui Nie1 2 , Chunyuan Li1 , Xinglong Wu1 , Jie Shao1
1

2

ByteDance Inc.
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yutao.135,yangmaoke,shaojie.mail}@bytedance.com
zzhang@mail.nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

order of layers. However, establishing the appropriate ordering of these layers is a design cornerstone that, if misorganized, can fracture the visual hierarchy, leading to disarray in
the intended message delivery. Requiring users to prescribe
an accurate layer sequence prior to layout not only burdens
them with foresight and planning but also stifles layout algorithms, restricting their capacity to transcend such confines
in the pursuit of innovative and aesthetically superior outcomes.
In practical graphic design applications, the order, size,
and position of elements are fundamental components that
form the entire layout, ultimately determining the visual impact, attraction, and communicability of the design work.
Therefore, it is crucial to consider them simultaneously. As
illustrated in the right panel of Figure 1, spatial fault (such
as incorrect size and position) as well as order fault can significantly compromise the aesthetics of a graphic design.
To advance the layout generation task towards a more
end-to-end approach, this paper introduces a new task called
Hierarchical Layout Generation (HLG). HLG aims to create a visually appealing graphic composition from a collection of any-ordered elements by meticulously considering
both their spatial arrangement and the ordering of layers.
The term hierarchical emphasizes the significance of element ordering, setting HLG apart from conventional layout
generation practices.
For the HLG task, we introduce CreatiGraphist, the
first layout generation model built upon Large Multimodal
Model (LMM) (Liu et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023a). The layout generation task is challenging that it digests diverse input
elements such as RGB-A materials, RGB images, and texts,
and the desired outcomes must precisely reflect the intricate relationships among these multimodal input elements.
LMMs are well-suited for this task, as they can unify different modalities, like images, text, coordinates (Peng et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2023a) into tokens. This allows for flexible configuration of various tasks, such as HLG, GLG, and
more variants. Furthermore, LMMs demonstrate significant
potential for scaling (Kaplan et al. 2020; Team et al. 2023),
enabling the pursuit of enhanced performance through the
use of larger models and more extensive datasets. For these
reasons, LMMs were a natural choice for our foundational
architecture in developing CreatiGraphist. In our specific approach for HLG, we train CreatiGraphist with graphic com-

In the field of graphic design, automating the integration of
design elements into a cohesive multi-layered artwork not
only boosts productivity but also paves the way for the democratization of graphic design. One existing practice is
Graphic Layout Generation (GLG), which aims to layout sequential design elements. It has been constrained by the necessity for a predefined correct sequence of layers, thus limiting creative potential and increasing user workload. In this
paper, we present Hierarchical Layout Generation (HLG) as
a more flexible and pragmatic setup, which creates graphic
composition from any-ordered sets of design elements. To
tackle the HLG task, we introduce CreatiGraphist, the first
layout generation model based on large multimodal models.
CreatiGraphist efficiently reframes the HLG as a sequence
generation problem, utilizing RGB-A images as input, outputs a JSON draft protocol, indicating the coordinates, size,
and order of each element. We develop multiple evaluation
metrics for HLG. CreatiGraphist outperforms prior arts and
establishes a strong baseline for this field.

Introduction
Graphic design (Jobling and Crowley 1996) fundamentally
serves as a form of visual communication. It involves the
creation and combination of symbols, images, and text to
express certain ideas or messages. This field requires significant expertise and time investment to produce aesthetically
pleasing graphic compositions. Recently, there is a significant paradigm shift in leveraging AI for automating the layout of given design elements into cohesive graphic compositions heralds (Zhong, Tang, and Yepes 2019; Yin, Mei, and
Chen 2013; Ganin et al. 2021). This could potentially reduce the workload of professional designers and provide an
avenue for beginners to create their design pieces, making
graphic design more democratize and effective.
A preliminary attempt to automate this process is observed in the task known as Graphic Layout Generation
(GLG) (Yamaguchi 2021). GLG attempts to intelligently arrange the size and position of each provided elements into
attractive compositions under the assumption of a predefined
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2473

