The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Theory of Formalisms for Representing Knowledge
Heng Zhang1∗ , Guifei Jiang2 , Donghui Quan1
1

Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311121, China
College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China
h.zhang@zhejianglab.org, g.jiang@nankai.edu.cn, donghui.quan@zhejianglab.org
2

Abstract

tonic logical systems such as Prolog (van Emden and Kowalski 1976) and description logics (Baader et al. 2017); nonmonotonic logics such as circumscription (McCarthy 1980)
and default logic (Reiter 1980); graph-based representations
such as Bayesian networks (Pearl 1985) and semantic network (Sowa 1991), and parametrized models such as recurrent neural networks (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams
1986) and transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017). It is noteworthy that machine learning and knowledge representation are
inherently intertwined; all learning algorithms are actually
based on some formalisms for representing knowledge.
The quest for the best formalism of knowledge representation has sparked a longstanding dispute. A prime example is
the “declarative vs. procedural” controversy, which centers
on choosing between declarative statements and procedures
as the primary means of representing knowledge. Similarly,
the ongoing debate between symbolic AI and connectionist AI revolves around the question of whether knowledge
should be represented explicitly or implicitly. In general,
knowledge representation formalisms in machine learning,
such as convolutional neural networks in deep learning and
transformers in large language models, are implicit, while
all logical formalisms in traditional KR are explicit.
In this work, we will undertake a systematic exploration
of disputed issues, particularly the search for the optimal knowledge representation formalism. A general framework is needed to systematically evaluate varied formalisms.
While extensive philosophical deliberations on fundamentals of knowledge representation exist, including the physical symbol system hypothesis (Newell and Simon 1976) and
the knowledge representation hypothesis (Smith 1982), they
primarily remain within the realm of theoretical consensusbuilding. Departing from this path, our goal is to obtain rigorous conclusions from a broad and inclusive framework
through meticulous mathematical demonstrations, thereby
deepening the understanding of the nature of representation.
The main contributions of this work are threefold. Firstly,
we propose a general framework to capture all the knowledge representation formalisms in which we are interested,
and propose a novel definitions for universal formalisms.
Secondly, we find a family of universal formalisms; based on
them, we then prove that all possible universal formalisms
are recursively isomorphic. Thirdly, we show that, under a
natural condition, all subrecursive formalisms that can be

There has been a longstanding dispute over which formalism is the best for representing knowledge in AI. The wellknown “declarative vs. procedural controversy” is concerned
with the choice of utilizing declarations or procedures as the
primary mode of knowledge representation. The ongoing debate between symbolic AI and connectionist AI also revolves
around the question of whether knowledge should be represented implicitly (e.g., as parametric knowledge in deep
learning and large language models) or explicitly (e.g., as
logical theories in traditional knowledge representation and
reasoning). To address these issues, we propose a general
framework to capture various knowledge representation formalisms in which we are interested. Within the framework,
we find a family of universal knowledge representation formalisms, and prove that all universal formalisms are recursively isomorphic. Moreover, we show that all pairwise intertranslatable formalisms that admit the padding property are
also recursively isomorphic. These imply that, up to an offline
compilation, all universal (or natural and equally expressive)
representation formalisms are in fact the same, which thus
provides a partial answer to the aforementioned dispute.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11855

Introduction
Knowledge is extensively acknowledged as a cornerstone of
intelligence (McCarthy and Hayes 1981; Delgrande et al.
2024), playing a crucial role in intelligent systems. How to
effectively represent, acquire, utilize and evolve knowledge
is undoubtedly one of the most critical parts of realizing artificial general intelligence (AGI). Knowledge representation
serves as the foundation and starting point for all these tasks.
In traditional knowledge representation and reasoning (KR),
representations of knowledge are often regarded as “explicit,
symbolic, declarative representations of information” (Delgrande et al. 2024). However, in this work, we will consider
more general forms of knowledge representation.
Over the past seven decades, researchers have devoted
substantial efforts to developing various knowledge representation formalisms. An incomplete list includes: mono∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15257

