The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Affordances-Oriented Planning Using Foundation Models for Continuous
Vision-Language Navigation
Jiaqi Chen1 , Bingqian Lin2 , Xinmin Liu3 , Lin Ma3 , Xiaodan Liang2∗ , Kwan-Yee K. Wong1 *
1

2

The University of Hong Kong
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
3
Meituan

Abstract
LLM-based agents have demonstrated impressive zero-shot
performance in vision-language navigation (VLN) task. However, existing LLM-based methods often focus only on solving
high-level task planning by selecting nodes in predefined navigation graphs for movements, overlooking low-level control
in navigation scenarios. To bridge this gap, we propose AOPlanner, a novel Affordances-Oriented Planner for continuous VLN task. Our AO-Planner integrates various foundation
models to achieve affordances-oriented low-level motion planning and high-level decision-making, both performed in a zeroshot setting. Specifically, we employ a Visual Affordances
Prompting (VAP) approach, where the visible ground is segmented by SAM to provide navigational affordances, based
on which the LLM selects potential candidate waypoints and
plans low-level paths towards selected waypoints. We further
propose a high-level PathAgent which marks planned paths
on the image input and reasons the most probable path by
comprehending all environmental information. Finally, we
convert the selected path into 3D coordinates using camera
intrinsic parameters and depth information, avoiding challenging 3D predictions for LLMs. Experiments on the challenging
R2R-CE and RxR-CE datasets show that AO-Planner achieves
state-of-the-art zero-shot performance (8.8% improvement on
SPL). Our method can also serve as a data annotator to obtain pseudo-labels, distilling its waypoint prediction ability
into a learning-based predictor. This new predictor does not
require any waypoint data from the simulator and achieves
47% SR competing with supervised methods. We establish an
effective connection between LLM and 3D world, presenting
novel prospects for employing foundation models in low-level
motion control.

Figure 1: In discrete VLN, LLMs only need to perform highlevel planning by selecting a view as the forward direction
(left). For continuous environments, previous agents rely on
collecting simulator data to train low-level policies. In this
paper, we utilize multimodal foundation models and propose
visual affordances prompting to predict low-level candidate
waypoints and paths in a zero-shot setting (right).

Introduction
Large Language models (LLMs) (OpenAI 2023a; Team et al.
2023; Anil et al. 2023) have shown strong capabilities and
potentials in embodied intelligence tasks. In particular, for
vision-and-language navigation (VLN) task (Anderson et al.
2018; Qi et al. 2020b; Hong et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022;
Qiao et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023b), where agents need
to make decisions by comprehending language instructions
and visual observations, LLMs have demonstrated impressive zero-shot navigation performance. Recent works (Zhou,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23568

Hong, and Wu 2023; Long et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024b)
have effectively leveraged the high-level capabilities of LLMs
for task planning, decision-making, instruction parsing, etc.
However, there exist several challenges and gaps which
hinder the application of LLM-based agents to more practical navigation tasks. For instance, agents in the classical
discrete VLN setting only need to navigate between predefined viewpoints with high-level decision-making capabilities.
In contrast, for more practical VLN in continuous environments (VLN-CE), learning-based models (Krantz et al. 2020;
Krantz and Lee 2022; Hong et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023a;
An et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024) must predict low-level
actions (e.g., turn left 15◦ ) or positions of subgoals in the
environment that can drive agents in the simulator. Recently
proposed zero-shot agents for navigation in continuous environments (Cai et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023) only utilize
LLMs for high-level task planning, and they still require a
large amount of sampled environmental data from the simulator to train low-level policies. Obviously, the gaps between
discrete and continuous environments have made current re-

