The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AdaCo: Overcoming Visual Foundation Model Noise in 3D Semantic
Segmentation via Adaptive Label Correction
Pufan Zou1,2 * , Shijia Zhao1,2 * , Weijie Huang1,2 , Qiming Xia1,2 ,
Chenglu Wen1,2† , Wei Li 3† , Cheng Wang 1,2
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China,
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China,
3
Inceptio
{zoupufan, zhaoshijia4567, weijie, xiaqiming}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
clwen@xmu.edu.cn, liweimcc@gmail.com, cwang@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Recently, Visual Foundation Models (VFMs) have shown
a remarkable generalization performance in 3D perception
tasks. However, their effectiveness in large-scale outdoor
datasets remains constrained by the scarcity of accurate supervision signals, the extensive noise caused by variable
outdoor conditions, and the abundance of unknown objects. In this work, we propose a novel label-free learning
method, Adaptive Label Correction (AdaCo), for 3D semantic segmentation. AdaCo first introduces the Cross-modal
Label Generation Module (CLGM), providing cross-modal
supervision with the formidable interpretive capabilities of
the VFMs. Subsequently, AdaCo incorporates the Adaptive
Noise Corrector (ANC), updating and adjusting the noisy
samples within this supervision iteratively during training.
Moreover, we develop an Adaptive Robust Loss (ARL) function to modulate each sample’s sensitivity to noisy supervision, preventing potential underfitting issues associated with
robust loss. Our proposed AdaCo can effectively mitigate the
performance limitations of label-free learning networks in
3D semantic segmentation tasks. Extensive experiments on
two outdoor benchmark datasets highlight the superior performance of our method.

...

Various Outdoor Environment

...

Abundant Seen and Unseen Objects

Pixel-wise Label Noise
CLGM

AdaCo

mIoU
1

...

ANC

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Car
Car

Road
Road

Build.
Building

Vege.
Vegetation

Truck
Truck

T-Sign Motocycle
Traffic-sign
Motocycle Person
Person

Figure 1: In outdoor scenes, variable environmental conditions and diverse object categories introduce significant
noise when using VFMs for 3D perception tasks. Adaco effectively improves the label quality of the baseline method,
MaskCLIP, in major categories in road scenes. ”Build.”,
”Vege.”, ”T-Sign” means Building, Vegetation, Traffic-Sign.

Introduction

for semantic annotation. However, these methods still rely
on a certain amount of high-quality 3D annotations.
With the powerful understanding and generalization ability of the Visual Foundation Models (VFMs) in zero-shot
2D semantic segmentation, especially SAM (Kirillov et al.
2023) for segment masks and CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) for
semantic labels, recent works (Chen et al. 2023b; Peng et al.
2023) show promising advances in label-free 3D semantic
segmentation. Technically, these works generate 3D semantic labels by unprojecting 2D semantic features, extracted by
VFMs, onto the corresponding point cloud.
However, these VFMs-assisted label-free methods also
suffer some challenges. (1) Inaccurate pseudo labels. Current approaches follow the fashion of first extracting semantics from 2D images using VFMs and subsequently embedding them in 2D/3D features. Though refinements based
on label consistency and spatial-temporal cues are well ex-

As a core task of 3D perception, 3D semantic segmentation intends to identify different objects and parts, which has
made significant progress in several fields such as robotics,
autonomous driving, and mixed reality. Existing advanced
methods (Hu et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021) inevitably rely
on precise point-wise semantic annotations to train a wellperformance segmenter. However, large-scale annotation for
outdoor scenes is time-consuming and labor-intensive.
In the past few years, many methods adopt weakly supervised learning (Hu et al. 2022; Liu, Qi, and Fu 2021; Huang
et al. 2024), semi-supervised learning (Li et al. 2021), and
other methods (Zhang et al. 2023) to further reduce the need
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11086

