The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CLIP-RestoreX: Restore Image Structure and Perception in Exposure Correction
Xiang Huang1 , Qing Zhang1,2 * , Jian-Fang Hu1,2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
huangx398@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org
2

Abstract
Exposure correction aims to adjust the exposure of an underand over-exposed image to enhance its overall visual quality.
The core challenge of this task lies in that it requires to faithfully restore both the structure and perception information.
In this work, we present a novel exposure correction method,
referred to as CLIP-RestoreX, that leverages structural and
perceptual priors from CLIP to tackle exposure correction.
Specifically, we in CLIP-RestoreX propose to perform exposure correction by aligning CLIP-based structural and perceptual feature of the impaired image with its ground-truth
image. To better restore the damaged structural information
and perceptual information, we further design a frequencydomain based feature enhancement diffusion model, where
we utilize the globality of Fourier transform to help reveal potential the relationship within the features. We conduct extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets. The results
demonstrate that the proposed CLIP-RestoreX outperforms
state-of-the-art exposure correction methods.

Input

CoTF

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Comparison with previous methods. In the first
and second rows, our CLIP-RestoreX can better preserve
the original structural information of the image. For example, our method recovers more cloud details. In the third
and fourth rows, our CLIP-RestoreX can better preserve
the original perceptual information of the image, for example, it restores the blue sky and the purple background of
the woman, which are closer to GT. These results demonstrate that our CLIP-RestoreX can effectively restore structural and perceptual information in severely under- and overexposed images.

Code —
https://github.com/HXDreamChaser/CLIP-RestoreX

Introduction
When the dynamic range of the camera fails to accommodate the complex lighting conditions of the environment,
the captured image often exhibits unwanted under- or overexposed areas. In this work, we study the exposure correction problem, which aims to adjust the exposure of an
under- or over-exposed image to enhance its visual quality
by restoring both the structure and perception information
degraded by the undesired exposure conditions. Specifically,
the structural information refers to the geometric elements
of an image, such as edges, contours and lines, while the
perceptual information relates to how human visual system
interprets images, including aspects like color, tone and contrast. With the rapid advancement of deep learning, existing exposure correction methods that focus on color correction (Baek et al. 2023), exposure consistency (Huang et al.
2023) and detail enhancement (Wang et al. 2023) have made
significant progress. However, for images that are severely

under- and over-exposed, these methods still struggle to effectively restore the impaired structural and perceptual information simultaneously.
To restore the structure and perceptual information damaged by severe under- and over-exposure, we introduce a
method that leverages the structural and perceptual priors
from CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) to improve exposure correction (named CLIP-RestoreX). Our method takes inspiration from (Guo et al. 2022; Wei et al. 2021; Wang, Chan,
and Loy 2023) that CLIP encodes structural and perception information in shallow and deep layers, respectively.
Specifically, We use CLIP to extract complete structural and
perceptual information from the ground-truth image, and
also the structural and perceptual feature degraded by severe under- or over-exposure. In order to restore the dam-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3760

