The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GaussianSR: High Fidelity 2D Gaussian Splatting for Arbitrary-Scale
Image Super-Resolution
Jintong Hu1 * , Bin Xia2 * , Bin Chen3 * , Wenming Yang1† , Lei Zhang4, 5
1

Tsinghua University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Peking University
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
5
OPPO Research Institute
hujt22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zjbinxia@gmail.com, chenbin@stu.pku.edu.cn
yang.wenming@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, john.zhang@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

the RGB values of high-resolution (HR) images as continuous functions of low-resolution (LR) features and pixel coordinates. This continuous representation enables LIIF to perform super-resolution at arbitrary scales without the need
for creating and training separate models for each scaling
factor. Building upon LIIF, numerous variants and extensions have subsequently emerged (Lee and Jin 2022; Xu,
Wang, and Shi 2022; Yang et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2023),
further advancing the capabilities of INR-based ArbitraryScale Super-Resolution (ASSR).
Although INR-based ASSR methods have demonstrated
their effectiveness, several intrinsic limitations remain. Latent codes are stored individually, which necessitates the use
of Multi-layer Perceptrons (MLPs) to interpolate these discrete features into a continuous output. This process may
not fully preserve key physical properties of the scene, such
as lighting and texture consistency, reducing the overall interpretability and physical fidelity of the generated images.
Moreover, as depicted in Figure 1(a), when query location
xq moves in 2D domain, the selection of zt can abruptly
switch from one to another if xq crosses the dashed lines, potentially leading to checkerboard artifacts in the output image. To counteract this, a strategy involving a weighted combination of nearby latent codes is employed, which, while
effective, increases the computational load and may become
a bottleneck for real-time applications.
How about continuously storing latent codes? After
discussing the limitations of existing INR-based methods
in handling 2D image super-resolution (SR) with continuous integrity, we explore the potential application of concepts derived from 3D reconstruction technologies to address these issues. Inspired by the recent advancements in
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) for detailed scene rendering
and object reconstruction (Kerbl et al. 2023; Keetha et al.
2024; Yan et al. 2024; Matsuki et al. 2024), we propose
a method that adapts this technology to more efficiently
handle continuous data representation. The key concept of
3DGS involves representing objects as 3D Gaussian fields,
allowing for the construction of continuous structures with
significantly reduced parameter requirements. By applying
this method, overlapped Gaussian spheres can form vari-

Implicit neural representations (INRs) have significantly advanced the field of arbitrary-scale super-resolution (ASSR)
of images. Most existing INR-based ASSR networks first extract features from the given low-resolution image using an
encoder, and then render the super-resolved result via a multilayer perceptron decoder. Although these approaches have
shown promising results, their performance is constrained
by the limited representation ability of discrete latent codes
in the encoded features. In this paper, we propose a novel
ASSR method named GaussianSR that overcomes this limitation through 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS). Unlike traditional methods that treat pixels as discrete points, GaussianSR represents each pixel as a continuous Gaussian field.
The encoded features are simultaneously refined and upsampled by rendering the mutually stacked Gaussian fields.
As a result, long-range dependencies are established to enhance representation ability. In addition, a classifier is developed to dynamically assign Gaussian kernels to all pixels to further improve flexibility. All components of GaussianSR (i.e., encoder, classifier, Gaussian kernels, and decoder) are jointly learned end-to-end. Experiments demonstrate that GaussianSR achieves superior ASSR performance
with fewer parameters than existing methods while enjoying
interpretable and content-aware feature aggregations.

Introduction
The vision world is continuous, presenting scenes and objects in their natural, uninterrupted forms. However, computer vision tasks predominantly employ pixel-based discrete representations for image processing, which inherently
constrains the ability capture the continuous nature with
high fidelity across different resolutions. The emergence of
implicit neural representations (INR) has revolutionized this
challenge by treating images as continuous functions. Pioneered by LIIF (Chen, Liu, and Wang 2021), INR-based
methods leverage Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) to model
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3554

