The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MonoBox: Tightness-Free Box-Supervised Polyp Segmentation Using
Monotonicity Constraint
Qiang Hu1 , Zhenyu Yi2 , Ying Zhou1 , Fan Huang3 , Mei Liu4 , Qiang Li1 , Zhiwei Wang1 *
1

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Engineering Sciences, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Wuhan United Imaging Healthcare Surgical Technology Co., Ltd.
4
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{huqiang77, zwwang}@hust.edu.cn
Abstract

We propose MonoBox, an innovative box-supervised segmentation method constrained by monotonicity to liberate its
training from the user-unfriendly box-tightness assumption.
In contrast to conventional box-supervised segmentation,
where the box edges must precisely touch the target boundaries, MonoBox leverages imprecisely-annotated boxes to
achieve robust pixel-wise segmentation. The ‘linchpin’ is
that, within the noisy zones around box edges, MonoBox
discards the traditional misguiding multiple-instance learning loss, and instead optimizes a carefully-designed objective, termed monotonicity constraint. Along directions transitioning from the foreground to background, this new constraint steers responses to adhere to a trend of monotonically decreasing values. Consequently, the originally unreliable learning within the noisy zones is transformed into a correct and effective monotonicity optimization. Moreover, an
adaptive label correction is introduced, enabling MonoBox
to enhance the tightness of box annotations using predicted
masks from the previous epoch and dynamically shrink the
noisy zones as training progresses. We verify MonoBox in
the box-supervised segmentation task of polyps, where satisfying box-tightness is challenging due to the vague boundaries between the polyp and normal tissues. Experiments on
both public synthetic and in-house real noisy datasets demonstrate that MonoBox exceeds other anti-noise state-of-the-arts
by improving Dice by at least 5.5% and 3.3%, respectively.

Figure 1: Examples of non-tight box annotations produced
by endoscopists in the real annotation process. The red
dashed lines indicate regions where the annotation is too
wide, and the yellow dashed lines indicate regions where the
annotation is too narrow.

To reduce the annotation cost, weakly-supervised segmentation (WSS) methods are studied, aiming to train segmentation models with more cost-effective labels, such as
image-level categories (Ahn, Cho, and Kwak 2019), points
(Cheng, Parkhi, and Kirillov 2022), and bounding boxes
(Tian et al. 2021; Wang and Xia 2021). Among them, boxsupervised segmentation (BSS) methods achieve the closest
performance to fully-supervised methods, and thus attract
dominant research attentions. The prevailing idea of BSS is
called multiple-instance learning (MIL), which views each
pixel as an instance, and defines a pixel-width image column or row as a positive bag if it crosses the annotated box,
or negative bag otherwise. By pooling the instances’ predictions as the corresponding bag-level prediction, the segmentation model can be trained to produce pixel-level results in
the optimization of bag classification. However, the existing
MIL-based BSS methods (Tian et al. 2021; Wang and Xia
2021; Cheng et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023)
mostly, if not all, are based on a box-tightness assumption,
that is, the box’s edges must precisely touch the target to
make sure the bag-level labels are accurate. This severely inhibits the practical application of polyp datasets. In the polyp
context, as shown in Figure 1, the characteristics of polyps,
such as blurred boundaries, low contrast with normal tissues,
and small sizes, bring ambiguities to annotators and lead to
inaccurate (i.e., non-tight) box annotations. Therefore, improving the tolerance of BSS methods to inaccurate boxes
can alleviate the annotation difficulty and thus is of urgency
for the clinical usage of polyp segmentation.
The above objective can fall into the scope of noise learning, where the noise is induced by box non-tightness. A

Code — https://github.com/Huster-Hq/MonoBox

Introduction
Colorectal Cancer (CRC) threats to human health worldwide, and colonoscopy is a golden-standard of identifying
and resecting early polyps (Haggar and Boushey 2009; Ji
et al. 2024). Recently, numerous deep learning-based polyp
segmentation methods (Fan et al. 2020; Zhao, Zhang, and
Lu 2021; Dong et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Ji et al.
2023) have been proposed to assist the accurate resection
and workload reduction. However, they are mostly fullysupervised and thus require pixel-level mask labels, which
are time-consuming and expensive to acquire.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3572

