The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

View Transformation Robustness for Multi-View 3D Object Reconstruction with
Reconstruction Error-Guided View Selection
Qi Zhang1 , Zhouhang Luo2,1 , Tao Yu1 , Hui Huang1 *
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
qi.zhang.opt@gmail.com, {luozhouhang2022, yutao2023}@email.szu.edu.cn, hhzhiyan@gmail.com

2

Reconstruction
Error

Abstract

GT

View Selection

View transformation robustness (VTR) is critical for deeplearning-based multi-view 3D object reconstruction models,
which indicates the methods’ stability under inputs with various view transformations. However, existing research seldom
focuses on view transformation robustness in multi-view 3D
object reconstruction. One direct way to improve the models’ VTR is to produce data with more view transformations
and add them to model training. Recent progress on large vision models, particularly Stable Diffusion models, has provided great potential for generating 3D models or synthesizing novel view images with only a single image input.
To fully utilize the power of Stable Diffusion models without causing extra inference computation burdens, we propose
to generate novel views with Stable Diffusion models for
better view transformation robustness. Instead of synthesizing random views, we propose a reconstruction error-guided
view selection method, which considers the reconstruction errors’ spatial distribution of the 3D predictions and chooses
the views that could cover the reconstruction errors as much
as possible. The methods are trained and tested on sets with
large view transformations to validate the 3D reconstruction
models’ robustness to view transformations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method can outperform
state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction methods and other view
transformation robustness comparison methods.

Sampling

Prediction
Multi-View
Reconstruction

Stable Diffusion
Origin Views
View Synthesis
Novel Views

Figure 1: The method’s main idea is to utilize the proposed
reconstruction error-guided view selection method for selecting and generating viewpoints covering the most errors.

sue for multi-view 3D object reconstruction. So, proposing
novel methods for boosting view transformation robustness
is important for multi-view 3D object reconstruction.
Recent progress in large vision models (LVMs), especially stable diffusion models (SD) (Rombach et al. 2022;
Hu et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2023; Qi et al. 2024; Yoo et al. 2024;
Zou et al. 2024; Kwak et al. 2024; Bauer et al. 2024), has
provided the extra potential for multi-view 3D object reconstruction, such as training a large model for direct 3D object
reconstruction (Liu et al. 2024, 2023c,a), or novel view synthesis. While utilizing LVMs for 3D reconstruction causes
heavy computation burdens at the inference stage and their
view transformation robustness (Liu et al. 2023b) is still limited. An effective way of utilizing stable diffusion models
(Liu et al. 2023b) for boosting the view transformation robustness of multi-view 3D reconstruction, is to use them as
a data augmentation platform to aid the model training by
randomly synthesizing novel views (see Figure 1). However,
even though these randomly generated views are useful for
increasing the model’s robustness to view transformations,
the repeated or similar views are also being synthesized with
no aid for the model’s robustness, reducing the approach’s
effectiveness. Thus, instead of generating random views,
and considering the error spatial distributions of 3D reconstruction predictions, we propose a novel reconstruction error-guided view selection method to choose the
most effective views to improve the 3D reconstruction
models’ view transformation robustness (VTR).
Overall, the proposed method consists of three components (see Figure 2): the original 3D object reconstruction

Introduction
Voxel-based multi-view 3D object reconstruction outputs
3D voxels of the object by fusing various viewpoints with
deep-learning neural networks. It plays an important role in
computer vision, robotics, augmented reality, and other domains. Naturally, multi-view 3D object reconstruction shall
perform stably with inputs of different viewpoints, i.e., the
view transformation robustness (VTR) is vital. However,
few research works have studied the view transformation robustness for multi-view 3D object reconstruction.
Instead, the VTR issue has been dealt with in other areas,
such as in multi-view classification (Wei, Yu, and Sun 2020)
or point cloud recognition (Qi et al. 2017; Wang, Yang, and
Tao 2022). However, these methods are not specially designed to deal with the view transformation robustness is* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10076

