The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Vision-aware Multimodal Prompt Tuning for Uploadable
Multi-source Few-shot Domain Adaptation
Kuanghong Liu, Jin Wang* , Kangjian He* , Dan Xu, Xuejie Zhang
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
liukh@mail.ynu.edu.cn, {wangjin, hekj, danxu, xjzhang}@ynu.edu.cn

Abstract
Conventional multi-source domain few-shot adaptation
(MFDA) faces the challenge of further reducing the load on
edge-side devices in low-resource scenarios. Considering the
native language-supervised advantage of CLIP and the plugand-play nature of prompt to transfer CLIP efficiently, this
paper introduces an uploadable multi-source few-shot domain adaptation (UMFDA) schema. It belongs to a decentralized edge collaborative learning in the edge-side models
that must maintain a low computational load. And only a limited amount of annotations in source domain data is provided,
with most of the data being unannotated. Further, this paper
proposes a vision-aware multimodal prompt tuning framework (VAMP) under the decentralized schema, where the
vision-aware prompt guides the text domain-specific prompt
to maintain semantic discriminability and perceive the domain information. The cross-modal semantic and domain distribution alignment losses optimize each edge-side model,
while text classifier consistency and semantic diversity losses
promote collaborative learning among edge-side models. Extensive experiments were conducted on OfficeHome and DomainNet datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed VAMP in the UMFDA, which outperformed the previous prompt tuning methods.

ProductClipart

Real WorldClipart

ArtClipart

(a) Decentralized domain-specific prompt tuning

Upload
a photo of a
<category>.

Clipart

Text
Encoder

Vision
Encoder

Plug-and-play domainspecific prompts

(b) Centralized integration platform for target domain

Figure 1: The illustration of uploadable multi-source fewshot domain adaptation (UMFDA) schema for decentralized
edge learning.

this might increase the cost of the storage and computation
for edge devices (McMahan et al. 2016).
The pretrained vision-and-language model (VLM), such
as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), has attracted attention for
its remarkable zero-shot inference performance and transferability. Pretraining by cross-modal alignment of contrastive
learning, CLIP has the native advantage of language-guided
supervision to form similar semantic clusters. A critical
insight is to leverage a manual-craft text prompt, e.g., a
photo of a <category>., as a query prompt for the
text encoder to inspire CLIP’s potential. With the development of prompt tuning in NLP (Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021; Li and Liang 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Shin et al.
2020), some methods (Zhou et al. 2022a; Zang et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2022; Khattak et al. 2023) replaced the manual-crafted prompt with a small fraction of
learnable parameters. Only by updating the fewer prompt
parameters rather than the entire model will these plug-andplay learnable prompts make CLIP favorably adaptable to
various downstream tasks, even under the few annotated
sample conditions. With insights into the native languagesupervised benefit of CLIP and the prompt’s efficient plug-

Code — https://github.com/lkh-meredith/VAMP-UMFDA

Introduction
Multi-source few-shot domain adaptation (MFDA) is a
resource-limited multi-source domain adaptation scenario,
since large-scale manual annotations of each source domain
are laborious and difficult, especially for the disease dataset
that needs expert labeling or is even inaccessible when involves private data (Gulshan et al. 2016; Harmon et al.
2020). That means only a limited amount of annotations in
the source domain data is provided, with most of the data
being unannotated. Therefore, it is more practical and worth
further exploration (Yue et al. 2021a; Kim et al. 2020). However, the improvement of the conventional MFDA method
comes at the expense of storing additional clustering prototype features as a classifier (Yue et al. 2021a). In practice,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18897

