The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HybridReg: Robust 3D Point Cloud Registration with Hybrid Motions
Keyu Du1 * , Hao Xu2,3 * , Haipeng Li1,4 , Hong Qu1 , Chi-Wing Fu2,3 , Shuaicheng Liu1,4†
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, CUHK
3
Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR, CUHK
4
Megvii Technology
{dukeyu@std., lihaipeng@std., hongqu@, liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn, {xuhao, cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Scene-level point cloud registration is very challenging when
considering dynamic foregrounds. Existing indoor datasets
mostly assume rigid motions, so the trained models cannot robustly handle scenes with non-rigid motions. On the
other hand, non-rigid datasets are mainly object-level, so the
trained models cannot generalize well to complex scenes.
This paper presents HybridReg, a new approach to 3D point
cloud registration, learning uncertainty mask to account for
hybrid motions: rigid for backgrounds and non-rigid/rigid for
instance-level foregrounds. First, we build a scene-level 3D
registration dataset, namely HybridMatch, designed specifically with strategies to arrange diverse deforming foregrounds in a controllable manner. Second, we account for
different motion types and formulate a mask-learning module to alleviate the interference of deforming outliers. Third,
we exploit a simple yet effective negative log-likelihood loss
to adopt uncertainty to guide the feature extraction and correlation computation. To our best knowledge, HybridReg is
the first work that exploits hybrid motions for robust point
cloud registration. Extensive experiments show HybridReg’s
strengths, leading it to achieve state-of-the-art performance
on both widely-used indoor and outdoor datasets.

Code — https://github.com/hxwork/HybridReg PyTorch

Figure 1: We build HybridMatch, the first large-scale indoor
synthetic dataset with hybrid motions for 3D point cloud
registration (top). To improve the robustness, we further design HybridReg, integrating probabilistic uncertainty masks
into correspondence estimation (middle), achieving significant boosts (below) in challenging hybrid-motion scenes.

Introduction
3D point cloud registration is vital for diverse applications,
attracting incredible attention from industry and academia.
Recent data-driven methods have shown remarkable success, particularly in indoor scenes (Bai et al. 2020; Huang
et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021), thanks to large-scale datasets
like 3DMatch (Zeng et al. 2017), SIRA-PCR (Chen et al.
2023a), and PointRegGPT (Chen et al. 2024).
Typically, the input pair of point clouds are partially overlapping, with (i) rigid background motions due to the camera
motion, and (ii) non-rigid foreground motion due to moving
or deforming objects. To align the background, algorithms
should eliminate the foreground interference and determine
a 3D rigid transformation. However, most existing indoor

datasets assume rigid motions in the whole scene, neglecting
common non-rigid foreground motions. So, the first challenge is the lack of a comprehensive benchmark for model
training and evaluation on scenes with hybrid motions.
Though directly training on real-captured datasets can alleviate this issue, data collection is highly time-consuming,
and data annotation is expensive and error-prone. An appealing alternative to overcome the data scarcity is to leverage simulated data, e.g., Lepard (Li and Harada 2022) introduces 4DMatch, an object-level synthetic dataset for nonrigid point cloud registration. Yet, models trained on objectlevel data have proven to struggle to generalize to complex
indoor scenes (Qin et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2021), as ob-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2789

