The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Multi-Interest Graph Neural Network
for Session-Based Recommendation
Mingyang Lv1,3 * , Xiangfeng Liu1,3 * , Yuanbo Xu1,2†
1

MIC Lab, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
3
College of Software, Jilin University, China
yuanbox@jlu.edu.cn, {lvmy5521, liuxf5521}@mails.jlu.edu.cn
Abstract

Session-based recommendation (SBR) is widely used in ecommerce and streaming services, with the task of performing real-time recommendations based on short-term anonymous user history data. Most existing SBR frameworks follow the pattern of learning a single representation for a
specific session, which makes it difficult to capture potential multiple interests, thus preventing discriminative recommendation. Multi-Interest learning has emerged as an effective approach for addressing this issue on sequential data
in recent years. However, the current Multi-Interest frameworks perform poorly on session data because they may generate excessive interests. To address these issues, we proposed a model named Dynamic Multi-Interest Graph Neural
Network (DMI-GNN), which introduces the Multi-Interest
learning framework into SBR and refines it by proposing a
multiple positional patterns (MPP) learning method and a Dynamic Multi-Interest (DMI) regularization. Specifically, the
MPP learning layer ensures the model to obtain representations with different positional information for sessions. The
DMI regularization, on the other hand, mitigates the influence of excessive interests. Experiments on three bench-mark
datasets demonstrate that our methods achieve better performance on different metrics.

Figure 1: Scenarios of Multi-Interest in session-based recommendation. S1 and S2 are different sessions. The two
v5 items are the next items of these sessions, respectively.
The heatmaps in the right corner represent the similarity
scores between the next items and their corresponding session items, respectively.
users and increased awareness of user privacy protection, the
performance of these methods has been quite limited. As
a result, session-based recommendation techniques (using
anonymous behavioral data) have gained significant attention, generating recommendations for the next item based
solely on the ongoing session.
Existing session-based recommendation methods are
mainly based on sequence structures or graph structures.
Sequence-based methods model sessions as sequences and
predict the next item the user is likely to interact with.
Methods based on recurrent neural networks, such as GRU
and LSTM, became early leaders in this field due to their
inherent ability to process sequences and their representational capabilities. However, as mentioned in (Qiu et al.
2019), methods based on recurrent neural networks cannot
effectively model the relationships between items, as the
actual transition patterns are far more complex than simple
temporal ordering. Graph-based methods (Li et al. 2016;
Wu et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019) have been proposed in recent
years to model more complex relationships within sessions.
On one hand, GNNs expand the expressive power of item
representations in the spatial dimension by explicitly aggregating neighborhood information of items; on the other

Code — https://github.com/MICLab-Rec/DMI-GNN

Introduction
With the rapid growth of information on the Internet, recommendation systems play a crucial role in many applications, helping users alleviate information overload and providing personalized delivery, making it easier for users to
choose information that they are interested in. Many existing recommendation methods typically rely on long-term
user behavior sequences, such as collaborative filtering, matrix factorization-based methods (Sarwar et al. 2001), and
Markov chain-based approaches (Rendle, Freudenthaler,
and Schmidt-Thieme 2010). These methods are simple and
easy to implement, and have been widely applied in practical recommendation scenarios. However, in recent years,
due to the limitations of real-world scenarios with unlogged
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12328

