The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust and Consistent Online Video Instance Segmentation
via Instance Mask Propagation
Miran Heo1 * , Seoung Wug Oh2 , Seon Joo Kim1 , Joon-Young Lee2
1

Yonsei University
Adobe Research

2

Abstract

We argue that there are two main causes of the problem. First, we identify popular VIS architectures that take
the decoupled approach, commonly known as the “trackingby-detection” paradigm (Fig. 1 (a)). These models generate
plausible proposals independently for each frame and mostly
focus on grouping (Heo et al. 2022b), propagation (Heo et al.
2023; Li et al. 2023b; Hannan et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2023), and matching (Huang, Yu, and Anandkumar 2022;
Wu et al. 2022b; Ying et al. 2023). However, this method
has clear limitations in enhancing the mask quality and the
mask consistency across frames, as it heavily depends on the
post-association of temporally discretized outputs. On the
other hand, some approaches attempt to explicitly incorporate spatio-temporal information to enhance both segmentation and tracking quality, i.e., “joint detection-and-tracking”,
illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). For instance, VisTR (Wang et al.
2020) and IFC (Hwang et al. 2021) employ Transformerbased architecture that leverages self-attention mechanisms
to aggregate spatio-temporal features. While pixel-level feature fusion aids in enhancing prediction quality, these methods also have two major limitations: i) they rely solely on
dense correlations without considering object context, and
ii) since fusion is confined to a temporal window, inconsistencies remain across different snippets.
Second, we identify the benchmarks’ metrics as not encouraging the resolution of the problem. The standard metric in most VIS benchmarks, Average Precision (AP), counts
true positives using segment-level Intersection Over Union
(IoU), thus overlooking the precision of mask boundaries’
quality. Moreover, as extensively discussed in (Dave et al.
2021), the AP implementation in current benchmarks can
be gamed and ignores cross-category confidence calibration
due to the post-ranking. This results in encouraging redundant mask generations while overlooking the importance of
confidence calibration, producing visually unsatisfactory results. We contend that ensuring confidence-calibrated and
consistent predictions is crucial for online VIS, considering
applications such as autonomous driving and real-time video
editing in live streaming.
In this paper, we propose a new class of online joint
detection-and-tracking model, RoCoVIS, that addresses the
inconsistency problems (Fig. 1 (c)). Based upon the prior
query propagation architecture (Heo et al. 2023), we explore
how to efficiently use the temporal context of objects at a

Recent advancements in online Video Instance Segmentation methods show notable performance improvements across
benchmarks. However, the leading methods in the trackingby-detection paradigm often result in temporally inconsistent predictions at both instance-level and pixel-level that
lead to visually unsatisfactory outcomes. To address these
challenges, we propose RoCoVIS, a simple yet effective approach that integrates segmentation and tracking to provide
consistent online VIS. Our approach is an end-to-end sequential learning where object queries are propagated through
mask predictions, improving the accuracy of temporal instance mapping at the pixel level. Additionally, we propose a
new label assignment criterion in harmony with our approach.
We also examine the limitations and challenges presented
by the current standard evaluation protocol (AP) and suggest
adopting additional metrics, Tube-Boundary AP and APP ool .
RoCoVIS demonstrates superior performance on challenging
VIS benchmarks with a Swin-L backbone and shows competitive results when employing a ResNet-50 backbone. By employing Tube-Boundary AP and APP ool as metrics to measure mask accuracy and consistency, RoCoVIS outperforms
its counterpart, GenVIS, on the HQ-YTVIS and VIPSeg.

Introduction
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) (Yang, Fan, and Xu
2019) is a fundamental task in computer vision that aims
to segment object masks and classify them across the temporal dimension. Given the inherent challenges of tracking
in the video domain, modern methods focus on bridging image segmentation models with novel association techniques.
Such efforts have successfully driven major progress in the
field, propelled by recent advancements in image segmentation models (Cheng et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a).
Despite this progress, existing methods often produce
visually unsatisfactory results in real-world applications.
We attribute this discrepancy to two types of inconsistencies: 1) pixel-level inconsistency, which leads to low-quality
mask predictions or temporal jittering of the masks, and
2) instance-level inconsistency, which results in redundant
mask predictions, i.e., false positives, or ID switching.
* Work partly conducted during an internship at Adobe.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3483

