The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting Short Text Classification with Multi-Source Information Exploration and
Dual-Level Contrastive Learning
Yonghao Liu1 * , Mengyu Li1 * , Wei Pang2 , Fausto Giunchiglia3 ,
Lan Huang1 , Xiaoyue Feng1† , Renchu Guan1†
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of the Ministry of
Education, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
2
Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University
3
University of Trento
{yonghao20, mengyul21}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, w.pang@hw.ac.uk, fausto.giunchiglia@unitn.it
{huanglan, fengxy, guanrenchu}@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract

For the challenge of semantic sparsity, short texts typically contain only one or two sentences with few words,
which have limited available contextual information (Tang,
Qu, and Mei 2015). Such severe semantic sparsity often
leads to vagueness and ambiguity, thus hindering the accurate understanding of short texts. An effective solution is to
explore multi-source information to enrich the context for
short texts. On the one hand, we can collect the statistical information and linguistic information contained within
short texts. Statistical information is related to the statistics
of words that constitute texts, and is often obtained by modeling word co-occurrence and word distribution probabilities
in the text (Thilakaratne, Falkner, and Atapattu 2019; Liu
et al. 2024d). For example, by analyzing the word statistics
in the text, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) can uncover
the topic structure that can enrich the information in short
texts. Linguistic information is implicit in the syntax and semantics of texts (Liu et al. 2019). For instance, we can obtain
the part-of-speech (POS) information of words to determine
their syntactic roles in the text. On the other hand, auxiliary
factual information can also be injected to compensate for
the missing contextual information (Liu et al. 2023b,a). In
this paper, factual information mainly refers to those textrelated entities existing in common sense knowledge graphs
(Chen et al. 2019). With such enriched auxiliary information, the learned model can naturally understand the meanings of short texts better.

Short text classification, as a research subtopic in natural
language processing, is more challenging due to its semantic sparsity and insufficient labeled samples in practical scenarios. We propose a novel model named MI-DELIGHT for
short text classification in this work. Specifically, it first performs multi-source information (i.e., statistical information,
linguistic information, and factual information) exploration
to alleviate the sparsity issues. Then, the graph learning approach is adopted to learn the representation of short texts,
which are presented in graph forms. Moreover, we introduce
a dual-level (i.e., instance-level and cluster-level) contrastive
learning auxiliary task to effectively capture different-grained
contrastive information within massive unlabeled data. Meanwhile, previous models merely perform the main task and
auxiliary tasks in parallel, without considering the relationship among tasks. Therefore, we introduce a hierarchical architecture to explicitly model the correlations between tasks.
We conduct extensive experiments across various benchmark
datasets, demonstrating that MI-DELIGHT significantly surpasses previous competitive models. It even outperforms popular large language models on several datasets.

Introduction
Text classification is a fundamental task in natural language
processing (NLP). As a special form of text, short texts often appear in our daily life in the form of tweets, queries,
and news feeds (Phan, Nguyen, and Horiguchi 2008). To
deal with these short texts, short text classification (STC),
as a subtask of text classification, has attracted extensive
attention from the research community. It is widely used
in various practical scenarios, such as news classification
(Dilrukshi, De Zoysa, and Caldera 2013), sentiment analysis (Chen et al. 2019), and query intent classification (Wang
et al. 2017). It is worth noting that compared to traditional
text classification, STC is particularly nontrivial, which is
mainly attributed to its two well-known challenges, i.e., semantic sparsity and limited labeled texts (Hu et al. 2019).

When faced with the challenge of limited labeled texts in
real-world applications, it is often the case that there is a
vast amount of easily accessible short texts, but only a small
number of labeled data are available (Kenter and De Rijke 2015). In addition, the proportion of unlabeled data is
much higher compared to that of long texts. Consequently,
deep learning models that rely on large-scale labeled data
for training are susceptible to overfitting issues, leading to
unsatisfactory performance outcomes. To cope with such issue, on the one hand, some works (Hu et al. 2019; Yang
et al. 2021) are mainly devoted to fully utilizing limited labeled short texts. They perform supervised graph learning on
the constructed corpus-level graph to learn the textual representations. Nevertheless, the performance of these models is

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24696

