The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Distribution-Level Feature Distancing for Machine Unlearning:
Towards a Better Trade-off Between Model Utility and Forgetting
Dasol Choi1,2 , Dongbin Na3 *
1

Yonsei University
2
MODULABS
3
POSTECH
dasolchoi@yonsei.ac.kr, dongbinna@postech.ac.kr
Abstract

which allows individuals to request the removal of their personal information from trained models. For example, in medical AI applications, a patient might request that their medical
images, used during the training of a diagnostic model, be
removed to protect their privacy. In such a scenario, machine
unlearning enables the model to forget the patient’s data
without compromising overall performance on other tasks.
This growing need for privacy has driven interest in machine
unlearning research within various AI-driven industries.
Despite advancements in machine unlearning algorithms,
we identify a critical issue that has not been fully explored:
the risk of correlation collapse. When simply applying existing error-maximizing methods (Tarun et al. 2023; Kurmanji,
Triantafillou, and Triantafillou 2023; Chundawat et al. 2023b),
unexpected outcomes can occur. For instance, these methods
can inadvertently increase the magnitude of loss excessively,
leading to additional data leakage by making certain data
points appear special. Moreover, relying solely on these approaches may degrade the generalization performance of the
model on the original task, introducing a trade-off between
model utility and forgetting. We believe this degradation is
due to correlation collapse, where the useful correlations between image features and their true labels are weakened. To
prevent these unexpected performance drops, it is crucial to
carefully adapt and improve upon the existing methods.
To address this challenge, we propose a novel framework,
Distribution-Level Feature Distancing (DLFD) that enables
unlearning of specific images while maintaining the accuracy
of the original task. Our approach shifts the feature distribution of the retain images away from the distribution of
the forget images, by leveraging the Optimal Transport (OT)
problem (Peyré, Cuturi et al. 2019; Le et al. 2021; Cuturi
2013; Altschuler, Niles-Weed, and Rigollet 2017). Specifically, DLFD generates perturbed images by maximizing
the distance between the optimized data distribution and the
forget data distribution in the feature space using OT loss.
Our method demonstrates superior performance compared
to state-of-the-art methods in a setting that closely reflects
real-world scenarios. We also introduce and analyze the concept of correlation collapse, which has not been extensively
addressed in previous works, and revisit the task-agnostic
instance unlearning setting. Our contributions are as follows:

With the explosive growth of deep learning applications and
increasing privacy concerns, the right to be forgotten has become a critical requirement in various AI industries. For example, given a facial recognition system, some individuals may
wish to remove their personal data that might have been used
in the training phase. Unfortunately, deep neural networks
sometimes unexpectedly leak personal identities, making this
removal challenging. While recent machine unlearning algorithms aim to enable models to forget specific data, we
identify an unintended utility drop—correlation collapse—in
which the essential correlations between image features and
true labels weaken during the forgetting process. To address
this challenge, we propose Distribution-Level Feature Distancing (DLFD), a novel method that efficiently forgets instances while preserving task-relevant feature correlations.
Our method synthesizes data samples by optimizing the feature distribution to be distinctly different from that of forget
samples, achieving effective results within a single training
epoch. Through extensive experiments on facial recognition
datasets, we demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art machine unlearning methods in both
forgetting performance and model utility preservation.

Introduction
Deep neural network models have achieved remarkable success in various computer vision applications (He et al. 2016;
Tan and Le 2019; Han et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2017; Jiang
et al. 2022). Especially, recent works show large-scale foundation models demonstrate superior classification performance
across a range of tasks (Radford et al. 2021; Kolesnikov et al.
2020; Floridi and Chiriatti 2020; Han et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2023). However, alongside these advancements, concerns
emerge regarding the unintentional leakage of sensitive information, such as personal identities from training data (Shokri
et al. 2017a; Hu et al. 2022).
Machine unlearning has emerged as a promising solution
to mitigate potential data leakage (Tarun et al. 2023; Golatkar,
Achille, and Soatto 2020b; Gupta et al. 2021; Bourtoule,
Chandrasekaran et al. 2021; Foster, Schoepf, and Brintrup
2024), particularly in upholding the right to be forgotten,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We identify and address correlation collapse, a critical
issue that can lead to a drop in model utility, and propose
2536

