The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ELLA-V: Stable Neural Codec Language Modeling
with Alignment-Guided Sequence Reordering
Yakun Song1 , Zhuo Chen2 , Xiaofei Wang3 , Ziyang Ma1 , Xie Chen1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
ByteDance Inc., USA
3
Microsoft, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, USA
{ereboas, chenxie95}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Le et al. 2023; Kim et al. 2024; Vyas et al. 2023). However,
they may also face the limitation in training an additional
duration predictor. Another major class of generative models is language modeling based on Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017a). AR language models use a decoder-only architecture to predict the next token in a sequence as the
training objective, which has demonstrated extremely powerful few-shot and zero-shot capabilities in many generative
tasks (Brown et al. 2020; Thoppilan et al. 2022; Chowdhery
et al. 2023). In light of this, VALL-E (Wang et al. 2023a)
and subsequent works (Kharitonov et al. 2023; Rubenstein
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023b) have successfully employed
decoder-only language model for zero-shot TTS. These approaches first quantize the speech signal into a series of
discrete acoustic tokens. Subsequently, they employ an AR
language model to predict coarse-grained acoustic tokens,
eliminating the necessity for explicit duration predictors
or speaker encoders. Once trained on a large-scale corpus,
these approaches are capable of synthesizing speech with
competitive fidelity and naturalness in a zero-shot manner.
While VALL-E and its variants have achieved numerous impressive milestones, they still possess certain limitations that impact practical deployment. For instance, existing methods (Wang et al. 2023a; Kharitonov et al. 2023)
directly concatenate phoneme tokens and acoustic tokens as
a whole sequence to train language models. In this way, the
alignment between audio and phoneme sequences is completely learned through the self-attention in the transformer,
making it potentially unstable as self-attention does not explicitly capture the monotonic alignment between audio and
phoneme. Additionally, the decoder-only language model
architecture can lead to potential attention degradation issues (Fu et al. 2023), where the alignment quality between
the target audio sequence and the source phoneme sequence
deteriorates as the generated sequence increases, resulting in
inaccurate or low-quality speech outputs.
Another limitation stems from the nature of AR language
modeling. Specifically, given a sequence x, the standard AR
language model factorizes the likelihood p(x) over the diQT
mensions of x via the chain rule p(x) = t=0 p(xt |x<t ).
AR models predict the current tokens solely based on the
historical tokens without users’ control in the inference process, and sometimes generate semantic repetitions or incoherence in the generated output (Yang et al. 2019; Brown

The language model (LM) approach based on acoustic and
linguistic prompts, such as VALL-E, has achieved remarkable progress in the field of zero-shot audio generation. However, existing methods still have some limitations: 1) repetitions, transpositions, and omissions in the output synthesized
speech due to limited alignment constraints between audio
and phoneme tokens; 2) challenges of fine-grained control
over the synthesized speech with autoregressive (AR) language model; 3) infinite silence generation due to the nature of AR-based decoding, especially under the greedy strategy. To alleviate these issues, we propose ELLA-V, a simple
but efficient LM-based zero-shot text-to-speech (TTS) framework, which enables fine-grained control over synthesized
audio at the phoneme level. The key to ELLA-V is interleaving sequences of acoustic and phoneme tokens, where
phoneme tokens appear ahead of the corresponding acoustic tokens. The experimental findings reveal that our model
outperforms baselines in terms of accuracy and delivers more
stable results using both greedy and sampling-based decoding
strategies.

Demo & Code — https://ereboas.github.io/ELLAV/

1

Introduction

Recently, deep generative AI has achieved remarkable results in various tasks, leading to the emergence of many
transformative real-world applications (Brown et al. 2020;
Ramesh et al. 2022; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020). There
have been rapid developments in the field of speech synthesis as well. In particular, zero-shot TTS technology has
gained increasing attention because it can synthesize highquality target voices without the need of specified speaker’s
training data. As a state-of-the-art generative model family, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020; Song and Ermon 2020) progressively add
noise to the training data and then learn the reverse process to generate samples. By leveraging diffusion models
and their variants (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Lipman et al. 2023), many works have successfully applied them to the audio domain (Shen et al. 2023;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25174

