The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Runtime Analysis of Population-Based Co-evolutionary Algorithms
on Sparse Binary Zero-Sum Games
Per Kristian Lehre, Shishen Lin*
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom
p.k.lehre@bham.ac.uk, sxl1242@student.bham.ac.uk

Abstract

2022). The absence of gradients or a nonconvex-nonconcave
structure, however, makes these problems intrinsically more
challenging (Colson, Marcotte, and Savard 2007).
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are biologically inspired
randomised heuristics designed to find global optima with
minimal knowledge of fitness functions, making them ideal
for black-box or oracle settings, especially where derivativefree methods are needed (Popovici et al. 2012; Eiben and
Smith 2015; Xue et al. 2021). Co-evolutionary algorithms
(CoEAs), a subset of EAs, are particularly promising for
tackling nonconvex-nonconcave and non-differentiable optimisation problems within cooperative or non-cooperative
game-theoretical scenarios. These methods have been applied in areas like coevolutionary learning, defence, design
of sorting network and novelty search (Xue et al. 2023;
Hemberg et al. 2021; Hevia Fajardo et al. 2024; Benford
et al. 2024; Ficici and Pollack 1998; Hillis 1990; O’Hanley
and Church 2011; Gomes, Mariano, and Christensen 2014;
Wang et al. 2019, 2020). However, a significant research gap
remains in the theoretical understanding of coevolution.
Runtime analysis studies the number of iterations or function evaluations algorithms take before finding the optimum.
Runtime analysis not only provides more precise performance guarantees and guidelines for practitioners to design
randomised algorithms but also enhances the explainability
of various heuristic search and black-box optimisation algorithms, including NSGA-II (Non-dominated Sorting Genetic
Algorithm II), MOEA/D (Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm based on Decomposition) and EDAs (Estimationof-Distribution Algorithms) (Do et al. 2023; Zheng and Doerr 2023; Doerr and Qu 2023; Zheng, Liu, and Doerr 2022).
Related Work: Theoretical analysis of evolutionary algorithms on discrete maximin problems is limited. Recent studies (Lehre 2022; Hevia Fajardo, Lehre, and
Lin 2023) have conducted rigorous runtime analyses of CoEAs on discrete maximin problems such as
D ISCRETE -B ILINEAR, demonstrating that single-pair CoEAs and population-based CoEAs with pairwise dominance
can solve D ISCRETE -B ILINEAR in polynomial runtime.
However, there is a gap in the theoretical understanding of
CoEAs on more challenging discrete games with binary outputs (i.e. g : X × Y → {0, 1}), as originated from seminal works on co-evolving sorting networks and test cases
by Hillis (1990) and co-evolving players in the game of

The maximin optimisation problem, inspired by Von Neumann’s work (von Neumann 1928) and widely applied in
adversarial optimisation, has become a key research area in
machine learning. Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) is a common method for solving these problems but requires the payoff function to be differentiable, making it unsuitable for discrete or binary functions that often occur in game-theoretical
scenarios. Co-evolutionary algorithms (CoEAs), which are
derivative-free, offer an alternative to these problems. However, the theoretical understanding of CoEAs is still limited.
This paper provides the first rigorous runtime analysis of
CoEAs with pairwise dominance on binary two-player zerosum games (or maximin problems), specifically focusing on
the D IAGONAL game. The mathematical analysis rigorously
shows that the PDCoEA can efficiently find the optimum in
polynomial runtime with high probability under low mutation rates and large population sizes. Empirical evidence also
identifies an error threshold where higher mutation rates lead
to inefficiency. In contrast, single-pair-individual algorithms,
i.e., RLS-PD and (1+1)-CoEAs, fail to find the optimum in
polynomial time. These findings highlight the usefulness of
pairwise dominance, low mutation rates, and large populations in maintaining a “co-evolutionary arms race”.

Introduction
The maximin problem is a significant class of optimisation problems in machine learning, with applications in adversarial optimisation, training, game playing, and matrix
games (Lin, Jin, and Jordan 2020; Palaniappan and Bach
2016; Mertikopoulos et al. 2018; Daskalakis and Panageas
2018; Goodfellow et al. 2014; Robey et al. 2024; Zhang
et al. 2022; Gidel, Jebara, and Lacoste-Julien 2017; GrandClément and Kroer 2021; Wei et al. 2021). When gradient
information is available, gradient descent ascent (GDA) is
a natural approach, especially for bilinear objectives like
f (x, y) = xT Ay (Gidel, Jebara, and Lacoste-Julien 2017;
Daskalakis and Panageas 2018). However, when gradients
are inaccessible but the problem is convex-concave, zerothorder methods can provide solutions (Dvinskikh et al. 2022;
Beznosikov, Sadiev, and Gasnikov 2020; Gasnikov et al.
* Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27054

