The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EventPillars: Pillar-based Efﬁcient Representations for Event Data
Rui Fan1,2 , Weidong Hao1,2 , Juntao Guan1,2,3 , Lai Rui1,2 * , Lin Gu4,5∗ , Tong Wu1,2 , Fanhong Zeng1,2 ,
Zhangming Zhu1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Analog Integrated Circuits and Systems (Ministry of Education)
2
School of Integrated Circuits, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
3
Hangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Hangzhou, China
4
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo103-0027, Japan
5
The University of Tokyo, Japan
2017301020002@whu.edu.cn, 24251111481@stu.xidian.edu.cn, guanjuntao@xidian.edu.cn, rlai@mail.xidian.edu.cn,
lin.gu@riken.jp, 22111110489@stu.xidian.edu.cn, fhzeng2000@163.com, zhangmingzhu@xidian.edu.cn
HATS

Abstract

EST

EventPillars(ours)
97.1

52.3

Input Size (K)

N-ImageNet

Time (ms)

DiST

85.3

Accuracy (%)

Event Cameras offer appealing advantages, including power
efﬁciency and ultra-low latency, driving forward advancements in edge applications. In order to leverage mature framebased algorithms, most approaches typically compute dense,
image-like representations from sparse, asynchronous events.
However, they are often unable to capture comprehensive information or are computationally intensive, which hinders the
edge deployment of event-based vision. Meanwhile, pillarbased paradigms have been proven to be efﬁcient and wellestablished for dense representations of sparse data. Hence,
from a novel pillar-based perspective, we present EventPillars, an efﬁcient, comprehensive framework for dense event
representations. To summarize, it (i) incorporates the Temporal Event Range to describe an intact temporal distribution, (ii) Activates the Event Polarities to explicitly record
the scene dynamics, (iii) enhances the target awareness by
a spatial attention prior from Normalized Event Density, (iv)
can be plug-and-played into different downstream tasks. Extensive experiments show that our EventPillars records a new
state-of-the-art precision on object recognition and detection
datasets with surprisingly 9.2× and 4.5× lower computation and storage consumption. This brings a new insight into
dense event representations and is promising to boost the
edge deployment of event-based vision.

Voxel Grid

N-Caltech101

N-cars

196

0.62

Figure 1: Comparisons of accuracy, input size (storage) and
representation time on event-based object recognition given
the ﬁxed 224 × 224 input resolution. Red arrow indicates
superior optimization direction.

Code — https://github.com/Fineshawray/EventPillars.git

1

To address this, prior approaches create dense representations from sparse events. Early research (Maqueda et al.
2018; Zhu et al. 2018, 2019) merely encoded one or two
aspects of event information, resulting in suboptimal performance. Accordingly, subsequent studies (Gehrig et al. 2019;
Kim et al. 2021; Zubić et al. 2023) demonstrated the criticality of comprehensive event information including count,
polarity, and temporal information, despite often incurring
substantial computational and storage overhead. However,
few studies have adequately discussed the optimal trade-off
between performance and efﬁciency of dense event representations. This unresolved tension may constrain the edge
deployment of event-based vision.
On the other hand, pillar-based paradigms, a research line
of dense representations tailored for sparse data such as
point cloud, have shown the effectiveness of encoding explicit feature dimensions into individual channels. Consid-

Introduction

Event Cameras are novel, bio-inspired sensors that transmit logarithmic brightness changes termed “events”. Unlike conventional frame-based cameras, they offer a unique
trade-off between visual information and temporal resolution with minimal bandwidth and power consumption
(Hamann et al. 2024), making them highly appealing for
edge computer vision, e.g., object recognition and detection.
However, by only encoding time, location, and polarity of
these changes (Zubić et al. 2023), the stream of events is
inherently sparse and asynchronous, thereby holding back
their integration with mature frame-based algorithms.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2861

