The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mediation Analysis for Probabilities of Causation
Yuta Kawakami, Jin Tian
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
{Yuta.Kawakami, Jin.Tian}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract

for explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) (Shin 2021). In
this paper, we aim to provide causal mediation analysis for
PoC, to reveal the necessity and sufficiency of the treatment
through different pathways. Once a treatment is revealed to
be necessary and sufficient to induce a particular event via
PNS, other causal questions would arise:

Probabilities of causation (PoC) offer valuable insights for
informed decision-making. This paper introduces novel variants of PoC-controlled direct, natural direct, and natural indirect probability of necessity and sufficiency (PNS). These
metrics quantify the necessity and sufficiency of a treatment
for producing an outcome, accounting for different causal
pathways. We develop identification theorems for these new
PoC measures, allowing for their estimation from observational data. We demonstrate the practical application of
our results through an analysis of a real-world psychology
dataset.

(Q1). Would the treatment still be necessary and sufficient
had the value of the mediator been fixed to a certain value?
(Q2). Would the treatment still be necessary and sufficient
had there been no influence via the mediator?
(Q3). Would the treatment still be necessary and sufficient
had the influence only existed via the mediator?

Introduction
Pearl (1999) introduced three types of probabilities of causation (PoC), that is, the probability of necessity and sufficiency (PNS), the probability of necessity (PN), and the
probability of sufficiency (PS). PoC quantify whether one
event was the real cause of another in a given scenario
(Robins and Greenland 1989; Tian and Pearl 2000; Pearl
2009; Kuroki and Cai 2011; Dawid, Murtas, and Musio
2014; Murtas, Dawid, and Musio 2017; Shingaki and Kuroki
2021; Kawakami, Shingaki, and Kuroki 2023). PoC are
valuable for decision-making (Hannart and Naveau 2018; Li
and Pearl 2019, 2022) and for explaining AI-based decisionmaking systems (Galhotra, Pradhan, and Salimi 2021; Watson et al. 2021).
Various variants of PoC have been studied, including for
multi-valued discrete variables (Li and Pearl 2024a,b) and
for continuous and vector variables (Kawakami, Kuroki, and
Tian 2024). Rubinstein, Cuellar, and Malinsky (2024) introduced direct and indirect mediated PoC to decompose total
PoC when there exists a mediator between the treatment and
outcome.
Causal mediation analysis is a key method for uncovering
the influence of different pathways between the treatment
and outcome through mediators (Wright 1921, 1934; Baron
and Kenny 1986; Robins and Greenland 1992; Imai, Keele,
and Tingley 2010; Imai, Keele, and Yamamoto 2010; Tchetgen and Shpitser 2012). Notably, Pearl (2001) formally defined direct and indirect effects for general nonlinear models. Causal mediation analysis is also a valuable technique

We introduce new variants of PoC - controlled direct, natural direct, and natural indirect PNS (CD-PNS, ND-PNS,
and NI-PNS) to answer these questions. We further define
direct and indirect PoC with evidence to capture more sophisticated counterfactual information useful for decisionmaking. These quantities can retrospectively answer questions (Q1), (Q2), and (Q3) for a specific subpopulation. We
provide identification results for each type of PoC we introduce. Finally, we apply our results to a real-world psychology dataset.

Notations and Background
We represent a single or vector variable with a capital letter
(X) and its realized value with a small letter (x). Let I(·)
be an indicator function that takes 1 if the statement in (·) is
true and 0 otherwise. Denote ΩY be the domain of variable
Y , E[Y ] be the expectation of Y , P(Y < y) be the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of continuous variable Y ,
and p(Y = y) be the probability density function (PDF) of
continuous variable Y . We use X ⊥⊥ Y |C to denote that
X and Y are conditionally independent given C. We use ⪯
to denote a total order. A formal definition of total order is
given in Appendix A in (Kawakami and Tian 2024).
Structural causal models (SCM). We use the language
of SCMs as our basic framework and follow the standard
definition in the following (Pearl 2009). An SCM M is a
tuple ⟨V , U , F , PU ⟩, where U is a set of exogenous (unobserved) variables following a distribution PU , and V is a
set of endogenous (observable) variables whose values are

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26823

