The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Runtime Analysis for Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms in Unbounded
Integer Spaces
Benjamin Doerr1 , Martin S. Krejca1 , Günter Rudolph2
1

Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), CNRS, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
2
Department of Computer Science, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
{first-name.last-name}@polytechnique.edu, guenter.rudolph@tu-dortmund.de

Abstract

concentrated on binary or continuous variables. Discrete
spaces with more than two variable values are considered
far more infrequently. Theoretical works include runtime
analyses for evolutionary algorithms, ant-colony optimizers, and estimation-of-distribution algorithms on categorical
variables, e.g., Scharnow, Tinnefeld, and Wegener (2004);
Baswana et al. (2009); Sudholt and Thyssen (2012); Doerr,
Happ, and Klein (2012); Ben Jedidia, Doerr, and Krejca
(2024); Adak and Witt (2024). The theoretical research for
cardinal variables was started by Doerr, Johannsen, and
Schmidt (2011); Doerr and Pohl (2012); Kötzing, Lissovoi,
and Witt (2015) with analyses how the (1 + 1) EA optimizes
multi-valued linear functions. Doerr, Doerr, and Kötzing
(2018, 2019) showed that for multi-valued variables larger
mutation rates can be advantageous. Submodular functions
with multi-valued discrete domain were studied by Qian
et al. (2018a,b). We are only aware of two analyses for
search spaces consisting of unbounded integer variables.
The first is (Rudolph 2023), which is a single-objective
analysis of subproblems of a multi-objective problem. The
second is (Harder et al. 2024), which considers a singleobjective problem and shows the benefit of larger mutation
rates. We are not aware of any true multi-objective works
with multi-valued variables, despite considerable recent theoretical research on multi-objective heuristics (Zheng, Liu,
and Doerr 2022; Dang et al. 2023; Cerf et al. 2023; Do et al.
2023; Dinot et al. 2023; Zheng and Doerr 2024; Zheng et al.
2024; Bian et al. 2024; Ren et al. 2024).

Randomized search heuristics have been applied successfully
to a plethora of problems. This success is complemented by a
large body of theoretical results. Unfortunately, the vast majority of these results regard problems with binary or continuous decision variables – the theoretical analysis of randomized search heuristics for unbounded integer domains is
almost nonexistent. To resolve this shortcoming, we start the
runtime analysis of multi-objective evolutionary algorithms,
which are among the most successful randomized search
heuristics, for unbounded integer search spaces. We analyze
single- and full-dimensional mutation operators with three
different mutation strengths, namely changes by plus/minus
one (unit strength), random changes following a law with
exponential tails, and random changes following a powerlaw. The performance guarantees we prove on a recently proposed natural benchmark problem suggest that unit mutation
strengths can be slow when the initial solutions are far from
the Pareto front. When setting the expected change right (depending on the benchmark parameter and the distance of the
initial solutions), the mutation strength with exponential tails
yields the best runtime guarantees in our results – however,
with a wrong choice of this expectation, the performance
guarantees quickly become highly uninteresting. With powerlaw mutation, which is an essentially parameter-less mutation
operator, we obtain good results uniformly over all problem
parameters and starting points. We complement our mathematical findings with experimental results that suggest that
our bounds are not always tight. Most prominently, our experiments indicate that power-law mutation outperforms the
one with exponential tails even when the latter uses a nearoptimal parametrization. Hence, we suggest to favor powerlaw mutation for unknown problems in integer spaces.

Since multi-objective optimization is an area where heuristics, in particular, evolutionary algorithms, are intensively
used and with great success (see, e.g., the famous NSGA-II
algorithm (Deb et al. 2002) with more than 50 000 citations
on Google Scholar), we start in this work the mathematical
runtime analysis for truly multi-objective optimization problems in unbounded integer search spaces. For the benchmark problems proposed by Rudolph (2023), we analyze the
performance of the simple evolutionary multi-objective optimizer (SEMO) (Laumanns et al. 2002) and the Global SEMO
(GSEMO) (Giel 2003), the two most prominent evolutionary
algorithms in the runtime analysis of multi-objective evolutionary algorithms. Our objective is to understand, via theoretical means, what are suitable mutation operators for unbounded integer domains. We propose three natural operators, changing variables (i) by plus or minus one (unit muta-

Introduction
For more than thirty years, the mathematical runtime analysis of randomized search heuristics has supported the design and analysis of these important algorithms, both in
single- and in multi-objective optimization (Neumann and
Witt 2010; Auger and Doerr 2011; Jansen 2013; Zhou,
Yu, and Qian 2019; Doerr and Neumann 2020). While in
practice heuristics are successfully employed for all types
of decision variables, the mathematical analysis is mostly
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26955

