The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EDGE: Unknown-aware Multi-label Learning by
Energy Distribution Gap Expansion
Yuchen Sun1,2 , Qianqian Xu1 * , Zitai Wang1 , Zhiyong Yang2 , Junwei He1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{sunyuchen22s, xuqianqian, wangzitai}@ict.ac.cn, yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn, hejunwei22s@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Multi-label Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) detection aims to
discriminate the OOD samples from the multi-label InDistribution (ID) ones. Compared with its multiclass counterpart, it is crucial to model the joint information among
classes. To this end, JointEnergy, which is a representative
multi-label OOD inference criterion, summarizes the logits
of all the classes. However, we find that JointEnergy can
produce an imbalance problem in OOD detection, especially
when the model lacks enough discrimination ability. Specifically, we find that the samples only related to minority classes
tend to be classified as OOD samples due to the ambiguous
energy decision boundary. Besides, imbalanced multi-label
learning methods, originally designed for ID ones, would not
be suitable for OOD detection scenarios, even producing a serious negative transfer effect. In this paper, we resort to auxiliary outlier exposure (OE) and propose an unknown-aware
multi-label learning framework to reshape the uncertainty energy space layout. In this framework, the energy score is separately optimized for tail ID samples and unknown samples,
and the energy distribution gap between them is expanded,
such that the tail ID samples can have a significantly larger
energy score than the OOD ones. What’s more, a simple yet
effective measure is designed to select more informative OE
datasets. Finally, comprehensive experimental results on multiple multi-label and OOD datasets reveal the effectiveness of
the proposed method.

(a) Distribution of baseline

(b) Distribution of EDGE

(c) FPR95 comparison result

(d) AUROC comparison result

Figure 1: Distribution and performance results with Binary
Cross-Entropy loss (BCE) training loss and our framework
on Places50 dataset. (a) shows the small gap between known
and unknown domains under basic multi-label models, and
(b) indicates the improvement of our method. The last two
figures show the (c) FPR95 and (d) AUROC imbalanced and
balanced results on different in-distribution subsets, where
the proportion of in-distribution samples that only relate to
minority classes increases with the x-axis value increases.

Introduction
Traditional classification methods mainly focus on InDistribution (ID) scenarios, where the training set and the
test set share the same data distribution. However, in practical applications, it is unavoidable that some test samples are
Out Of the Distribution (OOD) of the training ones (Yang
et al. 2021). In this case, an ID model will classify the OOD
samples into one of the ID classes due to the notorious overconfidence issue. Such wrong predictions seriously degenerate the model performance. Given this, OOD detection has
attracted rising attention in recent years, intending to discriminate the OOD samples from the ID ones (Huang and
Li 2021; Wang et al. 2022c; Djurisic et al. 2023)

In this direction, most prior art focuses on scenarios where
the ID samples only have a single ground-truth label. Nevertheless, samples are inherently associated with multiple labels in many real-world applications such as autonomous
driving (Mao et al. 2023) and medical image (Zhou et al.
2023). For multi-label OOD detection, one intuitive strategy
is to adapt the off-the-shelf multiclass algorithms (Du et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022b). However, Wang et al. (Wang et al.
2021), pioneered in multi-label OOD detection, point out
that simply using the largest model output (i.e., MaxLogit
(Hendrycks et al. 2022), Max) might be sub-optimal. Considering this, it is crucial to jointly model the information

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12613

