The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging the Knowledge Gap: Understanding User Expectations for Trustworthy
LLM Standards
Michaela Benk1,2 , Léane Wettstein4 , Nadine Schlicker3 , Florian von Wangenheim1 , Nicolas
Scharowski4
1

ETH Zurich
Mobiliar Lab for Analytics
3
Philipps-Universität Marburg
4
University of Basel
2

Abstract

For example, methods to increase transparency of AI are
now extended to LLMs (Liao and Vaughan 2023) and research is exploring how to adequately assess risks along the
complex LLM value chain (Sherman and Eisenberg 2024).
While these discussions have contributed to more ethical practices and an increased focus on human-centered approaches, the knowledge gap between experts who define
normative standards and users who are impacted by their
implementation remains largely unaddressed. For example,
users1 may not have access to relevant information to determine whether certain standards have been met or lack the
relevant knowledge to understand what these standards entail (Knowles and Richards 2021; Mokander et al. 2023).
Furthermore, misalignments or inconsistencies in communicating standards may arise due to experts’ limited understanding of users’ interpretations of these standards (Mokander et al. 2023).
Bridging this gap is important for at least three reasons.
(I) Trustworthiness is inherently subjective, relying on the
alignment between user values and the values implemented
within LLMs. In fact, the definition of AI trustworthiness
according to the International Standards Organization (ISO)
is “the ability to meet stakeholders’ expectations in a verifiable way” (International Organization for Standardization
2020). As such, design affordances and cues, such as interface features, documentation, and certifications addressing standards like safety and fairness, are effective only if
users can easily identify and understand them (Chiou and
Lee 2021; Schlicker et al. 2023; Liao and Sundar 2022).
(II) Communicating user-relevant information is an essential
mechanism for effective facework through which representatives can convey their commitment to ethical standards and
build public trust in AI (Knowles and Richards 2021). (III)
As research moves toward human-centered AI practices, it is
important to clearly define which trustworthiness information can be conveyed through technical mechanisms, such
as explainability approaches embedded within the interaction with the LLM, and those that should be communicated
through other means, such as certification labels or other
forms of governance disclosure (Scharowski et al. 2023;

Researchers, policymakers, and developers of artificial intelligence (AI) are actively collaborating to establish trustworthy AI standards that align with broader societal values, particularly in the context of large language models (LLMs).
However, the critical discourse on bridging the vast knowledge gap between experts who shape and implement standards for LLMs and users whose values are at stake remains
largely unaddressed. Taking a “bottom-up” perspective and
using a mixed-method approach, we first conducted interviews (N = 12) to engage with users’ perceptions of normative standards in the context of LLMs. We thereby identified 68 specific criteria that users’ consider when evaluating
whether their values are fulfilled. Second, we conducted an
online survey (N = 379) to further investigate how users prioritize these standards and the identified criteria in conversational LLM-based applications. Our findings reveal opportunities for strategic communication measures, the importance
of transparent governance mechanisms and the necessity of
non-technical complements to technical solutions for bridging the knowledge gap. We discuss actionable steps to effectively communicate trustworthy AI standards.

Extended version — https://osf.io/rkb76/?view only=
02f2b6019f114d77b9cc7980246f2163

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 (Open
AI) or LLaMA (Meta), have recently gained traction
as they are demonstrating unprecedented performance in
a wide array of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks (Thirunavukarasu et al. 2023; de Winter 2023) and
widespread, rapid adoption (Hu 2023). Despite their remarkable capabilities, significant uncertainties remain due
to their ethical and social risk, including the spread of misinformation, discrimination, or compromised privacy (Weidinger et al. 2022; Thirunavukarasu et al. 2023; Liao and
Vaughan 2023; Bommasani et al. 2021). To mitigate risks,
researchers, policymakers, and industry leaders are engaged
in a discourse aimed at establishing and implementing valuealigned principles, guidelines and standards for trustworthy
AI in the context of LLMs (Hacker, Engel, and Mauer 2023).

1
Following prior research (Scharowski et al. 2023), we define
users as layperson or groups who interact with LLMs in their dayto-day activities, for various tasks, without necessarily having expertise in its underlying mechanisms or development process.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27197

