The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Geometry-Aware 3D Salient Object Detection Network
Chen Wang1 , Liyuan Zhang1 , Le Hui1,2 * , Qi Liu1 , Yuchao Dai1 *
2

1
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Information Acquisition and Processing, Northwestern Polytechnical University
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{chenw, zhangliyuannpu}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {huile, liuqi, daiyuchao}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

Feature
Learning

Point cloud salient object detection has attracted the attention of researchers in recent years. Since existing works do
not fully utilize the geometry context of 3D objects, blurry
boundaries are generated when segmenting objects with complex backgrounds. In this paper, we propose a geometryaware 3D salient object detection network that explicitly clusters points into superpoints to enhance the geometric boundaries of objects, thereby segmenting complete objects with
clear boundaries. Specifically, we first propose a simple yet
effective superpoint partition module to cluster points into superpoints. In order to improve the quality of superpoints, we
present a point cloud class-agnostic loss to learn discriminative point features for clustering superpoints from the object.
After obtaining superpoints, we then propose a geometry enhancement module that utilizes superpoint-point attention to
aggregate geometric information into point features for predicting the salient map of the object with clear boundaries.
Extensive experiments show that our method achieves new
state-of-the-art performance on the PCSOD dataset.

input

pred

(a) Existing methods

output

3D structure
learning

input

Feature
Learning

superpoints
output
(b) Ours

Figure 1: Comparison between our method and existing
methods (PointSal (Fan, Gao, and Li 2022), EPFNet (Zhang
et al. 2023) and PSOD-Net (Wei et al. 2024)) in 3D salient
object detection task. We explicitly utilize the structural information of the point cloud by introducing superpoint representation. It can be observed that using superpoints can
effectively characterize the structure of the green cup.

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) focuses on segmenting the
most attractive object from the surrounding background. As
a pre-processing procedure, SOD has a variety of applications for many downstream tasks, such as semantic segmentation (Shi et al. 2021), object detection (Huang et al. 2020),
and visual tracking (Mahadevan and Vasconcelos 2012).
Many efforts (Fan et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021; Zhou et al.
2020) are dedicated to image-based salient object detection,
and plenty of well-known works have emerged. Recently,
with the rapid development of 3D sensors, such as LiDAR
and Kinect camera, acquiring 3D data has become more convenient, and growing numerous point cloud based applications. However, there are few works devoted to salient object detection on 3D point clouds. Due to the irregularity and
sparsity of point cloud data, it is difficult to extend the methods designed for regular 2D images to point clouds. Therefore, there are also some unresolved issues in point cloud
salient object detection.
Many excellent works (Wang 2020; Liu, Hou, and Cheng
2020; Huang, Xing, and Zou 2020) have emerged salient

works on images. Current state-of-the-art methods (Wang
et al. 2016; Liu and Han 2016; Hou et al. 2017; Chen and Li
2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Tu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021)
usually use multiple enhancement strategies to improve the
salient object detection performance. However, accurately
segmenting the object boundaries from the image still remains challenging, due to the lack of effective spatial information. Therefore, researchers considered introducing different modals for studying multi-modal salient object detection. RGB-D salient object detection (Qu et al. 2017) uses
depth maps to enhance the spatial information of objects
for improving the accuracy of object boundaries. In addition, RGB-T salient object detection (Wang et al. 2018) uses
RGB image combined with the thermal infrared image to
locate and segment the common prominent object. Recently,
researchers have begun to focus on point cloud salient object
detection, i.e., segmenting objects from the 3D point clouds.
As a pioneer of point cloud salient object detection, Fan et
al. (Fan, Gao, and Li 2022) proposed the first point cloud
salient object detection dataset, and designed a simple multiscale point network for 3D salient object detection task. Due
to the lack of context information, it did not perform well on
segmenting objects from complex backgrounds. Thus, Wei

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7554

