The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Modal Grounded Planning and Efficient Replanning
For Learning Embodied Agents with a Few Examples
Taewoong Kim, Byeonghwi Kim, Jonghyun Choi∗
Seoul National University
{twoongg.kim, byeonghwikim, jonghyunchoi}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning a perception and reasoning module for robotic assistants to plan steps to perform complex tasks based on natural
language instructions often requires large free-form language
annotations, especially for short high-level instructions. To
reduce the cost of annotation, large language models (LLMs)
are used as a planner with few data. However, when elaborating the steps, even the state-of-the-art planner that uses
LLMs mostly relies on linguistic common sense, often neglecting the status of the environment at command reception,
resulting in inappropriate plans. To generate plans grounded
in the environment, we propose FLARE (F EW- SHOT L AN GUAGE WITH ENVIRONMENTAL A DAPTIVE R EPLANNING
E MBODIED AGENT), which improves task planning using
both language command and environmental perception. As
language instructions often contain ambiguities or incorrect
expressions, we additionally propose to correct the mistakes
using visual cues from the agent. The proposed scheme allows us to use a few language pairs thanks to the visual cues
and outperforms state-of-the-art approaches. Our code and
the dataset are publicly available to facilitate further research.

1

Introduction

By the rapid advancement in the fields of computer vision,
natural language processing, and embodied AI, we are witnessing a significant improvement in key functionalities of
robotic assistants that can perform daily tasks. These functions include navigation (Anderson et al. 2018; Chaplot et al.
2017; Uppal et al. 2024), object manipulation (Zhu et al.
2017; Ryu et al. 2024), and responsive reasoning (Das et al.
2018; Gordon et al. 2018; Majumdar et al. 2024) in simulated 3D spaces (Ge et al. 2024; Chang et al. 2017; Xia
et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2024). Practical robotic assistants
require all of the aforementioned capabilities to understand
language instructions and actively perceive the environment.
To learn an agent that performs such complex tasks, a
straightforward approach is to train an agent in a supervised
manner by a large amount of natural language instruction
and action pairs (Shridhar et al. 2020; Ehsani et al. 2024;
Pashevich et al. 2021; Blukis et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2023).
However, annotating instructions and providing expert action sequences (i.e., navigating trajectories) is costly and

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed FLARE. Our agent
comprises (1) Multi-Modal Planner (MMP)’ for generating
subgoals using initial views and instructions via an LLM
(e.g., GPT-4), and (2) Environment Adaptive Replanning
(EAR)’ for refining ungrounded plans using visual cues
when agent gets stuck while executing a plan.
time-consuming, and thus collecting a sufficient amount of
language annotations is often prohibitive. When data are
insufficient, the above-mentioned data-driven approaches
would not be effective (Min et al. 2022; Inoue and Ohashi
2022; Bhambri, Kim, and Choi 2023; Song et al. 2022).
To learn an agent performing a long-horizon task by a
small amount of annotated data, recent approaches (Min
et al. 2022; Inoue and Ohashi 2022) exploit manually designed action sequences for specific task types. However,
such defined actions do not scale to various types of tasks.
Another line of research uses large language models (LLMs)
to address insufficient data, capitalizing on the remarkable advances achieved by prior knowledge encoded within

∗

JC is with ECE, ASRI & IPAI in SNU and a corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4329

