The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Knowledge Distillation-Based Approach to Enhance Transparency of Classifier
Models
Yuchen Jiang* , Xinyuan Zhao* , Yihang Wu, Ahmad Chaddad*
Artificial Intelligence for Personalised Medicine, School of Artificial Intelligence, Guilin University of Electronic Technology
Jinji Road, Guilin 541004, China
ahmad8chaddad@gmail.com

Abstract
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI),
especially in the medical field, the need for its explainability
has grown. In medical image analysis, a high degree of
transparency and model interpretability can help clinicians
better understand and trust the decision-making process of AI
models. In this study, we propose a Knowledge Distillation
(KD)-based approach that aims to enhance the transparency of
the AI model in medical image analysis. The initial step is to
use traditional CNN to obtain a teacher model and then use KD
to simplify the CNN architecture, retain most of the features
of the data set, and reduce the number of network layers. It
also uses the feature map of the student model to perform
hierarchical analysis to identify key features and decisionmaking processes. This leads to intuitive visual explanations.
We selected three public medical data sets (brain tumor, eye
disease, and Alzheimer’s disease) to test our method. It shows
that even when the number of layers is reduced, our model
provides a remarkable result in the test set and reduces the
time required for the interpretability analysis.

Code — https://github.com/AIPMLab/KD-FMV

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is now widely used in various
fields, especially deep learning (DL), which advances DL
applications in more autonomous directions (Wang et al.
2023a; Al-lQubaydhi et al. 2024). In medical imaging, AI has
become integral to healthcare (Chaddad, Wu, and Desrosiers
2024; Amiri et al. 2024). Despite Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) performing well in medical classification
tasks, they lack transparency, particularly in decision-making
(Chaddad et al. 2024; Hassija et al. 2024). This is crucial in
medicine because unexplainable AI results cannot convince
physicians and may lead to medical accidents (Jin et al. 2023).
Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) addresses this by
enhancing model transparency and understandability, helping
physicians trust AI results and improving medical decisions
(Chaddad et al. 2023a; Van der Velden et al. 2022).
DL models often have large parameters, complicating
interpretation. Knowledge distillation (KD) transfers
* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17653

knowledge from complex to simpler models (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015), widely used in medical tasks. For
instance, (Wang et al. 2023b) proposed a self-supervised
method integrating diverse knowledge into KD for skin
disease classification, achieving higher performance. The
Distilled Student Network, using KD, detects melanoma from
dermoscopic images more efficiently than pre-trained models
(Khan et al. 2022). Smaller models are computationally
cheaper and easier to understand. Our key question is:
How to design a simple model with feasible classification
accuracy while maintaining high interpretability? This
study simplifies CNN architecture through KD, retaining
most dataset features and reducing network layers. Our
approach involves: 1) training a teacher model such as CNNs
and performing KD to obtain a simpler student model, 2)
using average feature maps on limited layers for intuitive
visualization. We use Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence as a
loss function to preserve useful features while simplifying
the model. Feature distillation aims to make the student
model learn similar feature representations as the teacher
model, enhancing student model performance. We performed
a layer-by-layer interpretability analysis, reducing CNN
layers without compromising effectiveness. Analyzing each
student model layer’s feature map identifies key features
and decision-making processes. Our goal is to maximize
model performance and interpretability while maintaining
a lightweight structure. To verify the proposed approach,
we used two interpretability methods: 1) Grad-CAM,
highlighting image regions contributing to model predictions
by visualizing the last convolutional layer (Selvaraju et al.
2017), and 2) SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP),
assigning each feature a contribution value to the model
output (Lundberg and Lee 2017). Our contributions are:
• We propose a solution to the interpretability problem using
KD in the context of DL, ensuring high performance and
quick explanations.
• We simulate the proposed model using three medical
datasets to demonstrate classifier accuracy with few
layers.
• We compare the proposed interpretability model with
the Grad-CAM and SHAP models using both visual
explanations (e.g., heat map) and quantitative metrics
(e.g., Fidelity score).

