The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Biased Incomplete Multi-View Learning
Haishun Chen, Cai Xu, Ziyu Guan * , Wei Zhao, Jinlong Liu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
{chenhaishun@stu., cxu@, zyguan@, ywzhao@mail., 20069100042@stu.}xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Prevalent conditions
or healthy patients

Considering the ubiquitous phenomenon of missing views
in multi-view data, incomplete multi-view learning is a crucial task in many applications. Existing methods usually follow an impute-then-predict strategy for handling this problem. However, they often assume that the view-missing patterns are uniformly random in multi-view data, which does
not agree with real-world scenarios. In practice, view-missing
patterns often vary across different classes. For example, in
the medical field, patients with rare diseases would take more
examinations than those with common diseases; in the financial field, high-risk customers tend to receive evaluations
from more views than ordinary ones. Hence, we often observe that data-rich classes suffer limited views while datapoor classes suffer limited samples. Previous methods would
typically fail due to such biased view-missing patterns. This
motivates us to delve into a new biased incomplete multiview learning problem. To this end, we develop a Reliable
Incomplete Multi-view Learning (RIML) method. RIML is a
simple yet effective learning-free imputation framework that
goes beyond the conventional approaches by considering information from all classes, rather than just relying on individual views or within-class samples. Specifically, we utilize
an inter-class association matrix that allows data-poor classes
to refer the knowledge from data-rich classes. This enables
the construction of more reliable view-specific distributions,
from which we perform multiple samplings to recover missing views. Additionally, to obtain a reliable multi-view representation for downstream tasks, we develop an enhanced focal loss with a category-aware marginal term to learn a more
distinguishable feature space. Experiments on five multi-view
datasets demonstrate that RIML significantly outperforms existing methods in both accuracy and robustness.

…

Rare conditions

Condition or complex diseases
worsened

…

View 1:

…

View 2:

…

Patients

…

…

…

…

…

…

View V :
Examinations

Figure 1: Visualization of the non-uniform view-missing
patterns in multi-view data: “✓” indicates that patients had
this view examination, while “✗” indicates that patients did
not have this view examination.

complete representation of data instances, thereby enhancing various tasks such as clustering (Ling et al. 2023; Huang
et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2024). However, in real-life cases, partial views can be missing due to factors like sensor failures,
which leads most multi-view learning methods to suffer notable performance decrease.
In addressing the challenges of incomplete multi-view
learning (IMVL), existing methods primarily rely on two
key principles: Cross-View Consistency (CVC) and IntraClass Similarity (ICS). For instance, certain methods (Liu
et al. 2022; Xia et al. 2022) exploit the connotative consistency among available views within certain instances
to identify potential cross-view correlation patterns. These
patterns are then used to predict or reconstruct the missing views in incomplete instances. Alternatively, other approaches (Tang and Liu 2022; Xie et al. 2023) analyze the
common characteristics shared by instances within the same
category to predict missing views based on the premise that
instances from the same class exhibit similar view patterns.
Although these methods achieve promising performance,
it is worth noting that most prior studies (Huang et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2024) assume that view-missing
patterns are entirely arbitrary. However, in practice, the
view-missing patterns are often closely associated with specific categories, making it systematically biased rather than

Introduction
Multi-view learning has gained increasing importance in
real-world applications (Chen et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024). For example, in the
medical domain, physicians often depend on multiple perspectives of data to achieve a comprehensive understanding
of a patient’s condition. Combining consistent and complementary information from multiple views enables a more
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15767

