The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EventZoom: A Progressive Approach to Event-Based Data Augmentation for
Enhanced Neuromorphic Vision
Yiting Dong1,3,4 * , Xiang He2,3 * , Guobin Shen1,3,4 , Dongcheng Zhao3,4 , Yang Li2,3 , Yi Zeng1,2,3,4,5†
1

School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Brain-inspired Cognitive Intelligence Lab, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Center for Long-term Artificial Intelligence
5
Key Laboratory of Brain Cognition and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology, CAS
{dongyiting2020, hexiang2021,shenguobin2021,
zhaodongcheng2016,liyang2019,yi.zeng}@ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract

88

Dynamic Vision Sensors (DVS) capture event data with high
temporal resolution and low power consumption, presenting
a more efficient solution for visual processing in dynamic
and real-time scenarios compared to conventional video capture methods. Event data augmentation serves as an essential
method for overcoming the limitation of scale and diversity
in event datasets. Our comparative experiments demonstrate
that the two factors, spatial integrity and temporal continuity,
can significantly affect the capacity of event data augmentation, which guarantee the maintenance of the sparsity and high
dynamic range characteristics unique to event data. However,
existing augmentation methods often neglect the preservation of spatial integrity and temporal continuity. To address
this, we developed a novel event data augmentation strategy
EventZoom, which employs a temporal progressive strategy, embedding transformed samples into the original samples
through progressive scaling and shifting. The scaling process
avoids the spatial information loss associated with cropping,
while the progressive strategy prevents interruptions or abrupt
changes in temporal information. We validated EventZoom
across various supervised learning frameworks. The experimental results show that EventZoom consistently outperforms existing event data augmentation methods with SOTA
performance. For the first time, we have concurrently employed Semi-supervised and Unsupervised learning to verify
feasibility on event augmentation algorithms, demonstrating
the applicability and effectiveness of EventZoom as a powerful event-based data augmentation tool in handling real-world
scenes with high dynamics and variability environments.

NCALTECH101
No Temporal Continuity

86

Acc(%)

No Spatial Integrity

84
82
R
RS_S
Even
P
tZoo S_RP
m

SS_R
P

SS_S

P

C_SS

C
C
_RP _SS_RP _PS_PP

Figure 1: Visualization of Boxplots of multiple experiments
using event augmentation methods in settings lacking temporal continuity and spatial integrity.

and embodies several critical advantages, including high temporal resolution, low energy requirements, and substantial
reductions in data redundancy(Schuman et al. 2017). This
non-continuous, and asynchronous data capture method provides a finer granularity in capturing dynamic real-world
changes. It offers considerable potential for applications such
as visual navigation (Barranco et al. 2016; Zujevs et al. 2021),
autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2020a), and gesture recognition(Amir et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2021), by facilitating
enhanced real-time decisions and perception capabilities.
However, the deployment of event-based data systems
in practical applications encounters significant challenges,
predominantly due to the constraints on dataset availability
and diversity and the inherent characteristics of event data
itself(Gallego et al. 2022). Most event datasets are limited
in scale and scope. The dependency on specialized event
camera hardware and specific environmental conditions for
data collection complicates the creation of extensive and
diverse datasets. Additionally, the inherent sparsity and the
non-uniform temporal distribution of event data introduce
complexities in data processing (He et al. 2020b). In this
context, exploring data augmentation techniques specifically
designed for event data becomes crucial. These techniques
offer significant potential for better utilization of this novel

Introduction
Event data, as captured by Dynamic Vision Sensors (DVS),
signifies a paradigm shift from traditional frame-based video
capture to more sophisticated event-based or neuromorphic
vision systems. (Hu, Liu, and Delbruck 2021; Gallego et al.
2022; Lakshmi, Chakraborty, and Thakur 2019; Taverni et al.
2018). This mechanism generates asynchronous data streams
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1291

