The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Online Fraud Detection via
Test-Time Retrieval-Based Representation Enrichment
Yiran Qiao1,2,3 * , Ningtao Wang4 * , Yuncong Gao1,2,3 * ,
Yang Yang4 , Xing Fu4 , Weiqiang Wang4 , Xiang Ao1,2,3†
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing Technology,
CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
Key Lab of AI Safety, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100094, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, CAS, Beijing 100049, China
4
Independent Researcher
yrqiao@gmail.com, ntwang25@gmail.com, gaoyuncong21s@ict.ac.cn,
name yy@126.com, fux008@gmail.com, wang.weiqiang@gmail.com, aoxiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

users effectively. This issue, where the distribution of a data
stream varies over time, is known as concept drift (Gama
et al. 2014), which has long been a central challenge in fraud
detection (Soemers et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2021).
For example, Figure 1 shows the AUC performance of
two fraud detection models on an online payment platform
in China. These models were trained on user behavior sequence data up to 09/2022 and evaluated on five monthly
test datasets from 10/2022 to 02/2023. The trend of decreasing performance observed in both models highlights a significant case of incremental concept drift (Lu et al. 2019).
Outdated models fail to identify evolving fraud tactics, progressively exposing more vulnerabilities that fraudsters can
exploit. Consequently, the urgency to address this concept
drift escalates as performance degradation worsens.

Anti-fraud machine learning systems are perpetually confronted with the significant challenge of concept drift, driven
by the continuous and intense evolution of fraudulent techniques. That is, outdated models trained on historical fraudulent behaviors often fall short in addressing the evolving
tactics of malicious users over time. The key issue lies in
effectively tackling the rapid and significant evolution of
fraudsters’ behaviors to detect these emerging and unforeseen
anomalies. In this paper, we propose a solution by directly accessing real-time data and introducing a lightweight plug-in
approach named TRE (Test-time Retrieval-based Representation Enrichment). Considering the similarity among samples,
TRE employs a retriever to efficiently identify the top-K most
relevant recent samples and implements an aggregation strategy to provide neighboring embeddings to the predictor. It
thus adjusts the trained classifiers during the test time, providing them with the information from the latest unlabeled
data. Extensive experiments on three large-scale real-world
datasets demonstrate the superiority of TRE. By consistently
incorporating information from the nearest neighbors, TRE
demonstrates high adaptability and surpasses existing methods in performance.

Introduction
Online services typically evolve more rapidly than the formulation of regulatory measures, leaving fraudsters with
potential vulnerabilities to exploit. Meanwhile, fraudsters
swiftly adapt to new trends and technologies, consistently
developing advanced and inventive methods to evade detection by platform anti-fraud systems (Liu et al. 2021a; Li et al.
2022b; Zhang et al. 2022). As a result, the outdated models, trained on historical fraudulent behaviors, struggle to detect the continually evolving patterns exhibited by malicious

Figure 1: The AUC of Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
and SHORING (Li et al. 2022a) on five out-of-time (OOT)
test datasets. Both incremental and recurring concept drifts
can be inferred from the observed performance decreases.
Additionally, a notable decline in performance is observed in January 2023, coinciding with the Chinese New
Year holiday. The approaching of significant holidays typically presents opportune moments for executing scams.
Fraudsters are motivated by the pressure to boost their earnings for festive expenses, and facilitated by people’s lowered vigilance and increased spending. This surge in fraudulent activities challenges outdated models to capture the

* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding Author. Xiang Ao is also at CASMINO Ltd.,
Suzhou 215000, China.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12470

