The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Combinatorial Clustered Bandits for Recommendation Systems
Baran Atalar, Carlee Joe-Wong
Carnegie Mellon University
batalar@andrew.cmu.edu, cjoewong@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

rewards of the arms selected, which are functions of their
contexts, as well as a total (super arm) reward, which is a
function of the base arm rewards. In recommendation settings, where each base arm might represent a user to which
a product is being recommended, the base arm reward would
be the user’s rating for that product and the super arm reward
might indicate whether a threshold number of users rated
the product highly. However, both the base arm and the super arm reward functions are stochastic and unknown to the
user, and we aim to learn these reward functions in an online
manner in order to select the arms which would yield the
highest rewards for a given context. The main challenge in
the CC-MAB and bandits setting in general is to balance between exploiting arms that we already know to be good and
exploring new arms that might be better. A relatively new
approach to the exploration-exploitation tradeoff has been to
use neural networks to learn the base arm reward functions.
Drawbacks of existing formulations. Modeling reward
functions with neural networks introduces greater expressibility into the rewards learned, but existing neural and nonneural combinatorial bandit works generally require the existence of an exact or approximation oracle (Hwang, Chai,
and Oh 2023; Elahi et al. 2023; Chen, Wang, and Yuan 2013;
Chen, Xu, and Lu 2018), which selects the super arm after
being given as input the estimated reward/quality of each
base arm. This oracle, however, may be difficult to derive a
priori, before the super arm reward function is known. Indeed, many combinatorial bandit problems are NP-hard and
may not even have known approximation algorithms (Kong
et al. 2021), e.g., variants of knapsack problems. We eliminate the need for an oracle by leveraging the structure of
recommendation problems. In particular, we recognize that
the context space of many recommendation problems has a
clustered structure. Thus, we can cluster arms by clustering
their contexts and use the resulting groupings, aided by an
additional neural network-based estimation of super arm rewards, to guide our search for the optimal super arm.
Challenges of our approach. To estimate the performance of the clusters, we need an expression for the super
arm reward for the base arms in each cluster. We do so by
again using a neural network to model the super arm reward
and taking advantage of the recommendation problem structure: super arm reward functions in recommendation settings
are often monotonic, since users are more likely to prefer a

We consider the contextual combinatorial bandit setting
where in each round, the learning agent, e.g., a recommender
system, selects a subset of “arms,” e.g., products, and observes rewards for both the individual base arms, which are
a function of known features (called “context”), and the super arm (the subset of arms), which is a function of the base
arm rewards. The agent’s goal is to simultaneously learn the
unknown reward functions and choose the highest-reward
arms. For example, the “reward” may represent a user’s probability of clicking on one of the recommended products.
Conventional bandit models, however, employ restrictive reward function models in order to obtain performance guarantees. We make use of deep neural networks to estimate
and learn the unknown reward functions and propose Neural UCB Clustering (NeUClust), which adopts a clustering
approach to select the super arm in every round by exploiting
underlying structure in the context space. Unlike prior neural bandit works, NeUClust uses a neural network to estimate
the super arm reward and select the super arm, thus eliminating the need for a known optimization oracle. We nontrivially extend prior neural combinatorial bandit works to
prove that NeUClust achieves sublinear regret in the number of rounds. Experiments on real recommendation datasets
show that NeUClust achieves better regret and reward than
other contextual combinatorial and neural bandit algorithms.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.14586
Code — https://github.com/BaranAtalar/NeUClust

Introduction
The contextual combinatorial bandit (CC-MAB) setting has
been applied to content recommendation such as movies
(Qin, Chen, and Zhu 2014), where we recommend multiple
movies to a user or select multiple users to whom a movie
will be recommended. In this application, an agent is confronted with a set of choices, or “arms,” e.g., a set of movies,
each of which will yield an unknown reward that depends on
a known context, e.g., movie genre. Over the course of several rounds, the agent must learn to select the “best” arms.
We consider the usual semi-bandit feedback setting where
in each round, the user receives the individual (base arm)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15417

