The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning with Parameterized Action Primitives for
Diverse Manipulation Tasks
Xianxu Qiu1 , Haiming Huang2 , Weiwei Chen2 , Qiuzhen Lin1 * , Wei-Neng Chen3 , Fuchun Sun4
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
lijq@szu.edu.cn
Abstract

forgetting. The experiments show that ERLAP outperforms
four state-of-the-art RL algorithms in simulated RMTs with
dense rewards and can effectively avoid catastrophic forgetting in a set of more challenging simulated RMTs with
sparse rewards.
In recent years, deep RL (DRL) has shown better learning ability to solve RMTs. Moreover, imitation learning
(Li, Chappell, and Rojas 2023; Wang et al. 2022b; Zhang
et al. 2024), curriculum learning (Yang et al. 2022; Li et al.
2021), and experience replay techniques (Schaul et al. 2015;
Andrychowicz et al. 2017), are proposed for DRL to better
solve RMTs. However, these DRL algorithms have to explore the robotic state space by raw actions (e.g., force and
torque) or joint skill, which is a prohibitively large action
space for DRL to complete a specific task. Thus, some recent DRL algorithms (Fu et al. 2020; Singh et al. 2020; Mandlekar et al. 2020) adopt offline data to speed up the learning, which can alleviate the exploration burden, but they are
time-consuming to scale up for a new RMT as they need to
collect offline data each time.
On the other hand, hierarchical RL (HRL) is also designed
to alleviate the exploration burden, which decomposes the
target RMT into sub-tasks and addresses them separately.
HRL with parameterized action primitives (Lee, Yang, and
Lim 2019; Chitnis et al. 2020; Nasiriany, Liu, and Zhu 2022;
Wang et al. 2023; Dalal, Pathak, and Salakhutdinov 2021) is
a promising paradigm for robotic skill learning, which explores the robotic state space by primitives to alleviate the
exploration burden. Specifically, these algorithms determine
the primitive type at a high-level policy and corresponding
parameters at a low-level policy. Although these HRL algorithms have partially alleviated the exploration burden,
they still highly rely on informative rewards and suffer from
catastrophic forgetting, preventing them from scaling up to
more complex RMTs.
Moreover, evolutionary RL (ERL) (Khadka and Tumer
2018) has recently been proposed for overcoming the catastrophic forgetting, which combines the advantages of evolutionary algorithms (EAs) (Spears et al. 1993) and DRL.
Some ERL algorithms (Jianye et al. 2022; Khadka and
Tumer 2018; Bodnar, Day, and Lió 2020) utilize a population to store network parameters, which are evolved to alleviate the parameters forgetting problem during training. Be-

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promising performance in tackling robotic manipulation tasks (RMTs), which
require learning a prolonged sequence of manipulation actions to control robots efficiently. However, most RL algorithms often suffer from two problems when solving RMTs:
inefficient exploration due to the extremely large action space
and catastrophic forgetting due to the poor sampling efficiency. To alleviate these problems, this paper introduces an
Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning algorithm with parameterized Action Primitives, called ERLAP, which combines
the advantages of an evolutionary algorithm (EA) and hierarchical RL (HRL) to solve diverse RMTs. A library of heterogeneous action primitives is constructed in HRL to enhance
the exploration efficiency of robots and dual populations with
new evolutionary operators are run in EA to optimize these
primitive sequences, which can diversify the distribution of
replay buffer and avoid catastrophic forgetting. The experiments show that ERLAP outperforms four state-of-the-art
RL algorithms in simulated RMTs with dense rewards and
can effectively avoid catastrophic forgetting in a set of more
challenging simulated RMTs with sparse rewards.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promising performance in tackling robotic manipulation tasks (RMTs),
which require learning a prolonged sequence of manipulation actions to control robots efficiently. However, most
RL algorithms often suffer from two problems when solving RMTs: inefficient exploration due to the extremely large
action space and catastrophic forgetting due to the poor sampling efficiency. To alleviate these problems, this paper introduces an Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning algorithm
with parameterized Action Primitives, called ERLAP, which
combines the advantages of an evolutionary algorithm (EA)
and hierarchical RL (HRL) to solve diverse RMTs. A library of heterogeneous action primitives is constructed in
HRL to enhance the exploration efficiency of robots and
dual populations with new evolutionary operators are run in
EA to optimize these primitive sequences, which can diversify the distribution of replay buffer and avoid catastrophic
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14655

