The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Harnessing Large Language Models for Knowledge Graph Question Answering
via Adaptive Multi-Aspect Retrieval-Augmentation
Derong Xu12 , Xinhang Li1 , Ziheng Zhang3 , Zhenxi Lin3 , Zhihong Zhu4 , Zhi Zheng1 , Xian Wu3 * ,
Xiangyu Zhao2 * , Tong Xu1 * , Enhong Chen1
1

University of Science and Technology of China & State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence,
2
City University of Hong Kong,
3
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab,
4
Peking University
{derongxu,xinhangli,zhengzhi97}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zihengzhang, chalerislin, kevinxwu}@tencent.com,
xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk, {tongxu, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, zhihongzhu@stu.pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Question

KG

p what countries included in

Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate remarkable
capabilities, yet struggle with hallucination and outdated
knowledge when tasked with complex knowledge reasoning, resulting in factually incorrect outputs. Previous studies have attempted to mitigate it by retrieving factual knowledge from large-scale knowledge graphs (KGs) to assist
LLMs in logical reasoning and prediction of answers. However, this kind of approach often introduces noise and irrelevant data, especially in situations with extensive context
from multiple knowledge aspects. In this way, LLM attention can be potentially mislead from question and relevant
information. In our study, we introduce an Adaptive MultiAspect Retrieval-augmented over KGs (Amar) framework.
This method retrieves knowledge including entities, relations,
and subgraphs, and converts each piece of retrieved text into
prompt embeddings. The Amar framework comprises two
key sub-components: 1) a self-alignment module that aligns
commonalities among entities, relations, and subgraphs to enhance retrieved text, thereby reducing noise interference; 2) a
relevance gating module that employs a soft gate to learn the
relevance score between question and multi-aspect retrieved
data, to determine which information should be used to enhance LLMs’ output, or even filtered altogether. Our method
has achieved state-of-the-art performance on two common
datasets, WebQSP and CWQ, showing a 1.9% improvement
in accuracy over its best competitor and a 6.6% improvement
in logical form generation over a method that directly uses retrieved text as context prompts. These results demonstrate the
effectiveness of Amar in improving the reasoning of LLMs.

oceania ?
Retrieved Entities

Retrieved Relations

p Oceania Relevant

p topic.notable_types Relevant

p Remote Oceania Partially

p location.contains

Ground Truth
Logical Form: (AND
(JOIN base. biblioness.
bibs_location.loc_type …
…
Answers: Australia, Fiji,
New Zealand, ……

Irrelevant

Retrieval Recall

Figure 1: An example illustrates the retrieval results categorized as relevant, irrelevant, and partially relevant.

WEN et al. 2023; XU et al. 2024; ZENG et al. 2023). However, when dealing with specialized knowledge not in training corpus and complex knowledge reasoning, LLMs still
struggle with outdated knowledge and hallucination problems (Ji et al. 2023). They thus may produce factually incorrect outputs, limiting their usefulness in the areas requiring high reliability, such as healthcare (He et al. 2023) and
safety (Dong et al. 2024). To solve complex reasoning with
specialized knowledge, a line of research (Luo et al. 2023;
Sun et al. 2024) have explored Knowledge Graph Question
Answering (KGQA), a task that improves logical reasoning and prediction of answers by retrieving reliable information from large-scale knowledge graphs (KGs) like Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) and Wikidata (Vrandečić and
Krötzsch 2014). KGs store extensive factual knowledge in
a structured format known as triplets, consisting of (head
entity, relation, tail entity), which is seen as a potential solution for enhancing the interpretability of LLMs reasoning
(Sun et al. 2024).
The recent advancements in KGQA can be broadly classified into two main categories. The first category involves
using LLMs to transform input questions into structured log-

Code — https://github.com/Applied-Machine-LearningLab/AMAR

Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) like GPT-4 (OpenAI 2024) and Llama (Touvron et al. 2023) have shown impressive performance improvements across a variety of natural language processing (NLP) tasks (WANG et al. 2024;
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25570

