The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Metric-Agnostic Continual Learning for Sustainable Group Fairness
Heng Lian1 , Chen Zhao2 , Zhong Chen3 , Xingquan Zhu4 , My T. Thai5 , Yi He1 *
1

School of Computing, Data Sciences & Physics, William & Mary, Williamsburg, VA, USA
2
School of Engineering and Computer Science, Baylor University, Waco, TX, USA
3
School of Computing, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL, USA
4
College of Engineering & Computer Science, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA
5
Department of Computer & Information Science & Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
{hlian01, yihe}@wm.edu, chen zhao@baylor.edu, zhong.chen@cs.siu.edu, xzhu3@fau.edu, mythai@cise.ufl.edu
Abstract

and time-intensive to obtain across multiple tasks, making
them non-sustainable over time. Second, they falter in handling tasks with substantial covariate shifts. Consider, for example, a hiring system with different occupations as tasks.
The FRL models require to learn very different representations to disentangle correlations between protected feature
(e.g., gender) and label (e.g., hire or not), which can vary
significantly across occupations. Enforcing an FRL model
learned from one occupation (e.g., marketing) to make prediction on another very different occupation (e.g., engineering) may incur a brittle trade-off between stability and plasticity (Kim et al. 2023). That is, the model either persists
in the previously learned representations and hence makes
highly unfair or inaccurate predictions in the new occupation, or it adapts to the new occupation completely and forgets how to make fair predictions on all previous tasks.
In this paper, we aim to overcome the two drawbacks at
once by exploring a new GFCL problem, namely, how to
sustain a fair classifier across a sequence of tasks with covariate shifts and unlabeled data?
Our key insight to resolve the problem is drawn from human learning behaviors. We argue that, like human-beings
who rarely handle tasks in arbitrary orders (Elman 1993),
GFCL should follow an optimized sequence – tasks with
data distributions similar to those previously seen by the
classifier should be prioritized, while tasks with substantially different distributions should be deferred. Such optimized task sequence encourages high-confident learning,
where the classifier after learning from multiple prioritized
tasks can gradually become more knowledgeable to handle
the deferred task. We cast this insight into a novel GFCL
approach, termed Metric-agnostic continual Fair Representation Learning (MacFRL), which proceeds in three main
steps. First, a fair classifier is initialized with its training
dataset retained, and a set of subsequent tasks are fetched
in the buffer. Second, MacFRL gauges the distance between
the retained dataset and each buffered task, selecting the
most similar task as the next candidate to be learnt. A shared
representation space is induced from the classifier and the
selected task using domain adaptation with group fairness
constraints. Third, data instances predicted with high confidence from the selected task are merged into the retained
dataset, enlarging the classifier’s knowledge scope to prepare it for the less similar tasks. The learned task is then

Group Fairness-aware Continual Learning (GFCL) aims to
eradicate discriminatory predictions against certain demographic groups in a sequence of diverse learning tasks. This
paper explores an even more challenging GFCL problem –
how to sustain a fair classifier across a sequence of tasks with
covariate shifts and unlabeled data. We propose the MacFRL
solution, with its key idea to optimize the sequence of learning tasks. We hypothesize that high-confident learning can
be enabled in the optimized task sequence, where the classifier learns from a set of prioritized tasks to glean knowledge,
thereby becoming more capable to handle the tasks with substantial distribution shifts that were originally deferred. Theoretical and empirical studies substantiate that MacFRL excels
among its GFCL competitors in terms of prediction accuracy
and group fairness metrics.

Code — https://github.com/X1aoLian/MacFRL

Introduction
Group Fairness-aware Continual Learning (GFCL) has recently garnered significant attention due to its applications in
societal decision-making (Chowdhury and Chaturvedi 2023;
Truong et al. 2023b; Zhao et al. 2023). GFCL enables learning model to adapt to shifting data distributions, jointly optimizing classification accuracy and group fairness (Mehrabi
et al. 2021). The key idea of GFCL is to eradicate superficial correlation between class labels and protected characteristics, such as gender, age, or ethnicity (Malleson 2018),
across various tasks. To do that, Fair Representation Learning (FRL) has emerged as an important technique due to its
ease of implementation and reproduction (Oh et al. 2022;
Zhao et al. 2023; Chowdhury and Chaturvedi 2023; Truong
et al. 2023b). Given a sequence of tasks, FRL aims to represent data from any task into a shared latent space so that
1) the data representations are invariant across all tasks, enabling continual learning, and 2) the protected feature information is not included, ensuring fair predictions.
Unfortunately, the existing FRL methods for GFCL
mostly suffer from two major drawbacks. First, they heavily
depend on the availability of labeled data, which are costly
* Corresponding author: Dr. Yi He (yihe@wm.edu)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18648

