The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

L3TC: Leveraging RWKV for Learned Lossless Low-Complexity Text
Compression
Junxuan Zhang2 * , Zhengxue Cheng1 * † , Yan Zhao1 , Shihao Wang2 ,
Dajiang Zhou2 , Guo Lu1 , Li Song1
1

Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
junxuan.zjx@antgroup.com, zxcheng@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaoyanzy@sjtu.edu.cn, shihao.wsh@antgroup.com,
dajiang.zdj@antgroup.com, luguo2014@sjtu.edu.cn, song li@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

32.5

Learning-based probabilistic models can be combined with
an entropy coder for data compression. However, due to the
high complexity of learning-based models, their practical application as text compressors has been largely overlooked. To
address this issue, our work focuses on a low-complexity design while maintaining compression performance. We introduce a novel Learned Lossless Low-complexity Text Compression method (L3TC). Specifically, we conduct extensive
experiments demonstrating that RWKV models achieve the
fastest decoding speed with a moderate compression ratio,
making it the most suitable backbone for our method. Second, we propose an outlier-aware tokenizer that uses a limited
vocabulary to cover frequent tokens while allowing outliers
to bypass the prediction and encoding. Third, we propose a
novel high-rank reparameterization strategy that enhances the
learning capability during training without increasing complexity during inference. Experimental results validate that
our method achieves 48% bit saving compared to gzip compressor. Besides, L3TC offers compression performance comparable to other learned compressors, with a 50× reduction
in model parameters. More importantly, L3TC is the fastest
among all learned compressors, providing real-time decoding
speeds up to megabytes per second.

gzip
Transformer
TransformerXL
RWKV
(Ours) L3TC

Compression Ratio (%)

30.0
27.5
25.0
22.5

750KB/s
29KB/s

20.0

50×

17.5

1.3MB/s
15.0 (Decoding Speed)
12.5
10

0

10

1

Number of Params (M)

10

2

Figure 1: Compression Ratio vs. Model Size: The proposed
L3TC method outperforms other well-known compressors,
including gzip and learning-based models, with the best
compression ratio and a 50× reduction in model size while
maintaining comparable performance. When running on devices, other learned models typically decode at KB/s speeds,
while L3TC achieves decoding speeds up to MB/s.

Code —
https://github.com/alipay/L3TC-leveraging-rwkv-forlearned-lossless-low-complexity-text-compression.git

1

15KB/s

and demonstrated remarkable in-context learning capabilities across various tasks by predicting the probability of the
next token. This predictive capability can be inherently combined with entropy encoding to serve as a data compressor.
Entropy encoding can be implemented in various ways, including Huffman Coding (Huffman 1952), Arithmetic Coding (AC) (Pasco. 1977; Howard and Vitter 1991), and Asymmetric Numeral Systems (ANS) (Duda. 2013).
Despite the success of language models in many intelligent tasks, the literature has largely overlooked their application as a practical lossless text compressor. This is not surprising, because the decoding complexity is nearly equivalent to the model’s inference complexity, which is significantly slower compared to popular engineered compressors
such as gzip (Pasco. 1996). For a practical usage, the data
compression task basically demands a very critical real-time
decoding performance, up to megabytes per second. Therefore, it is a very promising and challenging research direction to develop a low-complexity text compression algo-

Introduction

Lossless text compression is a fundamental research field
focused on reducing data size based on information theory. In 1948, Shannon (Shannon. 1948) described that maximizing the log2 -likelihood of data is equivalent to minimizing the number of bits required for compression. Then
information theory (MacKay. 2003) established the essential equivalence between probabilistic models of data and
lossless compression. Recently, learning-based probabilistic models, like language models, have developed rapidly
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13251

