The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UCF-Crime-DVS: A Novel Event-Based Dataset
for Video Anomaly Detection with Spiking Neural Networks
Yuanbin Qian1 * , Shuhan Ye1 * , Chong Wang1,2† , Xiaojie Cai1 , Jiangbo Qian1,2 , Jiafei Wu3
1

Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Ningbo University, China
Merchants’ Guild Economics and Cultural Intelligent Computing Laboratory, Ningbo University, China
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
{2311100301, 216002718, wangchong, 2211100083, qianjiangbo}@nbu.edu.cn, jcjiafeiwu@gmail.com

2

Time (frame)

Abstract

Monitor

Light

Event-based Video
Anomaly Detection
Anomaly in
Event data

Anomaly in
RGB data

Event Camera Event Stream

MSF

Video anomaly detection plays a significant role in intelligent
surveillance systems. To enhance model’s anomaly recognition ability, previous works have typically involved RGB, optical flow, and text features. Recently, dynamic vision sensors
(DVS) have emerged as a promising technology, which capture visual information as discrete events with a very high
dynamic range and temporal resolution. It reduces data redundancy and enhances the capture capacity of moving objects compared to conventional camera. To introduce this rich
dynamic information into the surveillance field, we created
the first DVS video anomaly detection benchmark, namely
UCF-Crime-DVS. To fully utilize this new data modality, a
multi-scale spiking fusion network (MSF) is designed based
on spiking neural networks (SNNs). This work explores the
potential application of dynamic information from event data
in video anomaly detection. Our experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our framework on UCF-Crime-DVS and its
superior performance compared to other models, establishing a new baseline for SNN-based weakly supervised video
anomaly detection.

Time (us)

Figure 1: The overview of our contributions.

these datasets are first processed through a feature extractor
to obtain RGB features or optical flow features. RGB features capture the appearance information of the video, while
optical flow features focus on the motion information.
Recently, dynamic vision sensors (DVS) (Lichtsteiner,
Posch, and Delbruck 2008; Brandli et al. 2014), also known
as event cameras, have garnered significant attention due to
their high dynamic range, high temporal resolution, and low
latency. DVS is a bionic visual sensor inspired by human
retinal peripheral neurons. It uses a difference-based sampling model to generate event data only when pixel brightness changes above a threshold. Unlike traditional images,
event streams encode visual information as discrete events,
dramatically reducing data redundancy and preserving temporal characteristics. This efficient information processing
has enabled event cameras to capture moving objects in the
frame better than conventional cameras and reduce systemlevel power consumption by up to 100 times (Delbrück et al.
2010; Posch, Matolin, and Wohlgenannt 2010). However,
despite their advantages, event cameras have not yet been
applied to the field of VAD. Therefore, we introduced the
first DVS dataset in this field using an event camera, called
UCF-Crime-DVS, to explore the potential of it in VAD.
However, Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) do not handle event streams well due to the discrete nature of event
data. Unlike ANNs, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) receive event format data as input and use discrete, binary
spike signals, leading to a natural advantage in handling
event streams (Chen et al. 2023). Therefore, to better utilize
event data in the field of VAD, this paper introduces a fully
SNN-based VAD framework called MSF. Given the unique

Dataset and Code —
https://github.com/YBQian-Roy/UCF-Crime-DVS

Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) is a crucial research direction in the fields of computer vision and machine learning, which plays a significant role in intelligent video
surveillance system (Zhou, Yu, and Yang 2023). For VAD
tasks, content-rich datasets are effective in evaluating the
strengths and weaknesses of algorithms and models. Benchmark datasets help define the scope of problems that can
be solved. Some of the common publicly available benchmark datasets for VAD include UCSD-Peds (Li, Mahadevan, and Vasconcelos 2013), Avenue (Lu, Shi, and Jia 2013),
Street Scene (Ramachandra and Jones 2020), Shanghai Tech
(Luo, Liu, and Gao 2017), TAD (Lv et al. 2021), and UCFCrime (Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018), which cover various monitoring scenarios and anomalous events. Generally,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Chong Wang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6577

