The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Frame Order Matters: A Temporal Sequence-Aware Model
for Few-Shot Action Recognition
Bozheng Li1 * , Mushui Liu1 * , Gaoang Wang2 , Yunlong Yu1†
1

College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign Institute, Zhejiang University
{bozhengli, lms}@zju.edu.cn, gaoangwang@intl.zju.edu.cn, yuyunlong@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel Temporal Sequence-Aware
Model (TSAM) for few-shot action recognition (FSAR),
which incorporates a sequential perceiver adapter into the
pre-training framework, to integrate both the spatial information and the sequential temporal dynamics into the feature embeddings. Different from the existing fine-tuning approaches that capture temporal information by exploring
the relationships among all the frames, our perceiver-based
adapter recurrently captures the sequential dynamics alongside the timeline, which could perceive the frame order
change. To obtain the discriminative representations for each
class, we extend a textual corpus for each class derived from
the large language models (LLMs) and enrich the visual
prototypes by integrating the contextual semantic information. Besides, We introduce an unbalanced optimal transport strategy for feature matching that mitigates the impact
of class-unrelated features, thereby facilitating more effective
decision-making. Experimental results on five FSAR datasets
demonstrate that our method establishes a new benchmark,
outperforming the second-best competitors.

Inverse

✗
Shoot a Ball

Catch a Ball

✓
✓
✓

Video
Encoder

Sequence-aware
Video Encoder

Figure 1: Illustration of the semantic changing when rearranging video frames. The existing model could barely distinguish reversed video due to equally treated frame features
while our temporal sequence-aware model could capture the
differences between the videos with different frame orders.

He 2021) and others concentrating on the development of effective FSL paradigms (Zheng, Chen, and Jin 2022; Perrett
et al. 2021). The advent of Contrastive Language-Image PreTraining (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) has ushered in a more
robust visual backbone that supports multi-modal information integration. Consequently, leveraging the pre-trained
CLIP image encoder for video representation learning has
demonstrated promising potential in various works (Wasim
et al. 2023; Ni et al. 2022; Liu, Li, and Yu 2024; Wu et al.
2024b; Lu et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024).
Recent endeavors have investigated the adaptation of
CLIP for FSAR tasks. Notably, CLIPFSAR (Wang et al.
2023a) pioneered the transfer of the CLIP backbone to
FSAR by directly fine-tuning the entire architecture. A series of subsequent works (Pei et al. 2023; Xing et al.
2023a; Cao et al. 2024) employed Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT) strategies to transfer the pre-trained backbone to FSAR. These approaches prioritize capturing temporal information by delving into the interrelationships
among frames, yet they inadequately consider the temporal sequence. In some cases, the category of a video can be
significantly altered by merely rearranging the order of its
frames. As demonstrated in Fig. 1, reversing the order of input video frames to the models fails in altering the predicted
results, while the category semantic has been changed.

Introduction
Video action recognition (Arnab et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2023), a cornerstone task in video understanding (Tang et al.
2024; Zhao et al. 2024), demands comprehensive understanding and representation of spatial-temporal information.
However, the inherent challenges of large data volume and
storage complexities of video data often lead to a scarcity of
training samples, hindering model development (Dan et al.
2024, 2023; Tang et al. 2022). Few-shot action recognition
(FSAR) (Wang et al. 2023a; Cao et al. 2020; Perrett et al.
2021; Xing et al. 2023b) emerges as a promising direction to
alleviate this data bottleneck while exploring efficient video
encoding architectures. By leveraging a limited number of
labeled examples, FSAR aims to enable the rapid recognition of novel action categories.
Learning-based methods have significantly advanced the
boundaries of FSAR. Existing approaches have explored diverse avenues, with some focusing on the design of powerful video encoders (Thatipelli et al. 2022a; Zhang, Zhou, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18218

