The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Text-Diffusion Red-Teaming of Large Language Models: Unveiling Harmful
Behaviors with Proximity Constraints
Jonathan Nöther1,2 , Adish Singla1 , Goran Radanović1
1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
jnoether@mpi-sws.org, adishs@mpi-sws.org, gradanovic@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Recent work has proposed automated red-teaming methods
for testing the vulnerabilities of a given target large language
model (LLM). These methods use red-teaming LLMs to uncover inputs that induce harmful behavior in a target LLM.
In this paper, we study red-teaming strategies that enable a
targeted security assessment. We propose an optimization
framework for red-teaming with proximity constraints, where
the discovered prompts must be similar to reference prompts
from a given dataset. This dataset serves as a template for
the discovered prompts, anchoring the search for test-cases to
specific topics, writing styles, or types of harmful behavior.
We show that established auto-regressive model architectures
do not perform well in this setting. We therefore introduce
a black-box red-teaming method inspired by text-diffusion
models: Diffusion for Auditing and Red-Teaming (DART).
DART modifies the reference prompt by perturbing it in the
embedding space, directly controlling the amount of change
introduced. We systematically evaluate our method by comparing its effectiveness with established methods based on model
fine-tuning and zero- and few-shot prompting. Our results
show that DART is significantly more effective at discovering
harmful inputs in close proximity to the reference prompt.

Introduction
The recent large-scale adoption of large language models
(LLMs) raises several security concerns. The massive and uncurated datasets used for training can cause LLMs to inherit
biases and stereotypes, spread false information, reveal private information, or reproduce other harmful content. Methods such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Ouyang et al. 2022) are used to align these models
with human values, which significantly improves their safety.
However, recent findings indicate that these safeguards can
be circumvented, causing models to output undesired content (Zou et al. 2023).
A comprehensive understanding and systematic analysis of
these potential harms is the key to developing safe and helpful
assistants. Red-teaming of language models is an important
tool for evaluating the safety of LLMs. These methods aim to
discover user inputs that elicit harmful responses from the assistant. Traditionally, red-teaming was performed by human
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27547

testers (Ganguli et al. 2022). However, such techniques are
expensive, slow, and difficult to scale. More importantly, the
exposure to toxic and harmful content risks psychological
damage to human testers.
To address these issues, Perez et al. (2022) proposed automated red-teaming approaches, where a LLM is used to
generate prompts that elicit harmful responses from the target LLM. These works mostly utilize auto-regressive model
architectures, which excel at generating novel red-teaming
prompts that discover a wide range of test-cases. However,
customizing these approaches to find specific test cases is not
trivial, as the search is not constrained by any means. Yet, in
practice, it is important to enable such targeted safety tests,
for example, when analyzing the safety of a deployed model
on specific topics, writing styles, or types of harmful behavior. A model’s developer might be interested in discovering
for which topics their model is easily tricked into generating undesired responses, and for which ones their model
can be considered safe. Such information provides valuable
guidance for the development of further safety mechanisms.
In this paper, we address the controllability of existing redteaming methods by proposing a complementary red-teaming
paradigm. We are assuming a red-teamer who is interested
in the safety of a target model relative to a specific dataset
of prompts. This dataset serves as a reference with regards
to the topics, writing styles or types of harmful behaviors of
interest to the safety evaluation. The prompts therein may
be generated by the red-teamer themself or may be derived
from user data or synthetic generation. However, slight modifications of these prompts, such as alterations in word order
or the inclusion of a small number of additional characters,
can have a considerable influence on the degree of harmfulness of the responses. Hence, evaluating a target model on
a fixed set of prompts is insufficient—a red-teamer needs to
additionally assess the safety of the target model relative to
prompts that are semantically and syntactically close to the
reference prompts.
To this end, we propose a red-teaming approach that modifies a reference prompt to maximize its harmfulness when
used as an input to the target LLM. At the same time, we
ensure that the modified prompt is within close proximity to
the reference prompt. This approach is illustrated in Figure 1.
This procedure yields a dataset comprising the worst-case
modifications of each reference prompt in the original dataset.

