The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Batch Ensemble for Variance Dependent Regret in Stochastic Bandits
Asaf Cassel1 , Orin Levy1 , Yishay Mansour1,2
1

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2
Google Research, Tel-Aviv
acassel@mail.tau.ac.il, orinlevy@mail.tau.ac.il, mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract

Maillard, Munos, and Stoltz (2011) for empirical confidence
bounds or UCB-KL).
A commonality of nearly all past works is that they explicitly encode the distributional assumptions on the arms
into the algorithm. For example, UCB (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi,
and Fischer 2002) builds confidence bounds tailored to distributions bounded in [0, 1], UCB-V (Audibert, Munos, and
Szepesvári 2009) refines these confidence bounds by incorporating a variance estimate, and KL-UCB (Maillard,
Munos, and Stoltz 2011) explicitly uses the KL-divergence
to estimate uncertainty and often assume a parametric class
to reduce computational complexity. This explicit encoding
can (1) be disadvantageous when the arms are misspecified;
(2) require delicate parameter tuning; or (3) require prior
knowledge of the distributions.
In this work, we show that constructing standard mean
estimators from a simple batching scheme and combining
them using a min operator, yields an optimistic mean estimator. Choosing greedily with respect to this estimator
yields regret bounds that depend on the true concentration
properties of the arm distributions.

Efficiently trading off exploration and exploitation is one of
the key challenges in online Reinforcement Learning (RL).
Most works achieve this by carefully estimating the model
uncertainty and following the so-called optimistic model. Inspired by practical ensemble methods, in this work we propose a simple and novel batch ensemble scheme that provably achieves near-optimal regret for stochastic Multi-Armed
Bandits (MAB). Crucially, our algorithm has just a single parameter, namely the number of batches, and its value does not
depend on distributional properties such as the scale and variance of the losses. We complement our theoretical results by
demonstrating the effectiveness of our algorithm on synthetic
benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Multi-Armed Bandits is a classic framework for sequential
decision-making under uncertainty. In this setting, an agent
repeatedly interacts with an environment by choosing from
a set of K actions (arms) and subsequently observing a loss
signal associated with their choice. The loss signal associated with each arm is a sequence of i.i.d random variables
whose mean is unknown to the agent. The agent’s goal is to
minimize their cumulative loss, which presents a classic exploration vs. exploitation dilemma, i.e., whether to exploit
the current knowledge of the losses or to further explore
seemingly sub-optimal actions that may turn out to be better.
This trade-off is measured via a notion termed regret, which
is the difference between the agent’s performance and that of
an oracle who knows the best arm and chooses it throughout
the interaction.
Learning algorithms for this setting were extensively studied, and date back to Robbins’ paper (Robbins 1952). In
particular, (Lai and Robbins 1985) established that the regret in this problem is lower bounded by Ω(log T ), and
there exist learning algorithms that achieve this regret by
maximizing a confidence bound modification of the empirical mean. A non-asymptotic analysis was later provided by
(Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002). Subsequent works
obtain bounds that depend on subtler properties of the arms
by constructing more elaborate confidence bounds (see e.g.,

Our Contributions. Our main contribution is a simple
MAB algorithm, that does not need tuning of parameters
and has low computational overhead. We show that for the
Bernoulli r.v. our algorithm achieves an instance-dependent
regret that depends on the variances of the arms. We show
that our scheme extends to many other distributions, including, distributions that are either symmetric around the mean,
have bounded support, or lower bounded variance. Crucially,
this adaptation is purely in analysis and does not require
modifying the algorithm.
Our scheme easily adapts to a distributed environment.
Concretely, instead of explicitly constructing an optimistic
mean estimator for each arm, our algorithm may be viewed
as separate (distributed) naive bandit algorithms each receiving separate samples, computing the means of each arm, and
outputting the best empirical arm together with its empirical mean. The final decision is made by following the decision of the bandit algorithm with the best empirical mean.
This interpretation corresponds to practical methods such as
(Osband et al. 2016; Tennenholtz et al. 2022), which use ensembles to encourage exploration. We complement our theoretical findings by running experiments on synthetic bench-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15678

