The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Political Bias Prediction Models Focus on Source Cues, Not Semantics
†

Selin Chun1 , Daejin Choi2 * , Taekyoung Kwon1 *
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Incheon National University, Republic of Korea
slchun@mmlab.snu.ac.kr, djchoi@ewha.ac.kr, tkkwon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

of news articles can serve as a valuable tool to mitigate echo
chambers (Cinelli et al. 2021) and filter bubbles (Pariser
2011).
Recently, efforts have been made to address the bias prediction problem in news articles as a document classification task, focusing on analyzing the bias based on the article’s text. In Li and Goldwasser (2019), the authors proposed using a Hierarchical LSTM (HLSTM) model to embed the document, combined with a Graph Neural Network
(GNN) architecture that considers both document embeddings and article sharing activities to predict political bias.
In 2021, they enhanced their model by incorporating entity mentions and political frame indicators (Li and Goldwasser 2021). Following this, other studies have aimed to
improve bias classification performance by embedding additional features. For example, Zhang et al. (2022) introduced a GNN architecture that leverages paragraph embeddings from pre-trained RoBERTa and proposed a method to
integrate external knowledge into the news text representations. On the other hand, Ko et al. (2023) proposed an
end-to-end hierarchical attention-based model that does not
rely on a pre-trained language model. They also introduced
a method to build and integrate embeddings from multiple
knowledge graphs, some of which are specifically designed
to reflect political knowledge. By combining these features,
prior models have achieved over 90% accuracy in classifying the biases of news articles into one of three categories
(left, center, or right), with the text-only model alone reaching nearly 85% accuracy.
Despite achieving high performance in document-level
news bias classification, there is a misalignment between
the task’s objective and the available dataset. Specifically,
the bias classification task aims to predict the bias of individual news articles, but these articles are labeled based on
the political bias of their source (i.e., the news outlet). As a
result, when an article is analyzed, the model tends to identify its source rather than analyze its semantic content. More
precisely, when trained on news articles with source-based
bias labels, the model tends to learn ‘cues’ that indicate their
sources rather than focusing on the more challenging task of
understanding the contextual semantics related to bias.
To address such challenges, we first conduct a thorough
analysis of the cues present in the dataset by applying an attribution method to the trained model. This analysis reveals

Significant efforts have been made to analyze the political
stance or bias in news articles, especially as political polarization intensifies over the years. Recent advancements in
machine learning have enabled researchers to develop various bias prediction models, which typically learn features not
only from the text of the news articles but also from external
knowledge. However, when training these models, the political bias label assigned to a news article is often based solely
on the news source which published it. This approach can be
problematic, as a news outlet with a particular political stance
might publish an article that reflects a different political perspective.
To address this issue, we first identify distinct text patterns
associated with specific news sources or publishers, that are
minimally relevant to predicting the political bias of a news
article. We then conduct comprehensive experiments to investigate (i) whether existing models trained to predict political
bias can also accurately predict the source, and (ii) whether
these models change their predictions when a distinct pattern
from a source with a different political stance is incorporated
into a news article. Our experimental results reveal that all
existing models tend to predict the source, even when trained
solely to predict bias. Based on these findings, we propose
a new deep learning model for political bias prediction that
avoids learning source-indicative patterns specific to a given
news source.

1

Introduction

With the recent rise in polarized news articles (Auburn 2023)
and the increasing polarization of traditional media (Roscini
2021), understanding the perspectives behind journalistic
texts has become crucial to avoiding one-sided news. Historically, people relied on a few media channels curated by
reporters and editors. Today, however, many turn to digital
platforms such as social media, search engines, and news
aggregators (Barthel et al. 2020). While the impact of these
online platforms on news consumption partisanship is debated (Kitchens, Johnson, and Gray 2020; Dubois and Blank
2018; Calice et al. 2023), classifying the political positions
* Corresponding Authors
†
The author has permanently moved to Department of Artificial
Intelligence, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27233

