The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ROUTER R ETRIEVER: Routing over a Mixture of Expert Embedding Models
Hyunji Lee1 * , Luca Soldaini2 , Arman Cohan2, 3 , Minjoon Seo1 , Kyle Lo2
1
KAIST AI
Allen Institute for AI
3
Yale University
hyunji.amy.lee@kaist.ac.kr, {lucas, kylel}@allenai.org
2

Abstract

Even employing multi-task training, which combines both
MSMARCO as well as domain-specific data, to improve
performance of the single model setup can be expensive
when considering the need for full model retraining whenever a new target retrieval domain emerges, and may not always preserve performance uniformly across all target domains (Wang et al. 2023; Lee et al. 2023). Research has
largely focused on improving the performance of these single model setups through data construction (Wang et al.
2021; Ma et al. 2020) and domain adaptation (Xin et al.
2021; Fang et al. 2024). But less attention has been paid
to what can be done if we afford ourselves to use multiple
specialized retrieval models.
In this work, we introduce ROUTER R ETRIEVER, a retrieval model that leverages a mixture of domain-specific
experts with a routing mechanism to select the most suitable
expert for each instance. ROUTER R ETRIEVER consists of a
shared base retrieval model and multiple LoRA (Hu et al.
2021) components which serves as experts for specific domains. During training, each expert is trained on a domainspecific dataset while sharing the same frozen base model.
Thus the expert component captures domain-specific knowledge and extracts embeddings tailored to the domain. At inference time, as shown in Figure 1, our routing method determines the most appropriate expert by calculating the average similarity between the query and a set of pilot embeddings representing each expert. The expert with the highest
similarity score is selected, and the corresponding domainspecific embedding is generated using the chosen expert.
ROUTER R ETRIEVER is lightweight, as it only requires the
training of a parameter-efficient LoRA module for each expert, resulting in a minimal increase in parameters. Additionally, ROUTER R ETRIEVER offers significant flexibility:
unlike maintaining a single model that requires retraining
when domains are added or removed, ROUTER R ETRIEVER
simply adds or removes experts without the need for further
training of the rest of the model.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of ROUTER R ETRIEVER
on the BEIR benchmark (Thakur et al. 2021) through a
series of experiments with various combinations of target
domains: First, ROUTER R ETRIEVER routing between only
domain-specific experts outperforms both training a single
model on the same dataset in a multi-task manner and training a single model on MSMARCO only. Second, we ob-

Information retrieval methods often rely on a single embedding model trained on large, general-domain datasets like
MSMARCO. While this approach can produce a retriever
with reasonable overall performance, they often underperform models trained on domain-specific data when testing on
their respective domains. Prior work in information retrieval
has tackled this through multi-task training, but the idea of
routing over a mixture of domain-specific expert retrievers
remains unexplored despite the popularity of such ideas in
language model generation research. In this work, we introduce ROUTER R ETRIEVER, a retrieval model that leverages a
mixture of domain-specific experts by using a routing mechanism to select the most appropriate expert for each query.
ROUTER R ETRIEVER is lightweight and allows easy addition
or removal of experts without additional training. Evaluation on the BEIR benchmark demonstrates that ROUTER R E TRIEVER outperforms both models trained on MSMARCO
(+2.1 absolute nDCG@10) and multi-task models (+3.2).
This is achieved by employing our routing mechanism, which
surpasses other routing techniques (+1.8 on average) commonly used in language modeling. Furthermore, the benefit
generalizes well to other datasets, even in the absence of a
specific expert on the dataset. ROUTER R ETRIEVER is the first
work to demonstrate the advantages of routing over a mixture
of domain-specific expert embedding models as an alternative to a single, general-purpose embedding model, especially
when retrieving from diverse, specialized domains.

Code — https://github.com/amy-hyunji/RouterRetriever
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02685

Introduction
Domain-specific retrievers have been shown to outperform general-purpose retrievers for specialized retrieval settings (Izacard et al. 2021; Bonifacio et al. 2022), even in
cases where domain-specific training data is only available
at a much smaller scale than general-domain datasets like
MSMARCO (Campos et al. 2016). Yet, developing and
maintaining separate retrieval systems for each specialized
retrieval domain can be costly compared to simply maintaining a single general-purpose MSMARCO-trained model.
* Work performed during internship at Ai2.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11995

