The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Topo2Seq: Enhanced Topology Reasoning via Topology Sequence Learning
Yiming Yang1,2 , Yueru Luo1,2 , Bingkun He3 , Erlong Li4 , Zhipeng Cao4 ,
Chao Zheng4 , Shuqi Mei4 , Zhen Li2,1 *
1

FNii-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
3
SCSE, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
4
T Lab, Tencent, Beijing, China
{yimingyang@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Extracting lane topology from perspective views (PV) is crucial for planning and control in autonomous driving. This approach extracts potential drivable trajectories for self-driving
vehicles without relying on high-definition (HD) maps. However, the unordered nature and weak long-range perception of
the DETR-like framework can result in misaligned segment
endpoints and limited topological prediction capabilities. Inspired by the learning of contextual relationships in language
models, the connectivity relations in roads can be characterized as explicit topology sequences. In this paper, we introduce Topo2Seq, a novel approach for enhancing topology reasoning via topology sequences learning. The core concept of
Topo2Seq is a randomized order prompt-to-sequence learning between lane segment decoder and topology sequence
decoder. The dual-decoder branches simultaneously learn the
lane topology sequences extracted from the Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG) and the lane graph containing geometric information. Randomized order prompt-to-sequence learning extracts unordered key points from the lane graph predicted by
the lane segment decoder, which are then fed into the prompt
design of the topology sequence decoder to reconstruct an ordered and complete lane graph. In this way, the lane segment
decoder learns powerful long-range perception and accurate
topological reasoning from the topology sequence decoder.
Notably, topology sequence decoder is only introduced during training and does not affect the inference efficiency. Experimental evaluations on the OpenLane-V2 dataset demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of Topo2Seq in topology reasoning.

Surrounding MultiView Images

Surrounding MultiView Images

PV-to-BEV
Encoder

PV-to-BEV
Encoder

Lane Segment
Decoder

q

Lane Segment
Decoder

q

Query

Weaknesses
• Limited long-range perception
• Increased repetition in predictions
• Endpoint misalignment
• Inaccurate topology reasoning
(a)

q

q

Topology Sequence
Decoder

Randomized Order
Prompt-to-Sequence
Learning

Query

yy
yy
yy

Sequence

Strengths
• Strong long-range perception
• High-confidence predictions
• Precise endpoint alignment
• Accurate topology reasoning
(b)

Figure 1: Comparison between previous methods (a)
and Topo2Seq (b). Due to the limited sampling positions for
each query in deformable-DETR and the unordered detection characteristics, existing methods exhibit several weaknesses. (b) Topo2Seq employs a prompt-to-sequence learning strategy, which enhances lane segment perception and
topology reasoning through topology sequence learning.

Introduction
In recent years, lane topology reasoning in autonomous driving has gained increasing attention (Li et al. 2023b, 2024;
Ma et al. 2024). This is because autonomous driving has
traditionally relied on offline HD maps to provide path information. However, road conditions can be uncertain and
challenging, and outdated offline HD maps can be disastrous
for autonomous vehicles (Liao et al. 2023a). Solely relying
on these maps is insufficient to meet the higher demands of
advanced autonomous driving, such as L4 and L5 levels.
To address these issues, autonomous vehicles need to perform lane topology reasoning, which involves perceiving

the surrounding road flow in real-time from panoramic images and extracting both the geometric positions of the centerlines and their topological relationships. Therefore, lane
topology reasoning is crucial for trajectory prediction and
planning in end-to-end autonomous driving (Can et al. 2021;
Wu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a).
Early works focused on the characterization of map elements. The semantic map learning approaches assign labels to each pixel to mark map elements (Li et al. 2022a;
Liu et al. 2023a,b). However, inconsistent semantic predictions and insufficient instance perception can cause confusion in the planning of autonomous driving systems. More-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9318

