The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CLIP-CID: Efficient CLIP Distillation via Cluster-Instance Discrimination
Kaicheng Yang1 * , Tiancheng Gu2 * , Xiang An1 , Haiqiang Jiang1 ,
Xiangzi Dai1 , Ziyong Feng1 , Weidong Cai2‡ , Jiankang Deng3‡
1

DeepGlint
University of Sydney
3
Imperial College
kaichengyang@deepglint.com
2

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) has
achieved excellent performance over a wide range of tasks.
However, the effectiveness of CLIP heavily relies on a
substantial corpus of pre-training data, resulting in notable
consumption of computational resources. Although knowledge distillation has been widely applied in single modality
models, how to efficiently expand knowledge distillation
to vision-language foundation models with extensive data
remains relatively unexplored. In this paper, we introduce
CLIP-CID, a novel distillation mechanism that effectively
transfers knowledge from a large vision-language foundation
model to a smaller model. We initially propose a simple
but efficient image semantic balance method to reduce
transfer learning bias and improve distillation efficiency.
This method filters out 43.7% of image-text pairs from the
LAION400M while maintaining superior performance. After
that, we leverage cluster-instance discrimination to facilitate
knowledge transfer from the teacher model to the student
model, thereby empowering the student model to acquire a
holistic semantic comprehension of the pre-training data.
Experimental results demonstrate that CLIP-CID achieves
state-of-the-art performance on various downstream tasks
including linear probe and zero-shot classification.

1

Figure 1: The linear probe performance comparison between
CLIP-CID and OPENCLIP across 14 common datasets. Despite the exclusion of 43.7% of image-text pairs from the
LAION400M, CLIP-CID exhibits exceptional performance.

Introduction

With the proliferation of mobile networks and social platforms, there has been an explosion in the production of
image-text pairs (Guo, Wang, and Wang 2019; Gu et al.
2024). This abundance of data has provided a strong
foundation for the advancement of vision-language pretraining (Radford et al. 2021; Jia et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2020; Yang, Xu, and Gao 2020). The Contrastive LanguageImage Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) achieves
remarkable success in multi-modal learning by aligning
image-text pairs on a large-scale dataset. It learns two separate unimodal encoders for image and text using a contrastive loss, one of the most effective losses for representation learning (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020; He
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Chopra, Hadsell, and LeCun 2005). Nevertheless, the efficacy of CLIP heavily

depends on an extensive pre-training dataset. The original CLIP models are pre-trained on 400 million imagetext pairs for 32 epochs, demanding thousands of GPU
days. This poses a substantial challenge in scenarios with
limited computational resources (Radenovic et al. 2023;
Yang et al. 2023). Recently, large-scale image-text datasets
crawled from websites, such as LAION400M (Schuhmann
et al. 2021) and LAION5B (Schuhmann et al. 2022), have
gained widespread usage in vision-language pre-taining.
DataComp (Gadre et al. 2024) consists of image-text pairs
extracted from Common Crawl’s web data and employs various strategies such as basic filtering, CLIP score filtering,
and text&image-based filtering. However, there is still a lot
of semantic repetition in the training data, which not only
has the potential to impact the performance of representation learning but also results in a waste of computational
resources (Radenovic et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023).
Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015) is proposed to enhance the performance of a small stu-

* Equal contribution.
‡

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21974

