The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Capture Global Feature Statistics for One-Shot Federated Learning
Zenghao Guan1, 2, 3 , Yucan Zhou1, 3 * , Xiaoyan Gu 1, 2, 3 *
2

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security Defense
zenghaoguan.cs@gmail.com, {zhouyucan, guxiaoyan}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

2024), as adversaries can refine their strategies by exploiting global model updates, compromising the learning process and model integrity.
To solve above challenges, one-shot FL, which restricts
the communication rounds between clients and the server
to a single iteration (Guha, Talwalkar, and Smith 2019),
has emerged as a promising solution. Existing one-shot FL
methods can be broadly divided into three categories: 1)
Knowledge distillation methods (Li, He, and Song 2021;
Zhang et al. 2022; Dai et al. 2024). 2) Generative methods
(Heinbaugh, Luz-Ricca, and Shao 2023; Yang et al. 2024a,
2023, 2024b). 3) Bayesian methods (Neiswanger, Wang, and
Xing 2013; Jhunjhunwala, Wang, and Joshi 2024; Hasan
et al. 2024). Knowledge distillation methods obtain global
models by distilling knowledge from an ensemble of client
models using auxiliary public data or synthetic data generated by the ensemble. However, these distillation steps impose a significant computational cost on the server and require careful hyperparameter tuning (Kurach et al. 2019).
Generative methods aim to train the global model on the
server by using synthetic samples that match the distribution of each client’s data. These approaches, though effective, brings about privacy concerns when the generated data
closely mimics the original client data in the server (Rao
et al. 2024; Carlini et al. 2023). Bayesian methods approximate each client’s posterior distribution and aggregate them
into a global model within a single communication round.
However, these methods face high computational and memory costs, and using approximations to reduce these costs
can lead to significant errors, compromising both calibration
and accuracy (Neiswanger, Wang, and Xing 2013; Hasan
et al. 2024). Moreover, both of these three kinds of methods
have poor performance and robustness when dealing with
non-IID (Independent and Identically Distributed) data.
Recently, FedPFT (Beitollahi et al. 2024) has been proposed to leverage pre-trained models to improve both the
accuracy and computation efficiency of one-shot FL. Specifically, each client uploads the Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) learned from class-conditional feature. Subsequently, the server trains a classifier using synthetic features generated from GMMs on the server. With competitive performance, low computation overhead and robustness to data heterogeneity, FedPFT (Beitollahi et al. 2024)
shows the feasibility of adapting the classifier with fixed

Traditional Federated Learning (FL) necessitates numerous
rounds of communication between the server and clients,
posing significant challenges including high communication costs, connection drop risks and susceptibility to privacy attacks. One-shot FL has become a compelling learning paradigm to overcome above drawbacks by enabling the
training of a global server model via a single communication round. However, existing one-shot FL methods suffer
from expensive computation cost on the server or clients
and cannot deal with non-IID (Independent and Identically
Distributed) data stably and effectively. To address these
challenges, this paper proposes FedCGS, a novel Federated
learning algorithm that Capture Global feature Statistics
leveraging pre-trained models. With global feature statistics,
we achieve training-free and heterogeneity-resistant one-shot
FL. Furthermore, we extend its application to personalization
scenario, where clients only need execute one extra communication round with server to download global statistics. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
our methods across diverse data-heterogeneity settings.

Code — https://github.com/Yuqin-G/FedCGS

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging framework that enables multiple parties to participate in collaborative learning
under the coordination of a central server, which aggregates
model updates rather than private data, enhancing privacy in
distributed learning (McMahan et al. 2017). However, typical FL requires numerous communication rounds between
the server and clients, leading to significant challenges. First,
clients must maintain constant connections with the server
to upload and receive updates, resulting in high communication costs and the risk of connection drops (Li et al. 2020b;
Kairouz et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023), which is unbearable
for bandwidth-limited or real-time FL applications. Second,
frequent communication increases the system’s vulnerability to data and model poisoning attacks (Mothukuri et al.
2021; Rao et al. 2024; Guan et al. 2024; Yazdinejad et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16942

