The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tuning-Free Accountable Intervention for LLM Deployment
- A Metacognitive Approach
Zhen Tan1 , Jie Peng2 , Song Wang3 , Lijie Hu4 , Tianlong Chen5 Huan Liu1 ,
1

Arizona State University
University of Science and Technology of China
3
University of Virginia
4
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
5
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
ztan36@asu.edu, pengjieb@mail.ustc.edu.cn, sw3wv@virginia.edu, lijie.hu@kaust.edu.sa, tianlong@cs.unc.edu,
2

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have brought significant advances across various NLP tasks through few-shot or zero-shot
prompting, bypassing the need for parameter tuning. However, the “black-box” nature behind their massive parameter sizes increases the “hallucination” concerns, especially
in high-stakes applications (e.g., healthcare), where decision
mistakes can lead to severe consequences. In contrast, human
decision-making relies on complex cognitive processes, such
as the ability to sense and adaptively correct mistakes through
conceptual understanding. Drawing inspiration from human
cognition, we propose an innovative metacognitive approach
CLEAR, to equip LLMs with capabilities for self-aware error identification and correction. Our framework constructs
concept-specific sparse subnetworks that indicate decision
processes. This provides a novel interface for model intervention after deployment. The benefits include: (i) at inference
time, our metacognitive LLMs can self-consciously identify
potential mispredictions with minimum human involvement,
(ii) the model can self-correct its errors efficiently without
additional tuning, and (iii) the correction procedure is not only
self-explanatory but also user-friendly, enhancing model interpretability and accessibility. With these metacognitive features,
our approach pioneers a new path toward trustworthy LLMs.
Appendix is given in the arxiv version.

Figure 1: Metacognitive LLMs are able to perceive concepts
to self-correct potential errors.

Code — https://github.com/Zhen-Tan-dmml/CLEAR.git.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed impressive achievements of
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Raffel et al. 2020; Zhou
et al. 2022; OpenAI 2023). However, LLMs could make
mistakes due to issues like “hallucination” (McKenna et al.
2023). Such vulnerabilities pose critical challenges for the
trustworthy deployment of LLMs in high-stakes settings
where errors can lead to severe consequences. For example, in LLM-assisted medical diagnoses (Monajatipoor et al.
2022), a single wrong diagnosis can inflict significant physical and financial harm to the patient.
Despite the significance of this issue, the current literature lacks an effective approach to LLM intervention after
deployment to fix errors. With few-shot or zero-shot prompting (Wei et al. 2022; OpenAI 2023), which recently has
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25237

shown promising results, users can directly query LLMs and
point out their mistakes using usually “hand-crafted” prompts.
While straightforward, the post-prompting performance of
this method remains uncertain. Moreover, it necessitates human expertise both for error identification and prompt design.
Another potential method is to fine-tune part of the parameters
in LLMs (e.g, the final layers) on incorrectly predicted examples (Hardt and Sun 2023). This method not only requires
costly human involvement but also risks model overfitting on
those examples and “catastrophic forgetting” of prior knowledge. Some initial work (Li et al. 2023) repeatedly performs
activation-level intervention on all examples for better performance, thus resulting in increased time complexity during
inference. Considering these issues, we identify three main
challenges for fixing LLM errors after deployment: ❶ The
“black-box” nature of LLMs makes it difficult to locate the
source of errors within model parameters, thereby impeding
targeted intervention. ❷ Correcting errors usually requires
domain experts, which limits scalability and automatic error correction.❸ The complexity and large parameter size of
LLMs render targeted intervention a prohibitive task.
In this paper, we argue that an ideal intervention should be
metacognitive, where LLMs are capable of self-aware error
identification and correction. This perspective is informed by
several key insights from cognitive science literature: (a) Cognitive Perception of Concepts - humans demonstrate the
ability to quickly identify and correct judgment errors by
recognizing essential features, or “concepts” (Malafouris
2013; Koh et al. 2020). This ability validates the efficiency
of human cognitive processes. (b) Neural Sparsity for Efficiency - building upon the notion of efficiency, the architecture of the human brain is insightful. The distribution of

