The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GTDE: Grouped Training with Decentralized Execution for Multi-agent
Actor-Critic
Mengxian Li1,2 , Qi Wang1,2 * , Yongjun Xu1,2
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
limengxian24b@ict.ac.cn, wangqi08@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

solely on the observation history of each individual agent
to make decisions. The decentralized policies also avoid the
issue of exponential growth in the action space as the number of agents increases, making a fully centralized policy
impractical for large-scale multi-agent systems. The decentralized policies can be learned through either Decentralized Training and Execution (DTDE) and Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) (Albrecht, Christianos, and Schäfer 2024).
DTDE utilizes a decentralized approach to simplify the
training of multi-agents by using a single-agent RL algorithm for each individual agent. However, this training
paradigm introduces two inevitable issues. Firstly, agents are
unable to leverage information from other agents in the environment, making cooperation difficult (Mguni et al. 2023).
Secondly, since each agent treats other agents as part of
the environment, they are affected by environmental nonstationary caused by updates in the policies of other agents
(Laurent, Matignon, and Fort-Piat 2011), which intensifies
with a larger number of agents.
CTDE uses a centralized approach to train decentralized policies (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Kraemer
and Banerjee 2016), allowing agents to utilize global information during training while effectively avoiding the nonstationarity of the environment. However, due to limitations
in partial observability, obtaining comprehensive global information is often infeasible. Fortunately, we can replace
global information with joint information. Despite this, as
the number of agents increases, three challenges remain.
Firstly, the use of joint information faces the curse of dimensionality (Oroojlooy and Hajinezhad 2023), which makes
it impossible to train in large-scale scenarios, such as the
Gather scenario with 495 agents (Terry, Black, and Jayakumar 2020). Secondly, in regions where agents have weak interaction, joint information may not offer significant benefits (Kok and Vlassis 2004), indicating potential information
redundancy. Thirdly, communication restrictions may prevent each agent from obtaining joint observations from all
other agents, which poses a challenge for CTDE paradigms
to train in real-world applications.
With an increasing number of agents, the aforementioned
two paradigms may no longer apply to the training of policies. To address the training problem of large-scale multiagent systems, we consider abstracting the information re-

The rapid advancement of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has given rise to diverse training paradigms to
learn the policies of each agent in the multi-agent system. The
paradigms of decentralized training and execution (DTDE)
and centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE)
have been proposed and widely applied. However, as the
number of agents increases, the inherent limitations of these
frameworks significantly degrade the performance metrics,
such as win rate, total reward, etc. To reduce the influence of
the increasing number of agents on the performance metrics,
we propose a novel training paradigm of grouped training
decentralized execution (GTDE). This framework eliminates
the need for a centralized module and relies solely on local
information, effectively meeting the training requirements of
large-scale multi-agent systems. Specifically, we first introduce an adaptive grouping module, which divides each agent
into different groups based on their observation history. To
implement end-to-end training, GTDE uses Gumbel-Sigmoid
for efficient point-to-point sampling on the grouping distribution while ensuring gradient backpropagation. To adapt to the
uncertainty in the number of members in a group, two methods are used to implement a group information aggregation
module that merges member information within the group.
Empirical results show that in a cooperative environment with
495 agents, GTDE increased the total reward by an average
of 382% compared to the baseline. In a competitive environment with 64 agents, GTDE achieved a 100% win rate against
the baseline.

Code — https://github.com/lemonsinx/GTDE

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning has recently made remarkable progress across diverse real-world applications,
such as multi-robot cooperative tasks (Krnjaic et al. 2022),
complex games (Silver et al. 2018; Vinyals et al. 2019),
computer network (Wang et al. 2022; Wang, Huang, and
Xu 2024), and autonomous driving (Zhou et al. 2022; Dinneweth et al. 2022). These scenarios are often constrained
by partial observability or limited communication, necessitating the use of decentralized policies. These policies rely
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18368

