The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bayesian Optimization for Unknown Cost-Varying Variable Subsets
w ith No-Regret Costs
Vu Viet Hoang 1 * , Quoc Anh Hoang Nguyen 1 * , Hung The Tran 2 * †
1

FPT Software AI Center
Hanoi University of Science and Technology
HoangVV18@fpt.com, AnhNQH1@fpt.com, Hungtt@soict.hust.edu.vn
2

Abstract

values deterministically may incur costs. This setting is
known as Bayesian Optimization with Cost-varying variable
subsets (BOCVS), as introduced in (Tay et al. 2023). The
aim is to identify optimal candidates for the objective function while minimizing incurred costs as much as possible.
Naturally, greater control over the query variables leads to
higher costs. Therefore, in each iteration, the learner must
balance between the set of controllable query variables and
the associated costs.
We give an illustrative example with the BOCVS setting.
Other concrete scenarios can be found in (Tay et al. 2023).
In the context of adaptive control for manufacturing systems (Kruger et al. 2011), the goal is to optimize the production process to maximize output quality while managing the associated costs of process adjustments. The operator must adjust various control parameters, such as machine
settings, temperature, and operational schedules, to enhance
production quality. However, these adjustments can incur
costs like energy consumption, maintenance or operating
costs. To mitigate these costs, the operator can selectively
modify certain control parameters while allowing others to
vary randomly within a controlled range. The primary challenge lies in the fact that the cost constraints are not fully
known or predictable, complicating the evaluation of the impact of randomized versus deterministic adjustments. These
costs are often uncertain because they depend on fluctuating
factors such as labor, or machine conditions. The operator
must strike a balance between managing the risk of high,
unknown costs and maintaining acceptable production quality.
To the best of our knowledge, UCB-CVS (Tay et al. 2023)
is the first and only work that addresses this problem precisely. While UCB-CVS has shown promising theoretical
and empirical results, there are some drawbacks. Firstly, the
definition of their objective function focuses solely on finding the optimal solution and neglects the cost constraints.
To incorporate cost constraints, the authors introduced the
cost-varying cumulative regret, a cost-weighted version of
the regular cumulative regret. While it can be proven that
UCB-CVS achieves sublinear cost-varying cumulative regret, it is unclear whether it minimizes the total cost. For
example, if there exists two control sets with similar performance while the cost is significantly difference, the sublinear rate for cost-varying regret stated in Theorem 4.1 (Tay

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a widely-used method for
optimizing expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions. Traditional BO assumes that the learner has full control over
all query variables without additional constraints. However,
in many real-world scenarios, controlling certain query variables may incur costs. Therefore, the learner needs to balance the selection of informative subsets for targeted learning against leaving some variables to be randomly sampled
to minimize costs. This problem is known as Bayesian Optimization with cost-varying variable subsets (BOCVS). While
the goal of BOCVS is to identify the optimal solution with
minimal cost, previous works have only guaranteed finding
the optimal solution without considering the total costs incurred. Moreover, these works assume precise knowledge of
the cost for each subset, which is often unrealistic. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm for the extension of the
BOCVS problem with random and unknown costs that separates the process into exploration and exploitation phases.
The exploration phase will filter out low-quality variable subsets, while the exploitation phase will leverage high-quality
ones. Furthermore, we theoretically demonstrate that our algorithm achieves a sub-linear rate in both quality regret and
cost regret, addressing the objective of the BOCVS problem
more effectively than previous analyses. Finally, we show
that our proposed algorithm outperforms comparable baselines across a wide range of benchmarks.

Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a powerful technique designed for the sample-efficient optimization of expensiveto-evaluate black-box objective functions. It has been effectively used in various important experimental design
problems, such as hyperparameter optimization (Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012), chemical synthesis (Shields
et al. 2021), and particle accelerator control (Kirschner et al.
2022). Typically, BO has access to all query variables of
the objective function, allowing it to re-evaluate any variable
without additional hamper. However, in many practical situations, not all query variables can be easily modified. Some
variables may follow specific distributions, and altering their
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27000

