The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CTD4 - a Deep Continuous Distributional Actor-Critic Agent
with a Kalman Fusion of Multiple Critics
David Valencia1 , Henry Williams1 , Yuning Xing1 ,
Trevor Gee1 , Bruce A MacDonald1 , Minas Liarokapis 2
1

Centre for Automation and Robotic Engineering Science, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
2
New Dexterity Lab, Auckland, New Zealand
{dval035, yxin683}@aucklanduni.ac.nz, {henry.williams, t.gee, b.macdonald, minas.liarokapis}@auckland.ac.nz
Abstract

Therefore, better and more stable approximations of the Qfunction are needed.
Distributional RL presents the capability to learn a better approximation of the Q-function as a complete distribution as well as the intrinsic behaviours and randomness associated with the environment and the policy. By learning a
distribution of the returns rather than its expectations, policies can be learned more efficiently and achieve higher performance (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017; Choi, Lee,
and Oh 2019).
The works of (Lyle, Bellemare, and Castro 2019), (Rowland et al. 2018), (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017;
Choi, Lee, and Oh 2019) are examples of related literature that use distributions in RL for discrete control problems, where the output of the Q-function approximator is
a categorical distribution. This type of distribution is usually highly dependent on several hyperparameters, such as
the number of categories or bounding values. Furthermore,
to get acceptable performance and reduce the approximation
error, task-specific knowledge with additional steps such as
projections, truncations, or auxiliary predictions are needed
(Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017). Although the results
may outperform traditional deterministic RL approaches,
computing and training on categorical distributions are often complex.
Likewise, either in traditional RL or distributional RL, the
overestimation bias is one of the primary obstacles to accurate policy learning. When estimating a Q-function, an overestimation is inevitable due to the imperfect nature of the
estimator. That is, the approximation may be significantly
higher than the actual value. Prior studies addressed this
problem through an ensemble of various Q-approximators
in multiple ways.
For example, (Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018) and
(Lan et al. 2020) address overestimation in control problems
by utilizing minimum values from multiple network approximations. Similarly, (Kuznetsov et al. 2020) and (Chen
et al. 2021) enhance Q estimation stability through ensemble
learning and averaging techniques.
We argue that taking the minimum value among the Q approximations is not the best option since the opposite effect
of overestimation could happen, i.e. underestimation, ending up in discouragement of exploration (Lan et al. 2020).
Additionally, using the minimum value among the approx-

Categorical Distributional Reinforcement Learning (CDRL)
has demonstrated superior sample efficiency in learning complex tasks compared to conventional Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches. However, the practical application of
CDRL is encumbered by challenging projection steps, detailed parameter tuning, and domain knowledge. This paper
addresses these challenges by introducing a pioneering Continuous Distributional Model-Free RL algorithm tailored for
continuous action spaces. The proposed algorithm simplifies
the implementation of distributional RL, adopting an actorcritic architecture wherein the critic outputs a continuous
probability distribution. Additionally, we propose an ensemble of multiple critics fused through a Kalman fusion mechanism to mitigate overestimation bias. Through a series of experiments, we validate that our proposed method provides a
sample-efficient solution for executing complex continuouscontrol tasks.

Introduction
The real world has a stochastic nature characterized by different levels of uncertainty that are complex to model or
predict with deterministic systems. Thus, the adoption of
stochastic strategies becomes imperative to obtain accurate
information on environmental dynamics. This necessity is
particularly important in RL, where an intelligent agent is
tasked with learning effective behaviours in the presence of
noisy, stochastic environments. In addressing this challenge,
Distributional RL emerges as a viable solution, offering a
framework to navigate the stochastic nature of the world effectively, an aspect that traditional RL methods struggle to
handle directly.
Currently, most of the state-of-the-art RL algorithms use
the expectations of returns Qπ (as a scalar value) for each
action-state pair following a policy π (Fujimoto, Hoof, and
Meger 2018; Schulman et al. 2017; Haarnoja et al. 2018).
RL requires an accurate approximation of the Q-function
to guarantee sample efficiency and stability. An adequate
approximation is essential to calculate the Temporal Difference (TD) error or action selection, whether in policybased or value-based approaches (Kuznetsov et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20956

