The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sequence Accumulation and Beyond:
Infinite Context Length on Single GPU and Large Clusters
Weigao Sun1 * , Yongtuo Liu2 , Xiaqiang Tang3 , Xiaoyu Mo4 *
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory
University of Amsterdam
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Nanyang Technological University
sunweigao@outlook.com, y.liu6@uva.nl, xtang771@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, xiaoyu006@e.ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Linear sequence modeling methods, such as linear attention,
state space modeling, and linear RNNs, have recently been
recognized as potential alternatives to softmax attention thanks
to their linear complexity and competitive performance. However, although their linear-memory advantage during training
enables dealing with long sequences, it is still hard to handle
extremely long sequences with very limited computational
resources. In this paper, we propose Sequence Accumulation
(SA) which leverages the common recurrence feature of linear
sequence modeling methods to manage infinite context length
even on a single GPU. Specifically, SA divides long input
sequences into fixed-length sub-sequences and accumulates
intermediate states sequentially, which reaches only constantmemory consumption. Additionally, we further propose Sequence Accumulation with Pipeline Parallelism (SAPP), to
train large models with infinite context length, without incurring any additional synchronization costs in the sequence
dimension. Extensive experiments with a wide range of context lengths are conducted to validate the effectiveness of SA
and SAPP on both single and multiple GPUs. Results show
that SA and SAPP enable the training of infinite context length
on even very limited resources, and are well compatible with
the out-of-the-box distributed training techniques.

Introduction
The attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017; Qu et al.
2024) is recognized as a crucial component for effective
sequence modeling. However, softmax attention has a complexity that grows quadratically with context length, making
it inherently costly. Although recent advancements (Dao et al.
2022; Dao 2023; Shah et al. 2024) have enabled the scaling
of softmax attention to longer sequences by optimizing intermediate computations for hardware, these approaches still
necessitate the storage of key and value vectors. Managing
this "KV cache" can become cumbersome when dealing with
extremely long sequences.
Meanwhile, linear sequence modeling techniques, such as
linear attention (Katharopoulos et al. 2020; Qin et al. 2022a;
Yang et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2024c; Shen et al. 2024), state
space modeling (SSM) (Gu and Dao 2023; Dao and Gu
2024), and linear RNNs (Peng et al. 2023, 2024; Qin et al.
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20725

2024d), have recently emerged as compelling alternatives to
the conventional softmax-attention-based transformer architecture. These approaches are characterized by their linear
complexity in both training computation and memory usage,
which also eliminates the need for the KV cache, allowing for
constant-memory inference. Although these methods originate from different technical backgrounds, recent works (Qin
et al. 2024a; Yang et al. 2024) underscore the commonalities
among these models, leading to the development of common techniques that boost the efficiency of linear sequence
modeling methods.
Although the linear sequence modeling methods show
the advantages of linear complexity and competitive performance, they still face challenges when modeling extremely
long sequences with limited GPU resources. This is due to
their linear-memory complexity with respect to the context
length during training. To model extremely long sequences,
previous methods rely on sequence or context parallelism
techniques. However, sequence or context parallelism does
not change the linear-memory complexity of linear sequence
models, which also requires a lot more GPU resources and
introduces heavy communication overheads.
In the paper, we propose Sequence Accumulation (SA)
for linear sequence modeling methods to achieve constantmemory training. In this way, SA can enable infinite context length modeling even on a single GPU. Specifically,
SA works by dividing a long input sequence into multiple
sub-sequences (abbreviated as sub-seqs) and sequentially accumulating the intermediate states from each sub-seq into
a single state. SA offers a distinct advantage when training
with extremely long context lengths on limited computational
resources. Additionally, we further propose Sequence Accumulation with Pipeline Parallelism (SAPP) to integrate SA
with PP for training large models with infinite context length.
SAPP accumulates intermediate states across model partitions on different devices without incurring any additional
synchronization costs in the sequence dimension.
Through experiments conducted both on a single GPU and
across multiple GPUs, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
SA and SAPP on managing extremely long context lengths.
Additionally, we evaluate the compatibility of SAPP with
other parallel training strategies such as data parallelism (DP),
tensor parallelism (TP), and context parallelism (CP), on a
cluster with multiple nodes. The key contributions of this

