The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S3 C -M ATH: Spontaneous Step-Level Self-Correction Makes Large Language
Models Better Mathematical Reasoners
Yuchen Yan1,2 * , Jin Jiang2,3 , Yang Liu2 , Yixin Cao4 , Xin Xu2,5
Mengdi Zhang2 , Xunliang Cai2 , Jian Shao1†
1

Zhejiang University
2
Meituan Group
3
Peking University
4
Fudan University
5
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yanyuchen, jshao}@zju.edu.cn
Q: Jane eats three eggs for breakfast every morning and bakes
muffins with four. How many eggs do she need per week?

Abstract
Self-correction is a novel method that can stimulate the potential reasoning abilities of large language models (LLMs).
It involves detecting and correcting errors during the inference process when LLMs solve reasoning problems. However, recent works do not regard self-correction as a spontaneous and intrinsic capability of LLMs. Instead, such correction is achieved through post-hoc generation, external
knowledge introduction, multi-model collaboration, and similar techniques. In this paper, we propose a series of mathematical LLMs called S3 C -M ATH, which are able to perform
Spontaneous Step-level Self-correction for Mathematical
reasoning. This capability helps LLMs to recognize whether
their ongoing inference tends to contain errors and simultaneously correct these errors to produce a more reliable response.
We proposed a method, which employs a step-level sampling approach to construct step-wise self-correction data for
achieving such ability. Additionally, we implement a training
strategy that uses above constructed data to equip LLMs with
spontaneous step-level self-correction capacities. Our data
and methods have been demonstrated to be effective across
various foundation LLMs, consistently showing significant
progress in evaluations on GSM8K, MATH, and other mathematical benchmarks. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to introduce the spontaneous step-level self-correction
ability of LLMs in mathematical reasoning.

She eat 3+4=6 eggs
per day. So she eats
6*7=42 eggs per week

🤖
She eat
3+4=6 eggs
per day.
🧑🏫

🤖

🧑🏫
There is a
mistake in
your first step.🙁

She eat
🧑🏫

Wrong🙁

3+4=7 eggs
per day.
🧑🏫

🤖

Correct😃

She eat 3+4=7 eggs
per day. So she eats
7*7=49 eggs per
week

🤖

(a)

She eat 3+4=7 eggs
per day. So she eats
7*7=49 eggs per
week

🤖

(b)

She eat 3+4=6 eggs per day. Oh, I found a
mistake 🙁. She eats 3+4=7 per day😃 . So
she eats7*7=49 eggs per week.

🤖

(c)

Figure 1: Different ways to implement self-correction. (a)
Using more capable LLMs like GPT4 or a trained model to
generate the feedback; (b) Apply such process at the steplevel; (c) Our work, the LLMs spontaneously identify errors
in their output and correct them immediately. Red text denotes the wrong step, and green text denotes the content after correction.

Introduction
thought (CoT) inference (Wei et al. 2023) has been proven to
be a method that can significantly enhance an LLM’s ability
to solve reasoning problems (Suzgun et al. 2022; Wang and
Zhou 2024). CoT induces the model to explicitly output the
reasoning process, gradually deriving a series of intermediate processes or sub-goals, thereby enabling the model to
correctly answer reasoning questions. However, during the
step-by-step reasoning process, an LLM may still generate
errors (Chen et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024). These errors can
be propagated to subsequent reasoning processes, leading to
incorrect outputs from the LLMs.
To alleviate potential errors that may occur during model
reasoning, self-correction methods have been proposed.
These methods can check whether the model makes mis-

Reasoning is one of the essential foundational abilities of
large language models (LLMs), showing the capacity of
LLMs to tackle complex real-world problems. Nowadays,
researchers are increasingly focusing on the performance of
LLMs in specific reasoning tasks like mathematics, code,
logic, common-sense, etc. (Sun et al. 2024). Mathematics
is one of the significant branches of reasoning ability of
LLMs, and solving a mathematical problem can demonstrate an LLM’s ability to decompose, reason, and summarize complex problems. In recent works, the chain-of* Contribution during internship at Meituan Group.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25588

