The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Algebraic Notion of Conditional Independence, and Its Application to
Knowledge Representation
Jesse Heyninck
Open Universiteit, the Netherlands
University of Cape Town, South-Africa
jesse.heyninck@ou.nl

Abstract

define and investigate the same concept for different formalisms. In recent years, a promising framework for such
language-independent investigations is the algebraic approximation fixpoint theory (AFT) (Denecker, Marek, and
Truszczyński 2003), which conceives of KR-formalisms
as operators over a lattice (such as the immediate consequence operator from logic programming). AFT can represent a wide variety of KR-formalisms; such as propositional
logic programming (Denecker, Bruynooghe, and Vennekens
2012; Heyninck 2024b; Heyninck and Bogaerts 2023a),
default logic (Denecker, Marek, and Truszczyński 2003),
autoepistemic logic (Denecker, Marek, and Truszczyński
2003), abstract argumentation and abstract dialectical frameworks (Strass 2013), hybrid MKNF (Liu and You 2022) and
SHACL (Bogaerts and Jakubowski 2021), and was shown
to be fruitful for language-independent studies of concepts
such as splitting (Vennekens, Gilis, and Denecker 2006), or
non-determinism (Heyninck, Arieli, and Bogaerts 2022).
In this paper, we give an algebraic, operator-based account of conditional independence. In more detail, the paper
makes the following contributions:
(1) Definition of conditional independence in an operatorbased, algebraic framework, providing a notion applicabble
to any formalism that admits an operator-based characterization, such as the ones mentioned above.
(2) Proof of crucial properties about conditional independence, including that search for fixpoints of an (approximation) operator over conditionally indepedent modules.
(3) Fixed-parameter tractability results based on conditional
independence.
(4) A proof-of-concept application to normal logic programs
under various semantics.
(5) Establish connections with existing work on conditional
independence in KR.
Outline of the Paper: The necessary preliminaries on logic
programming (Section 2.1), lattices (Section 2.2) and approximation fixpoint theory (Section 2.3) are introduced in
Section 2. The concept of conditional independence of sublattices w.r.t. an operator is introduced and studied in Section 3, and applied to approximation operators in Section 4.
Fixed-parameter complexity results are shown in Section 5.
This theory is applied to the semantics of normal logic programs in Section 6. Related work is discussed in Section 7,
after which the paper is concluded (Section 8).

Conditional independence is a crucial concept supporting adequate modelling and efficient reasoning in probabilistics. In
knowledge representation, the idea of conditional independence has also been introduced for specific formalisms, such
as propositional logic and belief revision. In this paper, the
notion of conditional independence is studied in the algebraic framework of approximation fixpoint theory. This gives
a language-independent account of conditional independence
that can be straightforwardly applied to any logic with fixpoint semantics. It is shown how this notion allows to reduce
global reasoning to parallel instances of local reasoning, leading to fixed-parameter tractability results. Furthermore, relations to existing notions of conditional independence are discussed and the framework is applied to normal logic programming.

1

Introduction

Over the last decades, conditional independence was shown
to be a crucial concept supporting adequate modelling
and efficient reasoning in probabilistics (Pearl, Geiger, and
Verma 1989). It is the fundamental concept underlying
network-based reasoning in probabilistics, which has been
arguably one of the most important factors in the rise of
contemporary artificial intelligence. Even though many reasoning tasks on the basis of probabilistic information have
a high worst-case complexity due to their semantic nature,
network-based models allow an efficient computation of
many concrete instances of these reasoning tasks thanks to
local reasoning techniques. Therefore, conditional independence has also been investigated for several approaches in
knowledge representation, such as propositional logic (Darwiche 1997; Lang, Liberatore, and Marquis 2002), belief revision (Kern-Isberner, Heyninck, and Beierle 2022; Lynn,
Delgrande, and Peppas 2022) and conditional logics (Heyninck et al. 2023). For many other central formalisms in KR,
such a study has not yet been undertaken.
Due to the wide variety of formalisms studied in knowledge representation, it is often beneficial yet challenging
to study a concept in a language-independent manner. Indeed, such language-independent studies avoid having to
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14967

