The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training-Free and Hardware-Friendly Acceleration for Diffusion Models
via Similarity-based Token Pruning
Evelyn Zhang1 , Jiayi Tang2 , Xuefei Ning3 , Linfeng Zhang1 *
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
zhanglinfeng@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Zhao et al. 2024), pruning (Li et al. 2023), and distillation (Kim et al. 2023a) methods have been utilized to compress the denoising network in the diffusion models. These
methods focus on eliminating the computational redundancy
in the sampling process and the parameter space. However,
the size of the input data for diffusion models, which is also
an important contributor to the computation complexity, still
has not been well-studied in previous works.
Token reduction, which aims to reduce the size of the input data, has shown great acceleration performance in classification models (Kim et al. 2024). For image generation,
ToMeSD (Bolya and Hoffman 2023) and AT-EDM (Wang
et al. 2024) are two pioneering works that focus on merging
and pruning the redundant tokens, respectively. However,
ToMeSD is a direct application of traditional token reduction methods (Bolya et al. 2022) for classification and does
not consider the property for diffusion models and generative tasks. AT-EDM, which leverages the graph algorithm to
select the redundant tokens, has uncontrolled converge time,
is unfriendly to hardware, and does not support batch-wise
computation, making it not practical in real-world applications. The problems of previous methods introduce our target: performing high-ratio token reduction while preserving
the generation quality, by using low-cost, hardware-friendly,
and training-free operations.
To this end, we start by analyzing the difference between
token reduction for classification and generation and find
that their major difference is that the pruned tokens in generative tasks are required to be recovered. Different from
the classification task where only one or several class tokens
are utilized for the final prediction, all the tokens in generative tasks are indispensable since each token corresponds
to each patch in the image, which raises the requirement of
pruned token recovery. Specifically, in generative tasks, after
pruning the redundant tokens in the input data and feeding
the unpruned tokens to the neural layers, we have to recover
these pruned tokens by copying their most similar unpruned
tokens. The recovery error between the real computation results and the recovered results on the pruned tokens represents the error introduced by token pruning.
To minimize the recovery errors, we propose Similaritybased Token pruning (SiTo), which aims to maximize the
similarity between the pruned tokens and the tokens used to
recover them. Specifically, SiTo has a three-stage pipeline.

The excellent performance of diffusion models in image
generation is always accompanied by overlarge computation costs, which have prevented the application of diffusion
models in edge devices and interactive applications. Previous
works mainly focus on using fewer sampling steps and compressing the denoising network of diffusion models, while
this paper proposes to accelerate diffusion models by introducing SiTo, a similarity-based token pruning method that
adaptive prunes the redundant tokens in the input data. SiTo
is designed to maximize the similarity between model prediction with and without token pruning by using cheap and
hardware-friendly operations, leading to significant acceleration ratios without performance drop, and even sometimes
improvements in the generation quality. For instance, the
zero-shot evaluation shows SiTo leads to 1.90x and 1.75x acceleration on COCO30K and ImageNet with 1.33 and 1.15
FID reduction at the same time. Besides, SiTo has no training requirements and does not require any calibration data,
making it plug-and-play in real-world applications.

Code — https://github.com/EvelynZhang-epiclab/SiTo

Introduction
Diffusion models (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020) have led significant breakthroughs in content generation in the last several years, which boost diverse
downstream applications such as image-to-image translation (Choi et al. 2021; Saharia et al. 2022a), text-to-image
generation (Saharia et al. 2022b; Rombach et al. 2022;
Podell et al. 2023), text-to-video generation (Ho et al. 2022;
Luo et al. 2023), image editing (Avrahami, Lischinski, and
Fried 2022; Kawar et al. 2023). However, most diffusion
models contain a huge number of parameters in the denoising network and require multiple timesteps in the sampling
period, significantly increasing their computation costs and
making them unaffordable in real-world applications.
Abundant recent works have been introduced to accelerate
the sampling of diffusion models. For instance, step distillation and fast sampling methods such as DDIM (Song, Meng,
and Ermon 2020) have been introduced to reduce the number of sampling steps. Quantization (Shang et al. 2023a,b;
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9878

