The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Graph Agent Network: Empowering Nodes with Inference Capabilities for
Adversarial Resilience
Ao Liu1 , Wenshan Li2 * , Tao Li1 , Beibei Li1 , Guangquan Xu3,4 ,
Pan Zhou5 , Wengang Ma1 , Hanyuan Huang1
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Chengdu University of Information Technology
3
College of Information Science and Technology, Shihezi University
4
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Advanced Networking (TANK), College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
5
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{aliu, litao, libeibei, mawengang941206}@scu.edu.cn, helenali@cuit.edu.cn, losin@tju.edu.cn, panzhou@hust.edu.cn,
huanghanyuan@stu.scu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
perturb

End-to-end training with global optimization have popularized graph neural networks (GNNs) for node classification, yet inadvertently introduced vulnerabilities to adversarial edge-perturbing attacks. Adversaries can exploit the inherent opened interfaces of GNNs’ input and output, perturbing
critical edges and thus manipulating the classification results.
Current defenses, due to their persistent utilization of globaloptimization-based end-to-end training schemes, inherently
encapsulate the vulnerabilities of GNNs. This is specifically
evidenced in their inability to defend against targeted secondary attacks. In this paper, we propose the Graph Agent
Network (GAgN) to address the aforementioned vulnerabilities of GNNs. GAgN is a graph-structured agent network
in which each node is designed as an 1-hop-view agent.
Through the decentralized interactions between agents, they
can learn to infer global perceptions to perform tasks including inferring embeddings, degrees and neighbor relationships for given nodes. This empowers nodes to filtering adversarial edges while carrying out classification tasks.
Furthermore, agents’ limited view prevents malicious messages from propagating globally in GAgN, thereby resisting
global-optimization-based secondary attacks. We prove that
single-hidden-layer multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) are theoretically sufficient to achieve these functionalities. Experimental results show that GAgN effectively implements all
its intended capabilities and, compared to state-of-the-art defenses, achieves optimal classification accuracy on the perturbed datasets.

manipulate

perturb

Adversary

Filter

GNN

Poisoned Graph

Output
labels

Graph Agent Network

Output
labels

Figure 1: The principle of adversary exploiting the vulnerabilities caused by global optimization to attack GNNs, and
the defense mechanism of GAgN against these attacks.

to adversarial edge-perturbing attacks. These vulnerabilities
arise from GNNs exposing a global end-to-end training interface, which while allowing for precise classification, also
provides adversaries with opportunities to attack GNNs.
In response to the edge-perturbing attacks, existing defense mechanisms primarily rely on global-optimizationbased defense methods (Sun et al. 2022). Their objective
is to enhance the robustness of GNNs through adversarial
training (Feng et al. 2019), aiming to increase the tolerant
ability of perturbations to defend against potential adversarial perturbations. These approaches may still inherit some
inherent vulnerabilities of GNNs, as their model frameworks
still follow the global-optimization pattern of GNNs. Representative examples include: (1) RGCN (Zhu et al. 2019)
replaces the hidden representations of nodes in each graph
convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017) layer
to the Gaussian distributions, to further absorb the effects of
adversarial changes. (2) GCN-SVD (Entezari et al. 2020)
combines a singular value decomposition (SVD) filter prior
to GCN to eliminate adversarial edges in the training set. (3)
STABLE (Li et al. 2022) reforms the forward propagation of
GCN by adding functions that randomly recover the roughly
removed edges. Unfortunately, the computational universality of GNNs has been recently demonstrated (Loukas 2019),
signifying that attributed graphs can be classified into any
given label space, even those subject to malicious manipulation. This implies that defense approaches focused on en-

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.06909

1

Adversary

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have become state-of-theart models for node classification tasks by leveraging endto-end global training paradigms to effectively learn and extract information from graph-structured data (Hamilton et al.
2017). However, this approach has also inadvertently introduced inherent vulnerabilities, making GNNs vulnerable
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18746

