The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generating Traffic Scenarios via In-Context Learning
to Learn Better Motion Planner
Aizierjiang Aiersilan
University of Macau
ezharjan@outlook.com

Abstract

plexities of modern trajectory prediction scenarios involving both AVs and non-AVs, our custom virtual dataset, generated using our framework “AutoSceneGen”, produces improved prediction results. Most importantly, generating and
synthesizing data using our prompt-based, configurable, and
AI-driven AutoSceneGen framework is more cost-effective
and efficient than collecting real-world datasets such as Argoverse2 (Wilson et al. 2023), Waymo (Ettinger et al. 2021),
Round (Krajewski et al. 2020), Ind (Bock et al. 2020),
nuScenes (Caesar et al. 2020), Argoverse (Chang et al.
2019), Highd (Krajewski et al. 2018), and ApolloScapes.
Our framework automatically generates datasets with realworld features and provides easy control over dataset heterogeneity through scenario descriptions, especially for safetycritical scenarios.

Motion planning is a crucial component in autonomous driving. State-of-the-art motion planners are trained on meticulously curated datasets, which are not only expensive to annotate but also insufficient in capturing rarely seen critical
scenarios. Failing to account for such scenarios poses a significant risk to motion planners and may lead to incidents during testing. An intuitive solution is to manually compose such
scenarios by programming and executing a simulator (e.g.,
CARLA). However, this approach incurs substantial human
costs. Motivated by this, we propose an inexpensive method
for generating diverse critical traffic scenarios to train more
robust motion planners. First, we represent traffic scenarios as
scripts, which are then used by the simulator to generate traffic scenarios. Next, we develop a method that accepts userspecified text descriptions, which a Large Language Model
translates into scripts using in-context learning. The output
scripts are sent to the simulator that produces the corresponding traffic scenarios. As our method can generate abundant safety-critical traffic scenarios, we use them as synthetic
training data for motion planners. To demonstrate the value
of generated scenarios, we train existing motion planners on
our synthetic data, real-world datasets, and a combination of
both. Our experiments show that motion planners trained with
our data significantly outperform those trained solely on realworld data, showing the usefulness of our synthetic data and
the effectiveness of our data generation method.

Status quo. Despite the challenges and inefficiencies in
the testing phase of AVs, significant progress has been made
in optimizing the testing of individual modules, such as
motion planners. However, most efforts have focused on
evaluating trajectory prediction models in simulation environments (Shet et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023). While simulations reduce testing costs related to budget and safety, creating realistic and logically specific scenarios often requires
substantial human effort, though still less than testing AVs
on real roads. Additionally, safety evaluation is typically
performed module-by-module, demanding considerable resources to create safety-critical scenarios within simulators.
Scenario-based evaluation methods have largely focused on
coverage, unsafe scenarios, and indicator-estimation tests
(Jesenski et al. 2019; Amersbach and Winner 2019). Recent advancements in scenario generation prioritize datadriven methods (Sun et al. 2024), with generative models
trained on domain-specific data for traffic scenario generation (Tan et al. 2023). However, these methods struggle
with low-resource scenarios, such as corner cases and accidents, due to limited data availability. There is a clear
need for a universal, general, and budget-conscious framework that enhances traffic scenario heterogeneity automatically through scenario descriptions. This would expedite
the simulation and testing process. While advanced AI tools,
like large language models (LLMs), show promise, they often require extensive post-processing to correct inaccuracies
or generate overly generic results. Our framework addresses
these issues by automating complex scenario generation in

Code — https://ezharjan.github.io/AutoSceneGen

Introduction
Efficiently evaluating autonomous vehicles (AVs) under diverse real-world challenges on a limited budget is crucial
for ensuring their safety and sustaining long-term growth
in the AV industry. While existing works on vehicle or
pedestrian trajectory prediction, such as TrafficPredict (Ma
et al. 2019), Pishgu (Alinezhad Noghre et al. 2023), TraPHic
(Chandra et al. 2019), and MSRL (Wu et al. 2023), rely on
real-world datasets like ApolloScapes (Huang et al. 2018),
NGSIM (Kovvali, Alexiadis, and Zhang PE 2007), UCY
(Lerner, Chrysanthou, and Lischinski 2007), and ETH (Pellegrini et al. 2009), which may not fully capture the comCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14539

