The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TGLsta : Low-resource Textual Graph Learning with Semantic
and Topological Awareness via LLMs
Qin Zhang1 , Xiaowei Li1* , Ziqi Liu1 * , Xiaochen Fan2 , Xiaojun Chen1 , Shirui Pan3 †
1

2

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
Institute for Electronics and Information Technology in Tianjin, Tsinghua University, China
3
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Australia.
{qinzhang, xjchen}@szu.edu.cn, {lixiaowei2022, liuziqi2022}@email.szu.edu.cn,
fanxiaochen33@gmail.com, s.pan@griffith.edu.au
Abstract

For textual graph learning, where the data is constructed
by phrases, sentences or documents and their relations, the
goal is to learn both the structure modality (topological information) and the textual description (semantic information). Recent advances in textual graph learning (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Zhang et al. 2024a; Fang
et al. 2024) have achieved remarkable success with adequate
high-quality labels. The common routine follows a “pretrain, fine-tune” framework, which utilizes large amounts of
unlabeled data and self-supervised training strategies to obtain a pre-trained GNN. The fine-tuning phase is performed
in downstream tasks with a certain amount of labeled data.
Natural language is inherently characterized by open vocabulary and free-form expression (He et al. 2023). This fundamental characteristic poses significant challenges for textual graph labeling, making it both resource-intensive and
time-consuming. Consequently, low-resource classification
approaches, which operate with minimal or no labeled samples, have emerged as promising alternatives. Besides, the
pre-trained model tends to overfit the few-shot labeled data
in many low-resource scenarios. This has led to a proliferation of studies in the field of low-resource textual graph
learning, which aims to learn fast-adaptable GNNs for unseen tasks with extremely scarce labeled samples.
To effectively solve the low-resource textual graph learning problem, previous approaches generally fall into two
categories (Ju et al. 2023; Liang et al. 2024; Liu et al.
2024a). Methods in the first category (Wang et al. 2021b;
Lu et al. 2022; Ju et al. 2023; Liang et al. 2024) primarily employ meta-learning strategies, and focus on extracting transferable knowledge from source classes with abundant labeled data by subsequently adapting this knowledge
to target classes. They usually assume that the nodes in the
meta-training classes are gold-labeled, which is insatiable in
many real-world applications. Besides, most existing methods (Chen et al. 2019; Huang and Zitnik 2020; Sun, Zhou,
and Zong 2021; Zhang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022) focus
on task generalization within a single graph, or rely on simplified text representations (You et al. 2020; Hou et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2024b), such as skip-gram or bag-of-words, which
fail to capture complex semantics, especially sophisticated
relationships and contextual dependencies.
Methods in the other category primarily strive to leverage

Textual Graphs (TGs) present a graph-based representation of
textual data and find wide applications in real-world scenarios, such as citation networks, knowledge graphs, and social
networks. While the traditional “pre-train, fine-tune” framework effectively addresses tasks requiring abundant labeled
data, it falls short in scenarios with limited resource or zeroshot learning capabilities, particularly in low-resource textual
graph node classification. Additionally, prevalent approaches
that convert text nodes into shallow or manually engineered
features fail to capture the rich semantic nuances within the
text. The conventional methods often neglect the fusion of semantic and topological information, resulting in suboptimal
model learning. To overcome these challenges, we proposed
a novel method of low-resource textual graph node classification based on large language models, i.e., Textual graph
learning with semantic and topological awareness (TGLsta ),
which comprehensively explores the semantic information,
near neighborhood information, and the topology information
in textual graphs, where these components are the most important information source contained in textual graphs. Graph
prompt tuning for both zero- and few-shot textual graph node
classification is further introduced.

Introduction
Owing to the remarkable success in representation learning on graph-structured data, the exploration of learning
methodologies applied to textual graphs (TGs) has emerged
as a prominent research domain across multiple fields, including graph learning(Zhang et al. 2024c), information retrieval(Reinanda et al. 2020), and natural language processing(Wu et al. 2023). TGs (Zhang et al. 2024b; Ni, Li, and
McAuley 2019) are widely utilized in real-world applications, including citation graphs (Zhang et al. 2023, 2024c),
knowledge graphs (Wang et al. 2021a), and social networks
(Zhang et al. 2024d; Ni, Li, and McAuley 2019; Zeng et al.
2019). They can provide a graph-based representation of
text data, illustrating the relationships between phrases, sentences, or documents through edges.
* Contributed equally
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22506

