The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EventSum: A Large-Scale Event-Centric Summarization Dataset
for Chinese Multi-News Documents
Mengna Zhu1 , Kaisheng Zeng2,3 , Mao Wang1 , Kaiming Xiao1 ,
Lei Hou2 * , Hongbin Huang1 * , Juanzi Li2
1

Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, National University of Defense Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
College of Information and Communication, National University of Defense Technology
zhumengna16@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

(earthquakes, floods), major sports events (Olympics, UEFA
European Championship), and pressing social issues (criminal cases, sudden public health crises), etc. These events are
often covered by multiple news articles that report from different perspectives and may include real-time updates. Integrating these diverse news sources is essential for a comprehensive understanding of the event. Extracting key information from related news articles to create accurate and comprehensive summaries is crucial for quickly organizing information about the event and better supporting downstream
applications such as opinion mining, intelligent assistants,
emergency response, etc (Tsirakis et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2020;
Dutta et al. 2019; Purohit et al. 2018; Urologin 2018).
As illustrated in Figure 1, the news articles provide information about the “2023 Hebei Heavy Rain”: the cause
(News 1: Typhoon Doksuri and cold and warm air), casualties (News 3: 29 deaths), affected areas (News 4: 110 counties), and measures taken (News 5: all post-disaster reconstruction projects completed). According to the generated
summary which combined the information from the above
news articles, the reader can quickly and conveniently grasp
the full scope of the “2023 Hebei Heavy Rain” event.
Generating concise and comprehensive summaries based
on multiple documents surrounding the specified event not
only makes the content more comprehensible to humans but
also offers richer information. However, most of current research on event understanding is based on single-document
and structural comprehension (Peng et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020) and existing
Multi-document Summarization (MDS) research faces three
primary challenges: 1) News-focused datasets like MultiNews (Fabbri et al. 2019) consist of news-related articles
and corresponding summaries that are organized around
general news content rather than the specific dynamic event
in chronological order; 2) Most large-scale datasets are automatically constructed, like WikiSum (Liu et al. 2018),
which compromises dataset quality and increases the risk of
data leakage in the test set; 3) Common evaluation metrics
such as the ROUGE for lexical evaluation (Lin 2004) and
BERTScore (Zhang et al. 2020) for semantic evaluation, are
insufficient to adequately assess the completeness and comprehensiveness of summaries that focus on dynamic events.
To address the above challenges, in this paper, we constructed the first large-scale Chinese multi-news summariza-

In real life, many dynamic events, such as major disasters and
large-scale sports events, evolve continuously over time. Obtaining an overview of these events can help people quickly
understand the situation and respond more effectively. This
is challenging because the key information of the event is
often scattered across multiple documents, involving complex event knowledge understanding and reasoning, which is
under-explored in previous work. Therefore, we proposed the
Event-Centric Multi-Document Summarization (ECS) task,
which aims to generate concise and comprehensive summaries of a given event based on multiple related news documents. Based on this, we constructed the EventSum dataset,
which was constructed using Baidu Baike entries and underwent extensive human annotation, to facilitate relevant
research. It is the first large-scale Chinese multi-document
summarization dataset, containing 5,100 events and a total
of 57,984 news documents, with an average of 11.4 input
news documents and 13,471 characters per event. To ensure
data quality and mitigate potential data leakage, we adopted
a multi-stage annotation approach for manually labeling the
test set. Given the complexity of event-related information,
existing metrics struggle to comprehensively assess the quality of generated summaries. We designed specific metrics including Event Recall, Argument Recall, Causal Recall, and
Temporal Recall along with corresponding calculation methods for evaluation. We conducted comprehensive experiments
on EventSum to evaluate the performance of advanced longcontext Large Language Models (LLMs) on this task. Our
experimental results indicate that: 1) The event-centric multidocument summarization task remains challenging for existing long-context LLMs; 2) The recall metrics we designed are
crucial for evaluating the comprehensiveness of the summary
information.

Code — https://github.com/Mzzzhu/EventSum
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11814

Introduction
Dynamic events characterized by continuous development
and change over time, uncertainty, and intricate causal relationships are pervasive in real life, such as natural disasters
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26138

