The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exact Algorithms and Lower Bounds for Forming Coalitions of Constrained
Maximum Size
Foivos Fioravantes1 , Harmender Gahlawat2 , Nikolaos Melissinos1
1

Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic
2
Combinatorial Optimization group of G-SCOP, Grenoble-INP
foivos.fioravantes@fit.cvut.cz, harmender.gahlawat@grenoble-inp.fr, nikolaos.melissinos@fit.cvut.cz
Abstract

the weight of each edge represents the utility of the agents
joined by the edge for each other (see also Weighted Graphical Games model (Deng and Papadimitriou 1994)). Variants where the agent preferences are asymmetric are modeled using directed graphs. Here, the utility of an agent for
a group of agents is additive in nature. ASHGs are wellstudied in the literature (Aloisio, Flammini, and Vinci 2020;
Aziz, Brandt, and Seedig 2013; Barrot and Yokoo 2019).
Most literature in the ASHGs considers the agents to be
selfish in nature. Hence, the metric used to measure efficiency is that of stability (Peters and Elkind 2015), including core stability, Nash Stability, individual stability, etc.
Semi-altruistic approaches where the agents are concerned
about their relative’s utility along with theirs are also studied (Monaco, Moscardelli, and Velaj 2021). A standard altruistic approach in computational social choice is that of
utilitarian social welfare, where the goal is to maximize the
total sum of utility of all the agents.
Observe that if all edge weights are positive, then
the maximum utilitarian utility is achieved by putting all
agents in the same coalition. But there are many practical scenarios, e.g., forming office teams to allocate several projects or allocating cars/buses to people for a trip,
where we additionally require that each coalition should be
of a bounded size. Coalition formations with constrained
coalition size have recently been a focus of attention in
ASHGs (Levinger, Azaria, and Hazon 2023) and in Fractional Hedonic Games (Monaco and Moscardelli 2023). Further, coalition formations where each coalition needs to be
of a fixed size have also been studied (Bilò, Monaco, and
Moscardelli 2022; Cseh, Fleiner, and Harján 2019).
We consider the ASHGs with an additional constraint
on the maximum allowed size of a coalition (denoted by
C), with the goal to maximize the total sum of utility of
all the agents. We formally define the problem, along with
other preliminaries, in the Preliminaries section. This game
is known to be NP-hard even when C = 3 (Levinger, Azaria,
and Hazon 2023). Note also that this reduction is straightforward from the PARTITION I NTO T RIANGLES, which is
NP-hard even for graphs with ∆ ≤ 4 (van Rooij, van
Kooten Niekerk, and Bodlaender 2013).
We present a comprehensive analysis of the parameterized complexity of this problem, considering various structural parameters of the input graph. In parameterized com-

Imagine we want to split a group of agents into teams in the
most efficient way, considering that each agent has their own
preferences about their teammates. This scenario is modeled
by the extensively studied C OALITION F ORMATION problem. Here, we study a version of this problem where each
team must additionally be of bounded size. We conduct a systematic algorithmic study, providing several intractability results as well as multiple exact algorithms that scale well as
the input grows (FPT), which could prove useful in practice.
Our main contribution is an algorithm that deals efficiently
with tree-like structures (bounded treewidth) for “small”
teams. We complement this result by proving that our algorithm is asymptotically optimal. Particularly, there can be no
algorithm that vastly outperforms the one we present, under
reasonable theoretical assumptions, even when considering
star-like structures (bounded vertex cover number).

Introduction
Coalition Formation is a central topic in Computational Social Choice and economic game theory (Brandt et al. 2016).
The goal is to partition a set of agents into coalitions optimizing a utility function. One well-studied notion in Coalition Formation is Hedonic Games (Dreze and Greenberg
1980), where the utility of an agent depends only on the
coalition it is placed in. Due to their general nature, capturing numerous scenarios, hedonic games are intensively studied (Aziz et al. 2019; Barrot et al. 2019; Boehmer and Elkind
2020; Brandt, Bullinger, and Wilczynski 2023; Bullinger
and Kober 2021; Fanelli et al. 2021; Igarashi et al. 2019;
Ohta et al. 2017; Sliwinski and Zick 2017), and have applications in social network analysis (Olsen 2009), scheduling
group activities (Darmann et al. 2018), and allocating tasks
to wireless agents (Saad et al. 2010).
Most problems concerning the computational complexity
of hedonic games are hard (Peters and Elkind 2015). In fact,
even encoding the preferences of agents generally takes exponential space, motivating the study of succinct representations for these preferences. One well-studied such class of
games is Additive Separable Hedonic Games (ASHGs for
short) (Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002), where the agents
are represented by the vertices of a weighted graph and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13847

