The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KDAT: Inherent Adversarial Robustness via Knowledge Distillation
with Adversarial Tuning for Object Detection Models
Yarin Yerushalmi Levi1 , Edita Grolman1 , Idan Yankelev1 , Amit Giloni2 ,
Omer Hofman2 , Toshiya Shimizu3 , Asaf Shabtai1 , Yuval Elovici1
1

Department of Software and Information Systems Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel.
2
Fujitsu Research of Europe.
3
Fujitsu Unlimited.
{yarinye, edita, idanyan}@post.bgu.ac.il, {shabtaia, elovici}@bgu.ac.il,
{amit.giloni, omer.hofman, shimizu.toshiya}@fujitsu.com,
Abstract

performance on benign images, and 2) they add significant
overhead to the OD inference stage, which makes them unsuitable for real-time applications (Arani et al. 2022). To address these limitations, we propose KDAT (knowledge distillation with adversarial tuning), a novel fine-tuning strategy
that optimizes the parameters of a given OD model against
adversarial patches without increasing the inference time or
compromising performance on benign images. KDAT employs the knowledge distillation (KD) technique (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015) to transfer information from one
model (the teacher) to another (the student) during training.
In our proposed method, the given OD model is replicated
to serve as both the student and teacher models. Then the
teacher model processes the benign images and transfers the
acquired knowledge of benign features to the student model
to guide its predictions when facing the corresponding adversarial examples (created for each benign image).
We evaluated KDAT’s effectiveness on digital datasets,
COCO (Lin et al. 2014) and INRIA (Dalal and Triggs 2005),
and the physical Superstore dataset (Hofman et al. 2024),
with a wide range of adversarial patch attacks: DPatch (Liu
et al. 2018), Google’s adversarial patch (Brown et al. 2017),
Masked-PGD (M-PGD) (Madry et al. 2017), T-SEA (Huang
et al. 2023), natural patches (Hu et al. 2021) and printable
patches (Thys, Van Ranst, and Goedemé 2019). Our evaluation demonstrates KDAT’s advantage over other SOTA defenses when examining the trade-off between enhancing the
model’s adversarial robustness and its performance on benign images. The results show that KDAT improved the adversarial robustness against both seen and unseen attacks by
10-15 mAP% and the performance on benign images by 2-4
mAP% for both DETR and Faster R-CNN while preserving their inference time. We also demonstrate that using our
proposed defense method forces the attacker to invest additional resources in misleading the defended model, i.e., in an
adaptive attack, the attacker requires 8-10% more optimization iterations to successfully mislead the OD model.
In summary, our contributions are as follows: 1) To the
best of our knowledge, we are among the first to improve the
OD model’s performance on both attacked and benign images. 2) To the best of our knowledge, we are also the first to
design a fine-tuning strategy against adversarial patches for
OD models without the need to retrain the entire model, un-

Adversarial patches pose a significant threat to computer vision models’ integrity, decreasing the accuracy of various
tasks, including object detection (OD). Most existing OD defenses exhibit a trade-off between enhancing the model’s adversarial robustness and maintaining its performance on benign images. We propose KDAT (knowledge distillation with
adversarial tuning), a novel mechanism that enhances the robustness of an OD model without compromising its performance on benign images or its inference time. Our method
combines the knowledge distillation (KD) technique with the
adversarial tuning concept to teach the model to match the
predictions of adversarial images with those of their corresponding benign ones. To match these predictions, we designed four unique loss components, allowing the student
model to effectively distill the knowledge of different features from various parts of the teacher model. Our extensive
evaluation on the COCO and INRIA datasets demonstrates
KDAT’s ability to improve the performance of Faster R-CNN
and DETR on benign images by 2-4 mAP% and adversarial
examples by 10-15 mAP%, outperforming other state-of-theart (SOTA) defenses. Furthermore, our additional physical
evaluation on the Superstore dataset demonstrates KDAT’s
SOTA adversarial robustness against printed patches (improvement of 22 mAP% compared to the undefended model).

Code — https://github.com/Yarinyl/KDAT

1

Introduction

While object detection (OD) models are integrated into
many aspects of our daily life, e.g., autonomous vehicles and
surveillance (Vahab et al. 2019), there is a real concern that
adversaries may manipulate the detection process (Sharma
et al. 2022). In the computer vision domain, adversaries can
create a small, optimized patch, known as a patch attack, designed to deceive the OD model. These adversarial patches
can be applied to objects in a scene (Brown et al. 2017), necessitating the development of solutions to mitigate such attacks and ensure system reliability. While various defenses
have been developed to deal with such attacks (Liu et al.
2022; Xiang et al. 2023; Jing et al. 2024), most of them suffer from two major limitations: 1) they harm the model’s
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4598

