The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Open-Ended Learning Framework for Opponent Modeling
Yuheng Jing1,2 , Kai Li1,2† , Bingyun Liu1,2 , Haobo Fu6 , Qiang Fu6 , Junliang Xing5 , Jian Cheng1,3,4†
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
AiRiA
5
Tsinghua University
6
Tencent AI Lab
kai.li@ia.ac.cn, jian.cheng@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

is trained on a set of training opponent policies (termed
as Πtrain ), where the model learns to respond to opponents
based on their information. (2) Testing: The trained opponent model is evaluated on an unknown set of testing opponent policies (termed as Πtest ), where the model needs to
quickly adapt to non-stationary opponents and generalize to
handle unseen opponents.
Existing works typically assume that Πtrain is a predesignated, fixed set of policies, either consisting of handcrafted heuristic scripts or obtained through naive selfplay methods. However, this results in the opponent models
learned from training having poor generalization ability during testing, making it particularly difficult to handle unseen
opponents, as unseen opponents can exhibit many out-ofdistribution (OOD) behaviors never encountered.
To tackle this issue, we argue that using a dynamic Πtrain ,
which continuously grows in terms of strength and style,
can endow opponent models with stronger generalizabilities compared to a static Πtrain . This argument stems from
the following intuitions: (1) The more diverse the opponents
that the opponent model encounters during training, the less
likely it is to face OOD opponent behaviors during testing.
(2) A good diversity of Πtrain should consider not only game
performance (strength) but also behavioral patterns (style).
Based on the above observations, our first contribution is
proposing the Open-Ended Opponent Modeling (OEOM)
framework to encode the idea of generating a dynamic Πtrain .
OEOM is a general framework that continuously generates
opponents with diverse strengths and styles for any OM approach to training on, thereby enhancing its generalizability during testing. The diversity in strength within OEOM
is built upon Population-Based Training (PBT) (Jaderberg
et al. 2017), which uses Reinforcement Learning (RL) objectives to conduct cross-play training and natural selection.
This iterative process continuously generates policies with
increasing strength. The diversity in style within OEOM is
established through a novel information-theoretic Trajectory
Space Diversity (TSD) regularization. This regularization
maximizes the mutual information between the policy index and the observation-action sequences (i.e., trajectories).
The style diversity of policies should be reflected in the difference in trajectories they visit. By maximizing TSD, different policies are driven to visit as different trajectories as
possible, thus generating diverse styles of policies. OM ap-

Opponent Modeling (OM) aims to enhance decision-making
by modeling other agents in multi-agent environments. Existing works typically learn opponent models against a predesignated fixed set of opponents during training. However,
this will cause poor generalization when facing unknown opponents during testing, as previously unseen opponents can
exhibit out-of-distribution (OOD) behaviors that the learned
opponent models cannot handle. To tackle this problem, we
introduce a novel Open-Ended Opponent Modeling (OEOM)
framework, which continuously generates opponents with diverse strengths and styles to reduce the possibility of OOD
situations occurring during testing. Founded on populationbased training and information-theoretic trajectory space diversity regularization, OEOM generates a dynamic set of
opponents. This set is then fed to any OM approaches to
train a potentially generalizable opponent model. Upon this,
we further propose a simple yet effective OM approach that
naturally fits within the OEOM framework. This approach
is based on in-context reinforcement learning and learns a
Transformer that dynamically recognizes and responds to opponents based on their trajectories. Extensive experiments in
cooperative, competitive, and mixed environments demonstrate that OEOM is an approach-agnostic framework that improves generalizability compared to training against a fixed
set of opponents, regardless of OM approaches or testing opponent settings. The results also indicate that our proposed
approach generally outperforms existing OM baselines.

1

Introduction

Developing autonomous agents capable of modeling other
agents (including adversaries, teammates, etc., collectively
referred to as “opponents”) in a multi-agent environment is a
long-standing research topic commonly known as Opponent
Modeling (OM).1 This topic aims to model the behaviors,
goals, beliefs, and other properties of opponents to reduce
the uncertainty of the self-agent regarding the environment
and enhance its decision-making capabilities (Albrecht and
Stone 2018; Nashed and Zilberstein 2022; Lu et al. 2022;
Zhao et al. 2022). The OM domain typically adopts a twostage learning paradigm: (1) Training: An opponent model
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
0
The symbol † denotes the corresponding authors.
1
We refer to autonomous agent as self-agent in our paper.

23222

