The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

WST: Wavelet-Based Multi-scale Tuning for Visual Transfer Learning
Jia Zeng1 , Lan Huang1, 2 , Kangping Wang1, 2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
Changchun 130012, China
2
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of the Ministry of Education, Jilin University
Changchun 130012, China
zengjia22@mails.jlu.edu.cn, huanglan@jlu.edu.cn, wangkp@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT) models
have demonstrated remarkable performance on visual tasks
but are computationally expensive to transfer to downstream tasks. Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) offers
a promising transferring approach by updating only a subset
of parameters. However, PEFT’s effectiveness is hindered by
discrepancies between pre-training and downstream tasks in
terms of object scale and granularity. Downstream tasks often
focus on finer-grained and more specialized recognition, requiring more detailed features. The diversity of feature scales
of existing PEFT methods for ViT is limited. To address
this, we propose a novel PEFT method named Wavelet-based
multi-Scale Tuning (WST), which learns multi-scale features
in a simple and efficient way. WST introduces a parallel finetuning patch embedding branch with a smaller patch size than
the pre-trained model to capture finer-grained features. Furthermore, to handle the computational challenge from the
resulting longer token sequence, WST designs wavelet finetuning blocks that balance both efficiency and performance.
In the block, wavelet transform enables invertible and lossless
down-sampling of the longer token sequence, aligning it with
that of the backbone, and two lightweight linear mappings
are employed to learn task-specific features. This design facilitates efficient multi-scale information exchange between
the pre-trained backbone and fine-tuning branch. Extensive
experiments on transfer learning demonstrate the promising
performance and efficiency of our WST.

Figure 1: The sketches of previous PEFT methods vs. our
WST. Previous methods only consider single-scale features.
Our WST integrates a smaller scale (illustrated by green) to
learn fine-grained features benefiting for downstream tasks.

faces challenges due to the heavy load on the number of parameters. Recently, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)
has been widely explored as a practical solution. PEFT approaches (Houlsby et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2022; Jia et al. 2022;
Sung, Cho, and Bansal 2022; Fu, Zhu, and Wu 2024) aim
to efficiently adapt pre-trained ViTs to downstream tasks
by updating only a small subset of parameters and freezing other parameters. Many PEFT methods such as Adapter
(Houlsby et al. 2019), Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu
et al. 2022), Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT) (Jia et al. 2022)
and so on, have developed great potential. However, existing PEFT methods apply fine-tuning at the same scale and
granularity, disregarding differences in scale and granularity between pre-training and downstream tasks. Many downstream tasks especially such as fine-grained and specialized
image recognition tasks require finer features for accurate
predictions. PEFT methods need to capture not only general
features from pre-trained models to improve generalization,
but also detailed features to distinguish more similar and
specialized patterns. Therefore, it is necessary to integrate
multi-scale information in PEFT, particularly at finer levels.

Code — https://github.com/ZJia-goo/WST

Introduction
With the rapid expansion of dataset scale and model size,
large-scale Vision Transformer (ViT) models have achieved
remarkable success in many visual tasks (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020; Dehghani et al. 2023; Kirillov et al. 2023). Largescale ViTs pre-trained on large datasets (such as ImageNet21K) can learn general features, so pre-trained models are
widely used in transfer learning to improve performance and
accelerate convergence. However, transferring these largescale ViTs to various downstream visual tasks by full-tuning

The patch size of ViT is an important factor that influences
the scale of extracted features. Patch size refers to the size of
square sub-sections that an input image is split into. Smaller
patches can capture finer image details, leading to richer feature representations and better performance. This finding is
consistent with experimental results. For example, ViT-32/B
with a patch size of 32 attains 75.9% accuracy on ImageNet1K while ViT-16/B with a patch size of 16 achieves higher

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22317

