The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Non-English Capabilities of English-Centric Large Language Models
Through Deep Supervision Fine-Tuning
Wenshuai Huo1,2 , Xiaocheng Feng1,2 * , Yichong Huang1 , Chengpeng Fu1,2 , Baohang Li1 ,
Yangfan Ye1 , Zhirui Zhang3 , Dandan Tu3 , Duyu Tang3 , Yunfei Lu3 , Hui Wang2 , Bing Qin1,2 *
1

Harbin Institution of Technology
2
Pengcheng Laboratory
3
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
{wshuo, xcfeng, ychuang, cpfu, baohangli, yfye, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn, wangh06@pcl.ac.cn
{tudandan, tangduyu, luyunfei6}@huawei.com, zrustc11@gmail.com
Abstract

Label：北京

Linear Layer

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant progress in multilingual language understanding and
generation. However, due to the imbalance in training data,
their capabilities in non-English languages are limited. Recent studies revealed the English-pivot multilingual mechanism of LLMs, where LLMs implicitly convert non-English
queries into English ones at the bottom layers and adopt English for thinking at the middle layers. However, due to the
absence of explicit supervision for cross-lingual alignment in
the intermediate layers of LLMs, the internal representations
during these stages may become inaccurate. In this work, we
introduce a deep supervision fine-tuning method (DFT) that
incorporates additional supervision over the internal layers of
the model to guide its workflow. Specifically, we introduce
two training objectives on different layers of LLMs: one at
the bottom layers to constrain the conversion of the target language into English, and another at the middle layers to constrain reasoning in English. To effectively achieve the guiding
purpose, we designed two types of supervision signals: logits
and feature, which represent a stricter constraint and a relatively more relaxed guidance. Our method guides the model
to not only consider the final generated result when processing non-English inputs but also ensure the accuracy of internal representations. We conducted extensive experiments on
typical English-centric LLMs, LLaMA-2 and Gemma-2. The
results on 8 multilingual datasets show that our method significantly outperforms traditional fine-tuning methods.

Language
Reversion

Feed Forward

×(L − j)﻿
Multi-head Attention
Supervision

English

Feed Forward

Thinking

×(j − i)﻿
Multi-head Attention

Beijing

DFT

SFT

Where is

Supervision the capital
of China?

Language
Conversation

Feed Forward

×i﻿
Multi-head Attention

Embedding

Instruction：请回答下面的问题。
Input：中国的首都是哪里？

Figure 1: The illustration of Depth Supervision Fine-Tuning
(DFT) and Baseline Methods. The left side represents an
English-dominated large language model, which can be divided into three parts from shallow to deep layers: Language Conversion, English Thinking, and Language Reversion. The right side shows an sample of Chinese instruction tuning. Blue arrows represent the DFT method, while
gray arrows represent the Baseline method. Traditional finetuning methods focus only on the model predicting the corresponding target output based on the input instruction. In
contrast, our method adds supervision to the process, explicitly guiding the model’s workflow when processing nonEnglish inputs.

Introduction
The development of large language models has achieved
revolutionary breakthroughs in the field of natural language
processing, demonstrating exceptional performance (OpenAI 2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Team et al. 2023). However, performance disparities still exist across different languages due to the imbalance in the training data (Nguyen
et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023a). For instance, the well-known LLaMA series models are trained on
over 90 % English data. This results in a significant gap be-

tween their multilingual capabilities and their performance
in English.
To enhance the non-English processing capabilities of
these models, researchers have made numerous attempts. A
common and effective approach is to fine-tune pre-trained
models on instruction datasets in the target languages (Zhu
et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024b;
Zhao et al. 2024a). As research advances, some studies have
explored the internal mechanisms behind how large models

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24185

