The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On Probabilistic Truncation in Privacy-preserving Machine Learning
Lijing Zhou1 , Bingsheng Zhang2,3,∗ , Ziyu Wang1 , Tianpei Lu2 , Qingrui Song1 ,
Su Zhang1 , Hongrui Cui4 , Yu Yu4
1
Huawei Technology, China,
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, China,
3
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security,
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
{zhoulijing, songqingrui1, zhangsu14, wangziyu13, wangxianggui1}@huawei.com, {bingsheng, lutianpei}@zju.edu.cn,
rickfreeman@sjtu.edu.cn, yuyu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
2

Introduction

Abstract

Privacy-preserving machine learning (PPML) is an emerging research area that enables model training and inference without revealing the underlying data as well as the
model parameters to the PPML participants. To date, the
most popular state-of-the-art (SOTA) PPML platforms, such
as Orca (Jawalkar et al. 2023), Falcon (Wagh et al. 2021),
ABY3 (Mohassel and Rindal 2018), and SecureML (Mohassel and Zhang 2017), are based on the multi-party computation (MPC).
Existing research has explored various methods to reduce the communication overhead. However, these improvements can come with certain drawbacks. Taking truncation protocols as an example, a typical PPML uses
fixed-point arithmetics, and the truncation protocol is often needed to re-scale the range of the underlying data.
In practice, the non-interactive/less-interactive truncation
protocols, e.g., SecureML (Mohassel and Zhang 2017)
and ABY3 (Mohassel and Rindal 2018) demonstrate better performance compared to CryptFlow2 (Rathee et al.
2020) and Cheetah (Huang et al. 2022). Nevertheless, these
non-interactive/less-interactive truncation protocols may encounter truncation failure due to probabilistic errors. We
refer to these types of truncation protocols as “probabilistic truncation protocols”. The main focus of this paper is
to comprehensively analyze and discuss, from the perspectives of accuracy and efficiency, the issues arising from using probabilistic truncation protocols, and we propose corresponding solutions to address these issues.
Furthermore, we propose a new technique to reduce the
communication cost of ReLU while preserving the overall model accuracy. Based on the observation that ReLU/DReLU evaluation is at least 10× slower than secure multiplication, our main idea is to reduce the input size of the
DReLU component at the cost of an extra multiplication.
Our benchmark indicates that, for most models, using 7 effective bits can reduce over 70% communication cost and
speed up approximately 5x the ReLU evaluation protocols
of ABY3 , ABY 2.0, EdaBits, and Bicoptor with no noticeable accuracy loss. Tab. 1 summarizes the communication
cost of previous works on the ReLU protocol, with the improvement of adopting our new technique.

Probabilistic truncation has been widely used in a broad range
of privacy-preserving machine learning (PPML) platforms,
such as EdaBits (Crypto 20), ABY 2.0 (Usenix 21), Crypten
(NIPS 21), Piranha-Falcon (Usenix 22), and Bicoptor (S&P
23), etc. In this work, we examine the problems of common
probabilistic truncation protocols in PPML, and propose solutions from the perspectives of accuracy and efficiency.
With regard to accuracy, we found the recommended precision parameters in many existing works are incorrect, leading
to extremely low inference accuracy. We conducted a thorough analysis of their open-source code and found that their
errors were mainly caused by simplified implementation;
more specifically, random numbers are not correctly sampled
in probabilistic truncation protocols. Based on this, we provide a detailed theoretical analysis to validate our views.
With regard to efficiency, we identify limitations in the stateof-the-art secure comparison, Bicoptor’s (S&P 2023) DReLU
protocol, which relies on the probabilistic truncation and is
heavily constrained by the security parameter to eliminate
errors, significantly impacting its performance. To address
these challenges, we introduce a non-interactive deterministic truncation technique, replacing the original probabilistic truncation. Additionally, we propose a new technique for
speeding up the ReLU/DReLU evaluation, which can be applied to the other non-linear functions as well. When the input size of DReLU is reduced to 7 bits, we can speed up approximately 5x the ReLU protocols w.r.t. ABY3 , ABY 2.0,
EdaBits, and Bicoptor without compromising model accuracy. The improved protocol can complete a ReLU evaluation within 2 rounds and 704 bits overall communication
when the input/output is secretly shared over the 64-bit ring,
which yields a 92% communication reduction on original Bicoptor. Compared to existing PPML platforms with GPU acceleration, our benchmark indicates a 10x improvement in the
DReLU protocol, and a 6x improvement in the ReLU protocol over Piranha-Falcon and a 3.7x improvement over Bicoptor. As a result, the overall PPML model inference could be
sped up by 3-4 times.

∗

Bingsheng Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22955

