The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Why Does Dropping Edges Usually Outperform Adding Edges in Graph
Contrastive Learning?
Yanchen Xu1,2 * , Siqi Huang1,2 * , Hongyuan Zhang2,3† , Xuelong Li2†
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
3
The University of Hong Kong
{yanchenxu.tj, 4777huang, hyzhang98}@gmail.com, xuelong li@ieee.org
Abstract

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has been widely used as
an effective self-supervised learning method for graph representation learning. However, how to apply adequate and
stable graph augmentation to generating proper views for
contrastive learning remains an essential problem. Dropping edges is a primary augmentation in GCL while adding
edges is not a common method due to its unstable performance. To our best knowledge, there is no theoretical analysis to study why dropping edges usually outperforms adding
edges. To answer this question, we introduce a new metric,
namely Error Passing Rate (EPR), to quantify how a graph
fits the network. Inspired by the theoretical conclusions and
the idea of positive-incentive noise, we propose a novel GCL
algorithm, Error-PAssing-based Graph Contrastive Learning
(EPAGCL), which uses both edge adding and edge dropping
as its augmentations. To be specific, we generate views by
adding and dropping edges based on the weights derived from
EPR. Extensive experiments on various real-world datasets
are conducted to validate the correctness of our theoretical
analysis and the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm.

(a) Performance on WikiCS

Figure 1: Performance on WikiCS and CiteSeer. All the
hyper-parameters are fixed. Edge adding and edge dropping
are the only augmentation employed respectively.
randomly mask the features as the attribute augmentations.
Moreover, for many GCL methods (Zhu et al. 2020; Thakoor
et al. 2022; You et al. 2020), the most popular scheme is to
change the graph topology, most of which randomly drops
edges to generate views. Apart from random edge-dropping
(Rong et al. 2020), researchers have tried various methods
to generate stable views. MVGRL (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020) introduced diffusion kernels for augmentation.
GCA (Zhu et al. 2021) augmented the graph based on the
importance of edges. And GCS (Wei et al. 2023) adaptively
screened the semantic-related substructure in graphs for contrastive learning. Although various works have been done to
investigate augmentation schemes for GCL, edge adding, as
a simple way of graph topology augmentation, is only used
in supervised learning (Zhao et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020a).
Why is edge dropping a widely accepted way for GCL
other than edge adding? Can edge adding be modified to
achieve similar effect as edge dropping? In this paper, we
attempt to answer the above questions theoretically.
To begin with, a simple experiment is conducted on WikiCS (Mernyei and Cangea 2020) and CiteSeer (Sen et al.
2008) to compare the two strategies of augmentations. We
use the same hyper-parameters and employ Adding Edges
or Dropping Edges as the only augmentation, respectively.
The result is shown in Figure 1. It is easy to conclude the
disadvantage of edge adding in all respects.
Generally speaking, there are two main challenges for
edge adding as augmentation:

Code — https://github.com/hyzhang98/EPAGCL
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08128

1

(b) Performance on CiteSeer

Introduction

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has been a hot research
topic in graph representation learning (Zhu et al. 2021;
Thakoor et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Zhang, Zhu, and
Li 2024). It originates from contrastive learning (Chen et al.
2020b; He et al. 2020; Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021; Qu et al.
2021; Radford et al. 2021), which generates different augmented views and maximizes the similarity between positive
pairs (van den Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018). In particular,
compared with CL, it has been shown that how to generate proper graph augmentation views is a crucial problem in
GCL (Tian et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020). Due to the particularity of the structure of graph data, the reliable unsupervised
data augmentation schemes are greatly limited. Inspired by
Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), many researchers chose to
* : Equal Contribution.
†

: Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21824

