The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DUO: Diverse, Uncertain, On-Policy Query Generation and Selection
for Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
Xuening Feng1 , Zhaohui Jiang1 , Timo Kaufmann2, 3 , Puchen Xu1 ,
Eyke Hüllermeier2, 3, 4 , Paul Weng5 * , Yifei Zhu1
1

UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Institute for Informatics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
3
Munich Center of Machine Learning, Munich, Germany
4
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence
5
Data Science Research Center, Duke Kunshan University, Kunshan, China
{cindyfeng2019,jiangzhaohui,xupuchen,yifei.zhu}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{timo.kaufmann,eyke}@ifi.lmu.de, paul.weng@duke.edu

Abstract
Defining a reward function is usually a challenging but critical
task for the system designer in reinforcement learning, especially when specifying complex behaviors. Reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) emerges as a promising approach to circumvent this. In RLHF, the agent typically
learns a reward function by querying a human teacher using
pairwise comparisons of trajectory segments. A key question
in this domain is how to reduce the number of queries necessary to learn an informative reward function, since asking
a human teacher too many queries is impractical and costly.
To tackle this question, most existing methods mainly focus
on improving exploration, introducing data augmentation or
designing sophisticated training objectives for RLHF, while
the potential of query generation and selection schemes have
not been fully exploited. In this paper, we propose DUO, a
novel method for diverse, uncertain, on-policy query generation and selection in RLHF. Our method produces queries
that are (1) more relevant for policy training (via an on-policy
criterion), (2) more informative (via a principled measure of
epistemic uncertainty), and (3) diverse (via a clustering-based
filter). Experimental results on a variety of locomotion and
robotic manipulation tasks demonstrate that our method can
outperform state-of-the-art RLHF methods given the same total budget of queries while being robust to possibly irrational
teachers.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), the reward function is typically specified to convey the task objective to the agent and
provide guidance for learning to accomplish the task. A wellformulated reward function is fundamental for successful task
learning. However, how to define a proper reward function remains an open problem (Amodei et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2020),
especially for complex tasks with large or continuous state
and action spaces. Specifically, while a sparse reward function is easy to define, it can hardly guide the agent to reach
the goal effectively. In contrast, denser reward functions can
provide more informative learning signals but take significant
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16604

effort for the system designer to formulate and may suffer
from reward hacking (Skalse et al. 2022), where the agent
learns to achieve high return despite undesirable behavior by
exploiting flaws in the incorrectly-defined reward function.
To tackle the difficulty of defining a reward function, various directions have been explored in the past, including
inverse reinforcement learning (Arora and Doshi 2021), imitation learning (Hussein et al. 2017), reward learning from
demonstrations (Ibarz et al. 2018), and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Kaufmann et al. 2023).
Compared with other directions, RLHF has recently drawn
much attention due to its simplicity, scalability, and promising
empirical results in many domains, such as control (Christiano et al. 2017), image generation (Lee et al. 2023), and
language model alignment (Ouyang et al. 2022; OpenAI
2022).
In RLHF, instead of specifying a reward function explicitly,
it proposes to learn the reward function from human preference feedback while simultaneously updating a policy via
RL training using the learned reward function. In this setting,
preference feedback is generally acquired by generating and
selecting queries to be asked to a human teacher (oracle). The
most typical query is a pairwise comparison of trajectories
(Christiano et al. 2017; Lee, Smith, and Abbeel 2021; Lee
et al. 2021), which we also focus on in this work.
A key question in RLHF is that of query efficiency, i.e.,
how to generate and select informative queries so that a good
policy can be learned with fewer queries. Existing RLHF
methods (Christiano et al. 2017; Lee, Smith, and Abbeel
2021; Park et al. 2022) directly take inspiration from common
active learning approaches by selecting queries based on an
estimate of the model uncertainty about the oracle’s response.
The rationale is that such queries are more informative and
would help learn a good reward function faster. However, they
still require a lot of queries to solve complex tasks, leaving
much room for efficiency improvement.
By carefully examining the existing RLHF studies, we
identify three limitations that commonly impede query efficiency. First, many RLHF methods select queries comparing
off-policy trajectory segments regardless of their probability of being generated by the current policy. Unfortunately,

