The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

K-hop Hypergraph Neural Network: A Comprehensive Aggregation Approach
Linhuang Xie1,2 , Shihao Gao1,2 , Jie Liu3,4 , Ming Yin5 , Taisong Jin1,2 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
School of Information Science, North China University of Technology, China
4
China Language Intelligence Research Center, Capital Normal University, China
5
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, South China Normal University, China
linhuangxie@gmail.com, gaoshihao@stu.xmu.edu.cn, liujxxxy@126.com, m.yin@scnu.edu.cn, jintaisong@xmu.edu.cn
2nd hop

Abstract

1st hop

The powerful capability of HyperGraph Neural Networks
(HGNNs) in modeling intricate, high-order relationships
among multiple data samples stems primarily from their ability to aggregate both the direct neighborhood features of individual nodes and those associated with hyperedges. However,
the limited scope of feature propagation in existing HGNNs
significantly reduces the utilization of hypergraph information, exacerbating over-squashing and over-smoothing issues.
To this end, we propose a novel K-hop HyperGraph Neural
Network (KHGNN) to facilitate the interactions of distant
nodes and hyperedges. Specifically, the bisection nested convolution based on HyperGINE is employed to extract features from nodes, hyperedges, and structures along all shortest paths between nodes or hyperedges, providing representations of long-distance relationships. With these comprehensive path features, nodes and hyperedges are guided to aggregate distant information while learning their complex relationships. The extensive experiments, particularly on longrange graph datasets, demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves SOTA performance compared to existing HGNNs
and graph neural networks.

(a)HGNN

(b)𝑲-hop HGNN

Figure 1: (a) For the existing hypergraph neural networks,
node features are first aggregated by hyperedges and then
propagated to neighboring nodes. (b) The proposed K-hop
HGNN introduces a wider range of node aggregation by utilizing path features, facilitating feature propagation.

ous nodes are compressed into hyperedges with limited feature capacity, resulting in information loss. (2) Hyperedgeto-node: Identical hyperedge features are assigned to all
neighboring nodes, diminishing the discriminability of node
features. The aforementioned slow diffusion exacerbates the
issues of over-squashing and over-smoothing (Hu et al.
2019; Topping et al. 2021; Alon and Yahav 2020), reducing
the utilization of hypergraph information.
GNNs have extended the concept of direct message passing to K-hop message passing (Wang et al. 2021; Zhang
and Li 2021), thereby enhancing the expressive power of
them (Feng et al. 2022; Abboud et al. 2022). In particular,
leveraging path features that encapsulate contextual information to guide K-hop message passing between nodes can
explicitly provide rich semantic information for relationship
modeling, leading to promising performance in real-world
applications (Michel et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2022).
However, there is few research specifically dedicated to
path-based K-hop hypergraph neural networks. Considering the following reasons, it is intractable to design K-hop
HGNNs: (1) Inherent structural differences between hypergraphs, characterized by hyperedges with varying numbers of nodes, and normal graphs render the methods used
in K-hop GNNs unsuitable for HGNNs. (2) Diverging from
K-hop GNNs (Michel et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2022), merely
aggregating K-hop node neighborhoods while disregarding hyperedges representing higher-order relations constrains the expressive capacity of HGNNs. (3) Due to differences in feature space, the commonly used summation operators only aggregate either node (Sun et al. 2022; Michel

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) that effectively handle nonEuclidean structured data have been widely applied in tasks
such as computational chemistry (Yu et al. 2020), social networks (Cao et al. 2020), and anomaly detections (Yang et al.
2024). However, GNNs are inherently limited by their exclusive focus on pairwise relationships between data samples,
which restricts the expressive power.
Unlike GNNs, Hypergraph Neural Networks (HGNNs)
can capture higher-order non-Euclidean relationships among
real-world entities through unpaired connections involving
any number of nodes on hyperedges. Since the introduction
of the clique expansion (CE) technique by HGNN (Feng
et al. 2019), most of the existing HGNNs (Chien et al.
2022; Huang and Yang 2021; Wang et al. 2023) define various message-passing methods based on this technique. As
shown in Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 2(a1), CE involves a two-stage
message passing process: (1) Node-to-hyperedge: Numer* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21679

