The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FoldToken: Learning Protein Language via Vector Quantization and Beyond
Zhangyang Gao1,2 * , Cheng Tan1,2 * , Jue Wang1,2 , Yufei Huang1,2 , Lirong Wu1,2 , Stan Z.Li1 †
1

Westlake University
Zhejiang University
gaozhangyang@westlake.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Recent work shows promise on structure to sequence
transformation. IG-VAE (Eguchi, Choe, and Huang 2022)
and FoldingDiff (Wu et al. 2024) suggest converting protein structures as sequences of folding angles and shows
great potential in unconditional protein backbone generation. DiffSDS (Gao, Tan, and Li 2023a) extends the method
in the scenarios of conditional backbone inpainting. These
methods simplify 3D coordinates as angle sequence, allowing advanced transformers to be applied to structural modeling. However, continuous angles resist modeling as discrete
symbols, unlike human language, hindering transformers
in autoregressive generation where regression loss-trained
models generally underperform compared to those trained
by classification loss. (Pintea et al. 2023; Stewart, Bach,
and Vert 2023; Horiguchi, Dohi, and Kawaguchi 2023). Establishing a discrete protein language to bridge protein research with NLP remains an open challenge.
Inspired by learning discrete vision language (Yu et al.
2021; Esser, Rombach, and Ommer 2021; Lee et al. 2022),
we create a novel protein foreign language describing sequence and structure simultaneously, dubbled protein language. The key idea is to project the sequence and structure
into a joint discrete space via FoldTokenizer then the sequence of discrete codes can serve as a new protein language
to unify the sequence and structure modalities. To ensure
the created protein language is informationally equivalent to
original sequence-structure, we train the FoldTokenizer via
reconstruction loss. Once the protein language is learned, it
can be used for generative and predictive downstream tasks.
Recovering structures from the protein language poses
a non-trivial challenge, necessitating the development of
new VQ methods. After evaluating vanilla VQ (VVQ) (Van
Den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017) and recent lookup-free VQ
(LFQ) (Yu et al. 2023), we reveal their proficiency in sequence but suboptimal structure reconstruction. We systemically analized their limitations and strengths, proposing targeted strategies for improvement. The key to good reconstruction is soft querying across the entire codebook space.
LFQ (Yu et al. 2023) has identified a trade-off between
reconstruction and generation tasks - models excelling in
reconstruction may underperform in downstream tasks. We
further analize why the phenominon exist and propose imporved VQ method to overcome this challenge. For the first
time, the proposed SoftCVQ method achieves good perfor-

Is there a foreign language describing protein sequences and
structures simultaneously? Protein structures, represented by
continuous 3D points, have long posed a challenge due to
the contrasting modeling paradigms of discrete sequences.
We introduce FoldTokenizer to represent protein sequencestructure as discrete symbols. This approach involves projecting residue types and structures into a discrete space,
guided by a reconstruction loss for information preservation.
We name the learned discrete symbols as FoldToken, and the
sequence of FoldTokens serves as a new protein language,
transforming the protein sequence-structure into a unified
modality. We apply the created protein language on general
backbone inpainting task, building the first GPT-style model
(FoldGPT) for sequence-structure co-generation with promising results. Key to our success is the substantial enhancement
of the vector quantization module, Soft Conditional Vector
Quantization (SoftCVQ).

Introduction
Sequence and structure modeling play a crucial role
in protein applications, including mutation prediction
(Umerenkov et al. 2022), sequence design (Ingraham et al.
2019; Jing et al. 2020; Tan et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022;
Zheng et al. 2023; Hsu et al. 2022; Gao, Tan, and Li
2023c,b), and function prediction (Hu et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2024). However, the
modality gap between sequence and structure usually requires different model architectures, i.e., sequence learners are typically based on transformers, while the structure learners are generally based on graph neural networks
(GNNs). Constraints from modality-specific models, especially the structure prior required by GNNs, limit the
modeling flexibility and prevent the applications of recent
progress, such as GPT (Brown et al. 2020), on protein tasks.
Given the success of applying Transformer to ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), where a image is converted to sequence of
patches (image foreign language), we wonder is there a way
to unify the sequence and structure modalities by a protein
foreign language?
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

219

