The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LLMEmb: Large Language Model Can Be a Good Embedding Generator
for Sequential Recommendation
Qidong Liu1, 2 , Xian Wu3 * , Wanyu Wang2 , Yejing Wang2 , Yuanshao Zhu2 ,
Xiangyu Zhao2 * , Feng Tian4 * , Yefeng Zheng3, 5
1

School of Auto. Science & Engineering, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
City University of Hong Kong
3
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab
4
School of Comp. Science & Technology, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
5
Medical Artificial Intelligence Lab, Westlake University
liuqidong@stu.xjtu.edu.com, {kevinxwu, yefengzheng}@tencent.com, {wanyuwang4-c, yejing.wang}@my.cityu.edu.hk
yuanshao@ieee.org, xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk, fengtian@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

1-4

Sequential Recommender Systems (SRS), which model a
user’s interaction history to predict the next item of interest, are widely used in various applications. However, existing SRS often struggle with low-popularity items, a challenge known as the long-tail problem. This issue leads to reduced serendipity for users and diminished profits for sellers, ultimately harming the overall system. Large Language
Model (LLM) has the ability to capture semantic relationships between items, independent of their popularity, making
it a promising solution to this problem. In this paper, we introduce LLMEmb, a novel method leveraging LLM to generate
item embeddings that enhance SRS performance. To bridge
the gap between general-purpose LLM and the recommendation domain, we propose a Supervised Contrastive FineTuning (SCFT) approach. This approach includes attributelevel data augmentation and a tailored contrastive loss to
make LLM more recommendation-friendly. Additionally, we
emphasize the importance of integrating collaborative signals into LLM-generated embeddings, for which we propose Recommendation Adaptation Training (RAT). This further refines the embeddings for optimal use in SRS. The
LLMEmb-derived embeddings can be seamlessly integrated
with any SRS models, underscoring the practical value.
Comprehensive experiments conducted on three real-world
datasets demonstrate that LLMEmb significantly outperforms
existing methods across multiple SRS models.

(a) Long-tail Problem

5-9

(b) SASRec

10-29

30+

(c) LLM

Figure 1: The preliminary experiments are conducted for
SASRec on the Yelp dataset.

action history, e.g., SASRec (Kang and McAuley 2018) and
Bert4Rec (Sun et al. 2019).
Although the accuracy of SRS has seen continuous improvement, the long-tail problem remains a critical challenge that can undermine the overall user experience. To illustrate this issue, we trained a popular SRS model, SASRec, on the Yelp dataset and grouped the items based on
their interaction frequencies. As depicted in Figure 1(a),
the histogram reveals that the majority of items have fewer
than 5 records, while the corresponding line graph indicates
their relatively low performance. This phenomenon highlights the difficulty in effectively recommending long-tail
items, which can result in reduced serendipity for users and
diminished profits for sellers. Our analysis suggests that the
long-tail problem in SRS primarily stems from the skewed
distribution of item embeddings. To further investigate this,
we visualized the item embedding distribution of SASRec
using t-SNE in Figure 1(b). The result confirms that the embeddings of low-popularity items (i.e., 1-4) are sparsely distributed and distant from those of more popular items, indicating the poor quality of these embeddings. In contrast,
the Large Language Model (LLM) shows promise in capturing semantic relationships between items through textual
features, such as titles. Figure 1(c) shows the item embeddings generated by LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023) are more
uniformly distributed, which motivates the development of
an LLM-based generator for producing higher-quality embeddings.

Introduction
Sequential recommender systems (SRS) have been extensively applied across various practical scenarios, such as ecommerce (Zhou et al. 2018) and short video (Pan et al.
2023). The primary objective of SRS is to capture users’
preferences based on their historical interactions and predict
the next most possible item (Fang et al. 2020). To achieve
this, many research studies have committed to developing
neural network architectures for better modeling user inter* Corresponding authors: Xian Wu, Xiangyu Zhao, Feng Tian
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12183

