The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CodecNeRF: Toward Fast Encoding and Decoding, Compact, and High-quality
Novel-view Synthesis
Gyeongjin Kang1 * , Younggeun Lee2 * , Seungjun Oh2 , Eunbyung Park1, 2†
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
{ggggjin99, dudrms514, asxc1324, epark}@skku.edu

Abstract

The primary reason contributing to the longstanding success of image and video is the widespread adoption of standard codec software and hardware (Wiegand et al. 2003; Sullivan et al. 2012). We simply take a picture or video with our
hand-held devices, and the encoder rapidly compresses the
data. The encoded data are then transmitted over network
communication channels, and the receivers can consume the
data with the help of fast decoding software and hardware.
We envision similar usage of 3D media using NeRF: 1)
senders obtain multi-view images, 2) an encoder turns those
images into a NeRF representation, 3) the encoded representation is communicated through the network, 4) receivers
decode the encoded data and users enjoy the contents by rendering from various viewpoints. We urge the development of
an algorithmic pipeline that can achieve rapid encoding and
decoding speeds, compact data sizes, and high-quality view
synthesis to support this common practice.
Despite considerable technological progress, there has
yet to be a fully satisfying solution to achieve all of the
stated goals. Training speed (encoding time) has remarkably advanced from days to a few hours or minutes (Chen
et al. 2022; Sun, Sun, and Chen 2022; Müller et al. 2022;
Fridovich-Keil et al. 2022, 2023). However, due to the inherent drawback of the per-scene optimization approach, they
still require powerful GPU devices and at least tens of thousands of training iterations to converge. Encoder-decoder approaches, which generate NeRF in a single network forward
pass, have been proposed (Chen et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021).
However, they primarily focus on few-shot generalization
and do not consider the codec aspects, and the rendering image quality is limited compared to the optimization-based
approaches. On the other hand, there has been extensive investigation into compact NeRF representations to minimize
encoded data sizes (Takikawa et al. 2022; Tang et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2023; Rho et al. 2023; Shin and Park 2024; Li et al.
2024). While successful, the suggested methods are mostly
based on the per-scene optimization approach, resulting in
longer training iterations.
In this work, we introduce CodecNeRF, a neural codec
for NeRF designed to accomplish the previously mentioned
objectives all at once. The proposed neural codec consists
of a novel encoder and decoder architectures that can produce a NeRF representation in a single forward pass. The encoder takes multi-view images and produces compact codes

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have achieved huge success in effectively capturing and representing 3D objects and
scenes. However, to establish an ubiquitous presence in everyday media formats, such as images and videos, we need
to fulfill three key objectives: 1. fast encoding and decoding time, 2. compact model sizes, and 3. high-quality renderings. Despite recent advancements, a comprehensive algorithm that adequately addresses all objectives has yet to be
fully realized. In this work, we present CodecNeRF, a neural codec for NeRF representations, consisting of an encoder
and decoder architecture that can generate a NeRF representation in a single forward pass. Furthermore, inspired by
the recent parameter-efficient finetuning approaches, we propose a finetuning method to efficiently adapt the generated
NeRF representations to a new test instance, leading to highquality image renderings and compact code sizes. The proposed CodecNeRF, a newly suggested encoding-decodingfinetuning pipeline for NeRF, achieved unprecedented compression performance of more than 100× and a remarkable
reduction in encoding time while maintaining (or improving)
the image quality on widely used 3D object datasets.

Code — https://gynjn.github.io/CodecNeRF

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have been enormously successful in representing 3D scenes (Mildenhall et al. 2021).
Given a handful of pictures taken from various viewpoints, it generates photorealistic images from novel viewpoints, proving beneficial for various applications, such
as 3D photography and navigation (Jampani et al. 2021;
Adamkiewicz et al. 2022). In addition, ongoing research endeavors have enhanced its compatibility with conventional
graphics rendering engines by enabling mesh and texture
extraction (Baatz et al. 2022; Tang et al. 2023), and thus
it further expands its usability. Moreover, recent 3D generation and editing techniques make it more valuable as a
next-generation 3D media representation, opening new possibilities and applications.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4203

