The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Formal Quality Measures for Predictors in Markov Decision Processes
Chistel Baier1 , Sascha Klüppelholz1 Jakob Piribauer1,2 , Robin Ziemek1 *
1

Technische Universität Dresden
2
Universität Leipzig
{christel.baier, sascha.klueppelholz, jakob.piribauer, robin.ziemek}@tu-dresden.de

2
5

Abstract
Billy

In adaptive systems, predictors are used to anticipate changes
in the system’s state or behavior that may require system
adaption, e.g., changing its configuration or adjusting resource allocation. Therefore, the quality of predictors is crucial for the overall reliability and performance of the system under control. This paper studies predictors in systems
exhibiting probabilistic and non-deterministic behavior modeled as Markov decision processes (MDPs). Main contributions are the introduction of quantitative notions that measure
the effectiveness of predictors in terms of their average capability to predict the occurrence of failures or other undesired
system behaviors. The average is taken over all memoryless
policies. We study two classes of such notions. One class is
inspired by concepts that have been introduced in statistical
analysis to explain the impact of features on the decisions
of binary classifiers (such as precision, recall, f-score). Second, we study a measure that borrows ideas from recent work
on probability-raising causality in MDPs and determines the
quality of a predictor by the fraction of memoryless policies
under which (the set of states in) the predictor is a probabilityraising cause for the considered failure scenario.

w
t

BT

1
2

1
5

end

Shatter

2
5

Suzy

w
t

1
5

4
5

ST

Figure 1: An experiment where we want to predict Shatter

behavior. In order to get an understanding why a system behaves the way it does, we introduce measures in how well
certain events in a system serve as a predictor for undesired outcomes. Events which have a cause-effect relation
to such outcomes constitute a special case of such predictors
(Halpern and Pearl 2005; Pearl 2009).
In this paper, we consider binary predictors in Markov decision processes (MDPs) which are a stochastic operational
model with non-deterministic choices. We interpret the nondeterminism as uncertainty about the future behavior and
thus it may or may not be resolved adversarial to our goals.
For example, consider an experiment with two participating persons “Suzy” and “Billy” which are asked to throw a
rock at a bottle of glass. This example has been widely discussed for in philosophic literature on causality (Hall 2004;
Chockler and Halpern 2004; Halpern 2015). In our variant
(Fig. 1) a randomized process decides, which person is allowed to take a throw or whether the experiment ends. However, the participants can choose to wait w or to throw t. If
someone decides to throw their rock, the state is changed accordingly (ST for “Suzy throws” and BT for “Billy throws”).
For predictions in this system, we do not make any assumptions on the decisions of the participants and consider both
the outcomes and predictors described by sets of states. For
example, reaching the state ST is intuitively a good predictor since the throw of Suzy has a high probability of hitting.
However, if Suzy does not feel confident and thus has a decides to throw with a low probability, then state ST will only
be reached with low probability and so a lot of scenarios in
which the bottle shatters come from Billys throw. In order
to distinguish between the quality of different predictors, we

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11754

1

1
2

init

Introduction

In modern days, AI systems grow ever more complex and
harder to understand, e.g. code designed by artificial intelligence tends to be very abstruse and thus is not comprehensible in a simple way. Since a full understanding of such
systems is difficult to establish, it is important to predict certain events within such systems. In particular, situations in
which the system produces unwanted or even disastrous results need to be predicted early and precisely.
In the area of formal verification, counterexamples, invariants and related certificates are often used to provide a
verifiable justification that a system does or does not behave
according to a specification (see e.g., (Manna and Pnueli
1995; Clarke, Grumberg, and Peled 1999; Namjoshi 2001)).
However, most AI systems can not be designed in a way
that failure can be excluded and then certificates do not provide enough insights on the systems decisions to predict its
* Authors are listed in alphabetical order
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26760

