The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Deep Probabilistic Framework for Continuous Time Dynamic Graph
Generation
Ryien Hosseini1 , Filippo Simini2 , Venkatram Vishwanath2 , Henry Hoffmann1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
2
Argonne National Laboratory
ryien@uchicago.edu, fsimini@anl.gov, venkat@anl.gov, hankhoffmann@cs.uchicago.edu

Problem Formulation. The goal of continuous time dynamic graph (CTDG) generation is to learn a distribution
over source graph(s) that are in a state of continuous evolution. This learning process must ensure that the statistical
properties of graphs derived from this distribution closely resemble those of the source graphs. CTDGs are characterized
by a series of timestamped events, each involving a source
and destination node and an edge feature vector. The range
of possible events encompasses node additions and deletions, edge interactions, and feature evolution. Section 2.1
provides a formal mathematical definition of CTDGs. The
challenge of useful CTDG generative modeling lies in learning a distribution to generate event sequences that both reflect and diverge from reference graphs — achieving statistical similarity without exact duplication. This balance prevents information leakage and guarantees the uniqueness of
the generated graphs, ensuring they are innovative reflections rather than replicas of the source data.

Abstract
Recent advancements in graph representation learning have
shifted attention towards dynamic graphs, which exhibit
evolving topologies and features over time. The increased use
of such graphs creates a paramount need for generative models suitable for applications such as data augmentation, obfuscation, and anomaly detection. However, there are few generative techniques that handle continuously changing temporal
graph data; existing work largely relies on augmenting static
graphs with additional temporal information to model dynamic interactions between nodes. In this work, we propose a
fundamentally different approach: We instead directly model
interactions as a joint probability of an edge forming between
two nodes at a given time. This allows us to autoregressively
generate new synthetic dynamic graphs in a largely assumption free, scalable, and inductive manner. We formalize this
approach as DG-Gen, a generative framework for continuous
time dynamic graphs, and demonstrate its effectiveness over
five datasets. Our experiments demonstrate that DG-Gen not
only generates higher fidelity graphs compared to traditional
methods but also significantly advances link prediction tasks.

1

Limitations of Prior Approaches. We argue that current
generative models for CTDGs are too reliant on existing
static methods. Specifically, current approaches attempt to
model temporal graphs either as a single static graph with
temporal edges (Zhou et al. 2020; Gupta et al. 2022) or
as a set of static snapshots representing the graph at discrete timestamps (Zeno, La Fond, and Neville 2021). Such
methods then apply existing generative models for static
graphs (e.g. Chen, Sun, and Han 2018; Wang et al. 2018b;
Popova et al. 2019; You et al. 2018) to generate sequences
of evolving static graphs. However, this reliance on augmenting static graphs with discrete time representations falls
short in addressing the intrinsic nature of temporal graphs:
continuous and non-uniform evolution. This misalignment
introduces the following challenges:

Introduction

Recent research in graph representation learning focuses on
dynamic1 graphs, or graphs which change over time (Barros
et al. 2021; Kazemi et al. 2020). Dynamic graphs are necessary to model several interesting real world phenomena that
cannot be captured by static graphs alone, as the underlying
data distribution changes as a function of time. Examples
include social networks, citation graphs, and financial transactions (Barros et al. 2021).
Several methods learn in the discriminative regime (Xu
et al. 2020; You, Du, and Leskovec 2022; Bastas et al. 2019;
Ma et al. 2020; Nguyen et al. 2018b; Kumar, Zhang, and
Leskovec 2019). These models support a variety of downstream tasks such as link prediction, node and graph classification, etc. While considerable progress has been made in
this discriminative paradigm, work in the generative regime
is nascent. Yet, generative models for temporal graphs are
essential for tasks such as data augmentation, obfuscation of
sensitive user data during dataset creation, and anomaly detection (Guo and Zhao 2020; Oussidi and Elhassouny 2018).

• Topological assumptions: Prior work makes strong inductive assumptions about the source graph’s underlying
topology to fit it into a discrete series of static graphs.
This leads to poor modeling of many real world datasets,
where such assumptions may not hold.
• Lack of inductive modeling: Inductivity allows models
to transfer knowledge about the underlying graph to unseen nodes (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017). Here,
this refers to the ability of a model to create new synthetic nodes not seen during training. Most static repre-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use dynamic graph and temporal graph interchangeably.

17249

