The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DroughtSet: Understanding Drought Through Spatial-Temporal Learning
Xuwei Tan1 , Qian Zhao2 , Yanlan Liu2 , Xueru Zhang1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University
2
School of Earth Sciences, The Ohio State University
{tan.1206, zhao.4243, liu.9367, zhang.12807}@osu.edu

Abstract
Drought is one of the most destructive and expensive natural
disasters, severely impacting natural resources and risks by
depleting water resources and diminishing agricultural yields.
Under climate change, accurately predicting drought is critical
for mitigating drought-induced risks. However, the intricate
interplay among the physical and biological drivers that regulate droughts limits the predictability and understanding of
drought, particularly at a subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) time
scale. While deep learning has demonstrated the potential
to address climate forecasting challenges, its application to
drought prediction has received relatively less attention. In this
work, we propose a new dataset, DroughtSet, which integrates
relevant predictive features and three drought indices from
multiple remote sensing and reanalysis datasets across the
contiguous United States (CONUS). DroughtSet specifically
provides the machine learning community with a new realworld dataset to benchmark drought prediction models and
more generally, time-series forecasting methods. Furthermore,
we propose a spatial-temporal model SPDrought to predict and
interpret S2S droughts. Our model learns from the spatial and
temporal information of physical and biological features to
predict three types of droughts simultaneously. Multiple strategies are employed to quantify the importance of physical and
biological features for drought prediction. Our results provide
insights for researchers to better understand the predictability
and sensitivity of drought to biological and physical conditions. We aim to contribute to the climate field by proposing a
new tool to predict and understand the occurrence of droughts
and provide the AI community with a new benchmark to study
deep learning applications in climate science.

Code — https://github.com/osu-srml/DroughtSet
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15075

1

Introduction

Drought is among the most disastrous and costly natural
hazards, affecting water resources, agricultural yields, heat
waves, and ecosystem carbon sink (Cook, Mankin, and Anchukaitis 2018). It typically occurs under precipitation deficit,
which is frequently accompanied by abnormally high temperatures and low humidity, leading to high evapotranspiration
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28440

rates that quickly deplete soil moisture. As the global temperatures continue to increase, droughts are setting in quicker
and becoming more intense and more frequent (Trenberth
et al. 2014; Tripathy et al. 2023). In particular, recent studies
have highlighted the increasing frequency of S2S droughts,
which initiate and intensify quickly at time scales from weeks
to months, impairing ecosystem functions and challenging
drought risk management practices (Pendergrass et al. 2020;
Yuan et al. 2023). For example, precipitation deficits combined with record-high temperatures in 2012 led to rapid
drought development across the central US within just two
months, resulting in estimated losses exceeding $30 billion.
Accurate prediction of droughts is crucial for societal preparedness and risk mitigation strategies (Otkin et al. 2018;
White et al. 2017, 2022), but it still remains a significant challenge. Existing drought prediction models include data-driven
(Bonaccorso, Cancelliere, and Rossi 2015; Santos, Portela,
and Pulido-Calvo 2014; Wanders and Wada 2015), physicallybased (Wanders and Wood 2016; Wang et al. 2009), and hybrid models (Wu et al. 2022b). While some of these models
consider the interaction of biological drivers, their representations are generally simplified. In addition, most existing
drought predictive models focused on single drought type,
e.g. meteorological drought, hydrological drought, or ecological drought, while neglecting their joint behaviors. Tackling these drought prediction challenges requires a robust
and interpretable data-driven method that systematically integrates datasets of relevant climate and vegetation features
to jointly predict multiple aspects of drought (AghaKouchak
et al. 2022; Hao, Singh, and Xia 2018). However, most existing methods simplify or ignore dynamic interactions among
different factors, which inhibits realizing the potential of
artificial intelligence (AI) to improve drought prediction accuracy and advance mechanistic understanding of droughts.
We discuss these in the extended version Appendix 6.2
To address this research gap, we create a benchmark
dataset, DroughtSet, by compiling climate, physical, and
vegetation predictors that are relevant to drought initiation,
development, and propagation from various remote sensing
and reanalysis products across the contiguous United States
(CONUS) during years 2003–2013. DroughtSet encompasses
the wide diversity of climatic and ecological settings and
includes frequent drought events in recent decades. Specifically, we collect and preprocess drought-related predictors

