The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SAM-Aware Graph Prompt Reasoning Network for
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation
Shi-Feng Peng1 * , Guolei Sun2 * , Yong Li1 , Hongsong Wang3 , Guo-Sen Xie1†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
psf.nerver@gmail.com; guolei.sun@vision.ee.ethz.ch; yong.li@njust.edu.cn; gsxiehm@gmail.com
Abstract

The primary challenge of cross-domain few-shot segmentation (CD-FSS) is the domain disparity between the training
and inference phases, which can exist in either the input data
or the target classes. Previous models struggle to learn feature
representations that generalize to various unknown domains
from limited training domain samples. In contrast, the largescale visual model SAM, pre-trained on tens of millions of
images from various domains and classes, possesses excellent generalizability. In this work, we propose a SAM-aware
graph prompt reasoning network (GPRN) that fully leverages SAM to guide CD-FSS feature representation learning
and improve prediction accuracy. Specifically, we propose a
SAM-aware prompt initialization module (SPI) to transform
the masks generated by SAM into visual prompts enriched
with high-level semantic information. Since SAM tends to
divide an object into many sub-regions, this may lead to
visual prompts representing the same semantic object having inconsistent or fragmented features. We further propose
a graph prompt reasoning (GPR) module that constructs a
graph among visual prompts to reason about their interrelationships and enable each visual prompt to aggregate information from similar prompts, thus achieving global semantic
consistency. Subsequently, each visual prompt embeds its semantic information into the corresponding mask region to assist in feature representation learning. To refine the segmentation mask during testing, we also design a non-parameter
adaptive point selection module (APS) to select representative point prompts from query predictions and feed them
back to SAM to refine inaccurate segmentation results. Experiments on four standard CD-FSS datasets demonstrate that
our method establishes new state-of-the-art results.

(a)

CNN

SAM

(b)

Random Initialized

…

Tokens

Transformer

…

Inter-prompt
reasoning
…
…

CNN

…

SPI

…

GPR

Figure 1: Comparison of existing visual prompting methods and ours. (a) Existing methods typically input randomly
initialized visual prompts into the network alongside image
tokens, which lack prior semantic information and spatial
information. (b) Our approach leverages SAM to initialize
task-specific visual prompts and constructs a graph convolutional network (GCN) to reason about their inherent relationships. Zoom in for details.
and time-consuming process, particularly when it involves
dense pixel-wise labeling for segmentation tasks (Sun et al.
2022). Moreover, models trained on one category typically
struggle to generalize to unseen categories, making it even
more difficult to scale annotation efforts for diverse classes.
In light of this, researchers propose few-shot segmentation
(FSS), where the model can adapt to new tasks using a small
number of samples (Xie et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2024).
Existing FSS methods can be broadly classified into two
categories: prototype-based (Wang et al. 2019a; Liu et al.
2022; Yang et al. 2020) and correlation-based (Peng et al.
2023; Hong et al. 2022; Moon et al. 2023). Prototype-based
methods extract prototypes from the support set and generate predictions by comparing the query features with these
prototypes (Tian et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2020). Correlationbased methods model the pixel-to-pixel relationship between the query and support features to activate the query
pixels that are similar to the support foreground pixels (Min,
Kang, and Cho 2021; Shi et al. 2022). However, these methods are limited in scenarios where the base and novel classes
are within the same domain.
To overcome the limitations of traditional FSS, Lei et
al. (2022) extend the FSS task to cross-domain few-shot
segmentation (CD-FSS) task, where the training and test-

Code — https://github.com/CVL-hub/GPRN.

Introduction
With the development of deep convolutional neural networks trained on large-scale datasets (Cordts et al. 2016;
Zhou et al. 2017), numerous tasks (Li et al. 2018; Li, Zeng,
and Shan 2020; Sun et al. 2022) have made promising
progress. However, data annotation is a resource-intensive
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6488

