The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Stochastic Approach to Bi-Level Optimization for
Hyperparameter Optimization and Meta Learning
Minyoung Kim1 , Timothy Hospedales1,2
1

Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
2
University of Edinburgh, UK
mikim21@gmail.com, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We tackle the general differentiable meta learning problem that
is ubiquitous in modern deep learning, including hyperparameter optimization, loss function learning, few-shot learning, invariance learning and more. These problems are often formalized as Bi-Level optimizations (BLO). We introduce a novel
perspective by turning a given BLO problem into a stochastic
optimization, where the inner loss function becomes a smooth
probability distribution, and the outer loss becomes an expected loss over the inner distribution. To solve this stochastic
optimization, we adopt Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) MCMC to sample inner distribution, and propose a
recurrent algorithm to compute the MC-estimated hypergradient. Our derivation is similar to forward-mode differentiation,
but we introduce a new first-order approximation that makes it
feasible for large models without needing to store huge Jacobian matrices. The main benefits are two-fold: i) Our stochastic
formulation takes into account uncertainty, which makes the
method robust to suboptimal inner optimization or non-unique
multiple inner minima due to overparametrization; ii) Compared to existing methods that often exhibit unstable behavior
and hyperparameter sensitivity in practice, our method leads
to considerably more reliable solutions. We demonstrate that
the new approach achieves promising results on diverse meta
learning problems and easily scales to learning 87M hyperparameters in the case of Vision Transformers.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.10417

1

Introduction

We consider general differentiable meta learning, which includes bi-level optimization (BLO) problems such as hyperparameter optimization (HPO) and few-shot meta-learning.
We introduce our problem setting, terminology and notation
through a representative BLO problem of learning neural
network regularizer hyperparameters (aka weight decay, or
L1/2-regularization). Expressed as a BLO, this is
min E(x,y)∼V [lV (x, y; θ∗ (λ))]
(1)
λ

s.t. θ∗ (λ) = arg min E(x,y)∼T [lT (x, y; θ)] + R(λ, θ),
θ

where θ are neural network parameters to learn, λ are all
hyperparameters to learn (often denoted as outer variables
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17913

or hyperparameters, depending on the context), T and V
indicate training and validation data sets, respectively, lT
and lV indicate training and validation losses, and R is the
regularization or weight decay term.
parameter-wise
P
P In the
2
regularization case, R(λ, θ) =
λ
θ
or
j
j
j λj |θj | in
j
which λ has the same structure as θ.
The main challenge in differentiable BLO is to efficiently
and accurately compute the hypergradient dlV /dλ to update the hyperparameters. In the literature there exist some
well-known approaches. Some aim to unroll the inner-loop
optimization (i.e., forward- or reverse-mode differentiation
(Franceschi et al. 2017), denoted by FMD and RMD, respectively), while others aim to compute it via the implicit
function theorem (IFT) to circumvent the infeasible memory cost of saving intermediate Hessian matrices (in FMD)
or computation graphs (in RMD) from unrolled inner optimization steps. Despite the theoretical promise of IFT-based
meta-gradient (Rajeswaran et al. 2019; Lorraine, Vicol, and
Duvenaud 2020) for memory-efficiency, it still suffers from
a difficult and potentially unstable Hessian inverse, and it is
highly reliant on the gradient-equal-to-zero (i.e., perfectly
converged) condition for the inner optimization. In practice
these drawbacks mean that it is unreliable and hard to tune.
A fundamental issue for all these existing BLO solutions
is that the inner optimization is deterministic, and they are
unable to account for the uncertainty in the inner problem
and/or its solution. When applied to contemporary deep learning there are at least two highly practical examples of inner
optimization uncertainty: When implemented in practice by
minibatch SGD with a finite number of steps, the inner loop
is not perfectly converged (violating IFT’s assumption); and
when applied to non-convex neural networks, the inner optimization has many local minima due to overparametrization (Vicol et al. 2022), leading to uncertainty over which
inner minima is returned.
To address these issues, we introduce a new stochastic
gradient approach to hyper-gradient calculation for BLO.
We generalize the standard deterministic BLO problem to
a stochastic optimization where the inner optimization produces a smooth probability distribution, and the outer optimization takes an expectation with respect to the inner posterior. This stochastic generalization allows us to deal with
uncertainty in the inner optimization arising from noise, the
use of minibatch SGD, or from multiple local minima. More

