The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Model Editing for LLM-based Aspect-Based Sentiment Classification
Shichen Li1 Zhongqing Wang1 * , Zheyu Zhao1 , Yue Zhang2 , Peifeng Li1
Natural Language Processing Lab, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
2
Westlake University
{scli06,zyzhao0104}@stu.suda.edu.cn, {zqwang, pfli}@suda.edu.cn
zhangyue@westlake.edu.cn

(a) Causal Tracing Analysis

Abstract

Impact of aspect on different layers

Input

Model editing aims at selectively updating a small subset
of a neural model’s parameters with an interpretable strategy to achieve desired modifications. It can significantly reduce computational costs to adapt to large language models
(LLMs). Given its ability to precisely target critical components within LLMs, model editing shows great potential for
efficient fine-tuning applications. In this work, we investigate model editing to serve an efficient method for adapting LLMs to solve aspect-based sentiment classification.
Through causal interventions, we trace and determine which
neuron hidden states are essential for the model’s predictions.
By performing interventions and restorations on each component of an LLM, we identify the importance of these components for aspect-based sentiment classification. Our findings
reveal that a distinct set of mid-layer representations is essential for detecting the sentiment polarity of given aspect
words. Leveraging these insights, we develop a model editing approach that focuses exclusively on these critical parts
of the LLM, leading to a more efficient method for adapting LLMs. Our in-domain and out-of-domain experiments
demonstrate that this approach achieves competitive results
compared to the currently strongest methods with significantly fewer trainable parameters, highlighting a more efficient and interpretable fine-tuning strategy.

[10,15]

Language Model

?

Causal Tracing

Which part is important?

Impact

1

Layers

Negative

(b) Model Editing
Input

Output

The food here is good, but the waiters are bad!

Positive

aspect

Input

Model Editing

Input
Sentiment Specific Layers

Language Model

positive

positive

negative

negative

neutral

neutral

Weight Editing
Representation Editing

Introduction

Figure 1: An illustration of our 2-steps model editing
method for LLM-based aspect-based sentiment classification.

Aspect-based sentiment classification (Hu and Liu 2004)
aims to determine the sentiment polarity of the aspects
within a sentence. Traditional ABSC methods (Tang et al.
2016; Tay, Tuan, and Hui 2018; Zhang, Zhou, and Wang
2022) have often relied on smaller, task-specific language
models which frequently fall short in capturing complex
contextual dependencies and diverse expressions of sentiment.
As language models continue to grow in size, adapting
these large language models (Touvron et al. 2023; Ouyang
et al. 2022) to ABSC through full-parameter fine-tuning
has become increasingly challenging. Various parameterefficient fine-tuning methods (Hu et al. 2022; Houlsby et al.
2019; Li and Liang 2021; Liu et al. 2024) have been developed to address the inefficiencies of full-parameter fine-

tuning and shown strong performance in ABSC (Li et al.
2022), but these methods still need to update across broad
sections of the model’s architecture, potentially leading to
redundancies and inefficiencies.
Model editing (Mitchell et al. 2022; Meng et al. 2022; Dai
et al. 2022) gives a promising way to further reduce the cost
by selectively updating a small subset of a neural model’s
parameters with an interpretable strategy and achieve desired modifications.
Recent works in model editing (Meng et al. 2023;
Mitchell et al. 2022; Meng et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2024)
has shown effectiveness and efficiency in various tasks by
modifying LLMs with minimal changes to their parameters.
These methods highlight that targeted updates to specific

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24467

