The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-View Incremental Learning with Structured Hebbian Plasticity for
Enhanced Fusion Efficiency
Yuhong Chen1,2 , Ailin Song2,3 , Huifeng Yin4 , Shuai Zhong2 , Fuhai Chen1 , Qi Xu5 ,
Shiping Wang1 * , Mingkun Xu2,4 *
1
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
Guangdong Institute of Intelligence Science and Technology, Hengqin, Zhuhai, China
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
4
Center for Brain Inspired Computing Research, Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
yhchen2320@163.com, sal314159@163.com, yinhf22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhongshuai@gdiist.cn,
chenfuhai3c@163.com, xuqi@dlut.edu.cn, shipingwangphd@163.com, xumingkun@gdiist.cn
2

Olfactory

Abstract

Auditory

The rapid evolution of multimedia technology has revolutionized human perception, paving the way for multi-view learning. However, traditional multi-view learning approaches are
tailored for scenarios with fixed data views, falling short of
emulating the intricate cognitive procedures of the human
brain processing signals sequentially. Our cerebral architecture seamlessly integrates sequential data through intricate
feed-forward and feedback mechanisms. In stark contrast,
traditional methods struggle to generalize effectively when
confronted with data spanning diverse domains, highlighting the need for innovative strategies that can mimic the
brain’s adaptability and dynamic integration capabilities. In
this paper, we propose a bio-neurologically inspired multiview incremental framework named MVIL aimed at emulating the brain’s fine-grained fusion of sequentially arriving
views. MVIL lies two fundamental modules: structured Hebbian plasticity and synaptic partition learning. The structured
Hebbian plasticity reshapes the structure of weights to express the high correlation between view representations, facilitating a fine-grained fusion of view representations. Moreover, synaptic partition learning is efficient in alleviating drastic changes in weights and also retaining old knowledge by
inhibiting partial synapses. These modules bionically play a
central role in reinforcing crucial associations between newly
acquired information and existing knowledge repositories,
thereby enhancing the network’s capacity for generalization.
Experimental results on six benchmark datasets show MVIL’s
effectiveness over state-of-the-art methods.

Vision

Signals process sequentially...

Leaf venation
Leaf shape

Leaf color

Views collect sequentially...

Figure 1: Sensory signals reach the brain sequentially, and
in parallel with this, the view data increases dynamically.

especially in cutting-edge fields like brain-computer interfaces (Zhu et al. 2023; Kazi et al. 2022), which use multiple sensors, such as electrodes, to monitor neural signals
and convert them into commands, quite similar to the complex way in which the human brain handles multiple data. As
shown in Fig. 1, the human brain perceives and makes decisions by gathering information from diverse sensory channels, such as visual, olfactory, and auditory ones. Nevertheless, these sensory signals to the brain’s processing center
are not instantaneous (Pesnot Lerousseau et al. 2022). To
compensate for this temporal disparity and seamlessly integrate the diverse streams of information, the brain deploys
sophisticated mechanisms that intertwine feed-forward and
feedback mechanisms (Hou et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2022;
Jiang et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2022). The brain continuously interacts with the external environment sequentially,
constantly learning and optimizing its overall perception,
thereby achieving a higher level of adaptability and intelligence (Chiel and Beer 1997; Ito et al. 2022).
However, traditional multi-view learning deals with scenarios where all data views are available in advance (Wan
et al. 2024a; Lu et al. 2024b; Wan et al. 2023). Specifically,
they prioritize learning new view data over the whole knowledge accumulation, thus lacking the adaptability and scalability to efficiently integrate sequentially acquired data from
multiple views. In fact, they neglect the scenarios in which
the human brain dynamically handles and conveys new view
information, adapts, and optimizes overall cognition. This

Introduction
Swift advancements in multimedia technology have fundamentally altered human perception of the world and laid the
foundation for advanced analytical methods like multi-view
learning (Wen et al. 2023; Li et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2019;
Wu et al. 2023; Zhuang et al. 2024; Lu et al. 2024a). This
technology enhances information abundance by describing
data in varied formats and views. In practical applications,
multi-view data are collected and constructed dynamically,
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1265

