The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Agent-Aware Training for Agent-Agnostic Action Advising
in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Yaoquan Wei, Shunyu Liu* , Jie Song, Tongya Zheng, Kaixuan Chen, Mingli Song
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
{yaoquanwei,liushunyu,sjie,chenkx,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, doujiang zheng@163.com

Abstract
Action advising endeavors to leverage supplementary guidance from expert teachers to alleviate the issue of sampling
inefficiency in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). Previous agent-specific action advising methods are hindered by
imperfections in the agent itself, while agent-agnostic approaches exhibit limited adaptability to the learning agent.
In this study, we propose a novel framework called AgentAware trAining yet Agent-Agnostic Action Advising (A7) to
strike a balance between the two. The underlying concept of
A7 revolves around utilizing the similarity of state features
as an indicator for soliciting advice. However, unlike prior
methodologies, the measurement of state feature similarity is
performed by neither the error-prone learning agent nor the
agent-agnostic advisor. Instead, we employ a proxy model
to extract state features that are both discriminative (adaptive to the agent) and generally applicable (robust to agent
noise). Furthermore, we utilize behavior cloning to train a
model for reusing advice and introduce an intrinsic reward
for the advised samples to incentivize the utilization of expert guidance. Experiments are conducted on the GridWorld,
LunarLander, and six prominent scenarios from Atari games.
The results demonstrate that A7 significantly accelerates the
learning process and surpasses existing methods (both agentspecific and agent-agnostic) by a substantial margin.

Agent Uncertainty /
State Novelty
Current State
Current
State

History
States

...

(a) Existing methods
Feature
Extractor

Feature
Matching

Feature
Extractor

...

Teacher

Teacher

(b) Our method

Figure 1: Comparing our method with the existing methods
for action advising. (a) Existing methods rely on estimating
the uncertainty or novelty for the current state to seek teacher
advice. (b) Our method conducts feature matching to seek
teacher advice, which considers the relationship between the
current state and history states.
engage in numerous interactions with the environment in order to acquire a promising policy.
To this date, there has been a remarkable amount of research effort to overcome the sampling inefficiency with the
aid of online expert feedback, including action-based advice (Torrey and Taylor 2013; Silva et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2023), preference-based evaluation (Christiano et al. 2017;
Lee, Smith, and Abbeel 2021; OpenAI 2023), and languagebased instruction (Goyal, Niekum, and Mooney 2019; Zhou
and Small 2021). Among the diverse approaches, action advising is recently gaining increasing attention as a straightforward yet compelling solution for its more accurate guidance on the policy. Nevertheless, the inherent nature of continuous interactions in action advising inevitably burdens the
expert with substantial communications. Hence, the agent
must judiciously determine when to seek guidance and effectively leverage the limited resources of expert advice.
Existing action advising approaches determine whether
or not acquire action advice from the expert by evaluating
the agent uncertainty or novelty of the current state, as depicted in Figure 1(a), which can be broadly classified into

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has emerged as a wellestablished paradigm for addressing sequential decisionmaking tasks (Mnih et al. 2013; Barto, Sutton, and Anderson 2020; Jiang, Xie, and Yang 2021; Jiang et al. 2022; Liu
et al. 2024b) spanning across diverse practical domains, including video games (Vinyals et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2020),
robotics (Sangiovanni et al. 2018; Andrychowicz et al.
2020), auto-driving (Chen, Yuan, and Tomizuka 2019; Kiran
et al. 2021), industrial control (Zhou et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2020; Sharma et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2024a) etc. DRL necessitates the agent’s acquisition of knowledge through trial and
error, enabling them to adapt and enhance their performance
by interacting with the environment. However, a formidable
challenge within the realm of DRL lies in sampling inefficiency (Yarats et al. 2021; Ye et al. 2022), as the agent must
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21482

