The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Battling the Non-stationarity in Time Series Forecasting via Test-time Adaptation
HyunGi Kim1 , Siwon Kim1 , Jisoo Mok1 , Sungroh Yoon1, 2, 3 †
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
3
AIIS, ASRI, and INMC, Seoul National University
rlagusrl0128@snu.ac.kr, tuslkk17@gmail.com, magicshop1118@snu.ac.kr, sryoon@snu.ac.kr

(a) Test-time Failure of (b) Proactive Adaptation with POGT
GT TAFAS Full GT Adapt
POGT
a Source Forecaster
Test Data

Abstract

MSE

Deep Neural Networks have spearheaded remarkable advancements in time series forecasting (TSF), one of the major tasks in time series modeling. Nonetheless, the nonstationarity of time series undermines the reliability of pretrained source time series forecasters in mission-critical deployment settings. In this study, we introduce a pioneering
test-time adaptation framework tailored for TSF (TSF-TTA).
TAFAS, the proposed approach to TSF-TTA, flexibly adapts
source forecasters to continuously shifting test distributions
while preserving the core semantic information learned during pre-training. The novel utilization of partially-observed
ground truth and gated calibration module enables proactive,
robust, and model-agnostic adaptation of source forecasters. Experiments on diverse benchmark datasets and cuttingedge architectures demonstrate the efficacy and generality
of TAFAS, especially in long-term forecasting scenarios that
suffer from significant distribution shifts.

Forecasting Time Steps

Look-back
Window

Forecasting Window
Full GT

Figure 1: (a) The performance of a pre-trained source forecaster degrades when it encounters distribution-shifted inputs at test-time. In the figure, the distribution shift occurs
through the gradual increase of mean value. (b) The sequential nature of time series provides the opportunity to proactively adapt the forecaster with partially-observed ground
truth (POGT) before acquiring full ground truth (GT).

Code — https://github.com/kimanki/TAFAS

aim to improve the robustness of time series forecasters
through advancements in the pre-training process (Kim et al.
2021; Fan et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024b). Unfortunately,
as the non-stationarity worsens the distributional discrepancy between training and test data over time, the pretrained forecaster becomes increasingly unreliable, even if
it has learned meaningful temporal semantics from training
data (Kuznetsov and Mohri 2014). In Figure 1(a), we visualize how constantly evolving, non-stationary test data negatively affect the forecasting results of a pre-trained time series forecaster.
This shortcoming of existing approaches underscores the
need to continuously adapt the pre-trained source forecaster
on shifted test-time inputs while preserving its core semantics. Adapting the source forecaster to incorporate new
time-variant semantics within test-time inputs allows it to
reflect the ever-changing test distributions. In this regard,
we pioneer a test-time adaptation (TTA) framework tailored
for TSF (TSF-TTA). TTA, which has been primarily studied in the computer vision domain under classification settings (Wang et al. 2021; Niu et al. 2022, 2023; Lee et al.
2024), dynamically adjusts a pre-trained classifier on test inputs; this objective of TTA makes it well-aligned with the
aforementioned motivation of adapting the source forecaster
to newly arriving test data. Traditionally, TTA has operated
under two main assumptions on the nature of test inputs.

Introduction
Time series forecasting (TSF), which is one of the most
core tasks in time series modeling, aims to predict future
values based on historical data points. The widespread applications of TSF across various industries include but are
not limited to: weather prediction (Verma, Heinonen, and
Garg 2024), traffic forecasting (Liu et al. 2023), stock market prediction (Li et al. 2023), and supply chain management (Hosseinnia Shavaki and Ebrahimi Ghahnavieh 2023).
Such a broad and over-arching impact of TSF results highlights the importance of developing a dependable time series forecaster, whose predictions maintain reliability despite changes in external factors.
A critical bottleneck in the reliable deployment of pretrained time series forecasters is created by the nonstationary nature of real-world time series data that leads to
continuous data distribution shifts (Petropoulos et al. 2022).
Previous works on alleviating the effect of non-stationarity
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding Author

17868

