The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Trusted Lesion-assessment Network for Interpretable Diagnosis of Coronary
Artery Disease in Coronary CT Angiography
Xinghua Ma1,2 , Xinyan Fang1 , Mingye Zou1 , Gongning Luo1,2 * , Wei Wang3 , Kuanquan Wang1 ,
Zhaowen Qiu4* , Xin Gao2* , Shuo Li5,6
2

1
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
Computational Bioscience Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
3
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
4
College of Computer and Control Engineering, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin, China
5
Department of Computer and Data Science, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, United States
6
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, United States
luogongning@hit.edu.cn; qiuzw@nefu.edu.cn; xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

Adhering to the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography (SCCT) guidelines (Leipsic et al. 2014), arterial stenoses are categorized as significant (Sig.) or nonsignificant (Non-sig.) based on whether the luminal narrowing > 50%. Atheromatous plaques are categorized as Calcified (Calc.), Non-calcified (Non-calc.), or Mixed, based
on the presence of calcium deposits. Coronary CT angiography (CCTA) is widely used for the screening, diagnosis, and
prognosis of CAD (Abdelrahman et al. 2020). Automated
CCTA-based diagnosis offers a more efficient and intelligent
diagnostic mode for radiologists. Nevertheless, the level of
interpretability significantly affects the clinical reliability of
automated diagnosis, which in turn impacts its practicality
in clinical settings.
Despite considerable progress in CAD automated diagnosis, researchers often overlook the significance of
interpretability, which affects clinical application. Early
computer-aided diagnosis for CAD relied on semiautomated technologies (Xu et al. 2012). While these methods required substantial manual input from healthcare professionals, they inherently offered some interpretability. The
rise of deep learning in Computer Vision (CV) has led
to many automated CAD diagnostic methods (Singh et al.
2020). (Zreik et al. 2018) combined Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
for multi-class classification of stenoses and plaques. (Denzinger et al. 2019) and (Ma et al. 2021) further advanced
these C&RNN architectures, making notable progress in detecting Sig. stenosis. (Zhang, Ma, and Li 2022) analyzed
Curved Planar Reformation (CPR) volumes and employed
Faster R-CNN (Girshick 2015) for CAD-related object detection, while (Van Herten et al. 2023) inferred surface
meshes of arteries and plaques for CAD Reporting & Data
System (CAD-RADS) scoring. However, the lack of attention to interpretability during network parameter optimization hinders their suitability for real clinical settings, diminishing radiologists’ trust.
The limitations in interpretability of previous technologies throughout the diagnostic process can be attributed to
two main factors: network architecture and prediction outcomes. (1) Network architecture: The causality in the diag-

Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) poses a significant threat
to cardiovascular patients worldwide, underscoring the critical importance of automated CAD diagnostic technologies
in clinical practice. Previous technologies for lesion assessment in Coronary CT Angiography (CCTA) images have
been insufficient in terms of interpretability, resulting in solutions that lack clinical reliability in both network architecture and prediction outcomes, even when diagnoses are accurate. To address the limitation of interpretability, we introduce the Trusted Lesion-Assessment Network (TLA-Net),
which provides a clinically reliable solution for multi-view
CAD diagnosis: (1) The causality-informed evidence collection constructs a causal graph for the diagnostic process and
implements causal interventions, preventing confounders’ interference and enhancing the transparency of the network architecture. (2) The clinically-aligned uncertainty integration
hierarchically combines Dirichlet distributions from various
views based on clinical priors, offering confidence coefficients for prediction outcomes that align with physicians’ image analysis procedures. Experimental results on a dataset of
2,618 lesions demonstrate that TLA-Net, supported by its interpretable methodological design, exhibits superior performance with outstanding generalization, domain adaptability,
and robustness.

Code — https:
//github.com/PerceptionComputingLab/CAD Diagnosis

Introduction
The interpretability of methodologies is crucial for
computer-aided diagnosis, especially when addressing
severe conditions like coronary artery disease (CAD)
(Kagiyama et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2023). CAD, a prevalent cardiovascular condition, arises from arterial stenosis
caused by atheromatous plaques of varying compositions.
This condition can lead to life-threatening events such as
myocardial infarction and heart failure (Pagliaro et al. 2020).
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6009

