The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Implicit Relative Labeling-Importance Aware Multi-Label Metric Learning
Jun-Xiang Mao1,2,3 , Yong Rui4 , Min-Ling Zhang1,2 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Information Technology and Data Management Department of China Mobile Communications Group Zhejiang Co., Ltd
4
Lenovo Research, Lenovo Group Ltd., Beijing, China
maojx@seu.edu.cn, yongrui@lenovo.com, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

2

Abstract

much sky

Multi-label metric learning, as an extension of metric learning to multi-label scenarios, aims to learn better similarity
metrics for objects with rich semantics. Existing multi-label
metric learning approaches employ the common assumption
of equal labeling-importance, i.e., all associated labels are
considered relevant to the training instance, while there is no
differentiation in the relative importance of their semantics.
However, this common assumption does not reflect the fact
that the importance of each relevant label is generally different, even though such importance information is not directly
accessible from the training examples. In this paper, we claim
that it is beneficial to leverage the implicit Relative LabelingImportance (RLI) information to facilitate multi-label metric
learning. Specifically, the manifold structure within the feature space is exploited by local linear reconstruction, and then
the RLIs are recovered by transferring such structure to the
label space. Subsequently, a discrimiative multi-label metric
learning framework is introduced to align the predictive modeling outputs with the recovered RLIs, under which instances
with similar RLI are implicitly pulled closer to each other,
while those with dissimilar RLI are pushed further apart. Comprehensive experiments on benchmark multi-label datasets
validate the superiority of our proposed approach in learning
effective similarity metrics between multi-label examples.

a little grass

much sky

(a)

mostly horse

mostly grass

a little horse
(b)

Figure 1: Two landscape images both annotated with the
labels ‘horse’, ‘grass’, and ‘sky’ simultaneously. For each
image, the implicit relative labeling-importance (RIL) (a):
‘horse’ > ‘sky’ > ‘grass’ and (b): ‘grass’ > ‘sky’ > ‘horse’.

Introduction
Similarity between objects plays an important role in both
human cognitive processes and the recognition capabilities of
intelligent systems. Appropriately measuring such similarity
for a given task is crucial to the performance of many machine learning algorithms, such as k-nearest neighbor (K NN),
k-means, etc. Metric learning, as a solution to this problem,
aims to learn task-specific similarity metrics by leveraging
side information such as linkages and comparisons derived
from examples (Xing et al. 2002; Weinberger, Blitzer, and
Saul 2005). The learned similarity metrics align with the
inherent relations between examples, ensuring that similar
instances exhibit proximity while distances between dissimilar instances are sufficiently large. With its powerful ability
to characterize similarities, metric learning has been widely
applied in real-world applications, including face recognition
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19414

(Uzun, Cevikalp, and Saribas 2022), person re-identification
(Liao and Shao 2022), information retrieval (Warburg et al.
2023), and recommender systems (Yu et al. 2023).
Despite the tremendous success of metric learning, the
vast majority of research has focused on single-label scenarios where each instance is associated with only one label
(Ye et al. 2020; Yang, Wang, and Zhang 2023; Ren et al.
2024). However, in the face of more prevalent and practical
multi-label scenarios, where each instance is associated with
multiple labels, existing single-label metric learning techniques are not applicable due to the complicated semantics of
multi-label examples. Therefore, multi-label metric learning,
which aims to assess the more intricate semantic similarities
among objects with rich semantics, has emerged as a new
research hotspot in recent years (Liu and Tsang 2015; Gouk,
Pfahringer, and Cree 2016; Sun and Zhang 2021; Mao, Wang,
and Zhang 2023; Mao, Hang, and Zhang 2024).
It is worth noting that the labeling information for multilabel training examples is categorical, i.e., each label is regarded to be either relevant or irrelevant for each multi-label
instance. Therefore, existing multi-label metric learning approaches learn from multi-label examples by taking the common assumption of equal labeling-importance, i.e., each relevant label contributes equally in characterizing semantics
of multi-label examples. However, for real-world multi-label
examples, the importance of each associated relevant label is

