The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Identifying Macro Conditional Independencies and Macro Total Effects in
Summary Causal Graphs with Latent Confounding
Simon Ferreira1, 2 , Charles K. Assaad1
1

Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Pierre Louis d’Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, F75012, Paris, France
2
ENS de Lyon, F69342, Lyon, France
simon.ferreira@sorbonne-universite.fr, charles.assaad@inserm.fr

Abstract

among all pairs of observed variables. This knowledge is often unavailable, particularly in complex, high-dimensional
settings, thus limiting the applicability of causal inference
theory and tools. Therefore, recently there has been more
interest in partially specified causal graphs (Perkovic 2020;
Anand et al. 2023; Ferreira and Assaad 2024; Assaad et al.
2024). An important type of partially specified graphs is
the cluster-DMG which provides a coarser representation
of causal relations through vertices that represent a cluster
of variables (and can contain cycles). The partial specification of cluster-DMG arises from the fact that each vertex in an cluster-DMG represents a cluster of variables. A
well-known special case of cluster-DMGs is the clusterADMG, which imposes an acyclicity assumption on the
graph (Anand et al. 2023). Another notable special case of
cluster-DMGs in dynamic systems is the summary causal
graph (SCG), where each cluster represents one time series
in spacio-temporal data or repeated measurements through
time of the same variable in a longitudinal study, and all temporal information is omitted from the graph (Assaad, Devijver, and Gaussier 2022).

Understanding causal relations in dynamic systems is essential in epidemiology. While causal inference methods have
been extensively studied, they often rely on fully specified
causal graphs, which may not always be available in complex dynamic systems. Partially specified causal graphs, and
in particular summary causal graphs (SCGs), provide a simplified representation of causal relations between time series
when working spacio-temporal data, omitting temporal information and focusing on causal structures between clusters of of temporal variables. Unlike fully specified causal
graphs, SCGs can contain cycles, which complicate their
analysis and interpretation. In addition, their cluster-based
nature introduces new challenges concerning the types of
queries of interest: macro queries, which involve relationships between clusters represented as vertices in the graph,
and micro queries, which pertain to relationships between
variables that are not directly visible through the vertices of
the graph. In this paper, we first clearly distinguish between
macro conditional independencies and micro conditional independencies and between macro total effects and micro total
effects. Then, we demonstrate the soundness and completeness of the d-separation to identify macro conditional independencies in SCGs. Furthermore, we establish that the docalculus is sound and complete for identifying macro total
effects in SCGs. Finally, we give a graphical characterization
for the non-identifiability of macro total effects in SCGs.

In SCGs (or any cluster-DMG), there are two primary
types of queries of interest. The first, called a micro query,
involves considering one or a few specific variables (but not
all) represented by a vertex in an SCG. The second, called a
macro query, involves considering the whole cluster of variables represented by a vertex in an SCG. This paper focuses
on two types of macro queries: macro conditional independencies and macro total effects. Specifically, we show that
the d-separation criterion and the do-calculus respectively
identify macro conditional independencies and macro total
effects in SCGs. By addressing these macro queries, we aim
to provide practical solutions for inferring causal effects in
real-world applications where causal relations are only partially understood. In particular, the concept of macro queries
is crucial for public health strategies and epidemiological
modeling. For example, the macro total effect can be used
to understand the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the
flu epidemic and vice versa (Boëlle et al. 2020; Ferguson,
Galvani, and Bush 2003), shedding light on the broader impacts of interventions and natural immunity dynamics over
extended periods. Note that we assume having access to
spacio-temporal data with full time series, i.e., where the
coverage from the beginning of generative process is en-

Introduction
In observational studies, causal graphs are vital for decisionmaking regarding interventions and can be useful for detecting independencies between variables. Several standard
tools have been developed for fully specified causal graphs,
typically represented as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) or
acyclic directed mixed graphs (ADMGs). For example, dseparation (Pearl 1988) enables the detection of conditional
independencies directly from the graph. Similarly, the docalculus (Pearl 1995) allows for the derivation of total effect
estimands from observational data. These results were also
extended to directed mixed graphs (DMGs) (Richardson
1997; Forré and Mooij 2017, 2018; Forré and Mooij 2020).
However, constructing a fully specified causal graph is challenging because it requires knowledge of the causal relations
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26787

