The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semantic Ambiguity Modeling and Propagation for Fine-Grained Visual Cross
View Geo-Localization
Mingtao Feng1 , Fenghao Tian1 , Jianqiao Luo2 * , Zijie Wu2
Weisheng Dong1 , Yaonan Wang2 , Ajmal Mian3
1

Xidian University
Hunan University
3
University of Western Australia
2

Abstract
Visual cross view geo-localization is generally approached
within a joint retrieval-and-calibration framework. However,
existing methods overlook semantic ambiguities arising from
query and reference images characterized by low overlap, dynamic foregrounds, viewpoint changes, and perceptual aliasing. This makes it challenging to automatically control the
relative importance of the two tasks, potentially compromising the retrieval task in favor of the offset regression. Consequently, the model may encounter conflicting dominating
gradients during joint training. To address this, we propose
to model the semantic ambiguity during the offset regression process by integrating associated uncertainty scores, represented as 2D Gaussian distributions, to mitigate negative
transfer effects within the joint tasks. We further introduce
an uncertainty-aware similarity metric to enhance similarity
assessment between query and reference images, accounting for their semantic ambiguities. This metric propagates
uncertainty scores into the retrieval task, focusing on certain samples and learning discriminative feature embeddings,
allowing the model to adaptively handle conflicting dominating gradients during joint training. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method improves the overall performance of the joint tasks, achieving state-of-the-art results on
the VIGOR and CVACT datasets.

Figure 1: a) Positive sample (query image and blue box
aerial image) and semi-positive samples (query image and
yellow box aerial image). b) Semantic ambiguity destabilizes the training process, resulting in negative transfer
within the joint task.

calization; 2) the matching reference image is already available with coarse GPS priors, requiring only offset regression
without global image retrieval. However, these assumptions
are far from practical scenarios because: 1) query images
can be captured at arbitrary locations in the area of interest, with reference images typically taken before the queries
arise, leading to misalignments and location estimation errors of tens of meters when query images are far from the
reference image center. 2) In cases of GPS denial or large
GPS errors, coarse GPS priors cannot reliably select matching reference images, making fine-grained regression alone
insufficient for accurate localization. VIGOR (Zhu et al.
2021a) first identifies the issue of reference samples that,
while not centered on query locations, partially cover them,
leading to multiple overlapping reference images (yellow
boxes in Fig.1a) for the same query location (red stars in
Fig.1a). This disrupts the one-to-one correspondence, necessitating image retrieval for coarse localization and withinimage calibration for fine-grained offset prediction. Consequently, the cross view geo-localization problem is generally addressed within a joint retrieval-and-calibration framework, where retrieval and offset regression objectives are

Code — https://github.com/Afoolbird/SAMP

Introduction
The goal of fine-grained visual cross view geo-localization
is to predict the geographic location of a ground query image with respect to a GPS-tagged reference image database.
Utilizing readily available reference images as maps offers a
cost-effective and promising approach to localization, with
significant potential for applications such as autonomous
driving (Wang et al. 2024), ant robot navigation (Hou et al.
2024; Feng et al. 2023b,a, 2022, 2021), etc.
Previous works (Yang et al. 2021; Liu and Li 2019; Zhu
et al. 2022; Xia et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024) assume ideal
scenarios: 1) each ground query image has a corresponding
aerial reference image precisely centered on the query location, using the GPS coordinate of the central pixel for lo* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2978

