The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

D&M: Enriching E-commerce Videos with Sound Effects by Key Moment
Detection and SFX Matching
Jingyu Liu1,2 , Minquan Wang2 , Ye Ma2 , Bo Wang2 , Aozhu Chen1,2 , Quan Chen2 , Peng Jiang2 ,
Xirong Li1†
1

Renmin University of China
2
Kuaishou Technology
liujingyu2023@ruc.edu.cn, chenquan06@kuaishou.com

-

Abstract
Videos showcasing specific products are increasingly important for E-commerce. Key moments naturally exist as the first
appearance of a specific product, presentation of its distinctive features, the presence of a buying link, etc. Adding proper
sound effects (SFX) to such moments, or video decoration
with SFX (VDSFX), is crucial for enhancing user engaging
experience. Previous work adds SFX to videos by video-toSFX matching at a holistic level, lacking the ability of adding
SFX to a specific moment. Meanwhile, previous studies on
video highlight detection or video moment retrieval consider
only moment localization, leaving moment to SFX matching
untouched. By contrast, we propose in this paper D&M, a
unified method that accomplishes key moment detection and
moment-to-SFX matching simultaneously. Moreover, for the
new VDSFX task we build a large-scale dataset SFX-Moment
from an E-commerce video creation platform. For a fair comparison, we build competitive baselines by extending a number of current video moment detection methods to the new
task. Extensive experiments on SFX-Moment show the superior performance of the proposed method over the baselines.

(a) Input video

-

Wow~

Ring~-

Product Displaying by Shaking

Buying Link

Hoo~

Scene Switching

(b) Ground truth

-

Wow~

Mmm~

-

(c) Prediction by Moment-DETR+

Ring~

Ring~

Ring~

Ring~

(d) Prediction by R2 -Tuning+

-

Hoo~

Bling~

Ring~-

(e) Prediction by proposed D&M

Code and Data — https://rucmm.github.io/VDSFX/

1

Figure 1: Illustration of video decoration with sound effects (VDSFX), aiming to automatically add proper SFX
to key moments, which are also auto-detected, in a given
E-commerce video. Moment-DETR+ and R2 -Tuning+ are
baselines we implement, by re-purposing Moment-DETR
(Lei, Berg, and Bansal 2021) and R2 -Tuning (Liu et al.
2024) for the new task, with their detected moments used
for moment-to-SFX matching. Best viewed digitally.

Introduction

The eye sees better when the sound is great‡ . In this paper
we aim to automatically add sound effects (SFX) to key moments, which is also auto-detected, in E-commerce videos
to enhance their expressiveness, see Fig. 1.
Videos showcasing specific products are increasingly important for E-commerce. Key moments naturally exist as
the first appearance of a specific product, presentation of its
major features, the presence of a buying link, etc. Adding
proper SFX to such moments is crucial for enhancing the
engaging experience that helps turn a video viewer to a product consumer. Note that in contrast to a background music
(BGM), a sound effect is a sound, not music. The two differ
from their purposes and durations. BGMs play subtly behind
the primary content to enhance the atmosphere or mood,
while SFX are to boost the expressiveness of key moments

in a short period of time. As such, SFX are much shorter and
need to explicitly synchronize with the picture.
Previous studies add SFX to videos either by video-toSFX matching (Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2017; Lin et al.
2023a; Wilkins et al. 2023) or by video-to-SFX generation
(Ghose and Prevost 2020; Huang et al. 2023; Comunità et al.
2024), both at a holistic level. They thus lack the ability
of adding SFX to a specific moment. Meanwhile, previous
studies on video highlight detection (Lei, Berg, and Bansal
2021; Li, Sun, and Xiao 2024) or video moment retrieval
(Moon et al. 2023b; Liu et al. 2024) consider only moment
localization, leaving moment to SFX matching untouched.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author (xirong@ruc.edu.cn)
‡
by Steven Spielberg

5496

