The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Large-Scale School Mapping Using Weakly Supervised Deep Learning for
Universal School Connectivity
Isabelle Tingzon, Utku Can Ozturk, Ivan Dotu
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
itingzon@unicef.org, uozturk@unicef.org, jdoturodriguez@unicef.org

Abstract

However, while governments generally have comprehensive records of the schools in their national register, these
records often lack geographical coordinates, especially in
developing countries. For example, government partners in
Senegal estimate that approximately 20% of school geolocations are missing from their official dataset. Meanwhile, only
about 7,000 out of the estimated 33,000 schools in Kenya
have corresponding GPS coordinates (Giga 2024; Kenya
Ministry of Education 2024). These unmapped schools are
often located in rural and remote areas, meaning that without
accurate data, governments and internet service providers
risk overlooking the most vulnerable child populations.
To address these challenges, we look towards deep learning and satellite imagery to close critical gaps in school location data. Previous studies have shown that despite variations in school structures across countries, schools typically
have identifiable overhead signatures that make them distinguishable from high-resolution satellite imagery (Maduako
et al. 2022; Yi et al. 2019). However, extracting highly local
school location information typically requires costly bounding box or pixel-level annotations, which can be challenging
to acquire on a global scale (Fu et al. 2021, 2022).
This study improves upon previous works by introducing
a weakly supervised deep learning approach that approximates the precise geographical coordinates of school locations using only low-cost, classification-level annotations
(Lee et al. 2021). We began by developing a pipeline to create country-level school mapping datasets by integrating information from various public data sources, including OpenStreetMap (OSM), Overture Maps, and GigaMaps. Leveraging model ensembling techniques that combine transformerbased models and convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
we trained school classification models using satellite images, achieving AUPRC scores above 0.96 across 10 pilot
African countries. We then used explainable AI (XAI) to
further localize the schools within the images. We also examined how model performance varies between urban and
rural subregions and compared regional models (trained on
data from multiple countries) with local models (trained on
data from a single country).
Using our best-performing models, we demonstrate the
viability and scalability of our approach by generating nationwide maps of school locations for selected countries in
Africa and present a detailed analysis of the results. Finally,

Improving global school connectivity is critical for ensuring
inclusive and equitable quality education. To reliably estimate
the cost of connecting schools, governments and connectivity
providers require complete and accurate school location data
– a resource that is often scarce in many low- and middleincome countries. To address this challenge, we propose a
cost-effective, scalable approach to locating schools in highresolution satellite images using weakly supervised deep
learning techniques. Our best models, which combine vision transformers and convolutional neural networks, achieve
AUPRC values above 0.96 across 10 pilot African countries. Leveraging explainable AI techniques, our approach
can approximate the precise geographical coordinates of the
school locations using only low-cost, classification-level annotations. To demonstrate the scalability of our method, we
generate nationwide maps of school location predictions in
African countries and present a detailed analysis of our results, using Senegal as our case study. Finally, we demonstrate the immediate usability of our work by introducing
an interactive web mapping tool to streamline human-in-theloop model validation efforts by government partners. This
work successfully showcases the real-world utility of deep
learning and satellite images for planning regional infrastructure and accelerating universal school connectivity.

Introduction
Globally, approximately 2.2 billion children and young people – two-thirds of the world’s youth – do not have access to
the internet (UNICEF 2020). The absence of internet connectivity not only limits children’s opportunities for online
education but also prevents them from developing the digital
skills needed to compete in the modern economy. Disparities in school connectivity can exacerbate existing inequities
and widen the gap in educational outcomes for children with
and without internet access. To help bridge the digital divide, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and International Telecommunication Union (ITU) launched Giga,
a global initiative to connect every school to the internet
by 2030. To reach this target, governments and connectivity providers require complete and accurate school location
data to reliably estimate the cost of connecting schools and
strategically allocate their financial resources.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28449

