The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Verifying Proportionality in Temporal Voting
Edith Elkind1 , Svetlana Obraztsova2 , Jannik Peters3 , Nicholas Teh4
1

Northwestern University, USA
2
Carleton University, Canada
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
University of Oxford, UK
edith.elkind@northwestern.edu, svetlanaobraztsova@cunet.carleton.ca, peters@nus.edu.sg, nicholas.teh@cs.ox.ac.uk
Abstract

the concept of justified representation (JR) and its variants
(such as proportional justified representation (PJR) and extended justified representation (EJR)), which aim to capture
the idea that large cohesive groups of voters should be fairly
represented in the final outcome (Aziz et al. 2017; SánchezFernández et al. 2017; Aziz et al. 2018; Peters, Pierczyński,
and Skowron 2021; Brill and Peters 2023).
However, the existing notions of fairness do not fully capture the complexity of our setting: traditional multiwinner
voting models consider decisions made in a single round,
with the entire set of candidates to fund (or candidates) being chosen simultaneously. In contrast, in our model the decisions are made over time, voters’ preferences may evolve,
and a candidate may be chosen multiple times. This calls for
adapting the JR axioms to the temporal setting.
Temporal considerations in the multiwinner voting setting have been studied recently, most notably in the line
of work known as perpetual voting (Lackner 2020; Lackner and Maly 2023) or temporal voting (Elkind, Neoh, and
Teh 2024; Zech et al. 2024), and have broad real-world applications (see the recent survey by Elkind et al. (2024)). In
particular, Bulteau et al. (2021) and, subsequently, Chandak
et al. (2024) defined temporal analogues of the justified representation axioms and investigated whether existing multiwinner rules with strong axiomatic properties can be adapted
to the temporal setting so as to satisfy the new axioms.

We study a model of temporal voting where there is a fixed
time horizon, and at each round the voters report their preferences over the available candidates and a single candidate is
selected. Prior work has adapted popular notions of justified
representation as well as voting rules that provide strong representation guarantees from the multiwinner election setting
to this model. In our work, we focus on the complexity of
verifying whether a given outcome offers proportional representation. We show that in the temporal setting verification is
strictly harder than in multiwinner voting, but identify natural
special cases that enable efficient algorithms.

1

Introduction

Consider a large corporation that has decided to improve its
public image and to give back to the society by engaging
in corporate philanthropy over the next decade. They will
commit a small fraction of their profits towards supporting
the efforts of a single charitable organization, to be selected
on an annual basis. The management of this corporation decides to ask its customers, staff, and shareholders for input as
to which charity organization it should select each year. Furthermore, the charity selected is of strategic importance—it
would directly impact the company’s corporate image and
hence profitability. As such, it is important for the company
to ensure that the selection is representative of what its customers, staff, and shareholders care about and that it would
create maximum impact for the charity organization they
choose to support.
It is natural to view this problem through the lens of
multiwinner voting (Faliszewski et al. 2017; Elkind et al.
2017; Lackner and Skowron 2023): indeed, the corporation’s
goal is to select a fixed-size subset of candidates (in this
case, charities) while respecting the preferences of agents
(in this case, the customers, staff, and shareholders). In this
context, several notions of representation and fairness have
been proposed over the past decade, spanning across proportional representation (Elkind et al. 2017; Aziz and Lee
2020), diversity (Bredereck et al. 2018; Celis, Huang, and
Vishnoi 2018), and excellence, amongst others (Lackner and
Skowron 2023). Perhaps the most prominent among these is

1.1

Our Contributions

We build upon the works of Bulteau et al. (2021) and Chandak et al. (2024), and focus on the complexity of verifying
whether a given solution satisfies justified representation axioms. This task is important if, e.g., the outcome is fully or
partially determined by external considerations, so explicitly
using an algorithm to obtain an outcome with strong representation guarantees is not feasible, but representation remains an important concern. In multiwinner voting setting,
the verification problem is known to be coNP-hard for PJR
and EJR, but polynomial-time solvable for JR. We argue that
the existing complexity results do not automatically transfer
from the multiwinner setting to the temporal setting. However, we develop new proofs specifically tailored to the temporal setting, and show that in temporal elections all three
properties are coNP-hard to verify, even under strong constraints on the structure of the input instance. Our complex-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13805

