The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MetaNeRV: Meta Neural Representations for Videos
with Spatial-Temporal Guidance
Jialong Guo1 * , Ke Liu1 * , Jiangchao Yao2 , Zhihua Wang1 , Jiajun Bu1 , Haishuai Wang1†
1

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems,
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University, China
{jialongguo, keliu99, zhihua wang, bjj, haishuai.wang}@zju.edu.cn, Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

{ } =1

Neural Representations for Videos (NeRV) has emerged as a
promising implicit neural representation (INR) approach for
video analysis, which represents videos as neural networks
with frame indexes as inputs. However, NeRV-based methods
are time-consuming when adapting to a large number of diverse videos, as each video requires a separate NeRV model
to be trained from scratch. In addition, NeRV-based methods spatially require generating a high-dimension signal (i.e.,
an entire image) from the input of a low-dimension timestamp, and a video typically consists of tens of frames temporally that have a minor change between adjacent frames. To
improve the efficiency of video representation, we propose
Meta Neural Representations for Videos, named MetaNeRV,
a novel framework for fast NeRV representation for unseen
videos. MetaNeRV leverages a meta-learning framework to
learn an optimal parameter initialization, which serves as a
good starting point for adapting to new videos. To address the
unique spatial and temporal characteristics of video modality,
we further introduce spatial-temporal guidance to improve
the representation capabilities of MetaNeRV. Specifically, the
spatial guidance with a multi-resolution loss aims to capture
the information from different resolution stages, and the temporal guidance with an effective progressive learning strategy
could gradually refine the number of fitted frames during the
meta-learning process. Extensive experiments conducted on
multiple datasets demonstrate the superiority of MetaNeRV
for video representations and video compression.

NeRV block
NeRV block

…

Meta-Learned
Initialization

NeRV block

Random
Initialization

Slow Fitting from Random Initialization
Fast Adaptation from Meta-learned Initialization
(a) NeRV Network

(b) Gradient Descent When Fitting New Videos

Figure 1: (a) NeRV Network takes the frame index as input and outputs an image of that index. Querying a sequence of frame indexes results in a list of sequences, which
can represent a video. (b) The network with random initialization necessitates optimization through numerous steps
for new videos, whereas meta-learned initialization enables
swift adaptation to new videos.

process, allowing for the subsequent retrieval of these values through corresponding coordinates. Notably, INR has
recently gained significant attention in the context of neural representations for videos, with notable examples including NeRV (Chen et al. 2021) and E-NeRV (Li et al. 2022).
In contrast to traditional coordinate-based neural representations, NeRV-based approaches take the frame index as input and directly generate the desired frame image, which
is called image-wise implicit neural representations 1, resulting in significantly faster training and inference speeds
compared to their coordinate-based counterparts.
Although existing NeRV-based methods demonstrate impressive capabilities, their limitation to encoding a single
video at a time restricts their applicability in real-world scenarios, as each new video typically requires optimization
through numerous gradient descent steps.
D-NeRV (He et al. 2023) memorize keyframes of videos
within the training set, aiming to enhance generalization by
reconstructing transition frames from these keyframes. Nevertheless, such methodologies are constrained to representing frames within the trained videos, potentially hindering

code — https://github.com/jialong2023/MetaNeRV

Introduction
In recent years, Implicit Neural Representations (INR) have
emerged as a powerful tool for continuously representing
data in various computer vision tasks. The core idea of
INR is to represent a signal as a function that can be effectively approximated by a neural network (Pinkus 1999).
This network encodes the signal’s values implicitly within
its structure and parameters during the training or fitting
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Haishuai Wang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3257

