The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pre-trained Behavioral Model for Malicious User Prediction on Social Platform
Meng Jiang1 , Wenjie Wang2 * , Shaofeng Hu3 , Kaishen Ou3 , Zhenjing Zheng3 , Fuli Feng1*
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore
3
Weixin
jiangm@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wenjiewang96@gmail.com, hugohu@tencent.com, kaishenou@tencent.com,
cszjzheng@tencent.com, fulifeng93@gmail.com
Abstract

• Supervised learning methods utilize labeled datasets of
malicious users to learn the malicious user patterns.
Among these, one line models users and behaviors as
graphs, transforming into a node classification task (Hu
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021). Another line composes user
behaviors into sequences and leverages temporal models
for prediction (Zhu et al. 2020; Xiao et al. 2024). However,
these methods heavily rely on extensively labeled malicious users for training, while labeling malicious users is
challenging (Hu et al. 2019).
• In contrast, many efforts utilize self-supervised learning
for pre-training, followed by fine-tuning with a small number of labeled samples such as UB-PTM (Liu et al. 2022)
and SAGE (Wang et al. 2023). However, malicious users
on social platforms fall into various categories, each displaying distinct behavioral patterns. Previous research has
often concentrated on identifying a single type of malicious activity, such as fraud (Liu et al. 2022) or cash-out
schemes (Hu et al. 2019). Moreover, these studies depend
heavily on manually crafted rules (Liu et al. 2022) and
features (Wang et al. 2023), hindering the adaptability.
To overcome these limitations, we propose developing a
pre-trained behavior model with two primary objectives: 1)
capturing the behavior patterns of diverse malicious user categories to generate distinguishable user representations, and
2) eliminating reliance on manually crafted rules and features, thereby enhancing adaptability. The pre-trained behavior model can be fine-tuned for downstream tasks in
malicious user prediction, including 1) malicious user detection, which classifies users as malicious or not, and 2)
malicious user classification, which identifies different categories of malicious users.
However, capturing the heterogeneous behavior patterns
across different categories of malicious users presents a significant challenge. Previous pre-training approaches based
on reconstruction tasks (Sun et al. 2019) and contrastive
learning (Wu et al. 2022; Franceschi, Dieuleveut, and Jaggi
2019; Fan, Zhang, and Gao 2020; Yang and Hong 2022)
struggle to capture the unique patterns of different types of
malicious users, especially 1) repetitive malicious behavior patterns, where malicious users repeat malicious activities across multiple periods. For example, users of malicious
marketing will repeatedly post on social media feeds to promote their products; 2) sporadic malicious behavior pat-

The proliferation of malicious users on social platforms poses
significant financial and psychological threats, with activities ranging from scams to the dissemination of illicit content. Existing malicious user prediction comprises supervised
and self-supervised learning methods. However, the former
relies on extensive labeled malicious users for training, while
the latter typically focuses on one form of malicious activity
and depends heavily on manually crafted rules and features
during pre-training. Moreover, existing pre-training methods
fail to effectively capture the crucial repetitive and sporadic
behavior patterns of malicious users. To address these limitations, we propose a Malicious User Behavior Pre-training
framework (MaP) to build pre-trained behavior models. MaP
integrates malicious pattern recognition with behavior consistency augmentation and local disruption augmentation strategies for contrastive learning to capture repetitive and sporadic malicious patterns, respectively. We instantiate MaP on
a billion-level behavior pre-training scenario within an industry context. Both online and offline evaluations validate the
superior performance of MaP in malicious user detection and
classification.

1

Introduction

Malicious users have been rampant on social media platforms in recent years. Malicious users often engage in illegal activities including scams (Whitty and Buchanan 2012;
Wash 2020), gambling (James and Bradley 2021), unethical
marketing (Xu and Li 2021), and the distribution of illicit
content on social platforms, posing financial and psychological harm to the victims. For example, global social media
scams resulted in a staggering $1.02 trillion loss in 2023 according to Global Anti-Scam Alliance1 , while Weixin2 has
detected over 200 thousand cases of pornography dissemination within just three months in 2024. Consequently, predicting malicious users on social media platforms is a critical
research challenge.
Existing work primarily focuses on predicting malicious
users based on user behaviors, roughly falling into two folds.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.gasa.org/research.
2
https://www.weixin.qq.com/.

28134

