The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SrSv: Integrating Sequential Rollouts with Sequential Value Estimation for
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
Xu Wan1,3 , Chao Yang3 , Cheng Yang3 , Jie Song2 , Mingyang Sun* 2
1

Zhejiang University
Peking University
3
Alibaba DAMO Acedemy
wanxu@zju.edu.cn, xiuxin.yc@alibaba-inc.com, charis.yangc@alibaba-inc.com, jie.song@pku.edu.cn, smy@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

execution (CTDE) paradigm to partially alleviate this issue
(Lowe et al. 2017), where the CTDE framework allows for
a straightforward extension of single-agent policy gradient
theorems by providing agents with access to global information and other agents’ observations during training.
Within the CTDE framework, existing popular MARL algorithms such as QMIX (Rashid et al. 2018) and QualityDiversity Policy Pursuit (Q-DPP) (Yang et al. 2020) typically using value decomposition theory to represent the
global Q-value as an aggregation of individual agent values,
lacking effective modeling capabilities for intricate multiagent interactions. Despite achieving successes on smallscale tasks, these value decomposition-based methods face
limitations in scaling to complex multi-agent scenarios with
high-dimensional joint policy spaces (Wang et al. 2020).
To circumvent the restrictive assumptions on the decomposability of the joint value function, the multi-agent advantage decomposition theory and sequential policy update
algorithms have been proposed (Kuba et al. 2021b; Zhang
et al. 2021). The advantage decomposition lemma aims to
characterize an agent’s advantage increment over preceding
agents’ decisions, providing insights into the emergence of
cooperative behavior through a sequential decision-making
process.
Building upon this theory, the advantage decompositionbased methods such as Heterogeneous-Agent PPO
(HAPPO) and Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Actor-Critic
(HASAC) (Kuba et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2024) have been
developed to enable policy iteration with monotonic improvement guarantees. Meanwhile, unlike the sequential
policy updates, some researchers, exemplified by the
Multi-Agent Transformer (MAT) and Action-dependent
Q-learning (ACE) (Wen et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023), capture
cooperative intentions among multiple agents from the
perspective of multi-agent action rollouts. They leverage
the sequence model to generate actions agent by agent.
By incorporating the multi-agent advantage decomposition
theorem into an encoder-decoder architecture, it realizes
sequential action generation with a monotonic performance
improvement guarantee.
Nonetheless, a potential limitation of MAT lies in that
it estimates solely the joint advantage function, lacking
the fine-grained estimation of individual agents’ advantage functions compared to individual advantage-based ap-

Although multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
shown its success across diverse domains, extending its application to large-scale real-world systems still faces significant
challenges. Primarily, the high complexity of real-world environments exacerbates the credit assignment problem, substantially reducing training efficiency. Moreover, the variability of agent populations in large-scale scenarios necessitates scalable decision-making mechanisms. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel framework: Sequential rollout with Sequential value estimation (SrSv). This framework
aims to capture agent interdependence and provide a scalable solution for cooperative MARL. Specifically, SrSv leverages the autoregressive property of the Transformer model to
handle varying populations through sequential action rollout.
Furthermore, to capture the interdependence of policy distributions and value functions among multiple agents, we introduce an innovative sequential value estimation methodology and integrates the value approximation into an attentionbased sequential model.
We evaluate SrSv on three benchmarks: Multi-Agent MuJoCo, StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge, and DubinsCars. Experimental results demonstrate that SrSv significantly outperforms baseline methods in terms of training efficiency
without compromising convergence performance. Moreover,
when implemented in a large-scale DubinsCar system with
1,024 agents, our framework surpasses existing benchmarks,
highlighting the excellent scalability of SrSv.

Introduction
While multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
demonstrated its feasibility in several decision-making domains such as games, robotic planning, and simulated industrial control (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013; Vinyals
et al. 2019; Andrychowicz et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022), applying it to large-scale real-world systems remains an open
challenge. The interaction complexity among a large population of agents creates a fundamental difficulty in identifying
individual agents’ contributions to the global reward signal,
which significantly exacerbates the credit assignment problem of MARL (Foerster et al. 2018). Most current MARL
algorithms adopt the centralized training with decentralized
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23333

