The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HOIMamba: Efficient Mamba-based Disentangled Progressive Learning
for HOI Detection
Yongchao Xu 1 , Jiawei Liu 1 * , Sen Tao 2 , Qiang Zhang 1 , Zheng-Jun Zha 1
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yongchaoxu, zq 126 }@mail.ustc.edu.cn, taosen23@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {jwliu6, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to detect
the spatial positions of human-object pairs and recognize
their interactions. Existing single-branch, two-branch, and
three-branch methods are challenging to make an appropriate
trade-off on efficiency, multi-task decoupling, and collaborative learning, while they fail to identify rare and complex
interaction categories effectively as well. In this work, we
propose a novel Efficient Mamba-based Disentangled Progressive Learning (HOIMamba) for HOI Detection to absorb the advantages of the existing three approaches and
adaptively aggregate multi-level interaction semantics guided
by cross-task bidirectional information contexts. Specifically,
HOIMamba builds an efficient and effective decoder through
cascaded Low-Rank Adaptations (LoRAs), with high efficiency, thorough decoupling of tasks, and good multi-task
collaborative learning. Furthermore, to alleviate the recognition problem of interactions in difficult HOI samples, a novel
Mamba-based comprehensive progressive learning strategy
with Cross-enhance Mamba (CEM) blocks and Detection
Context Propagation (DCP) blocks is designed to gradually
excavate interaction-related discriminative cues from four
levels. CEM blocks automatically aggregate context to generate diverse task-shared semantics and simultaneously realize the cross-task interaction between human and object
branches, guiding the interaction branch to extract more expressive HOI representation. DCP blocks further transfer
the comprehensive interaction context to human and object
branches to achieve rich and effective information exchange,
facilitating the model to discover more HOI instances. Extensive experimental results on two standard benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our HOIMamba.

Figure 1: Comparison of HOIMamba and existing
Transformer-based HOI methods, HOIMamba well absorbs
the advantages of all paradigms. Moreover, the Mambabased comprehensive progressive learning strategy is introduced to solve the gradual process of interaction learning
that the existing methods lack, which greatly improves the
performance of the HOI detector.
Previous HOI detection methods can generally be divided
into two paradigms: CNN-based models (Wan et al. 2019;
Gao et al. 2020) and Transformer-based models (Kim et al.
2021; Ning et al. 2023). Limited by the local receptive field
of the convolution kernel, CNN-based methods are difficult
to recognize complex HOIs. Thanks to the advantages of
transformer in long-distance modeling, Transformer-based
architecture has become the mainstream of HOI task development, and its performance has been greatly improved
compared with CNN-based methods.
Existing Transformer-based methods can be classified
into single-branch (Tamura, Ohashi, and Yoshinaga 2021),
two-branch (Ning et al. 2023), and three-branch methods
(Fang et al. 2023) according to the number of their decoder
branches. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the single-branch methods use one decoder to be responsible for all sub-tasks (human detection, object detection, interaction prediction) simultaneously. Although the structure is simple, it is difficult
for a single model to achieve a good trade-off in multi-task
learning (Zhang et al. 2021). The two-branch methods decompose the HOI task into two sub-tasks: instance detection
and interaction classification, and adopt two decoders to deal
with these tasks respectively. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the

Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to detect
human-object pairs and identify their interactions simultaneously. An increasing interest has been attracted to HOI
detection due to its important role in a wide range of computer vision applications, such as 3D interaction understanding (Yang et al. 2023, 2024b) and image retrieval (Liu et al.
2019; Hu et al. 2024). The goal of the HOI detector is to
localize all HOI samples within an image, representing the
results in the form of triplets ⟨human, verbs, object⟩.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8987

