The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rule-Guided Graph Neural Networks for Explainable
Knowledge Graph Reasoning
Zhe Wang1 , Suxue Ma2 * , Kewen Wang1 , Zhiqiang Zhuang2
1

Griffith University
Tianjin University
zhe.wang@griffith.edu.au, msx@tju.edu.cn, k.wang@griffith.edu.au, zhuang@tju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The connections between symbolic rules and neural networks
have been explored in various directions, including rule mining through neural networks and rule-based explanation for
neural networks. These approaches allow symbolic rules to
be extracted from neural network models, which offers explainability to the models. However, the plausibility of the
extracted rules is rarely analysed. In this paper, we show that
the confidence degrees of extracted rules are generally not
high, and we propose a new family of Graph Neural Networks
that can be trained with the guidance of rules. Hence, the inference of our model simulates the rule reasoning. Moreover,
rules with high confidence degrees can be extracted from the
trained model that aligns with the inference of the model,
which verifies the effectiveness of the rule guidance. Experimental evaluation of knowledge graph reasoning tasks further
demonstrates the effectiveness of our model.

Figure 1: The average standard confidence of the rules extracted by explainable GNN-based models MGNN (Cucala
et al. 2021) and INDIGO (Liu et al. 2021), and end-to-end
rule learners NCRL (Cheng, Ahmed, and Sun 2022) and
MMDRUM (Wang et al. 2023) on 8 benchmarks.

Introduction
Both neural networks and symbolic rules have been widely
applied to perform inferences over structured data, such as
knowledge graphs (KGs) (Hogan et al. 2021). Approaches
based on various neural networks, especially Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), often demonstrate superior accuracy
than rule-based approaches in KG inference tasks such as
link prediction (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Teru, Denis, and
Hamilton 2020; Yan et al. 2022), due to the capability of
neural networks to model more complex inference patterns
(beyond those captured by rule-based reasoning) through
numeric manipulations. However, their reasoning processes
are often hard to interpret. On the other hand, approaches
based on symbolic reasoning have the clear advantage of explainability (Wu et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024).
Recently, there has been an emerging interest in neurosymbolic approaches by combining the inference power of
neural networks with the explainability of symbolic rules.
Several approaches have been proposed for end-to-end rule
mining through neural networks (Yang, Yang, and Cohen
2017; Sadeghian et al. 2019; Qu et al. 2020; Cheng, Ahmed,
and Sun 2022). These approaches often simulate rule reasoning using neural networks, which allows them to evaluate

candidate rules and extract rules from the neural networks.
Yet it is found that the extracted rules may not faithfully capture the inference of the neural networks; that is, the inference results of the models and the extracted rules may have
discrepancies. In particular, the extracted rules are not necessarily sound, in the sense that some facts derived from the
rules cannot be inferred from the corresponding model.
In order to better align neural network models with rules
for explainability, research efforts have been made to design neural networks whose inference can be faithfully captured by rules (Cucala et al. 2021; Cucala, Grau, and Motik
2022; Wang et al. 2023). In particular, it is shown that for
a GNN model M satisfying certain monotonic conditions,
its inference results on KGs coincide with those of a finite
set of Datalog rules RM ; that is, rules RM can be used to
explain the inference of M (Cucala et al. 2021). Although
these results provide a faithful and symbolic explanation of
GNNs, the quality of the explanation was not sufficiently
analysed. In the rule mining literature, the quality of rules
is typically measured by their statistical confidence degrees
(called standard confidence) over the KGs. As shown in Figure 1, the standard confidence degrees of the rules extracted
by existing methods are relatively low. This suggests that
the plausibility of the rules RM , which refers to how be-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12784

