The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contradicted in Reliable, Replicated in Unreliable:
Dual-Source Reference for Fake News Early Detection
Yifan Feng1 , Weimin Li* 1 , Yue Wang1 , Jingchao Wang1 , Fangfang Liu1 , Zhongming Han2 ,
1

2

School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing 100048, China
{fengyffyf, wmli, wyofficial, static, ffliu}@shu.edu.cn, hanzhongming@btbu.edu.cn

Abstract
Early detection of fake news is crucial to mitigate its negative impact. Current research in fake news detection often
utilizes the difference between real and fake news regarding the support degree from reliable sources. However, it has
overlooked their different semantic outlier degrees among unreliable source information during the same period. Since
fake news often serves idea propaganda, unreliable sources
usually publish a lot of information with the same propaganda idea during the same period, making it less likely to
be a semantic outlier. To leverage this difference, we propose the Reliable-Unreliable Source Reference (RUSR) Fake
News Early Detection Method. RUSR introduces the publication background for detected news, which consists of related
news with common main objects of description and slightly
earlier publication from both reliable and unreliable sources.
Furthermore, we develop a strongly preference-driven support degree evaluation model and a two-hop semantic outlier degree evaluation model, which respectively mitigate the
interference of news with weak validation effectiveness and
the tightness degree of semantic cluster. The designed redistribution module and expanding range relative time encoding are adopted by both models, respectively optimizing
early checkpoint of training and expressing the relevance of
news implied by their release time gap. Finally, we present a
multi-model mutual benefit and collaboration framework that
enables the multi-model mutual benefit of generalization in
training and multi-perspective prediction of news authenticity
in inference. Experiments on our newly constructed dataset
demonstrate the superiority of RUSR.

Figure 1: Fake news and its semantic cluster within its unreliable sources publication background which consist of 23
related news items with common main object of description
and slightly earlier publication from unreliable sources.

making content-only detection methods (Wang et al. 2018;
Ma et al. 2016) less effective. To address this problem, some
methods incorporate reliable source information as external
evidence and improve accuracy by leveraging the difference
between real and fake news regarding the support degree
from reliable sources (Popat et al. 2018; Vo and Lee 2021;
Hu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2024). However, current methods ignore their different semantic outlier degrees among
unreliable source information during the same period.
Promoting a specific viewpoint for an interest group is a
primary motivation for publishing fake news (Khan et al.
2022). These news may shape political views (Khan et al.
2022), propagandize ideologies (Baptista and Gradim 2021),
or change consumer perceptions of products (Domenico
et al. 2021). When fake news is published to promote
an opinion for an interest group, the fabricator often manipulates unreliable sources to simultaneously disseminate
other information supporting that opinion. Therefore, fake
news typically has greater semantic cluster among unreliable
source information during the same period than real news.
Figure 1 illustrates an example of fake news (2022/11/2)
published before the US 2022 mid-term elections and its semantic cluster. This fake news claims that Democrats priori-

Introduction
Fake news refers to entirely false news reports (Rastogi and
Bansal 2023). These reports influence individuals’ perceptions of social (Wu et al. 2023), health (Silva et al. 2021),
and other issues. As fake news spreads, it can even weaken
social stability and national security (Yin et al. 2024). Early
detection involves identifying the truthfulness of news at the
beginning of its dissemination (Liu and Wu 2020). Thus, automating the early detection of fake news is of significant
practical importance.
Fake news often imitates the content patterns of real news
to avoid detection by humans and machines (Hu et al. 2021),
* Weimin Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23896

