The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Descriptive and Discriminative Document Identifiers for Generative Retrieval
Jiehan Cheng, Zhicheng Dou* , Yutao Zhu, Xiaoxi Li
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
jiehancheng@gmail.com, dou@ruc.edu.cn, {yutaozhu94, lixiaoxi45}@gmail.com

Abstract

key bridge between the queries and the documents. This
paradigm differs from traditional approaches in the training
and inference phases. In the training phase, it takes generating the correct DocID as the optimization goal instead of
queries and documents similarity metrics. And in the inference phase, it generates DocIDs for the queries end-to-end
instead of searching for the most similar results by comparison. Therefore, the design of DocIDs is crucial for generative document retrieval (Zhang et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2023). Effective document identifier design can significantly
impact the performance and efficiency of generative IR systems (Tay et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022b).
Existing DocIDs can be categorized in terms of data type,
generation method, and data structure type (Li et al. 2024).
The data type of DocIDs can be either numeric (Zhuang
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023; Tay et al. 2022) or text (Wang
et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023). The numeric DocIDs can
be assigned a nice semantic structure. For example, DocIDs
with the same prefix can represent semantically similar documents (Tay et al. 2022). The text DocIDs are readable and
can utilize the internal knowledge of pre-trained models. Using titles and URLs as DocIDs (Zhou et al. 2022; De Cao
et al. 2020) is a straightforward way to indicate the semantics of documents. SE-DSI (Tang et al. 2023) uses synthetic
queries as DocIDs, getting rid of the reliance on structural
information. Zhang et al. (2024a) propose using term sets
rather than term sequences as DocIDs to address the false
pruning problem during generation. The generation methods of the above DocIDs are static, meaning that the DocIDs
are pre-defined before optimizing the generative retrieval
model, whereas some other DocIDs are learnable (Sun et al.
2024; Yang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024a; Wang et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2024).
However, existing methods did not take into account the
discriminative nature of DocIDs in a corpus. The function
of DocIDs is to help accurately retrieve the target document from a corpus. Therefore, the identifiers of the same
document should differ depending on the corpus in which
it is stored. Specifically, a good DocID should not only
be semantically associated with the corresponding document, but also be distinguished from the semantics of
other similar documents in the corpus in order to reduce
the confusion of the generative retrieval engine. To address
this challenge, we design learnable descriptive and dis-

Generative document retrieval is a novel retrieval framework,
which represents documents as identifiers (DocID) and retrieves documents by generating DocIDs. It has the advantage
of end-to-end optimization over traditional retrieval methods
and has attracted much research interest. Nonetheless, the development of efficient and precise DocIDs for document representation remains a pertinent issue within the field. Existing methods for designing DocIDs tend to consider only the
relevance of DocIDs to the corresponding documents, while
neglecting the ability of the DocIDs to distinguish the corresponding documents from similar ones, which is crucial for
the retrieval task. In this paper, we design learnable descriptive and discriminative document Identifiers (D2-DocID) for
Generative Retrieval and propose the paired retrieval model
D2Gen. The D2-DocID is semantically similar to the corresponding documents (descriptive) and is able to distinguish
similar documents (discriminative) in the corpus, thus enhancing retrieval performance. We use a contrastive learning
assisted generative retrieval task to enable the model to understand the document and then complete the generative retrieval. We then design a DocID selection method to select
DocIDs based on the retrieval model’s understanding of the
documents. Our experimental results on the MS MARCO and
NQ320k dataset illustrate the effectiveness of the approach.

Introduction
Information retrieval (IR) techniques play a crucial role in
various domains, including search engines, social media and
recommendation systems. Traditional IR paradigms consists of two methods: sparse retrieval and dense retrieval.
The former, such as BM25 (Robertson and Zaragoza 2009),
rely on bag-of-words representations, while the latter, like
DPR (Karpukhin et al. 2020), utilize semantic embeddings.
However, both of these approaches require separate steps for
representation and retrieval, which can limit their efficiency
and effectiveness.
In recent years, generative information retrieval has
emerged as a promising end-to-end retrieval paradigm and
has attracted significant research interest. In generative document retrieval, queries are directly mapped to the identifiers of relevant documents (DocID), making DocIDs the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11518

