The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Entropy Regularized Task Representation Learning for Offline
Meta-Reinforcement Learning
Mohammadreza Nakhaeinezhadfard1 , Aidan Scannell1,2 , Joni Pajarinen1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation (EEA), Aalto University, Finland
2
Finnish Center for Artifcial Intelligence, Finland
{mohammadreza.nakhaei, aidan.scannell, joni.pajarinen}@aalto.fi
Abstract

the training environments but instead has access to offline
datasets from each training environment.
A promising approach to OMRL is context encoding (Li
et al. 2020; Li, Yang, and Luo 2020; Yuan and Lu 2022;
Zhao, Zhou, and Liu 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Gao et al.
2024), where a context encoder learns a representation of
the task from a history of state-action-reward transitions, referred to as context. The agent is then conditioned on this
learned task representation. For example, in off-policy RL,
the policy and value functions are conditioned on the task
representation, which enables adaptation to different tasks,
including previously unseen ones.
As highlighted by Gao et al. (2024), context-based OMRL
suffers from a distribution shift in the context encoder. This
is because the context encoder is trained with contexts collected by the behavior policy, but at test time the context is
collected by a different policy, including the learned policy
conditioned on a prior task representation. As such, there is a
discrepancy between the contexts at train and test time. This
limits the context encoder’s ability to infer the correct task
at test time, which consequently limits the agent’s ability to
adapt to previously unseen tasks.
One approach to alleviating this distribution mismatch is
to minimize the mutual information between the task representations and the behavior policy. The intuition is that for
environments that require dissimilar policies for each task,
the context encoder should not rely on the characteristics of
the behavior policy. As such, we would like our learned task
representations to be independent of the behavior policy in
order to reduce the impact of the behavior policy on the task
representation. We sidestep the context shift issue by showing that minimizing the mutual information between the task
representations and the behavior policy is equivalent to maximizing the entropy of a meta-behavior policy conditioned
on the learned task representation.
Our contributions are as follows:

Offline meta-reinforcement learning aims to equip agents
with the ability to rapidly adapt to new tasks by training on
data from a set of different tasks. Context-based approaches
utilize a history of state-action-reward transitions – referred
to as the context – to infer representations of the current task,
and then condition the agent, i.e., the policy and value function, on the task representations. Intuitively, the better the
task representations capture the underlying tasks, the better
the agent can generalize to new tasks. Unfortunately, contextbased approaches suffer from distribution mismatch, as the
context in the offline data does not match the context at test
time, limiting their ability to generalize to the test tasks. This
leads to the task representations overfitting to the offline training data. Intuitively, the task representations should be independent of the behavior policy used to collect the offline data.
To address this issue, we approximately minimize the mutual information between the distribution over the task representations and behavior policy by maximizing the entropy of
behavior policy conditioned on the task representations. We
validate our approach in MuJoCo environments, showing that
compared to baselines, our task representations more faithfully represent the underlying tasks, leading to outperforming
prior methods in both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
tasks.

Code —
https://github.com/MohammadrezaNakhaei/ER-TRL

1

Introduction

The goal of offline reinforcement learning (RL; Prudencio,
Maximo, and Colombini 2023; Levine et al. 2020) is to
leverage offline datasets to learn policies that can accomplish tasks without interacting with the environment. It is a
promising approach for real-world applications where online RL may be expensive or dangerous, such as robotics
(Zhou et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023) and healthcare (Emerson,
Guy, and McConville 2023; Zhu, Li, and Georgiou 2023).
Offline meta-RL (OMRL) extends offline RL to the metaRL setting, where the goal is to solve a previously unseen
task, by leveraging behaviors learned from a set of training environments. In contrast to meta-RL, OMRL considers
the setting where the agent does not directly interact with

• We present Entropy Regularized Task Representation
Learning (ER - TRL), an OMRL method that improves
the ability of context-based OMRL methods to generalize to previously unseen environments. ER - TRL reduces
the amount of context distribution shift by leveraging a
generative adversarial network (GAN; Goodfellow et al.
2014) to minimize the mutual information between the
task representations and the behavior policy, by estimat-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19616

