The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Strategic Network Creation for Enabling Greedy Routing
Julian Berger 1 , Tobias Friedrich 1 , Pascal Lenzner2 , Paraskevi Machaira 1 , Janosch Ruff 1
1

Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany
Institute of Computer Science, University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany
julian.berger@student.hpi.de, {friedrich, paraskevi.machaira, janosch.ruff}@hpi.de, pascal.lenzner@uni-a.de
2

Abstract

whole research area devoted to game-theoretic network formation models (Papadimitriou 2001) and there is an abundance of interesting variants, typically called network creation games, that capture how networks emerge in different
domains, e.g., communication networks or social networks.
Networks enable communication. To this end, it is commonly assumed that shortest paths are used for routing traffic within the created network. However, to make this work,
all agents need to know the global structure of the network.
Moreover, in case of dynamic changes to the network, this
global view must be updated or otherwise shortest path routing would fail. In case of the Internet, shortest path routing
is currently ensured by the usage of extensive routing tables that exactly specify which next-hop neighbor to use for
which destination. All these routing tables must be maintained and updated accordingly, even for insignificant structural changes. This can be avoided by using greedy routing,
where in each network node every incoming packet is simply
routed to a neighbor that is closer to the packet’s destination.
For this, geographic information is needed, e.g., the nodes
must be embedded in some underlying metric space and the
positions in that space allow for deciding which next hop to
use for routing. Exactly this has been proposed for the Internet (Boguná, Papadopoulos, and Krioukov 2010), i.e., to
map the nodes of the Internet into a metric space such that
greedy routing works. This is called a greedy embedding and
they can be computed efficiently (Bläsius et al. 2020).
However, centrally computing a greedy embedding of a
network does not account for the selfish strategic behavior
of the network participants. The agents do not only want
to ensure that greedy routing works, but at the same time
they want to maximize their connection quality within the
created network, e.g., they want to minimize their average
stretch. Thus, strategic agents would ”rewire” a given greedy
embedding, if this reduces their stretch. However, this might
endanger that greedy routing is guaranteed to succeed.
In this paper, we set out to investigate this tension between
the stability of the network with respect to local structural
changes by the agents and maintaining greedy routing.

Today we rely on networks that are created and maintained
by smart devices. For such networks, there is no governing
central authority but instead the network structure is shaped
by the decisions of selfish intelligent agents. A key property
of such communication networks is that they should be easy
to navigate for routing data. For this, a common approach is
greedy routing, where every device simply routes data to a
neighbor that is closer to the respective destination.
Networks of intelligent agents can be analyzed via a gametheoretic approach and in the last decades many variants of
network creation games have been proposed and analyzed. In
this paper we present the first game-theoretic network creation model that incorporates greedy routing, i.e., the strategic agents in our model are embedded in some metric space
and strive for creating a network among themselves where
all-pairs greedy routing is enabled. Besides this, the agents
optimize their connection quality within the created network
by aiming for greedy routing paths with low stretch.
For our model, we analyze the existence of (approximate)equilibria and the computational hardness in different underlying metric spaces. E.g., we characterize the set of equilibria
in 1-2-metrics and tree metrics and show that Nash equilibria always exist. For Euclidean space, the setting which is
most relevant in practice, we prove that equilibria are not
guaranteed to exist but that the well-known Θ-graph construction yields networks having a low stretch that are gametheoretically almost stable. For general metric spaces, we
show that approximate equilibria exist where the approximation factor depends on the cost of maintaining any link.

Full version — https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.15307

Introduction
Many important real-world networks, like the Internet or
peer-to-peer ad-hoc networks among smart devices, are
created by the decentralized interaction of various agents
that pursue their own goals, like maximizing their centrality, minimizing their latency, or maximizing the network
throughput. These agents can thus be considered as acting
selfishly and strategic, i.e., they try to optimize their costs for
creating and using the network. This observation sparked a

Model and Preliminaries
We consider n agents that correspond to points P =
{p1 , . . . , pn } in some metric space M = (P, dM ), where
dM (u, v) denotes the distance of u ∈ P and v ∈ P in M.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13622

