The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BigMac: A Communication-Efficient Mixture-of-Experts Model Structure for Fast
Training and Inference
Zewen Jin1 2 * , Shengnan Wang2 * , Jiaan Zhu1 3 , Hongrui Zhan1 ,
Youhui Bai2 , Lin Zhang2 , Zhenyu Ming2 , Cheng Li1 3
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Huawei Technologies
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
zevin@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangshengnan12@huawei.com, andyzhu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhr2001@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
baiyouhui@huawei.com, zhang.lin4@huawei.com, mingzhenyu1@huawei.com, chengli7@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) structure scales the
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) and
improves their performance with only the sub-linear increase in computation resources. Recently, a fine-grained
DeepSeekMoE structure is proposed, which can further
improve the computing efficiency of MoE without performance degradation. However, the All-to-All communication
introduced by MoE has become a bottleneck, especially
for the fine-grained structure, which typically involves
and activates more experts, hence contributing to heavier
communication overhead.
In this paper, we propose a novel MoE structure named BigMac, which is also fine-grained but with high communication
efficiency. The innovation of BigMac is mainly due to that
we abandon the communicate-descend-ascend-communicate
(CDAC) manner used by fine-grained MoE, which leads
to the All-to-All communication always taking place at
the highest dimension. Instead, BigMac designs an efficient
descend-communicate-communicate-ascend (DCCA) manner. Specifically, we add a descending and ascending projection at the entrance and exit of the expert, respectively,
which enables the communication to perform at a very low
dimension. Furthermore, to adapt to DCCA, we re-design the
structure of small experts, ensuring that the expert in BigMac
has enough complexity to address tokens. Experimental results show that BigMac achieves comparable or even better
model quality than fine-grained MoEs with the same number
of experts and a similar number of total parameters. Equally
importantly, BigMac reduces the end-to-end latency by up
to 3.09× for training and increases the throughput by up to
3.11× for inference on state-of-the-art AI computing frameworks including Megatron, Tutel, and DeepSpeed-Inference.

Figure 1: Convergence result comparison of MoE models
with three structures. GPT-Fine-Grained takes 38.9 hours
to reach the target perplexity of 13.69, while GPT-BigMac
spends only 22.8 hours (1.7× faster). GPT-Vanilla fails to
converge to the target perplexity under time budget.

consumption. Fortunately, the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)
technique, capable of expanding the model size tens or even
hundreds of times without significantly increasing the computation, is widely used in various emerging huge models, such as GShard (Lepikhin et al. 2020), GLaM (Du
et al. 2022), Switch Transformer (Fedus, Zoph, and Shazeer
2022), and Mixtral (Jiang et al. 2024), each of which consists of hundreds of billion parameters or even beyond.
Recently, DeepSeekMoE (Dai et al. 2024), a fine-grained
and more parameter-efficient MoE structure, has been proposed. Compared to conventional MoE models, for the same
model size, DeepSeekMoE has significantly more experts
per MoE layer and fewer parameters per expert. It was
demonstrated that such a new structure can achieve comparable or even better results than conventional MoE models with much less time complexity and hence it is adopted
by many later released models, such as Qwen2 (Yang et al.
2024) and DeepSeek-v2 (DeepSeek-AI et al. 2024).
However, the MoE faces a serious All-to-All communication bottleneck during both training and inference. This
is mainly because of the underlying expert parallelism (EP)
strategy, which assigns experts to several hardware accelerators to avoid out-of-memory errors or improve efficiency (Fedus, Zoph, and Shazeer 2022). As a result, for
each MoE layer, two All-to-All communication steps are
introduced for dispatching tokens to their best-fit experts,
which may be stored in the other accelerators and then gath-

Introduction
Increasing the size of Transformer-based large language
models (LLMs) can continuously improve downstream application performance. Such a phenomenon, known as the
scaling law, has been demonstrated by the auto-regressive
dense models such as GPT-series (OpenAI et al. 2024) and
Llama-series (Dubey et al. 2024). However, this comes at
the price of higher computing complexity and more resource
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Zewen and Shengnan equally contributed to this work.

17689

