The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reducing AUV Energy Consumption Through Dynamic Sensor
Directions Switching via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Jiawei Liu1,2 * , Yuanbo Xu1,2 * , Shanshan Song2† , Lu Jiang3
1

MIC Lab, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
3
Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University, China
jiawei23@mail.jlu.edu.cn, {yuanbox, songss}@jlu.edu.cn, jiangl761@dlmu.edu.cn
Abstract

wireless sensor networks to plan paths for missions. However, pre-deploying underwater wireless sensor networks before each mission is not feasible due to the high deployment costs with underwater wireless sensor networks (Han
et al.,2023). It implies that AUVs typically perform missions
in unknown environments and utilize their sensing systems
to sense the surrounding environment to obtain environmental information along the path from the start point to the target point.
Batteries are the sole energy source for AUVs, and due
to the challenges of underwater recharging, AUV operational duration is limited by their energy consumption (Hou
et al.,2022). Vision-based methods (Xue et al.,2022;Sun
et al.,2023) or acoustic-based methods (Zhang et al.,2022)
are utilized to construct AUV sensing systems and each
method requires significant energy consumption. Despite
the sensing systems consuming significant energy, it is imperative to consume energy to sense the surrounding environment to avoid obstacles due to the complexity of the
underwater environment and the expensive AUVs (Chu
et al.,2022). The range of sensing areas is a circular sensing
area centered on the AUV with a radius r. AUVs moving
from the start point to the target point generate numerous
sensing areas, as shown in Figure 1. With full sensors on,
the AUV successfully utilized its sensing system to sense
the surrounding environment, reached the target point, and
avoided obstacles, with 26% of its energy remaining. However, it is evident that the sensed areas covered by the AUV
sensing system include some ineffective sensing areas. The
ineffective sensing areas are defined as the sensing areas
which do not sense the AUV planned path and consume additional energy compared to the part sensors on which the
energy remaining is 50%. Thus, reducing ineffective sensing
areas can effectively reduce the AUV energy consumption.
To reduce ineffective sensing areas, we divided the sensing
system into multiple switchable sensing directions to sense
effective areas and proposed a method for dynamically controlling both the sensing direction and sensing radii.
We proposed a deep reinforcement learning-based
method to reduce energy consumption by AUV sensing system (RECS). RECS reduces energy consumption utilizing
the following novel designs:

Autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) is crucial for marine
applications such as ocean data collection, pollution monitoring, and navigation. However, their limited energy resources
constrain their operational duration, posing a significant challenge for long-term operations. Due to the complex and unpredictable nature of the underwater environment, AUVs allocate energy to their sensing systems to sense the surrounding environment and avoid obstacles. Existing methods focus on reducing energy consumption on AUV computing
and movement, neglecting sensing energy consumption and
few attempts have been made to balance the AUV energy
and sensing ability with a flexible sensing system. Along
these lines, we consider both AUV energy consumption and
flexible sensing abilities, and propose a deep reinforcement
learning-based method to Reduce Energy Consumption by
AUV Sensing system (RECS). Specifically, we build an AUV
sensing system in a 2-dimension space, with controllable 8direction sensing abilities to collect the environment information dynamically. Then we divide the underwater environment into several areas and assign weights on the edges of
areas based on the AUV planned path. Additionally, we dynamically switch the sensors in different directions and radii
to sense the edges of the area where the AUV is located.
The Artificial Potential Field (APF) method is employed to
re-plan the AUV path to avoid obstacles and reach the target point effectively. Experimental results demonstrate that
compared to full sensors on, our method reduces energy consumption by 53.48% and is capable of generalizing to varying
environments and varying sensing system radii.

Introduction
AUV, short for Autonomous Underwater Vehicle, is an unmanned robot capable of autonomously executing missions
in underwater environments through pre-programmed program or self-learning algorithms (Yan et al.,2023a). AUVs
perform various types of marine applications, such as ocean
data collection (Wang et al.,2023b), pollution monitoring
(Lin et al.,2022), and navigation (Vial et al.,2023). AUVs
require environmental information provided by underwater
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We define the maximum radius that the sensing system
covers as r and divide the unknown underwater envi18843

