The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sparis: Neural Implicit Surface Reconstruction of Indoor Scenes
from Sparse Views
Yulun Wu1, 2 * , Han Huang1, 2 * , Wenyuan Zhang1, 2 , Chao Deng1, 2 ,
Ge Gao1, 2† , Ming Gu1, 2 , Yu-Shen Liu2
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{wu-yl22, h-huang20, zhangwen21, dengc23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {gaoge, guming, liuyushen}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

and complex object layouts. To solve these issues, subsequent works leverage structural constraints (Guo et al. 2022;
Ye et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024) or general-purpose monocular priors (Yu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022a; Liang et al.
2023) to provide more comprehensive supervision of depth
and normal, further enhancing the quality of reconstruction. However, reliable reconstruction results always rely on
dense input views. When only sparse views are provided, the
performance of these methods significantly decreases.
Two categories of approaches have provided inspiration
for addressing the problem of indoor sparse-view reconstruction, yet cannot resolve this issue. Indoor sparse novel
view synthesis methods (Roessle et al. 2022; Uy et al. 2023;
Song et al. 2023) improve rendering quality by employing
dense depth priors or refined monocular priors, but fail to
capture accurate geometry for lacking of clear geometric
representation. Object level sparse reconstruction methods
(Long et al. 2022; Ren et al. 2023; Wu, Graikos, and Samaras 2023; Huang et al. 2023) enhance the feature extraction
capabilities of neural fields while underperform in large and
complex indoor scenes.
In this work, we adopt SDF for geometric representation,
revisiting the paradigms of prior-based neural implicit learning under sparse settings. We notice that enforcing monocular depth supervision diminishes the reconstruction quality
due to the inability to calibrate depth scale within sparse
views. In addressing this challenge, we leverage matching
information between images to obtain more reliable absolute depth prior. Additionally, to further ensure consistency
between views, we introduce a reprojection loss, which optimizes the reconstruction geometry surface based on matching relationships. As our matching relationships are entirely
determined by the matching network, matching errors may
impact the accuracy of our priors. We designed a matching mechanism consisting of a matching angle filter and an
epipolar weight function. The matching angle filter calculates the angular score between views and can filter out severe bias introduced by matching errors in nearby perspectives. The epipolar weight function calculates the Sampson
Distance for matched pixels within the corresponding images, and quantitatively assesses their correspondence in 3D
space, enhancing the overall accuracy of reconstruction. As
shown in Figure 1, our method can achieve more complete
and detailed surface reconstruction, compared with previous

In recent years, reconstructing indoor scene geometry from
multi-view images has achieved encouraging accomplishments. Current methods incorporate monocular priors into
neural implicit surface models to achieve high-quality reconstructions. However, these methods require hundreds of images for scene reconstruction. When only a limited number
of views are available as input, the performance of monocular priors deteriorates due to scale ambiguity, leading to the
collapse of the reconstructed scene geometry. In this paper,
we propose a new method, named Sparis, for indoor surface
reconstruction from sparse views. Specifically, we investigate
the impact of monocular priors on sparse scene reconstruction, introducing a novel prior based on inter-image matching
information. Our prior offers more accurate depth information while ensuring cross-view matching consistency. Additionally, we employ an angular filter strategy and an epipolar matching weight function, aiming to reduce errors due to
view matching inaccuracies, thereby refining the inter-image
prior for improved reconstruction accuracy. The experiments
conducted on widely used benchmarks demonstrate superior
performance in sparse-view scene reconstruction.

Introduction
Reconstructing indoor 3D geometry from multi-view images is a significant task in the field of computer vision and
graphics. Due to the sparse nature of indoor image acquisition, traditional Multi-View Stereo (MVS) methods (Yao
et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022) often face challenges in generating satisfactory results when overlap is limited.
Recently, with the emergence of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020) technology, implicit scene
representations have injected new vitality into multi-view reconstruction of 3D scenes. Several works (Wang et al. 2021;
Yariv et al. 2021) utilize Signed Distance Functions (SDF)
as a geometric representation and employ a neural rendering pipeline to accurately learn the geometry of scenes from
multi-view images. Although they have gained considerable
advancement in indoor scene reconstruction, it is still challenged by texture-less regions (e.g., walls, floors, ceilings)
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8514

