The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

How Does the Smoothness Approximation Method Facilitate Generalization for
Federated Adversarial Learning?
Wenjun Ding1,2 , Ying An3 , Lixing Chen4,5 , Shichao Kan1 , Fan Wu1,* , and Zhe Qu1,2,*
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha, China
3
Big Data Institute, Central South University, Changsha, China
4
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
5
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for Information Security, Shanghai, China
{234712240, anying, kanshichao, wfwufan, zhe qu}@csu.edu.cn, lxchen@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Federated Adversarial Learning (FAL) is a robust framework
for resisting adversarial attacks on federated learning. Although some FAL studies have developed efficient algorithms,
they primarily focus on convergence performance and overlook generalization. Generalization is crucial for evaluating algorithm performance on unseen data. However, generalization
analysis is more challenging due to non-smooth adversarial
loss functions. A common approach to addressing this issue
is to leverage smoothness approximation. In this paper, we
develop algorithm stability measures to evaluate the generalization performance of two popular FAL algorithms: Vanilla FAL
(VFAL) and Slack FAL (SFAL), using three different smooth
approximation methods: 1) Surrogate Smoothness Approximation (SSA), (2) Randomized Smoothness Approximation
(RSA), and (3) Over-Parameterized Smoothness Approximation (OPSA). Based on our in-depth analysis, we answer how
to properly set the smoothness approximation method to mitigate generalization error in FAL. Moreover, we identify RSA
as the most effective generalization error reduction method. In
highly data-heterogeneous scenarios, we also recommend employing SFAL to mitigate the deterioration of generalization
performance caused by heterogeneity. Based on our theoretical results, we provide insights to help develop more efficient
FAL algorithms, such as designing new metrics and dynamic
aggregation rules to mitigate heterogeneity.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Qu et al.
2022; Li et al. 2023) plays an important role as it allows different clients to train models collaboratively without sharing
data samples. Although FL is considered a secure paradigm
to protect users’ private data, it has been vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Wang et al. 2020; Bagdasaryan et al. 2020). Adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014) are typically designed to mislead models into producing incorrect outputs, significantly degrading
learning performance and achieving the attacker’s goals.
To counter these attacks, much effort has been made to improve neural networks’ resistance to such perturbations using
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16280

Adversarial Learning (AL) (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Samangouei, Kabkab, and Chellappa 2018; Madry et al.
2018). Generating adversarial examples during neural network training is one of the most effective approaches for
AL (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner
2018; Croce and Hein 2020). Consequently, recent studies
(Zizzo et al. 2020; Hong et al. 2021; Shah et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021) have proposed a new FL framework
called Federated Adversarial Learning (FAL) to mitigate the
impact of adversarial attacks. It is important to improve the
robustness of FL in real-world applications.
There are two popular algorithms for FAL: Vanilla FAL
(VFAL) (Shah et al. 2021) and Slack FAL (SFAL) (Zhu et al.
2023). In particular, VFAL combines FedAvg (McMahan
et al. 2017) with AL on the client side to train the global
model. In contrast, SFAL modifies the aggregation process
by dynamically adjusting the weights of certain client models
during aggregation based on their evaluated importance.
Although these two algorithms have shown significant effectiveness and robustness, they prioritize convergence at the
expense of generalization ability (Li, Song, and Yang 2023;
Zhang et al. 2022). Generalization is a crucial aspect of evaluating an algorithm, as it measures the performance of trained
models on unseen data. One popular approach to studying
generalization is to examine algorithmic stability (Bousquet
and Elisseeff 2002; Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2016), which
measures sensitivity to perturbations in the training dataset.
Recently, a series of studies (Xing, Song, and Cheng 2021a;
Xiao et al. 2022a; Cheng, Fu, and Farnia 2024) have investigated the generalization error in AL.
Unfortunately, these generalization studies primarily focus
on the centralized setting. In FAL, one of the most important
problems is the heterogeneity across clients, which leads to
locally generated adversarial examples being highly biased
to each local distribution (Zhang et al. 2023). Experimental
results have demonstrated that this exacerbated data impairs
the generalization ability of FAL. Thus, the generalization
bounds of AL are insufficient for generalizing to FAL. While
(Sun, Niu, and Wei 2023; Lei, Sun, and Liu 2023) explored
the relationship between data heterogeneity and generalization in FL, characterizing generalization in FAL poses additional challenges.

