The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IMAGDressing-v1: Customizable Virtual Dressing
Fei Shen1 , Xin Jiang1 , Xin He2 , Hu Ye3 , Cong Wang4 , Xiaoyu Du1 , Zechao Li1 , Jinhui Tang1 *
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Wuhan University of Technology
3
Tencent AI Lab
4
Nanjing University

Abstract
Existing virtual try-on (VTON) methods provide only limited user control over garment attributes and generally overlook essential factors such as face, pose, and scene context.
To address these limitations, we introduce the virtual dressing (VD) task, which aims to synthesize freely editable human images conditioned on fixed garments and optional userdefined inputs. We further propose a comprehensive affinity metric index (CAMI) to quantify the consistency between generated outputs and reference garments. We present
IMAGDressing-v1, which leverages a garment-specific UNet to integrate semantic features from CLIP and texture
features from a VAE. To incorporate these garment features into a frozen denoising U-Net for flexible text-driven
scene control, we employ a hybrid attention mechanism composed of frozen self-attention and trainable cross-attention
layers. IMAGDressing-v1 seamlessly integrates with extension modules, such as ControlNet and IP-Adapter, enabling
enhanced diversity and controllability. To alleviate data constraints, we introduce the Interactive Garment Pairing (IGPair) dataset, comprising over 300,000 garment–image pairs
and a standardized data assembly pipeline. Extensive experiments demonstrate that IMAGDressing-v1 achieves state-ofthe-art performance in controlled human image synthesis.

Code — https://github.com/muzishen/IMAGDressing

Figure 1: Differences between virtual try-on and virtual
dressing tasks in conditions and applicable scenarios.

Introduction
Virtual dressing (VD) aims to achieve comprehensive and
personalized clothing displays for merchants by utilizing
given garments and optional faces, poses, and descriptive texts. This technology holds significant potential for
practical applications in e-commerce and entertainment.
However, existing works primarily focus on virtual try-on
(VTON) (Han et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2024;
Li et al. 2021b, 2022b,a; Xu et al. 2024b; Yang et al. 2024)
tasks for consumers, which involve given garments and fixed
human conditions, lacking flexibility and editability. While
VD offers greater freedom and appeal, it also presents more
significant challenges.
To enhance the shopping experience for consumers in ecommerce, VTON (Han et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2021) tasks

have become increasingly popular within the community.
Early methods primarily relied on generative adversarial network (GAN) (Creswell et al. 2018), typically comprising a
warping module to learn the semantic correspondence between clothes and the human body, and a generator module
to synthesize the warped clothes onto the person’s image.
However, GAN-based methods (Choi et al. 2021; Han et al.
2018) often suffer from instability due to the min-max training objective, and they have limitations in preserving texture details and handling complex backgrounds. Recently,
latent diffusion models (Ramesh et al. 2022; Zhang, Rao,
and Agrawala 2023; Saharia et al. 2022) have made significant advances in VTON applications. These methods (Kim
et al. 2024; Zeng et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024b) better retain the texture information of the input garments through a
multi-step denoising process, ultimately generating images

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6795

