The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semantic Enhanced Heterogeneous Hypergraph Network for Collaborative
Filtering
Mingtao Xu1,2 , Wei Wei1,2 * , Peixuan Yang2,3 , Hulong Wu4
1

Cognitive Computing and Intelligent Information Processing (CCIIP) Laboratory,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Joint Laboratory of HUST and Pingan Property & Casualty Research (HPL)
3
Ping An Property & Casualty Insurance Company of China, Ltd
4
Shenzhen Yishi Huolala Technology Limited
xumingtao252@gmail.com, weiw@hust.edu.cn, ypx hust@163.com, senter.wu@huolala.cn
Abstract

Inconsistent
Collaboration

Review: The short battery endurance makes
it incredibly inconvenient to use...

Collaborative Filtering (CF) based on graph neural networks
(GNNs) has yielded immense success for recommendation
systems by capturing high-order dependencies from implicit
feedback. Recently, the outstanding text comprehension ability of the Large Language Models (LLMs) has shown promising potential to provide auxiliary semantics for collaborative
representation. However, when aligning textual information
with collaborative signals, inconsistent semantics between
user-item and item-item text pairs may lead to the degradation
of the alignment model, thus hindering the recommender system from effectively utilizing heterogeneous information. In
this paper, we propose a novel method: Semantic Enhanced
Heterogeneous Hypergraph Network (SEHHN), which enhances the representations of CF correlations with semantics,
thereby avoiding alignment degradation. To better model the
collaborative signals, we design a graph autoencoder that captures the bidirectional relationship between user preferences
and item features in review semantics. Furthermore, we develop an LLM-based item classifier to adaptively exploit potential correlations of items via the co-occurrences of item
features. Finally, we design a heterogeneous hypergraph network to achieve efficient alignment and propagation of heterogeneous information, thereby alleviating the impact of semantic inconsistency on CFs. Extensive experiments on three
real-world datasets demonstrate that our proposed SEHHN
outperforms existing SOTA methods and validates the effectiveness of each component.

Indirect
Relevance

Color: ???
Brand: Apple
Network: ???
Price: $131
Description: Capture every moment with
our phone's exceptional camera...

Color: Blue
Brand: ???
Price: $145
Network: 4G
Description: Enjoy the futural of crystalclear communication...

RSs
Degraded Alignment
Missing
Attributes
Different
Aspects

Inconsistent
Co-occurrence

Figure 1: An illustration of semantic inconsistency within
user-item collaboration and item-item co-occurrence.

However, the above methods only capture user preferences via ID-based information from implicit feedback, neglecting the benefits of auxiliary semantics conveyed in interaction contexts and textual attributes. Recently, Large
Language Models (LLMs) like GPT3 (Brown et al. 2020)
and LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023) have been proposed
to empower general models with text comprehension and
natural language reasoning capacities (Zhao et al. 2023b),
which shows promising potential to enrich collaborative representation with additional semantics. Building on this, researchers have proposed using LLMs to integrate auxiliary
textual information into recommendation systems. For instance, KAR (Xi et al. 2023) uses LLM to deduce the knowledge of users and items and extracts relevant semantic representation to enhance collaborative embeddings. RLMRec
(Ren et al. 2024) further improves the exploitation of semantic information by optimizing collaborative embeddings
with a mutual information maximizing paradigm.
While the introduced semantics improve recommendation
performance, they still face the challenge of semantic inconsistency during representation alignment. Specifically,
CFs mainly utilized user-item collaboration and item-item
co-occurrence to learn representations, leading to inherent
similarities between related entity embeddings. On the other
hand, the similarity in the LLM-extracted representations is
solely associated with the semantic overlap in the textual
description. Therefore, if the above dependencies cannot be
accurately depicted in the text, the semantic embeddings of
users or items offered by LLM will not exhibit the corre-

Introduction
Recommender systems (RSs) have emerged as a core engine
for personalized information filtering on the Internet by providing users with potentially interesting items. Among them,
collaborative filtering (CF) has become the central theme of
RS due to its powerful ability to model complex relationships from historical interactions (He et al. 2017). By leveraging graph neural networks (GNNs) to encode high-order
dependencies such as user-item collaboration (Chen et al.
2020) and item-item co-occurrence (Ye, Xia, and Huang
2023) in recommender systems, a series of GNN-based CF
methods have greatly improved the baseline performance
and attracted widespread attention from researchers.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12936

