The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EBS-CFL: Efficient and Byzantine-robust Secure Clustered Federated Learning
Zhiqiang Li1 , Haiyong Bao1 * , Menghong Guan1 , Hao Pan1 , Cheng Huang2 , Hong-Ning Dai3
1

East China Normal University
2
Fudan University
3
Hong Kong Baptist University
{51255902170,mhguan,51255902119}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, hybao@sei.ecnu.edu.cn,
chuang@fudan.edu.cn, hndai@ieee.org
Abstract

Most CFL methods, such as recent researches (Ghosh
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023a; Vahidian et al. 2023), mainly
focus on improving accuracy or performance efficiency. For
example, Iterative Federated Clustering Algorithm (IFCA)
(Ghosh et al. 2022) is the first to provide convergence guarantees, which demonstrates its effectiveness in non-convex
problems of neural networks. Despite numerous studies on
CFLs, they still face challenges incurred by Byzantine attacks and privacy leakage. Particularly, they do not consider
protecting against clients’ cluster identities, which could potentially leak clients’ important privacy.
As highlighted in DLG (Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019), the vulnerability of FL is exposed when gradient inference attacks
target unencrypted gradients. Though Differential Privacy
(DP) methods provide some protection, their noise can hinder model convergence. The integration of DP with secure
aggregation in researches (Chen et al. 2022; Chen, Ozgur,
and Kairouz 2022) lessens DP’s security requirements and
tackles differential attacks, but efficiency is still problematic.
Secure aggregation methods (Bonawitz et al. 2016; Choi
et al. 2020; Kadhe et al. 2020; Jahani-Nezhad et al. 2023)
can protect plaintext gradients, yet they fall short in dealing with Byzantine attacks. Robust algorithms, as achieved
in PEFL (Liu et al. 2021), rely on interaction between the
server and the cloud platform, but this approach assumes no
collusion between the two, which is a relatively weak security assumption. Lastly, SAFELearning (Zhang et al. 2023b)
operates under the assumption of a single cloud server and
supports only the FedAvg algorithm, overlooking compatibility with other federated learning algorithms. The current
research primarily faces two core challenges:
Lack of a scheme to protect clients’ cluster identities.
Existing solutions require the acquisition of clients’ cluster
identities for training. However, there is no privacy preservation scheme for cluster identities. In this way, attackers may
use the clients’ cluster identities as additional information to
launch inference attacks.
Lack of a comprehensive secure aggregation solution.
Despite the advent of secure aggregation, the comprehensive solution of ensuring both efficiency and Byzantinerobustness in a single cloud server setting with compatibility
of diverse FL schemes is still largely elusive.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel Efficient
and Byzantine-robust Secure Clustered Federated Learning

Despite federated learning (FL)’s potential in collaborative
learning, its performance has deteriorated due to the data
heterogeneity of distributed users. Recently, clustered federated learning (CFL) has emerged to address this challenge by partitioning users into clusters according to their
similarity. However, CFL faces difficulties in training when
users are unwilling to share their cluster identities due to privacy concerns. To address these issues, we present an innovative Efficient and Robust Secure Aggregation scheme
for CFL, dubbed EBS-CFL. The proposed EBS-CFL supports effectively training CFL while maintaining users’ cluster identity confidentially. Moreover, it detects potential poisonous attacks without compromising individual client gradients by discarding negatively correlated gradients and aggregating positively correlated ones using a weighted approach.
The server also authenticates correct gradient encoding by
clients. EBS-CFL has high efficiency with client-side overhead O(ml + m2 ) for communication and O(m2 l) for computation, where m is the number of cluster identities, and l
is the gradient size. When m = 1, EBS-CFL’s computational
efficiency of client is at least O(log n) times better than comparison schemes, where n is the number of clients. In addition, we validate the scheme through extensive experiments.
Finally, we theoretically prove the scheme’s security.

Code — https://github.com/Lee-VA/EBS-CFL

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2016), as a distributed machine learning paradigm, decentralizes model
training across multiple local devices, thereby preserving
data privacy. However, traditional FL methods operate under the assumption of independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data, which limits their effectiveness in realworld scenarios with non-i.i.d. data. To address this challenge, Clustered Federated Learning (CFL) (Sattler, Müller,
and Samek 2021) has been proposed. CFL enhances model
performance on heterogeneous datasets by grouping participants into clusters based on data similarity, effectively extending FL’s applicability to non-i.i.d. scenarios.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18593

