The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Drawing Informative Gradients from Sources: A One-stage Transfer Learning
Framework for Cross-city Spatiotemporal Forecasting
Yudong Zhang1 , Xu Wang1,2∗ , Xuan Yu1 , Zhaoyang Sun1 , Kai Wang1 , Yang Wang1,2,3 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC
3
Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, USTC
{zyd2020@mail., wx309@, yx2024@mail., sunzhaoyang@mail., zaizwk@mail., angyan@}ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

effectively to enhance spatiotemporal forecasting in cities
with data limitations, referred to as target cities. Recent crosscity transfer learning methods (Ouyang et al. 2024; Chen,
Liu, and Li 2023; Tang et al. 2022) are mostly composed of
two procedures, learning transferable knowledge from source
cities and fine-tuning on target cities. The strategies of existing works on learning transferable knowledge from source
cities can be divided into two categories: (1) Designing crafty
model architectures and pre-training the models on source
cities with ingenious strategies. DASTNet (Tang et al. 2022)
leverages the adversarial domain adaptation techniques to
learn the domain-invariant node embeddings, which are further incorporated to model the temporal traffic data. TPB (Liu,
Zheng, and Yu 2023) pre-trains a masked autoencoder, uses
the autoencoder to generate a spatiotemporal pattern bank by
clustering embeddings of spatiotemporal data, and fine-tunes
the pattern bank along with an STF model for target city. (2)
Learning to generate initial parameters of forecasting models
and fine-tuning the models on the target city. ST-GFSL (Lu
et al. 2022) learns a hypernetwork trained on source cities,
which generates parameters of the STF model for the target city based on node-level meta knowledge. GPD (Yuan
et al. 2024b) recasts spatiotemporal few-shot learning as
pre-training a generative diffusion model, which generates
tailored neural networks guided by prompts, allowing for
adaptability to diverse data distributions and city-specific
characteristics.

Spatiotemporal forecasting (STF) is pivotal in urban computing, yet data scarcity in developing cities hampers robust
model training. Addressing this, recent studies leverage transfer learning to migrate knowledge from data-rich (source) to
data-poor (target) cities. This strategy, while effective, faces
challenges as pre-trained models risk absorbing noise and
harmful information due to data distribution disparities, potentially undermining the accuracy of forecasts for target cities.
To address this issue, we propose a one-stage STF framework
named Target-Skewed Joint Training (TSJT). Central to TSJT
is a novel Target-Skewed Backward training strategy that selectively refines gradients from source city data, preserving
only the elements that positively impact the target city. To further enhance the quality of these gradients, we have designed a
Node Prompting Module (NPM). TSJT is crafted for seamless
integration with existing STF models, endowing them with the
capability to efficiently tackle challenges stemming from data
scarcity. Experimental results on several real-world datasets
from multiple cities substantiate the efficacy of TSJT in the
realm of cross-city transfer learning.

Introduction
Spatiotemporal forecasting (STF) models facilitate various
smart-city applications across various domains, e.g., traffic (Zhang et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023), and climate (Wu
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023). Leveraging the foundation
of extensive spatiotemporal data, numerous deep learning
models (Li et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Rao et al. 2022; Yuan
et al. 2024a) have been proposed, achieving remarkable success in the realm of predictive accuracy. However, the uneven
development levels and disparate data collection policies
across cities often result in a scarcity of spatiotemporal data
in many cities. This scarcity presents a significant barrier to
the effective application of STF models in these cities.
The analogous patterns of human activity across various
cities have inspired researchers to develop cross-city transfer learning strategies (Wei, Zheng, and Yang 2016). These
strategies capitalize on the vast datasets from data-rich cities,
known as source cities, to extract generalizable and transferable knowledge. The aim is to apply this learned knowledge

Challenge. Though the two categories of methods employ
diverse learning strategies, they are united by a common principle that, by constructing learning tasks on data from source
cities, models can acquire knowledge that is transferable not
only across source cities but also anticipated to be applicable
to the target city. However, data distributions between source
and target cities often exhibit considerable divergence, which
results in the acquisition of knowledge that includes not only
potential noise but also information that may be counterproductive (Jin, Chen, and Yang 2022; Yuan et al. 2024b). This
discrepancy presents significant hurdles to the successful
transfer of knowledge to a target city. Consequently, models
trained on the extensive source data may assimilate noise or
even detrimental source-specific knowledge, adversely affecting the efficacy of transfer learning when applied to the target
city. How to learn the beneficial information for the target
city from the data from source cities remains an open and

* Xu Wang and Yang Wang are the corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1147

