The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Walk Wisely on Graph: Knowledge Graph Reasoning with Dual Agents via
Efficient Guidance-Exploration
Zijian Wang1,2 , Bin Wang1 * , Haifeng Jing1,3 , Huayu Li1 , Hongbo Dou1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology & Qingdao Institute of Software, China University of Petroleum(East China),
China
2
College of Science, China University of Petroleum(East China), China
3
School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University, China
alococo710@gmail.com, {wangbin,lhyzj}@upc.edu.cn, 2201120005@stu.pku.edu.cn, hongboDou@163.com
Abstract
𝑒1

Recent years, multi-hop reasoning has been widely studied for knowledge graph (KG) reasoning due to its efficacy
and interpretability. However, previous multi-hop reasoning
approaches are subject to two primary shortcomings. First,
agents struggle to learn effective and robust policies at the
early phase due to sparse rewards. Second, these approaches
often falter on specific datasets like sparse knowledge graphs,
where agents are required to traverse lengthy reasoning paths.
To address these problems, we propose a multi-hop reasoning
model with dual agents based on hierarchical reinforcement
learning (HRL), which is named FULORA. FULORA tackles the above reasoning challenges by eFficient GUidanceExpLORAtion between dual agents. The high-level agent
walks on the simplified knowledge graph to provide stagewise hints for the low-level agent walking on the original
knowledge graph. In this framework, the low-level agent optimizes a value function that balances two objectives: (1) maximizing return, and (2) integrating efficient guidance from the
high-level agent. Experiments conducted on three real-word
knowledge graph datasets demonstrate that FULORA outperforms RL-based baselines, especially in the case of longdistance reasoning.

𝑟1

𝑒2

𝑟2

𝑒3

𝑒1

𝑟1

𝑒2
𝑟3

𝑟2

𝑒3
𝑟4

𝑒4
(a) Short direct path

(b) Long indirect path

Figure 1: An illustrative example of short direct path and
long indirect path. When no short direct path exists, the
agent searches for a long indirect path.

2018) have been introduced to compose single-hop triplets
into multi-hop reasoning chains. Recent advances in deep
learning (DL) and RL (Wang et al. 2019; Lv et al. 2020;
Nikopensius et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2025) further enhance
multi-hop reasoning. For instance, AttnPath (Wang et al.
2019) employs attention mechanisms to guide agents, preventing them from stalling at the same node.
Although existing multi-hop reasoning models have
achieved impressive results, there is a noteworthy issue with
these models that they only perform well when the agent’s
reasoning path length is short. The drawback that the agent
relies heavily on short reasoning chains is fatal in certain
datasets, such as sparse KG. Figure 1 is an illustration of
short direct path and long indirect path. It’s challenging for
an agent to identify a short direct path due to the sparsity
which makes the relation r2 do not exist. The optimal path
for agent is e1 → e2 → e4 → e3 we called long indirect
path instead of e1 → e2 → e3 . From this point, enhancing
the agent’s long-distance reasoning ability is one solution
to alleviate the multi-hop models’ poor performance in the
sparse KG.
However, the dimension of the discrete action space at
each space is large (Das et al. 2018). As the path length
increases, the choices the agent faced will grow exponentially. The most relevant to our work is CURL (Zhang et al.
2022) which proposed a dual-agent framework and mutual
reinforcement rewards to assign one of the agents (GIANT)
searching on cluster-level paths quickly and providing stagewise hints for another agent (DWARF). Compared to the
classic multi-hop model MINERVA (Das et al. 2018), CURL
does improve long-distance reasoning ability. But CURL
also has two drawbacks, which make CURL’s performance

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are designed to represent the
world knowledge in a structured way. There are various
downstream NLP tasks especially knowledge-driven services, such as query answering (Guu, Miller, and Liang
2015; Cui et al. 2019), relation extraction (Mintz et al. 2009;
Reiplinger, Wiegand, and Klakow 2014) and dialogue generation (He et al. 2017). However, a significant proportion of
KGs are severely incomplete, which constrains their efficacy
in numerous tasks. Consequently, this study concentrates on
automatic knowledge graph (KG) reasoning, also as known
knowledge graph completion (KGC).
Over recent years, embedding-based models (Bordes et al.
2013; Lin et al. 2015) have effectively preserved KG structural information for single-hop reasoning but lack interpretability. To address this, reinforcement learning (RL)
frameworks (Xiong, Hoang, and Wang 2017; Das et al.
* Bin Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12818

