The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Multi-Scale Decomposition Framework for Time Series Forecasting
†

Yifan Hu1,2, * , Peiyuan Liu1, * , Peng Zhu2 , Dawei Cheng2, , Tao Dai3,

†

1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
2
Tongji University
3
Shenzhen University
{huyf0122, peiyuanliu.edu, daitao.edu}@gmail.com
{pengzhu, dcheng}@tongji.edu.cn
Selector Weights

Abstract
Transformer-based and MLP-based methods have emerged as
leading approaches in time series forecasting (TSF). However, real-world time series often show different patterns at
different scales, and future changes are shaped by the interplay of these overlapping scales, requiring high-capacity
models. While Transformer-based methods excel in capturing long-range dependencies, they suffer from high computational complexities and tend to overfit. Conversely, MLPbased methods offer computational efficiency and adeptness in modeling temporal dynamics, but they struggle with
capturing temporal patterns with complex scales effectively.
Based on the observation of multi-scale entanglement effect in time series, we propose a novel MLP-based Adaptive
Multi-Scale Decomposition (AMD) framework for TSF. Our
framework decomposes time series into distinct temporal patterns at multiple scales, leveraging the Multi-Scale Decomposable Mixing (MDM) block to dissect and aggregate these
patterns. Complemented by the Dual Dependency Interaction (DDI) block and the Adaptive Multi-predictor Synthesis
(AMS) block, our approach effectively models both temporal
and channel dependencies and utilizes autocorrelation to refine multi-scale data integration. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate our AMD framework not only overcomes the
limitations of existing methods but also consistently achieves
state-of-the-art performance across various datasets.

Multi-Scale
Decomposition

High Attention
Score Focus on
Mutate Points
Historical Input
Historical
Input

Predict Series

Figure 1: Illustration of multi-scale temporal patterns in time
series and the impact of selector weights. Transformer-based
methods often overfit by overemphasizing mutation points,
weakening temporal relationships. Efficiently modeling and
integrating distinct temporal patterns at various scales is crucial for accurate predictions.

It is worth noting that time series exhibit distinctly different temporal patterns at various sampling scales (Wang et al.
2024). Moreover, the weight of these time scales in predicting future variations is not uniform, as future variations are
jointly determined by the entangle of multiple scales (see
Fig. 1). For example, weather data sampled hourly reflects
fine-grained, sudden changes, while monthly sampled data
captures coarse-grained climate variations. Similarly, while
short-term hourly data might highlight immediate weather
shifts, long-term monthly data provides a broader view of
climatic trends. Therefore, efficiently modeling the multiscale changes in time series and adeptly integrating information across different scales, which requires high-capacity
models, remains a critical challenge.
Although Transformer-based methods excel at modeling
long-range dependencies due to the self-attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al. 2017), they come with computational complexity that scales quadratically with the length of
the sequence. Despite their recognized performance, these
methods still face challenges in industrial applications, including low training efficiency and high memory consumption. Additionally, self-attention can diminish the tempo-

Code — https://github.com/TROUBADOUR000/AMD

Introduction
Time series forecasting (TSF) aims to use historical data
to predict future values across various domains, such as
finance (Cheng et al. 2022, 2018; Zhu et al. 2024), energy (Xue and Salim 2023), traffic management (Kim et al.
2022), and weather forecasting (Volkovs, Urtans, and Caune
2024). Recently, deep learning has made substantial and reliable advancements in TSF, with the most state-of-the-art
performances achieved by Transformer-based methods (Nie
et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2022b; Zhang and Yan 2023) and
MLP-based methods(Zeng et al. 2023; Tolstikhin et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2023b; Qiu et al. 2024).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Dawei Cheng and Tao Dai.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17359

