The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contrastive Multi-view Subspace Clustering via
Tensor Transformers Autoencoder
Qianqian Wang1 * , Zihao Zhang1 , Wei Feng2 , Zhiqiang Tao3 , Quanxue Gao1
1

School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, 710071
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, 710049
3
School of Information, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA, 14623
qqwang@xidian.edu.cn, zihaoz2021@stu.xidian.edu.cn, zhiqiang.tao@rit.edu, weifeng.ft@xjtu.edu.cn, qxgao@xidian.edu.cn
2

dH

Abstract
Z1

Multi-view clustering aims to identify consistent and complementary information across multiple views to partition data
into clusters, emerging as a popular unsupervised method
for multi-view data analysis. However, existing methods often design view-specific encoders to extract distinct features
from each view, lacking exploration of their complementarity.
Additionally, current contrastive-based multi-view clustering
methods may lead to erroneous negative sample pairs conflicting with the clustering objective. To address these challenges, we propose a novel Contrastive Multi-view Subspace
Clustering via Tensor Transformers Autoencoder (TTAE). On
the one hand, it facilitates information exchange between
views by tensor transformers autoencoder, thereby enhancing complementarity. On the other hand, It learns a consistent subspace with a self-expression layer. Meanwhile, adaptive contrastive learning helps to provide more discriminative features for the self-expression learning layer, and the
self-expression learning layer in turn supervises contrastive
learning. Moreover, our method adaptively selects positive
and negative samples for contrastive learning to mitigate the
impact of inappropriate negative sample pairs. Extensive experiments on several multi-view datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our model.

ov
m

Z2



Wh
V

…



ZV

ov

m




V

h

Split
Head h

m

V
h

Wh
Wh

m

V

X

h

V

h
Concat (1, 2,..., H )

X

dH

m

V

h

Figure 1: The flowchart of the Tensor Attention Layer. Due
to the parallel computation of multiple attention heads, we
depict only a single head h. These heads are concatenated
after the same transformation i.e., to obtain the strengthened
representation Ẑ.
behavior (Fang et al. 2023). In image processing, integrating multiple views—such as color histograms and texture
features—facilitates more nuanced content analysis, leading
to improved clustering performance (Wang et al. 2022c). In
data mining, merging features from diverse views can uncover hidden associations and trends, facilitating the extraction of valuable insights while reducing computational complexity. Prior research on MVC can be broadly categorized
based on architecture: traditional MVC methods (Tao et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2018, 2023a) and deep MVC methods
(Lin et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2024).
Traditional MVC methods include Non-negative Matrix
Factorization (NMF) clustering (Li et al. 2023; Zong et al.
2017), graph constraint-based methods (Orecchia and Zhu
2014; Zhang et al. 2019), and subspace clustering methods (Cao et al. 2015; Li et al. 2019). However, these traditional methods primarily rely on shallow and linear embedding functions to capture the clustering structure, which limits their ability to explore the deep, nonlinear relationships
within multi-view data. Although some approaches (Akaho
2001; Tzortzis and Likas 2012) attempt to address this limitation by incorporating multi-kernel learning strategies to
capture nonlinear features, their clustering performance remains suboptimal.
In recent years, the emergence of deep neural networks

Introduction
Owing to the rapid development of information technology, multi-view data, which comprise multiple modalities,
have become increasingly ubiquitous, such as in applications like instant music videos. The vastness and complexity of multi-view data make it challenging to obtain reliable
data labels, resulting in significant obstacles for data processing. As a consequence, Multi-view Clustering (MVC)
has gained considerable attention (Zhou et al. 2024; Huang
et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2015). MVC is an unsupervised
method that effectively leverages both inter-view and intraview statistical properties to partition data into meaningful
clusters. MVC has found wide application across a variety
of domains. For example, in social network analysis, combining views such as user profiles, social relationships, and
behavioral records enables a deeper understanding of user
* *Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21207

