The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Partially Observable Off-Switch Game
Andrew Garber1 * , Rohan Subramani1 * , Linus Luu2 * ,
Mark Bedaywi1 , Stuart Russell1 , Scott Emmons1
1

Center for Human-Compatible AI, UC Berkeley
2
ML Alignment & Theory Scholars Program
andrewg4000@gmail.com, emmons@berkeley.edu

Abstract

OH

A wide variety of goals could cause an AI to disable its off
switch because “you can’t fetch the coffee if you’re dead.”
Prior theoretical work on this shutdown problem assumes that
humans know everything that AIs do. In practice, however,
humans have only limited information. Moreover, in many
of the settings where the shutdown problem is most concerning, AIs might have vast amounts of private information. To capture these differences in knowledge, we introduce
the partially observable off-switch game (PO-OSG), a gametheoretic model of the shutdown problem with asymmetric
information. Unlike when the human has full observability,
we find that in optimal play, even AI agents assisting perfectly
rational humans sometimes avoid shutdown. As expected, increasing the amount of communication or information available always increases (or leaves unchanged) the agents’ expected common payoff. But counterintuitively, introducing
bounded communication can make the AI defer to the human less in optimal play even though communication mitigates information asymmetry. In particular, communication
sometimes enables new optimal behavior requiring strategic
AI deference to achieve outcomes that were previously inaccessible. Thus, designing safe artificial agents in the presence
of asymmetric information requires careful consideration of
the tradeoffs between maximizing payoffs (potentially myopically) and maintaining AIs’ incentives to defer to humans.

1

S

OH

OA
OA
πA
aA

πH
w(a)
aH
ON
ua (S)

a

OFF

ua (S) uo (S)
OFF
uo (S)

Figure 1: The basic setup of a partially observable off-switch
game (PO-OSG). A state is selected randomly and the human H and AI assistant A receive (possibly dependent) observations. Then, each agent acts. A may wait (w(a)), disable the off-switch and act (a), or shut down (OFF). If A
waits, H may let A act (ON) or turn A off (OFF). A and
H share a common payoff ua (S) if the action goes through
and uo (S) if not. Definition 3.2 formally defines PO-OSGs.

Introduction

Advanced AI systems with a variety of goals might avoid being shut down because “you can’t fetch the coffee if you’re
dead” (Russell 2019). Being shut off would likely prevent
AI systems from achieving their goals, no matter what those
goals are (Omohundro 2008; Russell 2019). Thus, we must
take care when designing AI systems to ensure they are corrigible, i.e., that they allow humans to modify or turn them
off to prevent harmful behaviors (Soares et al. 2015).
Hadfield-Menell et al. (2017) introduced the off-switch
game (OSG) as a stylized mathematical model for exploring AI shutdown incentives when an AI is assisting a human. In the OSG, AIs seeking to satisfy the preferences of
a fully-informed rational human never have an incentive to
avoid shutdown. Moreover, making an AI uncertain about

the human’s preferences can incentivize it to defer to the human even when the human is not perfectly rational. Followup work has highlighted and relaxed central assumptions of
the OSG, including assumptions of exact common payoffs
(Carey 2018), the Boltzmann model of human irrationality
(Wängberg et al. 2017), single-round interactions, and costlessness of human feedback (Freedman and Gleave 2022).
While there has been extensive analysis of the shutdown
problem, almost all of this analysis makes the key assumption that the human fully observes the environment. However, partial observability is a fact of life: humans and AIs do
not always have access to the same information. Moreover,
the shutdown problem is motivated by powerful and goaldirected AIs that might be hard to shut down—traits that
could make the AI observe more of the environment than
humans due to faster computation, access to more sensors,
and other factors (Omohundro 2008; Soares et al. 2015).

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27304

