The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SMamba: Sparse Mamba for Event-based Object Detection
Nan Yang1 * , Yang Wang1 * , Zhanwen Liu1† , Meng Li2 , Yisheng An1 , Xiangmo Zhao1
1

School of Information Engineering, Chang’an University, China
2
School of Civil Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
{2022024001, ywang120, zwliu, aysm, xmzhao}@chd.edu.cn, mengli@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Transformer-based methods have achieved remarkable performance in event-based object detection, owing to the global
modeling ability. However, they neglect the influence of nonevent and noisy regions and process them uniformly, leading to high computational overhead. To mitigate computation
cost, some researchers propose window attention based sparsification strategies to discard unimportant regions, which
sacrifices the global modeling ability and results in suboptimal performance. To achieve better trade-off between accuracy and efficiency, we propose Sparse Mamba (SMamba),
which performs adaptive sparsification to reduce computational effort while maintaining global modeling capability.
Specifically, a Spatio-Temporal Continuity Assessment module is proposed to measure the information content of tokens
and discard uninformative ones by leveraging the spatiotemporal distribution differences between activity and noise
events. Based on the assessment results, an InformationPrioritized Local Scan strategy is designed to shorten the scan
distance between high-information tokens, facilitating interactions among them in the spatial dimension. Furthermore, to
extend the global interaction from 2D space to 3D representations, a Global Channel Interaction module is proposed to aggregate channel information from a global spatial perspective.
Results on three datasets (Gen1, 1Mpx, and eTram) demonstrate that our model outperforms other methods in both performance and efficiency.

Figure 1: (a) The event sparsity statistics on three datasets.
Each point represents a scenario. (b) Compared with calculating all regions uniformly in Transformer, our proposed
SMamba can suppress non-event and noisy regions (gray
regions) from participating in calculations and only retain
information-rich areas (yellow regions), alleviating computational overhead significantly and suppressing noise disturbance, simultaneously. (c) mAP-FLOPs-Parameters comparison between state-of-the-art methods and our SMamba
on Gen1, where the circle radius is the parameter. SMamba
achieves a superior balance between accuracy and efficiency.

Introduction
Robust object detection is fundamental for intelligent systems, such as autonomous driving and robotics (Liu et al.
2024b; Zhang et al. 2013; Li et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2023).
However, frame-based cameras encounter inherent limitations in frame rate and dynamic range, leading to low-quality
images and hindering the extraction of discriminative features in challenging scenarios, such as high-speed motion
and adverse exposure conditions (e.g., low light and overexposure) (Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2008; Sayed
and Brostow 2021; Liu et al. 2024c; Yan, Gong, and Zhang
2018; Liu et al. 2024d). In these scenarios, event cameras

emerge as a superior alternative due to their unique advantages, which asynchronously detect pixel-level changes in
light intensity, offering high temporal resolution and high
dynamic range, exhibiting stable and robust performance under challenging conditions (Finateu et al. 2020; Huang et al.
2023; Son et al. 2017; Gallego et al. 2020).
To fully exploit the superior performance of event cameras in object detection task, researchers have developed various methods based on well-designed neural network architectures, including SNN-based, GNN-based, CNN-based,
and Transformer-based methods. Theoretically, SNN-based
(Cordone, Miramond, and Thierion 2022) and GNN-based

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9229

