The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

pFedES: Generalized Proxy Feature Extractor Sharing for
Model Heterogeneous Personalized Federated Learning
Liping Yi1 , Han Yu2 , Chao Ren2 , Gang Wang1,⇤ , Xiaoguang Liu1, * , Xiaoxiao Li2,3,4
College of Computer Science, TMCC, SysNet, DISSec, GTIISC, Nankai University, China
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Canada
4
Vector Institute, Canada
{yiliping, wgzwp, liuxg}@nbjl.nankai.edu.cn
{han.yu, chao.ren}@ntu.edu.sg, xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca
1

Abstract

are repeated until the global model converges. During the
entire training process, only models are transmitted between
the server and clients, while the data never leaves clients,
thereby protecting data privacy.
The above prevailing mode of FL follows the model homogeneity assumption. It requires that all clients train local
models with the same structures as the global model. Thus,
it is still not equipped to address the following challenges
often encountered in practice:

Federated learning (FL), as a privacy-preserving collaborative machine learning paradigm, has attracted significant interest from industry and academia. To allow each data owner
(FL client) to train a heterogeneous and personalized local model based on its local data distribution, system resources and requirements on model structure, the field of
model-heterogeneous personalized federated learning (MHPFL) has emerged. Existing MHPFL approaches either rely
on the availability of a public dataset with special characteristics to facilitate knowledge transfer, incur high computational and communication costs, or face potential model
leakage risks. To address these limitations, we propose a
model-heterogeneous personalized Federated learning approach based on generalized proxy feature Extractor Sharing
(pFedES) for supervised image classification tasks. (1) We
devise a shared small proxy homogeneous feature extractor
before each client’s heterogeneous local model. (2) Clients
train them via the proposed iterative learning to enable the
exchange of global generalized knowledge and local personalized knowledge. (3) The small proxy local homogeneous extractors produced after local training are uploaded
to the server for aggregation to facilitate knowledge fusion
across clients. We theoretically prove pFedES converges
with a non-convex convergence rate O(1/T ). Experiments
on 3 benchmark datasets against 9 baselines demonstrate
that pFedES performs state-of-the-art model accuracy while
maintaining efficient communication and computation.

• Data Heterogeneity. Clients have non-independently
and identically distributed (non-IID) data (Tan et al.
2022a; Yi et al. 2023c). Aggregating biased local models
trained on such data might lead to a sub-optimal global
model (Zhu et al. 2021a), which may perform worse than
the local models trained solely on clients.
• System Resource Heterogeneity. FL clients are often
devices (e.g., mobile phones, autonomous vehicles) with
divergent system resources (computational power, communication bandwidth, etc (Jiang et al. 2022; Yi et al.
2022)). The traditional FL approach limits all clients to
train the smallest model supported by the lowest-end
client, leading to model performance bottlenecks and
wasted system resources of high-end devices.
• Model Ownership Heterogeneity. When FL clients are
companies, they are often willing to fine-tune heterogeneous models from their internal repositories via FL. Due
to intellectual property considerations (Ye et al. 2023),
they are reluctant to expose model structures to others.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (Goebel et al. 2023) is an emerging
collaborative machine learning paradigm. It often relies on
a central FL server to coordinate decentralized data owners
(FL clients) to train a shared global FL model in a privacypreserving manner (Kairouz et al. 2021).
In a traditional FL system, the server first broadcasts the
global model to clients. Clients then train the received global
model on their respective local data and upload the trained
local models to the server. The server aggregates the received local models to update the global model. These steps

The field of model-heterogeneous personalized federated
learning (MHPFL) has emerged to address these challenges.
It enables each client to train a personalized and heterogeneous model based on its local data distribution, system resources, and model structure requirements (Yi et al. 2023a,b,
2024a,b).
Prior efforts for MHPFL can be divided into three main
branches: Knowledge distillation-based MHPFL methods
either depend on a public dataset which is not always available (Lin et al. 2020), or introduce heavy communication
costs (Cheng et al. 2021), computational overheads (Huang
et al. 2022b), and risks of privacy leakage (Takahashi et al.
2023; Tan et al. 2022b). Mutual learning-based MHPFL

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22146

