The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Universal Features Guided Zero-Shot Category-Level Object Pose Estimation
Wentian Qu1,2,3 , Chenyu Meng1,2 , Heng Li3 , Jian Cheng1,2 , Cuixia Ma1,2 ,
Hongan Wang1,2 , Xiao Zhou4 , Xiaoming Deng1,2 * , Ping Tan3 *
1

Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wentian2019, chengjian, cuixia, hongan, xiaoming}@iscas.ac.cn, mengchenyu21@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
lh.heng.li@connect.ust.hk, zhouxiao@aircas.ac.cn, pingtan@ust.hk
Abstract

Oquab et al. 2023; Rombach et al. 2022) pre-trained on
large-scale datasets, recent work has explored 2D universal
features to estimate object pose, such as FoundPose (Örnek
et al. 2023), FoundationPose (Wen et al. 2024) and ZeroPose (Goodwin et al. 2022). FoundPose needs to know the
model of the instance object in advance, and FoundationPose needs to use multi-view images to model the object
before pose estimation. These settings require strong object
shape priors and are difficult to extend to unseen categories.
Zero-Pose establishes 2D correspondences for object pose
estimation using DINOv1 (Caron et al. 2021). We find that
DINOv1 is less effective in building correspondences and is
severely affected by object pose (Fig. 1 (b)). The correspondence will degrade if the pose difference between the reference image and the target image is large (Fig. 3). They also
do not consider shape differences between intra-category
objects, resulting in biased correspondences and inaccurate
pose estimation (Fig. 1 (c)). Similarly to 2D universal features, 3D universal features, extracted by pre-trained models
such as DGCNN (Wang et al. 2019c) can provide effective
geometric clues for correspondence, while they are barely
used in object pose estimation. Inspired by this, we utilize
both 2D and 3D universal features to solve the 6-DOF pose
estimation for unseen categories without model training or
fine-tuning, achieving a zero-shot category-level pose estimation. In particular, we do not need to know the 3D model
of the instance objects. Our method offers superior generalizability over traditional instance-level and category-level
methods (Fig. 1 (a)).
In this paper, we design a coarse-to-fine framework for accurate 6-DOF pose estimation. At the coarse stage, it identifies sparse correspondences to solve an initial coarse object pose. Given an input RGB-D image, we use a reference model of the interested category to render reference
images and extract 2D universal features from both the target and rendered reference images. We then calculate the cosine similarity map between the 2D features and use cyclical
distance to select Top-k correspondences. Combined with
the depth map and camera intrinsics, we choose the Top-k
keypoints in the camera coordinate and calculate the transformation from the reference to the target space to get the
initial coarse 6-DOF object pose by a least-squares solution.
To deal with the problem of feature correspondence degradation of 2D universal features if the initial pose deviates

Object pose estimation, crucial in computer vision and
robotics applications, faces challenges with the diversity of
unseen categories. We propose a zero-shot method to achieve
category-level 6-DOF object pose estimation, which exploits
both 2D and 3D universal features of input RGB-D image to establish semantic similarity-based correspondences
and can be extended to unseen categories without additional
model fine-tuning. Our method begins with combining efficient 2D universal features to find sparse correspondences
between intra-category objects and gets initial coarse pose.
To handle the correspondence degradation of 2D universal
features if the pose deviates much from the target pose, we
use an iterative strategy to optimize the pose. Subsequently,
to resolve pose ambiguities due to shape differences between
intra-category objects, the coarse pose is refined by optimizing with dense alignment constraint of 3D universal features.
Our method outperforms previous methods on the REAL275
and Wild6D benchmarks for unseen categories.

Project Page — https://iscas3dv.github.io/universal6dpose/

Introduction
Object pose estimation, which aims to estimate the orientation and location of an object in 3D space, is a long-standing
challenge and plays a key role in AR/VR and robotics applications. Instance-level methods (Labbé et al. 2020; Xiang
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018) achieve pose estimation for seen
instances. To deal with unseen instances of the same category, category-level methods (Zhang et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2019a; He et al. 2022) introduce a mean shape for a category
object with improved model attention to texture and geometry details, while these methods require retraining or model
fine-tuning when applied to unseen categories. To address
this limitation, we aim to address zero-shot category-level
object pose estimation from input RGB-D, which utilizes
both 2D and 3D universal features from pre-trained models
to achieve pose estimation for unseen categories.
Witnessed by a strong ability to establish correlations
(Amir et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022) with 2D universal features extracted by the foundation models (Caron et al. 2021;
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6648

