The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Unifying Evaluation of Counterfactual Explanations: Leveraging Large
Language Models for Human-Centric Assessments
Marharyta Domnich1 , Julius Välja1 , Rasmus Moorits Veski1,2 , Giacomo Magnifico1 , Kadi Tulver1 ,
Eduard Barbu1 , Raul Vicente1 *
1
2

Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
marharyta.domnich@ut.ee

Abstract

capturing the human perspective, missing key explanatory
virtues, and leading to inconsistent findings that complicate
the development of a standardized evaluation framework.
User studies are commonly recommended to assess the efficacy of counterfactual explanations, as ”excellent computational explanations may not be good psychological explanations” (Keane et al. 2021). Despite this, such studies are
rarely utilized for benchmarking counterfactual explanations
(Longo et al. 2024). One of the reasons for this is the difficulty and expense of recruiting a sufficient number of experts capable of performing these evaluations. Even when
executed, user studies do not guarantee consistent and reproducible results as perceptions of what constitutes a reasonable explanation can vary widely between individuals and
user groups (Kenny et al. 2021). Furthermore, most studies only employ a few qualitative measures, such as satisfaction and trust, which fail to address the nuanced features
influencing human preferences (Warren, Byrne, and Keane
2023). While human assessments of counterfactual explanations are invaluable, these issues of cost and scalability make
it very challenging to make meaningful comparisons and
generalizations between multiple frameworks or domains.
Recognizing the limitations of existing methodologies,
this paper explores the potential of Large Language Models
(LLMs) to serve as a benchmark for automating the evaluation of counterfactual explanations. Current LLMs have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities in interacting with
natural language data, ranging from extensive data summarisation (Liu et al. 2024) and pattern deduction (Jin et al. 2024)
to idea generation (Girotra et al. 2023) and problem-solving
through branching solutions (Yang et al. 2024). Based on
these premises, LLMs are hypothesized to mimic human
evaluative judgments effectively, offering a more accessible
and cost-efficient alternative to traditional methods.
In light of these considerations, this paper addresses the
following question: Can the evaluation process of counterfactual explanations be effectively automated using
LLMs? To answer this question, we created a diverse set
of 30 counterfactual scenarios that were designed to vary
across multiple dimensions of explanatory qualities. The
scenarios were evaluated by 206 human respondents in overall satisfaction, feasibility, consistency, completeness, trust,
fairness, complexity, and understandability. Next, we divided data for fine-tuning several LLM models to assess ev-

As machine learning models evolve, maintaining transparency demands more human-centric explainable AI techniques. Counterfactual explanations, with roots in human reasoning, identify the minimal input changes needed to obtain a given output, and hence, are crucial for supporting
decision-making. Despite their importance, the evaluation of
these explanations often lacks grounding in user studies and
remains fragmented, with existing metrics not fully capturing human perspectives. To address this challenge, we developed a diverse set of 30 counterfactual scenarios and collected ratings across 8 evaluation metrics from 206 respondents. Subsequently, we fine-tuned different Large Language
Models (LLMs) to predict average or individual human judgment across these metrics. Our methodology allowed LLMs
to achieve an accuracy of up to 63% in zero-shot evaluations
and 85% (over a 3-classes prediction) with fine-tuning across
all metrics. The fine-tuned models predicting human ratings
offer better comparability and scalability in evaluating different counterfactual explanation frameworks.

Introduction
The rapid adoption of AI in various domains has significantly increased the urgency for explainable AI models.
Counterfactual explanations, which address the question
”How should the input be different in order to change the
model’s decision outcome?” (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017), not only clarify the machine’s reasoning but also
suggest potential changes that users might implement to
achieve different results. These explanations enhance user
trust and understanding by providing a richer mental representation compared to causal explanations (Warren, Byrne,
and Keane 2023). Additionally, counterfactual explanations
align closely with human cognitive processes (Miller 2019),
as they provide alternative hypothetical realities that are pervasive in our natural reasoning (Byrne 2002).
Evaluating counterfactual explanations poses a significant
challenge in the field. While various quantitative metrics,
such as validity, proximity, sparsity, coherence, robustness,
and diversity (Guidotti 2022; Karimi et al. 2022; Rasouli and
Chieh Yu 2024) are currently used, they often fall short in
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16308

