The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FastPERT: Towards Fast Microservice Application Latency Prediction via
Structural Inductive Bias over PERT Networks
Da Sun Handason Tam1 , Huanle Xu2 , Yang Liu3 , Siyue Xie1 , Wing Cheong Lau1
1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2 University of Macau
3 Shanghai University

tds019@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, huanlexu@um.edu.mo, yangliu_cs@shu.edu.cn, xs019@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, wclau@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
et al. 2022a). Microservices with dedicated functions are
then invoked to fulfill these user requests. For example, a social networking application mighht have a post/compose
API endpoint that enables users to create a post. This API
endpoint could invoke the postStorage microservice to
archive the post in the database and the userTimeline
microservice to refresh the user’s timeline.
Compared to a monolithic architecture, the modular nature of microservices facilitates easy scaling of the application. When the application faces an increasing load, the service provider can identify and scale individual microservices
experiencing heavy traffic, rather than scaling the entire application. State-of-the-art resource scaling solutions for microservices primarily focus on proactive scaling (Zhang et al.
2021; Qiu et al. 2020; Chow et al. 2022b; Park et al. 2021a;
Wang et al. 2022; Tam et al. 2023). In this approach, the objective is to predict the end-to-end latency of a microservices
trace under various resource configurations in advance. It’s
important to note that a trace encompasses all microservices
invoked from the initial API call requests to the final response
through the API endpoints. The optimal configuration is then
chosen to meet the service level objective (SLO).
The success of real-time proactive scaling hinges on efficient and accurate end-to-end latency prediction models. However, these goals often conflict, as accounting for
intricate microservice interactions can compromise model
lightweightness. Neglecting complex dependencies leads to
inaccurate predictions (Zhang et al. 2021; Park et al. 2021b;
Tam et al. 2023; Park et al. 2021b), while overly complex
models, like PERT-GNN (Tam et al. 2023), which uses a
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) graph
(see sections 4.1 and 4.2 for details) and Graph Transformers to capture temporal dependencies between microservice
tasks, become computationally demanding and challenging
to deploy in real-time production environments.
In addition to grappling with the trade-off between effectiveness and efficiency, most prior works overlook the
inherent structural and computational inductive biases of
microservices traces. Specifically, the structural inductive
bias refers to the fact that the relationships among microservices in a trace naturally form a Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG). This structure reveals the dependencies between
consecutive microservices. The computational inductive
bias pertains to the principle that the end-to-end latency of

Abstract
The recent surge in popularity of cloud-native applications
using microservice architectures has led to a focus on accurate end-to-end latency prediction for proactive resource allocation. Existing models leverage Graph Transformers to Microservice Call Graphs or the Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) graphs to capture complex temporal
dependencies between microservices. However, these models
incur a high computational cost during both training and inference phases. This paper introduces FastPERT, an efficient
model for predicting end-to-end latency in microservice applications. FastPERT dissects an execution trace into several
microservices tasks, using observations from prior execution
traces of the application, akin to the PERT approach. Subsequently, a prediction model is constructed to estimate the
completion time for each individual task. This information,
coupled with the computational and structural inductive bias
of the PERT graph, facilitates the efficient computation of the
end-to-end latency of an execution trace. As a result, FastPERT can efficiently capture the complex temporal causality
of different microservice tasks, leading to more accurate and
robust latency predictions across a variety of applications.
An evaluation based on datasets generated from large-scale
Alibaba microservice traces reveals that FastPERT significantly improves training and inference efficiency without
compromising performance, demonstrating its potential as a
superior solution for real-time end-to-end latency prediction
in cloud-native microservice applications.

1

Introduction

Microservice architecture is becoming a pivotal software
development framework within the realm of cloud-native
applications. It decomposes an application as an assembly
of small and self-contained services, which can be independently deployed and managed. Owing to these advantages, industry giants such as Netflix, Twitter, Facebook, and
Airbnb have embraced this architecture for building their
cloud-based applications (net 2019; Dragoni et al. 2017; Sriraman, Dhanotia, and Wenisch 2019; air 2017).
In many cases, microservices are deployed in distinct
Docker containers and orchestrated by Kubernetes (Merkel
et al. 2014; Kuberntes 2014). Client users send API call
requests to the application via the API endpoints (Chow
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
20787

