The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Personalized Sleep Staging Leveraging Source Free Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation
Yangxuan Zhou1,2 , Sha Zhao1,2* , Jiquan Wang1,2 , Haiteng Jiang3,4,1 ,
Shijian Li1,2 , Benyan Luo5 , Tao Li3,4,1 , Gang Pan1,2,4
1

State Key Laboratory of Brain-machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Department of Neurobiology, Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China
4
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
5
The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{zyangxuan, szhao, wangjiquan, h.jiang, shijianli, luobenyan, litaozjusc, gpan}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Sleep staging is important for monitoring sleep quality and
diagnosing sleep-related disorders. Recently, numerous deep
learning-based models have been proposed for automatic
sleep staging using polysomnography recordings. Most of
them are trained and tested on the same labeled datasets
which results in poor generalization to unseen target domains.
However, they regard the subjects in the target domains as a
whole and overlook the individual discrepancies, which limits the model’s generalization ability to new patients (i.e.,
unseen subjects) and plug-and-play applicability in clinics.
To address this, we propose a novel Source-Free Unsupervised Individual Domain Adaptation (SF-UIDA) framework
for sleep staging, leveraging sequential cross-view contrasting and pseudo-label based fine-tuning. It is actually a twostep subject-specific adaptation scheme, which enables the
source model to effectively adapt to newly appeared unlabeled individual without access to the source data. It meets
the practical needs in real-world scenarios, where the personalized customization can be plug-and-play applied to new
ones. Our framework is applied to three classic sleep staging
models and evaluated on three public sleep datasets, achieving the state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: (a) Traditional Domain Adaptation for a group of
target (new) individuals and (b) Source-free Unsupervised
Personalized Customization for each target (new) individual.

Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) (Berry et al. 2012).
Obviously, such process is subjective and time-consuming.
Numerous deep learning-based models have been proposed for automatic sleep staging (Tsinalis et al. 2016;
Mousavi, Afghah, and Acharya 2019; Zhou et al. 2024;
Wang et al. 2024c) in recent years. Such models are usually trained and tested on the same labeled source data, automatically classifying different stages. They have achieved
good performance for sleep staging in the valid set, however, their performance is not so satisfying on unknown
samples. Most of them overlook the individual discrepancies, such as physiological structures (Matsushima, Minami, and Takadama 2012), physical characteristics (i.e.,
Electrodermal Response) and sleep habits. In clinical practice, the new patients (unknown subjects) are probably different from the samples used for training the models offline.
This limits the model’s generalization ability to unknown
subjects and dramatically degrades the performance, especially when they are directly tested on the new patients in
clinics. Therefore, we desperately need to make the model
adapt to new subjects. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA) is a suitable method which can transfer knowledge

Introduction
Sleep plays a crucial role in people’s lives and has a significant impact on their overall well-being (Humphreys, Sharps,
and Campbell 2005). Sleep staging is important for monitoring sleep quality and serves as a valuable tool to help
diagnose sleep disorders(Wang et al. 2023), which refers
to classify sleep periods into different stages. Recently,
Polysomnography (PSG) has been widely used for sleep
staging in clinics, which records various physiological signals by the sensors attached to different parts of one body,
such as electroencephalography (EEG), electrooculography
(EOG), and electromyography (EMG). The PSG recordings
are usually divided into consecutive epochs of 30s. Experts
manually identify each epoch into five distinct sleep stages,
namely, W, N1, N2, N3, REM, according to the American
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14529

