The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hierarchical Cross-Modal Alignment for Open-Vocabulary 3D Object Detection
Youjun Zhao* , Jiaying Lin* , Rynson W.H. Lau†
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
youjun.zhao@my.cityu.edu.hk, jiayinlin5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

Recently, vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP
(Radford et al. 2021a) and ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021) have
made tremendous progress by training on large-scale imagetext data from the Internet. The ability of VLMs to learn
the rich object-level context of image-text embedding has
inspired open-vocabulary 2D understanding tasks, such as
object detection (Gu et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2022; Bangalath
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023) and semantic segmentation
(Ding et al. 2022; Zhou, Loy, and Dai 2022; Xu et al. 2023;
Han et al. 2023). However, it is not straightforward to pretrain 3D-text models due to the lack of large-scale 3D-text
data. Recent attempts (Ding et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023b;
Peng et al. 2023) leverage rich linguistic representations of
VLMs in 3D open-vocabulary understanding tasks by directly projecting 3D data onto the 2D image space. This
motivates us to leverage VLMs for the OV-3DOD task. By
doing so, we can utilize the rich object-centric context of
linguistic descriptions in the 3D domain, allowing us to connect 3D point clouds with text representation for OV-3DOD.
However, directly applying 2D VLMs to address the
3DOD task is not feasible due to the significant contextual
differences between 2D and 3D data. First, pre-trained 2D
VLMs (Chen et al. 2023a) are typically trained on images
containing mostly a single object. In contrast, 3D scenes often comprise multiple objects of various sizes. Connecting
multiple objects with textual descriptions in a 3D scene is
more challenging. Second, 3D scenes have more data dimensions than 2D images. This discrepancy may lead to the negligence of important spatial information associated with 3D
objects. Third, unlike the 2D images used for pre-training
VLMs, in which objects are usually located at the center,
objects in a 3D scene may be located in various corners or
even partially outside the 3D scene. This variability of 3D
scenes makes it difficult to learn the model. The above three
challenges pose a significant need for a holistic understanding of 3D scenes in the 3DOD task.
For effective 3D detection, our insight is that it is essential to consider not only the object features, but also the
surrounding 3D scene context, in order to accurately locate the object. Hence, in this paper, we propose a hierarchical framework, named HCMA, to simultaneously learn
3D objects as well as scene contexts for the OV-3DOD task.
Our HCMA framework has three technical contributions.
First, unlike the state-of-the-art OV-3DOD method (Lu et al.

Open-vocabulary 3D object detection (OV-3DOD) aims at
localizing and classifying novel objects beyond closed sets.
The recent success of vision-language models (VLMs) has
demonstrated their remarkable capabilities to understand
open vocabularies. Existing works that leverage VLMs for 3D
object detection (3DOD) generally resort to representations
that lose the rich scene context required for 3D perception.
To address this problem, we propose in this paper a hierarchical framework, named HCMA, to simultaneously learn local
object and global scene information for OV-3DOD. Specifically, we first design a Hierarchical Data Integration (HDI)
approach to obtain coarse-to-fine 3D-image-text data, which
is fed into a VLM to extract object-centric knowledge. To
facilitate the association of feature hierarchies, we then propose an Interactive Cross-Modal Alignment (ICMA) strategy to establish effective intra-level and inter-level feature
connections. To better align features across different levels,
we further propose an Object-Focusing Context Adjustment
(OFCA) module to refine multi-level features by emphasizing
object-related features. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms SOTA methods on the
existing OV-3DOD benchmarks. It also achieves promising
OV-3DOD results even without any 3D annotations.

Code and Extended version —
https://youjunzhao.github.io/HCMA/

Introduction
3D object detection (3DOD) aims at localizing and classifying objects in 3D scenes. As a fundamental task in 3D
scene understanding, it has various potential applications,
e.g., robotic (Zeng et al. 2018) and autonomous driving (Bojarski et al. 2016). However, existing 3DOD methods are
limited to a small set of categories due to the lack of annotated 3D datasets. Most 3DOD works focus on detecting
seen categories that exist in the training data and cannot be
easily generalized to real-world data with unseen categories.
To address this limitation, open-vocabulary 3D object detection (OV-3DOD) aims to detect novel objects in 3D scenes
that are outside the limited categories of the training dataset.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10501

