The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Filling Memory Gaps: Enhancing Continual Semantic Parsing via SQL Syntax
Variance-Guided LLMs Without Real Data Replay
Ruiheng Liu1, 2 , Jinyu Zhang2 , Yanqi Song2 , Yu Zhang2 * , Bailong Yang1 *
1

Xi’an Research Institute of High-Tech, Xi’an, China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{rhliu, jyzhang, yqsong, zhangyu}@ir.hit.edu.cn, xa 403@163.com

Abstract

Limited annotated data
For each classroom, report the classroom
number and the number of grades using it.

Train

Sequential Training

Continual Semantic Parsing (CSP) aims to train parsers to
convert natural language questions into SQL across tasks
with limited annotated examples, adapting to dynamically
updated databases in real-world scenarios. Previous studies
mitigate this challenge by replaying historical data or employing parameter-efficient tuning (PET), but they often violate data privacy or rely on ideal continual learning settings. To address these issues, we propose a new Large
Language Model (LLM)-Enhanced Continuous Semantic
Parsing method, named L ECSP, which alleviates forgetting
while encouraging generalization, without requiring real data
replay or ideal settings. Specifically, it first analyzes the commonalities and differences between tasks from the SQL syntax perspective to guide LLMs in reconstructing key memories and improving memory accuracy through calibration.
Then, it uses a task-aware dual-teacher distillation framework to promote the accumulation and transfer of knowledge
during sequential training. Experimental results on two CSP
benchmarks show that our method significantly outperforms
existing methods, even those utilizing data replay or ideal settings. Additionally, we achieve generalization performance
beyond upper limits, better adapting to unseen tasks.

Task 1

Student

SELECT Classroom, COUNT(DISTINCT Grade)
FROM List GROUP BY Classroom

Overfitting

·
·
·

Update

Limited annotated data

Overfitting

What are the countries for JetBlue Airways
flights, ordered by time?

Task 2
Train

·
·
·

Flight

SELECT Country FROM AIRLINES WHERE
Airline = ‘JetBlue Airways’ ORDER BY Time

·
·
·

Forget the SQL knowledge like COUNT(DISTINCT…)…GROUP BY in Task 1

(a)
Task accuracy

Our method
GROUP BY
DISTINCT
LIMIT
ASC|DESC
0

1

2

3

4
5
Task ID

(b)

6

7

8

9

Large language
models

Previous methods

Additional data required

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Description of the continual semantic parsing
process. (b) The average number of single SQL keywords
at cluster centers of different tasks in Spider-stream-semi
dataset (Chen et al. 2023a). (c) Comparison between our
method and others, where Additional data required refers
to extra historical data or unsupervised data.

Code — https://github.com/tom68-ll/LECSP
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.07246

Introduction
Semantic parsing offers a user-friendly interface for nonexperts to query data and perform various analyses (Hu et al.
2023; Li et al. 2023b). While most previous studies focus
on static data distributions (Li et al. 2023a; Wang et al.
2024a; Guo et al. 2024), the frequent updates in real-world
databases have led researchers to shift their focus to continual semantic parsing (Li, Qu, and Haffari 2021; Lialin et al.
2021; Yadav et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023a,b).
As illustrated in Figure 1(a), a semantic parser must undergo continual training across a series of tasks from different databases, while ensuring good performance on current
and historical tasks. This task faces two primary challenges:
(1) The scarcity of annotated data for each task can easily

result in model overfitting (Qin and Joty 2022; Chen et al.
2023a). (2) Training sequentially leads to catastrophic forgetting (Chen et al. 2023a,b; Wang et al. 2024b; Qiao and
Mahdavi 2024), where the model’s performance on earlier
tasks significantly worsens after learning new ones.
To tackle these challenges, several studies have explored
continual learning methods, which can be divided into two
types from data and model dimensions: Rehearsal-based
and PET-based. The former devises specific sampling strategies to replay historical task data to prevent forgetting (Li,
Qu, and Haffari 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023a).
The latter freezes the model backbone and uses small-scale
parameters, such as prompt (Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant
2021), to steer representation learning (Chen et al. 2023b;

* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24641

