The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Specifying What You Know or Not for Multi-Label Class-Incremental Learning
Aoting Zhang1,3 , Dongbao Yang1,3 * , Chang Liu5 , Xiaopeng Hong4 * , Yu Zhou2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Harbin Institute of Technology
5
Tsinghua University
{zhangaoting, yangdongbao}@iie.ac.cn, liuchang2022@tsinghua.edu.cn
hongxiaopeng@ieee.org, yzhou@nankai.edu.cn
Abstract

H
C

Existing class incremental learning is mainly designed for
single-label classification task, which is ill-equipped for
multi-label scenarios due to the inherent contradiction of
learning objectives for samples with incomplete labels. We
argue that the main challenge to overcome this contradiction in multi-label class-incremental learning (MLCIL) lies
in the model’s inability to clearly distinguish between known
and unknown knowledge. This ambiguity hinders the model’s
ability to retain historical knowledge, master current classes,
and prepare for future learning simultaneously. In this paper,
we target at specifying what is known or not to accommodate
Historical, Current, and Prospective knowledge for MLCIL
and propose a novel framework termed as HCP. Specifically,
(i) we clarify the known classes by dynamic feature purification and recall enhancement with distribution prior, enhancing the precision and retention of known information. (ii) We
design prospective knowledge mining to probe the unknown,
preparing the model for future learning. Extensive experiments validate that our method effectively alleviates catastrophic forgetting in MLCIL, surpassing the previous stateof-the-art by 3.3% on average accuracy for MS-COCO B0C10 setting without replay buffers.

P
: target
: feature

(a) label: bus, car, person (b) entangled features

(c) feature aliasing

Specify what is known or not

C

: target
: feature

(d)

bus

car

P

H

(e) class-aware features

known (Historical&Current): bus&car unknown (Prospective): person

Figure 1: The contradiction of learning objectives in MLCIL
arises from the model’s inability to distinguish known and
unknown knowledge. Current model fails to effectively recall prior known knowledge due to (a) the absence of historical labels, while (b) unknown classes’ attention is inadvertently overlapped with known classes, and known classes are
also entangled, resulting in (c) feature aliasing and contradictory learning objectives. By specifying what is known or
not, (d) fine-grained class-aware features are focused, leading to (e) enhanced inter-class discriminability, alleviating
the contradiction.

Introduction
To know what it is that you know, and to know what it is
that you do not know–that is understanding.
—The Analects
Class incremental learning (CIL) (Aljundi et al. 2018;
Douillard et al. 2022) is developed to continuously identify new classes while preserving old knowledge. Numerous
studies endeavor to address the problem of catastrophic forgetting in CIL caused by the absence of old data. These studies are generally tailored to single-label class-incremental
learning (SLCIL), assuming that each image only contains
one single class. However, real-world images often feature
multiple labels (e.g., a street scene depicts cars, buses, persons, etc.). To this end, multi-label class incremental learning (MLCIL) has caught progressive attention (Dong et al.

2023), aiming to correctly classify an image into multiple
classes that may be introduced across different sessions.
Different from SLCIL, MLCIL typically involves images
that simultaneously contain objects from historical, current
and prospective classes since the foreground class definition evolves between incremental sessions. Annotations are
available only for the classes learned at the current session
(car in Figure 1), leaving past (bus) and future (person)
classes unlabelled. Directly adopting anti-forgetting techniques in SLCIL, such as knowledge distillation and exemplar replay, yields poor results, as they fail to tackle the contradiction of learning objectives caused by incomplete labels
inherent to MLCIL. Specifically, the learning objective contradiction arises from the inconsistency among three critical

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22345

