The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing the Adversarial Robustness via Manifold Projection
Zhiting Li, Shibai Yin, Tai-Xiang Jiang* , Yexun Hu, Jia-Mian Wu, Guowei Yang, Guisong Liu
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, P.R.China
Kash Institute of Electronics and Information Industry, Kash, P.R.China
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Finance, Ministry of Education, Chengdu, P.R.China

Abstract

2016; Zhao, Dua, and Singh 2018; Xiao et al. 2018; Poursaeed et al. 2018; Dia, Barshan, and Babanezhad 2019; Liu
et al. 2022), particularly in fields such as autonomous driving and facial recognition (Kong et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2022;
Zheng et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023). These attacks exploit the
vulnerabilities of DNNs by introducing perturbations that
are imperceptible to humans but can drastically alter the
model’s predictions.
Adversarial training (AT) has emerged as one of the most
effective defense methods against such attacks (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018; Wong, Rice,
and Kolter 2020; Andriushchenko and Flammarion 2020).
AT incorporates adversarial examples into the training data
to enhance the model’s robustness. However, AT is typically
employed in a discriminative learning manner, focusing on
learning the mapping (conditional probability) from samples to labels (Ng and Jordan 2001; Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016; Sandler et al. 2018). This
approach primarily aims to reinforce the mapping from input samples to their corresponding labels, without considering the underlying distribution of normal samples. Consequently, AT often requires high-capacity models, making
it less suitable for edge computing scenarios where computational resources are limited (Madry et al. 2018; Xie and
Yuille 2020; Zhang et al. 2021).
To address the limitations of AT, adversarial distillation
(AD) has been proposed, where robustness is distilled from
an adversarially pretrained model (teacher model) to a student model in a teacher-student architecture (Goldblum et al.
2020; Zi et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2023). AD aims to improve the robustness of small, low-capacity models. However, existing AD methods are limited to aligning the prediction outputs of teacher and student models, neglecting the
underlying data distribution. If there is a significant capacity
gap between the teacher and student models or the teacher
model’s performance is suboptimal, the effectiveness of adversarial distillation may be compromised (Cho and Hariharan 2019; Huang et al. 2022). Both AT and AD reinforce the
sample-to-label mapping without considering the underlying data distribution. Moreover, adversarial examples often
deviate from the distribution of normal samples, leading to
suboptimal robustness (Pang et al. 2022; Yu, Chen, and Gan
2023).
In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial defense

Deep learning has been widely applied to various aspects
of computer vision, but the emergence of adversarial attacks
raises concerns about its reliability. Adversarial training (AT)
is one of the most effective defense methods, which incorporates adversarial examples into the training data. However,
AT is typically employed in a discriminative learning manner, i.e., learning the mapping (conditional probability) from
samples to labels, it essentially reinforces this mapping without considering the underlying data distribution. It is notable
that adversarial examples often deviate from the distribution
of normal (clean) samples. Therefore, building upon existing adversarial defense schemes, we propose to further exploit the distribution of normal samples, partly from the generative learning perspective, resulting in a novel robustness
enhancement paradigm. We train a simple autoencoder (AE)
autoregressively on normal samples to learn their prior distribution, effectively serving as an image manifold. This AE is
then used as a manifold projection operator to incorporate the
distribution information of normal samples. Specifically, we
organically integrate the pretrained AE into the training process of both AT and adversarial distillation (AD), a method
aiming at improving the robustness of small models with low
capacity. Since the AE captures the distribution of normal
samples, it can adaptively pull adversarial examples closer to
the normal sample manifold, weakening the attack strength
of adversarial samples and easing the learning of mappings
from adversarial samples to correct labels. From the Pearson
correlation coefficient (PCC) between the statistics on normal and adversarial examples, it’s validated that the AE indeed pulls adversarial samples closer to normal samples. Extensive experiments illustrate that our proposed adversarial
defense paradigm significantly improves the robustness compared with previous state-of-the-art AT and AD methods.

1

Introduction

Currently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
tremendous success in the field of computer vision (He
et al. 2016; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; Tan and Le
2019; Liu et al. 2021). However, adversarial attacks against
DNNs pose significant security threats (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard
* Corresponding author. (Email: taixiangjiang@gmail.com)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

451

