The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging Traffic State and Trajectory for Dynamic Road Network and Trajectory
Representation Learning
Chengkai Han1 , Jingyuan Wang1,2,3 * , Yongyao Wang1 , Xie Yu1 , Hao Lin2,3 , Chao Li1,4 , Junjie Wu2,3
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
MIIT Key Laboratory of Data Intelligence and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Shenzhen Institute of Beihang University, Shenzhen, China
Abstract

Effective urban traffic management is vital for sustainable
city development, relying on intelligent systems with machine learning tasks such as traffic flow prediction and travel
time estimation. Traditional approaches usually focus on
static road network and trajectory representation learning,
and overlook the dynamic nature of traffic states and trajectories, which is crucial for downstream tasks. To address this
gap, we propose TRACK, a novel framework to bridge traffic
state and trajectory data for dynamic road network and trajectory representation learning. TRACK leverages graph attention networks (GAT) to encode static and spatial road segment features, and introduces a transformer-based model for
trajectory representation learning. By incorporating transition
probabilities from trajectory data into GAT attention weights,
TRACK captures dynamic spatial features of road segments.
Meanwhile, TRACK designs a traffic transformer encoder to
capture the spatial-temporal dynamics of road segments from
traffic state data. To further enhance dynamic representations,
TRACK proposes a co-attentional transformer encoder and a
trajectory-traffic state matching task. Extensive experiments
on real-life urban traffic datasets demonstrate the superiority
of TRACK over state-of-the-art baselines. Case studies confirm TRACK’s ability to capture spatial-temporal dynamics
effectively.

Figure 1: An example of mutual influences between traffic
state data and trajectory data.
ous urban traffic tasks (Chen et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019a;
Jiang et al. 2023d).
Recently, many efforts have been devoted to modeling
traffic state data (Jiang et al. 2023a; Zou et al. 2024; Yi et al.
2024; Ji et al. 2022b, 2023, 2020) and trajectory data (Yang
et al. 2021; Fu and Lee 2020; Jiang et al. 2023c). However,
existing methods typically model these two types of data independently, lacking approaches capable of jointly modeling
them. In urban transportation scenarios, traffic state data describes the dynamic macroscopic characteristics of groups
on the road network, while trajectory data reflects the dynamic movement attributes of individuals on the road network. There are spatio-temporal correlations and mutual influences between traffic state data and trajectory data.
Firstly, traffic states influence individuals’ choices of the
trajectory route. For example, as shown in Figure 1(a), people tend to choose the shortest route R1 during non-peak
hours, but it might be a better choice to detour with a more
time-saving route R2 during peak hours (i.e., when the average traffic speed of R1 is low). Traffic states naturally affect
the travel time of each road segment in a trajectory. Secondly, individual transitions on the road network are the direct cause of changes in traffic states. As shown in Figure
(b), the traffic flow on segment C consists of the traffic flow
entering from segment A and that entering from segment B.
Therefore, the transition probability from segment A to segment C varies over different time periods, directly impacting
the traffic states on segment C. Therefore, jointly modeling
traffic state data and trajectory data can enrich the spatio-

Code — https://github.com/NickHan-cs/TRACK

Introduction
Intelligent urban traffic management, such as traffic flow
prediction (Bai et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022; Ji et al. 2022a;
Liu et al. 2024), travel time estimation (Wang et al. 2018;
Wu et al. 2019a) and trajectory analysis (Chen et al. 2017;
Ding et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019), plays a crucial role in ensuring efficient city functioning and promoting sustainable
development (Wang et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2023b). In the
realm of intelligent urban traffic management, traffic state
data and trajectory data are two core components that can
encapsulate the macroscopic and microscopic characteristics of cities, respectively, and their representation learning,
i.e., learning generic low-dimensional road segment and trajectory vectors, serve as two fundamental pillars for vari* Corresponding author: jywang@buaa.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11763

