The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Lightweight Contrastive Distilled Hashing for Online Cross-modal Retrieval
Jiaxing Li1 , Lin Jiang2 , Zeqi Ma3 , Kaihang Jiang3 , Xiaozhao Fang4,* , Jie Wen5
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China
School of Computer Science, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou 510665, China
3
School of Fashion and Textiles, The Hong Kong Polytechic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
4
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
5
Bio-Computing Research Center, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518067, China
jiaxing.li.cs@gmail.com, linn jiang@163.com, 22123638r@connect.polyu.hk, jkh1650290810@163.com,
xzhfang168@126.com, jiewen pr@126.com
2

Abstract

the increasing volume of multimedia data, and has shown its
great potentials in representation learning, neural language
processing and generation, etc. Training of LLMs involves
a large number of parameters, and thus they can be applied
to many complex scenarios for real time prediction or processing (Zhu et al. 2024). However, the devices that handling
the cross-modal retrieval tasks in AI applications may not be
powerful in performance, especially for the mobile devices.
Thus, a lightweight retrieval framework supervised by the
large training model for multimedia data is with urgent need.
However, the application of lightweight online crossmodal hashing that is supervised by large-scale model training in the knowledge distillation framework, is hindered by
some technical hurdles. Firstly, it is difficult in cross-modal
retrieval to extract coexistent semantic relevance of data
from different modalities, as there exists huge semantically
heterogeneous gaps between different modalities. Secondly,
the feature representation of coexistent semantic relevance
on similarity is essential to effectively achieve better performances in hashing-based cross-modal retrieval, but most of
the existing methods may fail to adequately obtain the effective representation. Finally, bridging the connection between
the offline hashing in teacher network and online hashing in
the lightweight student network under the knowledge distillation framework is also challenging.
To overcome the above-mentioned technical hurdles, this
paper proposes a lightweight contrastive distilled hashing
(LCDH) for online cross-modal retrieval. LCDH follows
the research trend that combining traditional methods and
modern neural networks to provide a lightweight retrieval
framework for AI applications (Zhu et al. 2024). Specifically, LCDH first fuses the cross-modal features extracted
by CLIP, and the fused feature is further fed into an attention
module to enhance feature representation in the teacher network. Then, for aligning the sizes of similarity matrices in
offline and online hashing, the output of the attention module
is fed into a FC layer. In the student network, LCDH extracts
image and text features by lightweight models, and then the
features are fed into a FC layer to obtain binary codes, respectively. Finally, the performance of online cross-modal
hashing in the lightweight student network can be boosted
under the supervision of the coexistent semantic relevance
which is learned from the teacher network, after similarity

Deep online cross-modal hashing has gained much attention
from researchers recently, as its promising applications with
low storage requirement, fast retrieval efficiency and cross
modality adaptive, etc. However, there still exists some technical hurdles that hinder its applications, e.g., 1) how to extract the coexistent semantic relevance of cross-modal data,
2) how to achieve competitive performance when handling
the real time data streams, 3) how to transfer the knowledge learned from offline to online training in a lightweight
manner. To address these problems, this paper proposes a
lightweight contrastive distilled hashing (LCDH) for crossmodal retrieval, by innovatively bridging the offline and online cross-modal hashing by similarity matrix approximation
in a knowledge distillation framework. Specifically, in the
teacher network, LCDH first extracts the cross-modal features by the contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP),
which are further fed into an attention module for representation enhancement after feature fusion. Then, the output of the
attention module is fed into a FC layer to obtain hash codes
for aligning the sizes of similarity matrices for online and
offline training. In the student network, LCDH extracts the
visual and textual features by lightweight models, and then
the features are fed into a FC layer to generate binary codes.
Finally, by approximating the similarity matrices, the performance of online hashing in the lightweight student network
can be enhanced by the supervision of coexistent semantic
relevance that is distilled from the teacher network. Experimental results on three widely used datasets demonstrate that
LCDH outperforms some state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
In the past decades, the volume of multimedia data has explosively grown in an exponential way (Jiang et al. 2024b;
Cui et al. 2023b; Jiang et al. 2023b; Xu et al. 2023; Ling
et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2023a; Chen et al. 2024), especially
in some artificial intelligence (AI)-based applications. Under this circumstance, it is much more difficult to provide
the real time retrieval services for the cross-modal data with
such huge volume. As a powerful model in AI-based applications, large language model (LLM) is benefited from
* Corresponding Author: Xiaozhao Fang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4779

