The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Look Inside for More: Internal Spatial Modality Perception for 3D Anomaly
Detection
Hanzhe Liang1, 2 , Guoyang Xie4 , Chengbin Hou5 , Bingshu Wang6 , Can Gao1 * , Jinbao Wang3,7∗
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
2
Shenzhen Audencia Financial Technology Institute, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
4
Department of Intelligent Manufacturing, CATL, Ningde, China.
5
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Fuyao University of Science and Technology, Fuzhou, China.
6
School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China.
7
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen, China.
2023362051@email.szu.edu.cn, guoyang.xie@ieee.org, chengbin.hou10@foxmail.com, wangbingshu@nwpu.edu.cn,
davidgao@szu.edu.cn, wangjb@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
3D anomaly detection has recently become a significant focus
in computer vision. Several advanced methods have achieved
satisfying anomaly detection performance. However, they
typically concentrate on the external structure of 3D samples
and struggle to leverage the internal information embedded
within samples. Inspired by the basic intuition of why not
look inside for more, we introduce a straightforward method
named Internal Spatial Modality Perception (ISMP) to explore the feature representation from internal views fully.
Specifically, our proposed ISMP consists of a critical perception module, Spatial Insight Engine (SIE), which abstracts
complex internal information of point clouds into essential
global features. Besides, to better align structural information with point data, we propose an enhanced key point feature extraction module for amplifying spatial structure feature
representation. Simultaneously, a novel feature filtering module is incorporated to reduce noise and redundant features
for further aligning precise spatial structure. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our proposed method,
achieving object-level and pixel-level AUROC improvements
of 4.2% and 13.1%, respectively, on the Real3D-AD benchmarks. Note that the strong generalization ability of SIE has
been theoretically proven and is verified in both classification
and segmentation tasks.

(a) CPMF (Outside)

(b) ISMP (Inside)

Figure 1: Visualization of internal and external perception. Compared with external view (CPMF), our method
(ISMP) projects from the internal view, better capturing the
different-shaped protrusions in the 3D structure.

details, with some emphasizing 3D data alone and others integrating multi-modal approaches.
The methods centered on 3D structures emphasize the
unique feature representation of the structure. For example, (Bergmann and Sattlegger 2022) used geometric descriptors with a teacher-student model to achieve promising results, while (Rudolph et al. 2022) introduced asymmetric networks to enhance discrimination further. Additionally, (Li et al. 2023) focused on improving local feature
representations, and (Kruse et al. 2024) proposed leveraging
pose information for better anomaly detection across different viewpoints. Despite these advancements, many methods
start from an intuitive structure, potentially leading to incomplete information coverage. On the other hand, multimodal methods provide richer feature representations by integrating different data modalities. For instance, combining
RGB 2D and 3D data (Wang et al. 2023) or using independent evaluations of both (Chu et al. 2023) has enhanced detection capabilities. (Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2023)
leveraged depth and RGB information to identify anomalies
better, while (Bhunia, Li, and Bilen 2024) advanced 2D-3D
detection by constructing a query image database. However,

Introduction
3D anomaly detection (AD) plays a crucial role in industrial
and medical applications by identifying abnormalities in
complex structures. Traditional methods, such as BTF (Horwitz and Hoshen 2022), primarily focus on single-sample
analysis, while recent deep learning-based approaches have
improved detection by incorporating cross-sample information. However, these methods often rely on intuitive feature extraction, which may overlook deeper anomalies. Researchers are exploring different strategies to uncover finer
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5146

