The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spatiotemporal-aware Trend-Seasonality
Decomposition Network for Traffic Flow Forecasting
Lingxiao Cao, Bin Wang, Guiyuan Jiang, Yanwei Yu* , Junyu Dong
Faculty of Information Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China
caolingxiao@stu.ouc.edu.cn, {wangbin9545,jiangguiyuan,yuyanwei,dongjunyu}@ouc.edu.cn

Abstract

To address temporal dynamics, sequential models like RNNbased variants (Graves and Graves 2012; Deng et al. 2022,
2024a) and non-sequential Transformers (Vaswani et al.
2017) have been profoundly studied. For spatial dynamics,
recent progress has been made with the Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Yin et al. 2021), which represent sensors as
nodes within a graph, leveraging graph structure to capture
traffic patterns. Despite these substantial advancements, our
study suggests that current methods still exhibit considerable
potential for improvement in two critical aspects.
Firstly, the prominent spatio-temporal characteristics in
traffic flow can be more effectively modeled with the appropriate inductive bias. Although previous studies have
demonstrated (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017; Yu et al. 2019;
Guo et al. 2019), traffic patterns are strongly influenced by
the specific temporal periodicities, most efforts have roughly
incorporated these temporal features into the models without
explicitly modeling the synergy between the long and short
periodicities (Chen et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2024b). Regarding spatial aspects, while different locations exhibit unique
spatial characteristics, most GNN methods construct static
graphs based solely on the distances between two nodes, fail
to consider the global interactions among all nodes in the
graph (Yin et al. 2021).
Secondly, effective trend-seasonality decomposition of
traffic flow can greatly enhance the representation learning
of traffic nodes (Wu et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2023). Utilizing this methodology improves the prediction of traffic flow
by distinguishing systematic patterns and noise components.
However, the application of trend-seasonality decomposition predominantly to individual nodes in a traffic network
overlooks the interactions among global nodes, thereby diminishing the quality of node representations learned by
GNNs.
To bridge these research gaps, we introduce a
Spatiotemporal-aware Trend-Seasonality Decomposition
Network (STDN), which enhances global node representations through a novel trend-seasonality decomposition
incorporating spatio-temporal embeddings. It features three
key modules: (1) Module of Spatio-Temporal Embedding
Learning models the temporal periodicity by learning the
temporal embedding including specific weeks and minutes,
and acquires an initial spatial location embedding from the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian matrix.

Traffic prediction is critical for optimizing travel scheduling
and enhancing public safety, yet the complex spatial and temporal dynamics within traffic data present significant challenges for accurate forecasting. In this paper, we introduce
a novel model, the Spatiotemporal-aware Trend-Seasonality
Decomposition Network (STDN). This model begins by constructing a dynamic graph structure to represent traffic flow
and incorporates novel spatio-temporal embeddings to jointly
capture global traffic dynamics. The representations learned
are further refined by a specially designed trend-seasonality
decomposition module, which disentangles the trend-cyclical
component and seasonal component for each traffic node at
different times within the graph. These components are subsequently processed through an encoder-decoder network to
generate the final predictions. Extensive experiments conducted on real-world traffic datasets demonstrate that STDN
achieves superior performance with remarkable computation
cost. Furthermore, we have released a new traffic dataset
named JiNan, which features unique inner-city dynamics,
thereby enriching the scenario comprehensiveness in traffic
prediction evaluation.

Introduction
With technological advancements, a diverse array of sensors has been increasingly integrated into monitoring systems to bolster modern intelligent transportation systems
(ITS) (Cirstea et al. 2021; Ji et al. 2022; Dai et al. 2023).
Transportation authorities deploy a variety of sensors, such
as electronic police cameras and bayonet detectors, across
road networks to continuously collect essential traffic data,
including flow and speed. Utilizing historical traffic flow
data and road network topology, traffic forecasting aims to
predict future flow variations, thereby improving daily travel
and traffic management (Dai et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023).
In the realm of traffic forecasting, considerable efforts are
devoted to modeling traffic dynamics. Methods based on
deep learning, especially the Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Networks (STGNNs), have proven more effective than
statistical time series analysis and shallow machine learning techniques in addressing traffic forecasting challenges.
* Corresponding author: Yanwei Yu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11463

