The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Details Enhancement in Unsigned Distance Field Learning for High-fidelity 3D
Surface Reconstruction
Cheng Xu1, 2, 3 , Fei Hou1, 2 * , Wencheng Wang1, 2 , Hong Qin4 , Zhebin Zhang5 , Ying He6
1

Key Laboratory of System Software (CAS), State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, USA.
5
InnoPeak Technology, USA
6
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{xucheng, houfei, whn}@ios.ac.cn, qin@cs.stonybrook.edu, zhebin.zhang@oppo.com, yhe@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

near the surface, causing the reconstructed surfaces to be
fragmented (Guillard, Stella, and Fua 2022).
Due to the inherently low accuracy of learned UDFs, the
extracted zero level sets are typically over-smoothed and
lack crucial geometric details. Several studies have aimed
to enhance the precision of UDF learning. For instance,
NDF (Chibane, Mir, and Pons-Moll 2020) trains a shape
encoder and a decoder from 3D surfaces of various types,
including point clouds, meshes and mathematical functions.
As a supervised method, its performance heavily relies on
the quality and diversity of the training dataset. Unsupervised approaches, such as CAP-UDF (Zhou et al. 2022) and
LevelSetUDF (Zhou et al. 2023), offer greater flexibility in
handling a wider range of 3D models. Despite advancements
in UDF learning techniques, all existing methods still suffer
from relatively low accuracy in the learned distance fields
compared to SDFs. This limitation significantly diminishes
their practical usage in real-world applications.
This paper introduces a new method, called Details Enhanced UDF (DEUDF) learning, aimed at enhancing the accuracy of UDF learning from unoriented point clouds to ensure that learned UDFs can capture the fine geometric details of target surfaces. A key observation is the significant
role normal directions play in learning fine details. Although
obtaining globally consistent orientations (Xu et al. 2023)
is challenging due to its combinatorial and global optimization nature, acquiring normal directions locally, for instance,
through principal component analysis (Hoppe et al. 1992),
is feasible. Consequently, we constrain the UDF gradients
to align with normal directions to enhance detail capture,
while disregarding normal orientations.
Existing methods strictly constrain UDFs to non-negative
values, so the UDFs are hard to achieve exact zero values.
Meanwhile, such strict constraint has brought some other
problems as illustrated in Figure 1. To overcome this limitation, we relax the strict requirements that UDFs must be
non-negative and that the surface must precisely correspond
to the zero iso-surfaces. Though the distances are not strictly
non-negative, we still call it UDF. This adaptation enables
the use of an unconditioned multilayer perceptron (MLP),

While Signed Distance Fields (SDF) are well-established
for modeling watertight surfaces, Unsigned Distance Fields
(UDF) broaden the scope to include open surfaces and models
with complex inner structures. Despite their flexibility, UDFs
encounter significant challenges in high-fidelity 3D reconstruction, such as non-differentiability at the zero level set,
difficulty in achieving the exact zero value, numerous local
minima, vanishing gradients, and oscillating gradient directions near the zero level set. To address these challenges, we
propose Details Enhanced UDF (DEUDF) learning that integrates normal alignment and the SIREN network for capturing fine geometric details, adaptively weighted Eikonal constraints to address vanishing gradients near the target surface, unconditioned MLP-based UDF representation to relax
non-negativity constraints, and DCUDF for extracting the local minimal average distance surface. These strategies collectively stabilize the learning process from unoriented point
clouds and enhance the accuracy of UDFs. Our computational
results demonstrate that DEUDF outperforms existing UDF
learning methods in both accuracy and the quality of reconstructed surfaces.

Introduction
While signed distance fields (SDF) are favored for their capability to represent watertight surfaces, unsigned distance
fields (UDFs) provide a means to model both open surfaces and objects with complex inner structures. However,
achieving high-quality UDFs that accurately reconstruct 3D
surfaces with fine geometric details is challenging for several reasons. Firstly, UDFs struggle to precisely achieve a
zero value, making it difficult to generate open boundaries.
Secondly, UDFs are theoretically non-differentiable at the
zero level set, resulting in vanishing gradients near the target surface. This issue leads to numerous undesired local
minima, complicating the extraction of the zero level set.
Thirdly, the gradient directions of UDFs tend to oscillate
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8806

