The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Proportional Representation in Practice:
Quantifying Proportionality in Ordinal Elections
Tuva Bardal1 , Markus Brill1 , David McCune2 , Jannik Peters3
1

University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
William Jewell College, Liberty, MO, United States
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
tuva.bardal@warwick.ac.uk, markus.brill@warwick.ac.uk, mccuned@william.jewell.edu, peters@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

generally considered to guarantee proportional representation since it satisfies a property known as proportionality for
solid coalitions (PSC) formulated by Dummett (1984). This
property, in essence, guarantees that any sufficiently large
group of voters that rank the same candidates (not necessarily in the same order) above all other candidates is given an
amount of representation commensurate with its size. Such
groups are referred to as solid coalitions.
Despite the prominence of PSC in the literature, some
have challenged the idea that PSC is a good way to capture
the notion of proportional representation rigorously. For instance, the requirement that all voters in a solid coalition
must all share the exact same candidate set in their ballot
prefix makes PSC highly non-robust (Tideman 2006). This
issue has been considered from a purely theoretical point of
view (Aziz and Lee 2020; Brill and Peters 2023), as well
as through experiments on synthetic data (Brill and Peters
2023). There exist several other properties that seek to guarantee proportional representation in ways similar to that of
PSC (Aziz et al. 2017; Brill and Peters 2023), and that, from
the aforementioned perspective, are more robust (Brill and
Peters 2023). However, such properties are purely qualitative, and like PSC they usually rely rigidly on a “threshold
of representation,” making them blind to groups of voters
that come close to being “sufficiently large.”
While proportionality axioms have received much attention in the theoretical literature, empirical investigation of
the force of axioms formulated to guarantee proportional
representation has been limited due to a scarcity of realworld ballot data. However, McCune and Graham-Squire
(2024) recently compiled a real-world dataset consisting of
1100 Scottish local council elections from the period 2007–
2022. In these elections, STV is used to elect members for
local councils in Scotland. We observe that in this data,
solid coalitions of sufficient size rarely occur. Consequently,
for most elections in the dataset, PSC places no or few restrictions on the winning committee, and most outcomes
are therefore proportional according to the property. Since
PSC often undergirds the claim that STV is proportional, the
toothlessness of PSC in practice raises the question of how
proportional the method really is.1 More generally, we con-

Proportional representation plays a crucial role in electoral
systems. In ordinal elections, where voters rank candidates
based on their preferences, the Single Transferable Vote (STV)
is the most widely used proportional voting method. STV is
considered proportional because it satisfies an axiom requiring that large enough “solid coalitions” of voters are adequately represented. Using real-world data from local Scottish elections, we observe that solid coalitions of the required
size rarely occur in practice. This observation challenges the
importance of proportionality axioms and raises the question
of how the proportionality of voting methods can be assessed
beyond their axiomatic performance. We address these concerns by developing quantitative measures of proportionality. We apply these measures to evaluate the proportionality
of voting rules on real-world election data. Besides STV, we
consider SNTV, the Expanding Approvals Rule, and Sequential Ranked-Choice Voting. We also study the effects of ballot truncation by artificially completing truncated ballots and
comparing the proportionality of outcomes under complete
and truncated ballots.

Datasets — https://github.com/mggg/scot-elex

1

Introduction

Proportional representation is a core principle of modern
electoral systems, its goal being to ensure that elected officials proportionally represent the composition of the electorate. Most countries achieve proportional representation
through party-list systems, where voters cast their ballots
for political parties rather than individual candidates, and
legislative seats are allocated in proportion to the number
of votes each party receives. However, several countries—
mostly from the former British commonwealth—use a system in which voters can vote for individual candidates using
ranked preferences. In such settings, the electorate is usually
divided into a number of districts, each of which elects a few
(usually 2–6) candidates to represent the district in the given
governing body. To achieve proportional representation in
district elections which do not use a party-list system, most
localities use the Single Transferable Vote (STV), a voting
rule dating back to the 19th century (Tideman 1995). STV is

1
As demonstrated by Brill and Peters (2023), STV fails proportionality axioms that are stronger than PSC.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13581

