The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Causal Transition Matrix for Instance-dependent Label Noise
Jiahui Li1, 2 * , Tai-Wei Chang2 * , Kun Kuang1† , Ximing Li2 , Long Chen3 , Jun Zhou2
1

Zhejiang University
2
Ant Group
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
jiahuil@zju.edu.cn, taiwei.twc@antgroup.com, kunkuang@zju.edu.cn
xili.lxm@antgroup.com, longchen@ust.hk, jun.zhoujun@antgroup.com
Abstract

Observed 𝑋

Causal Graph

Noisy labels are both inevitable and problematic in machine
learning methods, as they negatively impact models’ generalization ability by causing overfitting. In the context of
learning with noise, the transition matrix plays a crucial role
in the design of statistically consistent algorithms. However,
the transition matrix is often considered unidentifiable. One
strand of methods typically addresses this problem by assuming that the transition matrix is instance-independent; that is,
the probability of mislabeling a particular instance is not influenced by its characteristics or attributes. This assumption
is clearly invalid in complex real-world scenarios. To better
understand the transition relationship and relax this assumption, we propose to study the data generation process of noisy
labels from a causal perspective. We discover that an unobservable latent variable can affect either the instance itself,
the label annotation procedure, or both, which complicates
the identification of the transition matrix. To address various
scenarios, we have unified these observations within a new
causal graph. In this graph, the input instance is divided into
a noise-resistant component and a noise-sensitive component
based on whether they are affected by the latent variable.
These two components contribute to identifying the “causal
transition matrix”, which approximates the true transition matrix with theoretical guarantee. In line with this, we have designed a novel training framework that explicitly models this
causal relationship and, as a result, achieves a more accurate
model for inferring the clean label.

𝑍

𝑋

𝑌

(a)
𝑌#
𝑍

𝑋

𝑌

(b)
𝑌#
𝑍

𝑋

𝑌

(c)
𝑌#

Figure 1: Examples of three causal graphs illustrating the
mislabeling of “5” as “6” in MNIST, where X denotes
instance(image), Y denotes the ground truth label, Ŷ denotes the noisy label, and Z denotes the latent variable. The
dashed circles represent the unobservable variable. (a) The
instance is perturbed by noise, making “5” looks like “6”.
(b) The instance is clean, but it is mislabeled by an annotator. (c) The instance exhibits a mixture situation of (a) and
(b).

Introduction

Bae et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2024) in label-noise learning
focuses on estimating the transition matrix Tij = P (Ŷ =
j|Y = i, X = x), which captures the relationship between the true (clean) labels Y and the observed (noisy) labels Ŷ . This transition matrix provides valuable information
about the noise distribution and can be used to guide the
learning process. Typically, the identification of the transition matrix becomes a challenge due to the inaccessibility
of the clean label Y for direct observation. In order to facilitate learning in the presence of noise, one strand of methods (Natarajan et al. 2013; Berthon et al. 2021; Xia et al.
2020b) assumes that the transition relationship between the
noisy label Ŷ and the clean label Y is instant-independent,
wherein P (Ŷ |Y, X) = P (Ŷ |Y ). However, in complex realworld scenarios, label noise can be attributed to various factors and may violate the instance-independent assumption.

The success of deep neural networks is heavily based on
large-scale annotation datasets (Daniely and Granot 2019;
Yao et al. 2020a). However, data annotation inevitably introduces label noise, and the models are prone to overfitting
on the mislabeled data, which hampers their performance
in terms of generalization. Cleaning up corrupted labels is
extremely expensive and time-consuming. Therefore, finding effective algorithms to mitigate the impact of label noise
and improve model performance is of utmost importance.
Most of the main research (Patrini et al. 2017; Vahdat
2017; Xiao et al. 2015; Cheng et al. 2020; Yao et al. 2021;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18305

