The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Approximating Optimal Labelings for Temporal Connectivity
Daniele Carnevale1 , Gianlorenzo D’Angelo1 , Martin Olsen2
1

Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
2
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
daniele.carnevale@gssi.it, gianlorenzo.dangelo@gssi.it, martino@btech.au.dk

Abstract

A

A

A

7am;9am

6am;7am

6am;8am

7am;8am

6am;8am

6am;7am

B

C

B

1st schedule

W

W

W

In a temporal graph the edge set dynamically changes over
time according to a set of time-labels associated with each
edge that indicates at which time-step the edge is available.
Two vertices are connected if there is a path connecting them
in which the edges are traversed in increasing order of their
labels. We study the problem of scheduling the availability
time of the edges of a temporal graph in such a way that all
pairs of vertices are connected within a given maximum allowed time a and the overall number of labels is minimum.
The problem, called Minimum Aged Labeling (MAL), has
several applications in logistics, distribution scheduling, and
information spreading in social networks, where carefully
choosing the time-labels can significantly reduce infrastructure costs, fuel consumption, or greenhouse gases.
Problem MAL has previously been proved to be NP-complete
on undirected graphs and APX-hard on directed graphs. In
this paper, we extend our knowledge on the complexity and
approximability of MAL in several directions. We first show
that the problem cannot be approximated within a factor better than O(log n) when a ≥ 2, unless P = NP, and a
1−ϵ
n
factor better than 2log
when a ≥ 3, unless NP ⊆
polylog(n)
DTIME(2
), where n is the number of vertices in the
graph. Then we give a set of approximation algorithms that,
under some conditions, almost match these lower-bounds. In
particular, we show that the approximation depends on a relation between a and the diameter of the input graph.
We further establish a connection with a foundational optimization problem on static graphs called Diameter Constrained Spanning Subgraph (DCSS) and show that our hardness results also apply to DCSS.

6am;7am

C
2nd schedule

7am

6am;8am

B

C
3rd schedule

Figure 1: The scheduled time of trips are reported close to
the edges. 1st schedule: All the 6 scheduled trips are needed
to deliver all parcels and the last parcel is delivered at 9am.
2nd schedule: All the parcels are deposited in W with the 3
trips at 6am and then are delivered from W to the right cities
at 7am; still 6 trips are needed but the last parcel is delivered
at 7am. 3rd schedule: The parcels leaving cities A and C are
deposited in W with the trips at 6am; the single trip from
B at 7am deposits the parcels from B in W and brings the
parcels directed to B previously deposited at 6am; finally,
the trips at 8am deliver the parcels directed to A and C. Only
5 trips are needed, but the last parcel is delivered at 8am.

there is a vehicle that is used to deliver the parcels from its
home city A to the warehouse and vice-versa. Each vehicle
can possibly depart from its home city at every hour and,
once the vehicle reaches W , it deposit the parcels and then
comes back to its home city. A travel of a vehicle from its
own town to W and back is called a trip. For simplicity, we
assume that the travel time is negligible. When a vehicle V1
moves from city A to the the warehouse W , it deposits in
W all the parcels that departs from A and whose final destination is any of the other cities and then comes back to its
home city A. When a vehicle V2 returns to its home city B it
brings to B all the parcels that have been deposited in W so
far and whose final destination is B. If the trip of V1 is scheduled earlier than that of V2 , the parcels directed from A to B
are delivered. Otherwise, they must wait for the next trip.
Carefully scheduling the trips of all vehicles might reduce
at the same time the delivery time and the costs in terms of
number of required trips, fuel consumption, pollutants, and
emission of greenhouse gasses. For example, the 1st schedule in Figure 1, requires 6 trips to deliver all parcels and the
last parcels are delivered at 9am. The 2nd schedule optimizes
the latest arrival time and ensures that the last parcels are delivered two hours earlier than the previous solution, at 7am,
but still requires 6 trips to deliver all parcels. The 3rd schedule, instead optimizes the required number of trips, reducing

Introduction
We consider a scheduling problem on dynamic networks that
is motivated by several applications in logistics, distribution
scheduling, and information diffusion in social networks.
As a real-world example, consider a parcel-delivery scenario where there is a warehouse W serving three cities as
the center of a star topology, see Figure 1 for an illustration.
Each city has a bunch of parcels to be delivered to the other
cities and for each pair of cities (A, B) there is at least one
parcel that must be delivered from A to B. In each city A
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26490

