The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Memory-Augmented Re-Completion for 3D Semantic Scene Completion
Yu-Wen Tseng1 , Sheng-Ping Yang1 , Jhih-Ciang Wu1,3 , I-Bin Liao4 ,
Yung-Hui Li4 , Hong-Han Shuai2 , Wen-Huang Cheng1 *
1

2

National Taiwan University, Taiwan
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
3
National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan
4
Hon Hai Research Institute, Taiwan

Abstract

Input Image

Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) aims to reconstruct a 3D
voxel representation occupied by semantic classes based on
ordinary inputs such as 2D RGB images, depth maps, or point
clouds. Given the cost-effective and promising applications
in autonomous driving, camera-based SSC has attracted considerable attention to developing various approaches. However, current methods mainly focus on precise 2D-to-3D projection while overlooking the challenge of completing invisible regions, leading to numerous false negatives and suboptimal SSC performance. To address this issue, we propose a novel architecture, Memory-augmented Re-completion
(MARE), designed to enhance completion capability. Our
MARE model encapsulates regional relationships by incorporating a memory bank that stores vital region-tokens while
two protocols concerning diversity and age are adopted to
optimize the bank adversarially. Additionally, we introduce
a Re-completion pipeline incorporated with an Information
Spreading module to progressively complete the invisible regions while bridging the scale gap between region-level and
voxel-level information. Extensive experiments conducted on
the SSCBench-KITTI-360 and SemanticKITTI datasets validate the effectiveness of our approach.

GT

Prediction

car
bicycle
motorcycle
truck
parking
fence
building
other-grnd
traf.-sign
other-struct.
sidewalk

other-veh.
vegetation
other-obj.

person
road
terrain
pole
user vehicle

Figure 1: Insufficient completion problem. We illustrate
the input image, ground truth, and prediction from Symphonies on SSCBench-KITTI-360. The voxels highlighted
in light gray within the prediction represent false negatives.

Code — https://github.com/ywtseng0226/MARE

semantic state of each voxel in the 3D space. The challenge of SSC lies in understanding the environment using
relatively coarse inputs, such as monocular RGB images or
sparse point clouds, while the fine-grained dense volumes
are expected to describe the surroundings as the vehicle
moves across streets. Although recent advancements (Cao
and De Charette 2022; Li et al. 2023c; Jiang et al. 2024)
have facilitated the evolution of SSC by introducing various
techniques to transfer knowledge between 2D and 3D representations, a fundamental issue, termed insufficient completion, persists. As shown in Figure 1, the 3D scene volume
generated by the SOTA method (Jiang et al. 2024) contains
numerous false negatives (FNs) colored in light gray.
These FNs are primarily found in invisible regions, which
include two scenarios: occlusion, exemplified by the area
occluded by the truck in the left example, and regions outside the field-of-view (FOV), such as the road sections on
either side that are absent from the 2D image. This observation highlights the significant challenges in existing models:
completing the invisible regions solely based on input information is insufficient, which results in a high empty rate of

Introduction
Learning to thoroughly comprehend the environment is crucial for autonomous vehicles, encompassing the recognition and reaction to various elements such as road conditions (Singh et al. 2022), pedestrian movement (Duan et al.
2022), and other vehicles (Guériau et al. 2015; Xu et al.
2023). With a satisfactory understanding of the scene, the
perception systems can provide precise navigation and effectively avoid collisions, ensuring the safety of both passengers and others on the road. Consequently, the development
of advanced methods that enhance AI’s ability to accurately
perceive and interact with the real world is vital for advancing the capabilities of autonomous driving systems.
To build reliable strategies for self-driving automobiles,
one of the related tasks is 3D Semantic Scene Completion (SSC), which seeks to infer both the occupancy and
* Corresponding author. # wenhuang@csie.ntu.edu.tw
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7446

