The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Privacy in the Early Detection of Sexual Predators Through Federated
Learning and Differential Privacy
Khaoula Chehbouni1,2 , Martine De Cock3 , Gilles Caporossi4 , Afaf Taik 2, 5
Reihaneh Rabbany 1, 2 , Golnoosh Farnadi 1, 2
1
McGill University
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
3
University of Washington Tacoma
4
HEC Montreal
5
Université de Montréal
khaoula.chehbouni@mila.quebec
2

Abstract

Indeed, while parents can have a tighter hold on their children’s interactions in real life, monitoring their online conversations is far more complicated.
In May 2022, the European Commission proposed a new
regulation to compel chat apps to scan private user messages for child abuse and exploitation (European Commission 2022). This new regulation was strongly condemned
by privacy experts, who believed that implementing such
mechanisms and breaking end-to-end encryption of users’
messages could lead to mass surveillance (Vincent 2022)
and compromise not only users’ privacy but also their online safety: online scams, cyberattacks or social engineering attacks being more likely to happen once encryption is
lifted (Radauskas, Gintaras 2023). As a result, the e-Privacy
derogation was implemented to allow companies to detect
and remove child sexual abuse material online on a voluntary basis only. In April 2024, the Parliament decided to
prolong the exemption until April 2026 (European Parliament 2024). In the meantime, it is crucial for social media providers to devise more effective strategies for safeguarding children while also respecting the privacy of their
users since previous attempts made at adopting child protection features, such as Apple’s and Facebook’s scanning
tools, have sparked wide criticism by privacy experts (Snowden 2021; Hill 2012). More recently, Google made the news
when a father was the subject of an investigation for child
sexual abuse and exploitation after sending naked pictures
of his toddler to the pediatrician (Hill 2022).
Previous work in communication studies has shown that
the sexual predators’ discourse contains specific indicators
that can be leveraged for the detection of online grooming (Olson et al. 2007; Lorenzo-Dus et al. 2016). Some researchers focused on finding these linguistic cues by extracting lexical, syntactical, and behavioral features from chat
messages (Inches and Crestani 2012; Mcghee et al. 2011).
Others have used deep learning techniques to learn useful
representations from text (Zambrano et al. 2019; Morgan
et al. 2021). All, however, have been limited by the lack
of realistic and publicly-available training datasets for the
task. Although preventing grooming before any harm occurs is essential to ensure safe access to online social media
platforms for children, there are only a few works that treat

The increased screen time and isolation caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic have led to a significant surge in
cases of online grooming, which is the use of strategies
by predators to lure children into sexual exploitation. Previous efforts to detect grooming in industry and academia
have involved accessing and monitoring private conversations
through centrally-trained models or sending private conversations to a global server. In this work, we implement a privacypreserving pipeline for the early detection of sexual predators.
We leverage federated learning and differential privacy in order to create safer online spaces for children while respecting
their privacy. We investigate various privacy-preserving implementations and discuss their benefits and shortcomings.
Our extensive evaluation using real-world data proves that
privacy and utility can coexist with only a slight reduction
in utility.

1

Introduction

With the COVID-19 pandemic, the number of children victim of online grooming (OG) has increased substantially: the
Canadian Centre for Child Protection has recorded an 815%
spike in the reported cases of sexual exploitation online over
the last 5 years (Canada 2024). The unprecedented rise in
screen time and isolation brought about by the pandemic
have left children more vulnerable than ever to online sexual
exploitation. In 2021 alone, 85 million pictures and videos
of child sexual abuse have been reported worldwide (European Commission 2022).
OG can be defined as the different strategies used by
predators to lure children into sexual relationships. Studies
have shown that predators have a particular communication
style and exhibit common behavior patterns that allow them
to approach children, lure them into a trusting relationship,
isolate them and desensitize them to the sexual act (Olson
et al. 2007; Lorenzo-Dus et al. 2016).
Social media platforms have changed the rules in the past
decade, and made children far more accessible to predators.
The direct messages in these platforms have become a lowrisk tool for luring a child into (online) sexual exploitation.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27887

