The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Harnessing Event Sensory Data for Error Pattern Prediction in Vehicles: A
Language Model Approach
Hugo Math, Rainer Lienhart, Robin Schön
Augsburg University, Augsburg 86159, Germany

Abstract
S = <s> DTC1 DTC2 DTC3 </s> P(EP|S)
Event type

In this paper, we draw an analogy between processing natural
languages and processing multivariate event streams from vehicles in order to predict when and what error pattern is most
likely to occur in the future for a given car. Our approach
leverages the temporal dynamics and contextual relationships
of our event data from a fleet of cars. Event data is composed
of discrete values of error codes as well as continuous values such as time and mileage. Modelled by two causal Transformers, we can anticipate vehicle failures and malfunctions
before they happen. Thus, we introduce CarFormer, a Transformer model trained via a new self-supervised learning strategy, and EPredictor, an autoregressive Transformer decoder
model capable of predicting when and what error pattern will
most likely occur after some error code apparition. Despite
the challenges of high cardinality of event types, their unbalanced frequency of appearance and limited labelled data,
our experimental results demonstrate the excellent predictive
ability of our novel model. Specifically, with sequences of
160 error codes on average, our model is able with only half
of the error codes to achieve 80% F1 score for predicting what
error pattern will occur and achieves an average absolute error of 58.4 ± 13.2h when forecasting the time of occurrence,
thus enabling confident predictive maintenance and enhancing vehicle safety.

DTC2

DTC3

EP

what

Time

Figure 1: Error pattern (EP) prediction (when and what with
which probability) based on the past sequence S of diagnostic trouble codes (DTCs).

Our goal is to learn the correlation between DTCs using a
DTC-based language model to predict when and what with
which probability an error pattern (EP) is occurring after
having seen a number of DTCs (see Figure 1). Thus, we
consider DTCs to be the words in our language. In contrast, EPs are very different from DTCs. They are defined
by domain experts after observing DTC sequences. Therefore, they are way more precise about the critical error that
the car is having. While some DTCs can also be noisy and
repetitive events about recurring errors (e.g. electrical issues,
software updates), EPs characterize a whole error sequence
consisting of precise vehicle failures (e.g. engine or battery
failures). Recent research has approached predictive maintenance in the automotive field using sequences of DTCs via
RNNs (Hafeez, Alonso, and Ter-Sarkisov 2021) and, more
recently, Transformers (Hafeez, Alonso, and Riaz 2024) to
predict the next DTC. However, distinguishing minor errors
or noise-like DTCs from important events such as error patterns (EPs) is essential since the latter poses higher risks and
necessitates greater safety and maintenance measures, such
as vehicle immobilization or addressing critical malfunctions. Furthermore, as the data volume increases, accurately
predicting the next DTC becomes challenging, particularly
when the event type cardinality approaches ∼ 104 . This phenomenon is akin to language processing, where the accuracy
of the next token prediction using greedy decoding or other

Code — https://github.com/Mathugo/AAAI2025CarFormer-EPredictor

1

when
DTC1

Introduction

Today’s vehicles generate an astounding amount of data,
typically reported as events on an irregular basis, but continuously over time. Some events occur simultaneously, while
others are scattered over time, with unequally distributed
time intervals between their occurrence. They usually report
numerical and/or categorical features. In our work, we focus
on processing and analyzing such multivariate and irregular
event streams produced by modern cars, for which related
research is still sparse. Our sequences of discrete events in
time are known as DTCs (diagnostic trouble codes). DTCs
are preferred over raw sensory data because they provide
less granular and discrete information. This makes them easier to analyze.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19423

