The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SIGMA: Selective Gated Mamba for Sequential Recommendation
Ziwei Liu1 * , Qidong Liu1,2 * , Yejing Wang1 , Wanyu Wang1† , Pengyue Jia1 , Maolin Wang1 ,
Zitao Liu3 , Yi Chang4 , Xiangyu Zhao1
1
City University of Hong Kong
School of Auto. Science & Engineering, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Jinan University
4
Jilin University
{ziwliu8-c, yejing.wang, wanyuwang4-c, jia.pengyue, morin.wang}@my.cityu.edu.hk, liuqidong@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk, liuzitao@jnu.edu.cn, yichang@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Sequential Recommender Systems (SRS) have emerged as
a promising technique across various domains, excelling at
capturing complex user preferences. Current SRS have employed transformer-based models to give the next-item prediction. However, their quadratic computational complexity often leads to notable inefficiencies, posing a significant obstacle to real-time recommendation processes. Recently, Mamba has demonstrated its exceptional effectiveness in time series prediction, delivering substantial improvements in both efficiency and effectiveness. However, directly
applying Mamba to SRS poses certain challenges. Its unidirectional structure may impede the ability to capture contextual information in user-item interactions, while its instability
in state estimation may hinder the ability to capture shortterm patterns in interaction sequences. To address these issues, we propose a novel framework called SelectIve Gated
MAmba for Sequential Recommendation (SIGMA). By introducing the Partially Flipped Mamba (PF-Mamba), we construct a special bi-directional structure to address the context modeling challenge. Then, to consolidate PF-Mamba’s
performance, we employ an input-dependent Dense Selective
Gate (DS Gate) to allocate the weights of the two directions
and further filter the sequential information. Moreover, for
short sequence modeling, we devise a Feature Extract GRU
(FE-GRU) to capture the short-term dependencies. Experimental results demonstrate that SIGMA significantly outperforms existing baselines across five real-world datasets.

Figure 1: The illustration for long-tail user problem.

tions (Fang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2023c), an increasing number of researchers are focusing on refining existing architectures and proposing novel approaches (Wang et al. 2019; Liu
et al. 2024b; Wang et al. 2023).
Recently, Transformer-based models have emerged as the
leading approaches in sequential recommendation due to
their outstanding performance (de Souza Pereira Moreira
et al. 2021). By leveraging the powerful self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017; Keles, Wijewardena, and Hegde
2023), these models have demonstrated a remarkable ability to deliver accurate predictions. However, despite their
impressive performance, current transformer-based models are proven inefficient since the amount of computation
grows quadratically as the length of the input sequence increases (Keles, Wijewardena, and Hegde 2023). Other approaches, such as RNN-based models (Jannach and Ludewig
2017) and MLP-based models (Li et al. 2023b; Gao et al.
2024; Liang et al. 2023), are proven to be efficient due
to their linear complexity. Nevertheless, they have struggled with handling long and complex patterns (Yoon and
Jang 2023). All these methods above seem to have suffered from a significant trade-off between effectiveness and
efficiency. Consequently, a specially designed State Space
Model (SSM) called Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023) has been
proposed. By employing simple input-dependent selection
on the original SSM (Liu et al. 2024a; Hamilton 1994), it
has demonstrated remarkable efficiency and effectiveness.

Code — https://github.com/Applied-Machine-LearningLab/SIMGA

Introduction
Over the past decade, sequential recommender systems
(SRS) have demonstrated promising potential across various domains, including content streaming platforms (Song
et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2023a), e-commerce (Wang et al.
2020) and other domains (Li et al. 2022). To harness this potential and meet the demand for accurate next-item predic* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12264

