The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Active Large Language Model-Based Knowledge Distillation for Session-Based
Recommendation
Yingpeng Du1 , Zhu Sun2 * , Ziyan Wang1 , Haoyan Chua1 , Jie Zhang1 , Yew-Soon Ong1,3
1

2

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
3
A*STAR Center for Frontier AI Research, Singapore
dyp1993@pku.edu.cn,zhu sun@sutd.edu.sg,ziyan.wang1753@e.ntu.edu.sg,
haoyan001@e.ntu.edu.sg,zhangj@ntu.edu.sg,asysong@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

Intuitively, existing knowledge distillation (KD)-based
recommendation methods (Tang and Wang 2018; Lee et al.
2019) seem to be potential solutions to these issues, which
applied a model-agnostic KD technique to reduce model size
while preserving the performance by training a lightweight
recommender. Specifically, they train a new compact model
(i.e., student recommender) based on the predictions of
a well-trained cumbersome model (i.e., teacher recommender). However, it poses significant challenges for LLMbased KD in SBR. Firstly, these methods lead to extreme
cost, thus restricting the efficiency of KD. Specifically, the
inference of LLMs is more expensive w.r.t. time and resources than conventional recommenders. Predicting for all
instances (e.g., all sessions in SBR) with LLMs is not a
sustainable solution. Secondly, LLMs may make ineffective (e.g., similar and incorrect) predictions for some instances thus hindering the effectiveness of KD. Specifically,
LLMs may make similar predictions as conventional recommenders in some instances, therefore these instances provide limited information to KD and potentially lead to a redundant distillation. In addition, some instances are hard to
correctly predict by LLMs (i.e., failing to model users’ real
preferences), which may mislead the student recommender.

Large language models (LLMs) provide a promising way for
accurate session-based recommendation (SBR), but they demand substantial computational time and memory. Knowledge distillation (KD)-based methods can alleviate these issues by transferring the knowledge to a small student, which
trains a student based on the predictions of a cumbersome
teacher. However, these methods encounter difficulties for
LLM-based KD in SBR. 1) It is expensive to make LLMs predict for all instances in KD. 2) LLMs may make ineffective
predictions for some instances in KD, e.g., incorrect predictions for hard instances or similar predictions as existing recommenders for easy instances. In this paper, we propose an
active LLM-based KD method in SBR, contributing to sustainable AI. To efficiently distill knowledge from LLMs with
limited cost, we propose to extract a small proportion of instances predicted by LLMs. Meanwhile, for a more effective
distillation, we propose an active learning strategy to extract
instances that are as effective as possible for KD from a theoretical view. Specifically, we first formulate gains based on
potential effects (e.g., effective, similar, and incorrect predictions by LLMs) and difficulties (e.g., easy or hard to fit) of
instances for KD. Then, we propose to maximize the minimal gains of distillation to find the optimal selection policy
for active learning, which can largely avoid extracting ineffective instances in KD. Experiments on real-world datasets
show that our method significantly outperforms state-of-theart methods for SBR.

To address the first challenge, we propose only extracting a small proportion of instances to be predicted by the
LLM teacher. Compared to most of the existing KD methods, our strategy does not demand LLM predicting for all
instances, which can significantly reduce the cost of KD. To
address the second challenge, we propose to conduct active
learning to elicit effective LLM-based KD. Specifically, we
first define the difficulty of instances based on whether their
embedded knowledge can be easily learned by the recommender. Typically, an easy instance may be less informative
(e.g., low gain) for LLM-based KD, because its knowledge
is likely to be already captured by the student recommender.
Although a hard instance may contribute informative knowledge, such an instance may also easily lead to an incorrect
prediction (e.g., negative gain) by LLMs when it contains
much noise. Meanwhile, we also identify the three potential effects of instances when they are effectively, similarly,
and incorrectly predicted by the LLM in ranking tasks, abbreviated as effective/similar/incorrect instances. Then, we
formulate their gains with consideration of both their diffi-

Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have shown the
potential to equip recommender systems (RSs) with their
extensive knowledge and powerful reasoning capabilities
(Zhao et al. 2023). Most of the existing methods employ
LLMs as recommenders based on sophisticated prompt engineering (Gao et al. 2023) and fine-tuning with domainspecific knowledge (Wu et al. 2023). However, employing
LLMs as recommenders usually demands substantial computational time and memory, leading to a high latency and
computation requirement during the serving time and limiting real-world applications (e.g., on-device session-based
recommendation (SBR) (Xia et al. 2022)).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11607

