The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dis2 Booth: Learning Image Distribution with Disentangled Features for
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Guanqi Ding1,3 , Chengyu Yang2 , Shuhui Wang3,5 * , Xincheng Li4 , Jinzhe Zhang4 , Xin Jin4 ,
Qingming Huang1,3,5
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
4
Huawei Cloud EI Innovation Lab, China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
dingguanqi19@mails.ucas.ac.cn, 1120210671@bit.edu.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn,
{lixincheng1, zhangjinzhe, jinxin11}@huawei.com, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
Monotonic
Data

Abstract
Personalized image generation enables customized content
creation based on the text-to-image diffusion models. However, existing personalization methods focus on fine-tuning
generative models to generate a specific instance or concept,
like a specific Corgi, but cannot handle multiple instances or
concepts with commonalities, such as images of multiple different Corgis. In this work, we focus on personalizing a diffusion model to generated varied data usually containing multiple instances, which has a more diverse and complex data
distribution. Our basic assumption is that the varied data distribution is composed of the common features shared among
all samples, as well as the reasonable variations within it. Accordingly, we are capable to decompose the learning process
of complex data distributions into two simpler sub-tasks, employing a divide-and-conquer approach. To this end, we propose Dis2 Booth, a framework that can learn complex image
Distribution by Disentangling data distribution in an unsupervised manner. Specifically, Dis2 Booth contains two modules, Anchor LoRA and Delta LoRA, tasked with learning
the common features and variational features constrained by
Contextual Loss and Delta Loss unsupervisedly. Besides, the
Asynchronous Optimization Strategy is proposed to ensure
the collaborative training of the two modules. Extensive experiments suggest that Dis2 Booth can learn the data distribution with higher diversity and complexity and be flexibly
applied across various tasks.

Varied Data Personalized Generation
Textual
Dream
DreamBooth
Inversion
Distribution

Varied
Data

Dis2Booth

Category
Fidelity

Figure 1: Illustration of distributions of monotonic data (a
specific Corgi dog) and varied data (multiple different Corgi
dogs) and comparison of different methods for personalized
generation of varied data. Existing personalized generation
methods for complex data distributions tend to exhibit drift
in discriminative semantics (category change), overfitting
and significant degradation in generation quality.
those images. These methods enable customized generation
and editing of specific instances.
Previous personalization methods (Ruiz et al. 2023; Gal
et al. 2022) have primarily focused on modifying the pretrained generation model (Rombach et al. 2022; Podell et al.
2023) to generate a specific instance or concept based on
a few given individual reference images. However in many
cases, user may want to personalize the generation model
over more abstract visual attributes from varied data, instead
of instance-level personalization. For example, in art design,
automotive designers may generate design sketches of different car models follow a consistent design language, and in
industry, images of different kinds of workpieces with specific defects can be created as augmented data for training
defect detection models. In these cases, it is more critical to
generate different individuals with certain common characteristics, rather than a single individual. To make the issue

Introduction
The emergence of diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol
2021) such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) and
DALL-E (Ramesh et al. 2022) have pushed up the ceiling of
what is possible in terms of generating realistic and creative
images.
Personalized image generation methods (Ruiz et al. 2023;
Gal et al. 2022) use a small set of reference images to finetune network parameters or token embeddings, enabling the
diffusion models to generate specific instance or concept in
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2744

