The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ScreenMark: Watermarking Arbitrary Visual Content on Screen
Xiujian Liang, Gaozhi Liu, Yichao Si, Xiaoxiao Hu, Zhenxing Qian *
Fudan University, School of Computer Science
ShangHai 200438, China
liangxj23,gzliu22,ycsi22,xxhu23@m.fudan.edu.cn, zxqian@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Digital watermarking has shown its effectiveness in protecting multimedia content. However, existing watermarking is
predominantly tailored for specific media types, rendering
them less effective for the protection of content displayed
on computer screens, which is often multi-modal and dynamic. Visual Screen Content (VSC), is particularly susceptible to theft and leakage through screenshots, a vulnerability
that current watermarking methods fail to adequately address.
To address these challenges, we propose ScreenMark, a robust and practical watermarking method designed specifically
for arbitrary VSC protection. ScreenMark utilizes a threestage progressive watermarking framework. Initially, inspired
by diffusion principles, we initialize the mutual transformation between regular watermark information and irregular watermark patterns. Subsequently, these patterns are integrated with screen content using a pre-multiplication alpha blending technique, supported by a pre-trained screen
decoder for accurate watermark retrieval. The progressively
complex distorter enhances the robustness of the watermark
in real-world screenshot scenarios. Finally, the model undergoes fine-tuning guided by a joint-level distorter to ensure
optimal performance. To validate the effectiveness of ScreenMark, we compiled a dataset comprising 100,000 screenshots
from various devices and resolutions. Extensive experiments
on different datasets confirm the superior robustness, imperceptibility, and practical applicability of the method.

Figure 1: The comparison of the traditional watermarking
and the proposed ScreenMark. The red and green content
represent non-watermarked and watermarked, respectively.

and identity management, provide comprehensive protection against data leaks. However, these methods primarily manage permissions, allowing authorized users to capture screen content in real-time using screenshot tools. Current specialized protection techniques for VSC often rely on
non-learning watermarking methods, which are even visible. These methods struggle to balance robustness and visual quality effectively, rendering them unsuitable for realworld applications. Therefore, this study focuses on VSC
security in screenshot scenarios and aims to propose a universal learning-based screen watermarking method.
In recent years, the rapid advancement of multimedia watermarking technology(Liu et al. 2023; Xiao et al. 2024;
Tang et al. 2024; Li, Liao, and Wu 2024) has facilitated the
protection of multimedia file content. However, it is important to recognize that current watermarking techniques are
primarily designed for individual modalities, offering specialized protection for images, videos, text, and other media
types. As depicted in Fig.1, there are two main drawbacks:
limited scope of protection and response time constraints.

Introduction
With the continuous advancement of the Internet and computer technologies, an increasing amount of information is
presented in the form of Visual Screen Content (VSC), including images, videos, texts, web pages, windows, and
more. In the context of users’ personal computers, VSC is
displayed on screens without exception. From a visual perspective, this mode of presentation is the most readily acceptable form of expression. At the same time, this also
means that the VSC can easily be leaked.
For most enterprise and home computers, ensuring data
security is a significant challenge. Traditional security measures, such as data encryption, firewalls, access control,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26273

