The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DeMo: Deep Motion Field Consensus with Learnable Kernels for Two-view
Correspondence Learning
Yifan Lu1 * , Jiajun Le1 * , Zizhuo Li1 , Yixuan Yuan2 , Jiayi Ma1†
1

Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
Department of Electronic Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong SAR, China
lyf048@whu.edu.cn, jiajunle01@gmail.com, zizhuo li@whu.edu.cn, yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, jyma2010@gmail.com
2

Abstract

2015), visual localization (Philbin et al. 2010), and image fusion (Xu et al. 2022). The standard pipeline generally begins
with detecting keypoints and generating local descriptors,
followed by establishing putative correspondences based on
the similarity between descriptors. Significant progress has
been made in both traditional handcrafted descriptors and
learning-based descriptors, such as SIFT (Lowe 2004) and
SuperPoint (DeTone, Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich 2018).
However, attributed to the ambiguity of visual descriptors
caused by complex scenes such as viewpoint changes and
illumination variations, putative correspondences inevitably
contain considerable mismatches, which would induce significant deviations in geometry estimation. This paper focuses on rejecting outliers from putative correspondences.
Outlier rejection aimed at creating robust two-view correspondences has been explored long ago. As a long-range
prior, motion consensus is a crucial cue for correspondence
pruning, which means the overall spatial transformation between a pair of images is smooth and consistent. The classical method VFC (Ma et al. 2014) seeks motion consensus by
estimating the vector field, while LPM (Ma et al. 2019) and
GMS (Bian et al. 2017) focus on local consensus. However,
traditional methods tend to fail when the putative set contains a significant number of outliers. Fortunately, the rapid
development of deep learning has provided new technological breakthroughs for correspondence learning. Representatively, PointCN (Yi et al. 2018), for the first time, processes
each correspondence individually and predicts inlier scores
within an MLP framework, introducing context normalization to aggregate global information. But it overlooks the
underlying local geometric relations. Thus, OANet (Zhang
et al. 2019) designs a permutation-invariant pooling-like operation to capture local context. CLNet (Zhao et al. 2021)
constructs annular convolution within a k-nearest neighbor graph to aggregate local context. Further, UMatch (Li,
Zhang, and Ma 2023) proposes a multi-level hierarchyaware framework to flexibly encode and decode high-level
features for implicit local context. Even though these methods are effective, they neglect the property motion consensus which is inherently a highly important cue for rejecting
spurious matches from candidate ones.
Essentially, the two-view correspondence learning task
can be regarded as a motion field learning problem and recent advances have increasingly focused on this perspec-

As a long-range prior, motion consensus essentially forces
the overall spatial transformation between a pair of images to
be smooth and consistent, which is naturally well-suited for
two-view correspondence learning. However, such precious
property remains under-explored by most existing studies due
to the modeling challenges posed by the sparsity and uneven
distributions of putative correspondences. In this paper, we
propose DeMo, a novel and cutting-edge network for outlier
rejection, which possesses the capacity to fully capture global
motion consensus clues by way of consensus interpolation
over the entire high-dimensional motion field generated by
putative correspondences. Specifically, through incorporating
regularization techniques into a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS), a concise interpolation formula can be derived for the high-dimensional motion field, which inherently
allows a closed-form solution. Subsequently, learnable deep
kernels are collaboratively used to flexibly and efficiently
capture the relationships between global inputs, thus maintaining the entire motion field consensus. In addition, to remedy the cubic computational overhead of explicit interpolation, a scene-adaptive sampling strategy is introduced, which
implicitly selects the more scene-representative motions, reducing the computational complexity of motion consensus interpolation to be approximately linear while maintaining the
accuracy. Moreover, to deal with underlying depth discontinuities caused by complicated scene variations, a local consensus complementation block is designed, which maintains
local bilateral consensus across both feature and spatial channels. Without bells and whistles, DeMo achieves superior performance in various geometric tasks, including relative pose
estimation, homography estimation, and visual localization.

Code — https://github.com/JiajunLe/DeMo

Introduction
Identifying reliable correspondences and estimating the relative pose between two images depicting the same scene captured from different perspectives, is a long-standing problem
in computer vision, with applications to many high-level vision tasks, such as SLAM (Mur-Artal, Montiel, and Tardos
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5829

