The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generating Synthetic Data for Unsupervised Federated Learning of Cross-Modal
Retrieval
Tianlong Zhang1 , Zhe Xue1 * , Adnan Mahmood2 , Junping Du1 , Yuchen Dong1 , Shilong Ou1 , Lang
Feng1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang3 , Yuankai Qi2 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Macquarie University
3
University of California at Merced
{tlzhang, xuezhe, junpingd, dongyuchen, osl, xiangba0n1ng}@bupt.edu.cn, {adnan.mahmood, yuankai.qi}@mq.edu.au,
mhyang@ucmerced.edu
Abstract

devices. To satisfy the privacy requirements, federated learning (FL) (Yang et al. 2019; Li, Li, and Xue 2022; Long et al.
2023; Zang et al. 2023) is introduced into cross-modal retrieval. These methods allow the server to ascertain a relatively good performance model without requiring original
clients’ data.
To the best of our knowledge, there are only a few methods have been developed for cross-modal retrieval in FL.
FedCMR (Zong et al. 2021) focuses on FL and proposes to
learn a common subspace of each client and aggregate these
subspaces to benefit feature learning. On the other hand,
FedCAFE (Fu et al. 2024) proposes to embed global semantic information into feature learning to constrain the training
of local models. Both these approaches require ground-truth
annotations, however, annotations are not available in many
real-world scenarios. To overcome this problem, an unsupervised method in PT-FUCH (Li et al. 2023) is proposed.
PT-FUCH utilizes cluster prototypes to align the local models with the global model. The above-mentioned methods
are still challenged by the data non-IID problem: the amount
and categories of data vary across clients.
To address the above-mentioned problem, we propose to
learn a data generator for each client and then generate data
on the server, which is later filtered according to global
data distribution across all clients. Our method, FedWGAN,
adopts WGAN (Arjovsky and Bottou 2017) as our generator due to its stability and convergence of training procedure. Then, we compute cluster prototypes, which are used
to create pseudo labels for training data. Next, to improve
the quality of generated data, we design three new loss constraints for WGAN: a direct contrastive loss between generated image and text features, an indirect contrastive loss
with reference to pseudo labels, and a Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) loss also with reference to pseudo labels.
The JSD loss facilitates that the synthetic data shares a similar distribution to the real dataset of each client. Locally
trained generators are sent to the server to generate synthetic data. Local prototypes are also gathered on the server
to compute global cluster prototypes, which are used to filter out outliers in the synthetic data. Last, the filtered data
are fed to the aggregated global retrieval model for further
training, which is later sent back to clients.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as

Unsupervised federated learning for cross-modal retrieval has
received increasing attention in recent years as it can free
the requirement for annotations and avoid uploading original clients’ data to servers. Most existing methods focus on
how to learn better local models and their aggregation to overcome data distribution drift across clients. Unlike prior works,
we propose to address the data distribution problem by generating synthetic data, which can benefit existing federated
learning methods. Specifically, we train a WGAN generator
with three newly designed loss constraints on each client to
improve the quality of the generated data. We first compute
cluster prototypes to address the problem of lack of labels.
Then, a direct contrastive loss between generated image and
text features, an indirect contrastive loss with reference to
cluster prototypes, and a Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD)
loss also with reference to cluster prototypes work together
to constrain the WGAN. The locally trained generators and
local prototypes are sent to the server to generate and filter
synthetic data with consideration of data distribution across
all clients. The filtered data are used to train the aggregated
global retrieval model, which is later sent to clients. The final global model becomes robust to all clients after several
rounds of client-server iteration. Extensive experiments using four baselines across three datasets demonstrate that our
method performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
In modern society, the booming amount of multi-modal data,
e.g., images, texts, and videos over the internet, makes the
requirement for a robust cross-modal retrieval model a key
point (Kaur, Pannu, and Malhi 2021; Wang et al. 2023).
Among various advanced technologies, deep cross-modal
hashing methods leveraging deep neural networks with the
advantage of hash techniques significantly enhance the accuracy and efficiency of large-scale cross-modal retrieval.
However, training deep cross-modal hashing models still
faces data privacy concerns. Real-world data is usually distributed across multiple clients and can only be accessed by
the clients, e.g., mobile phones, personal computers, and IoT
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22569

