The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KnowPO: Knowledge-Aware Preference Optimization for Controllable
Knowledge Selection in Retrieval-Augmented Language Models
Ruizhe Zhang1,2 * , Yongxin Xu1,2 * , Yuzhen Xiao1,2 * , Runchuan Zhu1,2 ,
Xinke Jiang1,2 , Xu Chu1,2,4,5 , Junfeng Zhao1,2,6† , Yasha Wang2,3,5†
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
3
National Engineering Research Center For Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Peking University Information Technology Institute (Tianjin Binhai)
6
Nanhu Laboratory, Jiaxing, China
{nostradamus,xuyx,xiaoyuzhen}@stu.pku.edu.cn; zhaojf@pku.edu.cn; wangyasha@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

extensive pre-training data (Ziegler et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2023b; Ma et al. 2024; Lin et al. 2024). However, because
of the static nature of the training data, LLMs may generate seemingly coherent but actually unreliable information,
a phenomenon known as “hallucination” (Ji et al. 2023a,b;
Cao et al. 2020), due to outdated knowledge and long-tail
knowledge (He, Zhang, and Roth 2022; Kandpal et al. 2023;
Jiang et al. 2024). Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
paradigm (Izacard et al. 2022; Asai et al. 2023b,a), within
a retrieve-and-read framework, leverages information from
reliable knowledge bases to compensate the static nature of
the Internal knowledge of LLM. However, the performance
of RAG framework is limited by the knowledge conflicts
between internal knowledge stored in LLM parameters and
external database (Xu et al. 2024; Jin et al. 2024). In this
paper, we focus on resolving knowledge conflict by adhere
to the retrieved knowledge, and meanwhile, improving the
robustness against noise in the retrieved context.
In response to the aforementioned issue, a mainstream
approach is to construct specific instruction-tuning datasets
to optimize the knowledge prioritization of LLMs in contexts with varying degrees of relevance (Li et al. 2022; Xue
et al. 2023). However, as shown in Figure 1, achieving a
balance between adherence capability and noise robustness is highly challenging. On one hand, when the LLM
heavily relies on external knowledge, it risks over-focusing
on irrelevant retrieval contexts, struggling to effectively discern noise. On the other hand, an excessive emphasis on enhancing the LLM’s noise resistance can inadvertently filter
out useful contextual information (Wu, Wu, and Zou 2024).
Moreover, the manifestation of these capabilities is closely
related to the complexity of the context in real-world RAG
scenarios (Longpre et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2024). Therefore,
it is crucial to address the balance between adherence capability and noise robustness in real RAG scenarios.
Therefore, our insights stem from the error types observed
in real-world scenarios involving RAG. We observe that
existing research fails to distinguish between supervisory
signals, leading to adherence capability and noise robustness being treated as analogous instruction-following pos-

By integrating external knowledge, Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) has become an effective strategy for
mitigating the hallucination problems that large language
models (LLMs) encounter when dealing with knowledgeintensive tasks. However, in the process of integrating external non-parametric supporting evidence with internal parametric knowledge, inevitable knowledge conflicts may arise,
leading to confusion in the model’s responses. To enhance the
knowledge selection of LLMs in various contexts, some research has focused on refining their behavior patterns through
instruction-tuning. Nonetheless, due to the absence of explicit negative signals and comparative objectives, models
fine-tuned in this manner may still exhibit undesirable behaviors such as contextual ignorance and contextual overinclusion. To this end, we propose a Knowledge-aware Preference
Optimization strategy, dubbed KnowPO, aimed at achieving
adaptive knowledge selection based on contextual relevance
in real retrieval scenarios. Concretely, we proposed a general paradigm for constructing knowledge conflict datasets,
which comprehensively cover various error types and learn
how to avoid these negative signals through preference optimization methods. Simultaneously, we proposed a rewriting
strategy and data ratio optimization strategy to address preference imbalances. Experimental results show that KnowPO
outperforms previous methods for handling knowledge conflicts by over 37%, while also exhibiting robust generalization
across various out-of-distribution datasets.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Taylor et al. 2022; Zhao
et al. 2023b) have been widely applied in various fields,
such as natural language processing, question-answering
systems, and text generation, giving rise to numerous AI applications (Kaplan et al. 2020; Vu et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023,
2024). These models exhibit outstanding performance in
many tasks, primarily due to their large-scale parameters and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25895

