The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimize Incompatible Parameters
Through Compatibility-aware Knowledge Integration
Zheqi Lv1,3 , Keming Ye1 , Zishu Wei1 , Qi Tian2 , Shengyu Zhang1 * , Wenqiao Zhang1 ,
Wenjie Wang3∗ , Kun Kuang1∗ , Tat-Seng Chua3 , Fei Wu1
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Tencent TEG., Shenzhen, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
{zheqilv, kemingye, weizishu, sy zhang, wenqiaozhang, kunkuang, wufei}@zju.edu.cn,
noaltian@tencent.com, wenjiewang96@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg
Abstract

2022). These parameters can be referred to as “incompatible parameters”.
Existing methods to tackle the negative impact of these
parameters primarily include: 1) Removing these incompatible parameters (such as pruning and so on) (Raedt 2022; Ma,
Fang, and Wang 2023; Guo, Ouyang, and Xu 2020; Zhou
et al. 2023; Han et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2020; Dong, Chen,
and Pan 2017; Sanh, Wolf, and Rush 2020) to enhance computational efficiency is well-established. However, in dynamic environments, characterized by shifting data distributions (e.g., context and scenarios on language tasks, user
preferences on recommendation tasks.), pruning may lose
its efficiency. 2) An alternative strategy is training multiple
models under different conditions (e.g., with different random seeds and so on) and merging their outputs during inference (such as outputs ensemble (Dong et al. 2020; Zhou
et al. 2021)), which increase accuracy by aggregating the
outputs of several models trained under different conditions.
This approach can mitigate the negative effects of incompatible parameters by leveraging complementary strengths
from diverse models. However, this benefit comes at the cost
of significantly higher computational demands during inference, and it does not address the core issue of improving the
incompatible parameters themselves.
Inspired by the complementary model capabilities in output ensemble, we propose a novel perspective in optimizing incompatible parameters, that is identifying these parameters and integrating complementary counterparts from
models trained under diverse conditions for enhancement.
Our goal is to establish a unified framework for knowledge
integration, applicable to multiple domains including recommendation and language tasks. This integrative approach
acknowledges the ubiquitous presence of potentially complementary models in real-world applications. For instance,
within large online platforms such as Amazon and Taobao,
models dedicated to understanding multi-modal content and
user behaviors at different stages, such as initial engagement, search, and post-purchase, can provide mutually reinforcing insights. A straightforward strategy might involve
averaging the parameters across models to synthesize a unified model for inference. However, this approach can fall
short of expectations, as illustrated in Figure 1.

Deep neural networks have become foundational to advancements in multiple domains, including recommendation systems, natural language processing, and so on. Despite their
successes, these models often contain incompatible parameters that can be underutilized or detrimental to model performance, particularly when faced with specific, varying data
distributions. Existing research excels in removing such parameters or merging the outputs of multiple different pretrained models. However, the former focuses on efficiency
rather than performance, while the latter requires several
times more computing and storage resources to support inference. In this paper, we set the goal to explicitly improve
these incompatible parameters by leveraging the complementary strengths of different models, thereby directly enhancing the models without any additional parameters. Specifically, we propose Compatibility-aware Knowledge Integration (CKI), which consists of Parameter Compatibility
Assessment and Parameter Splicing, which are used to evaluate the knowledge content of multiple models and integrate
the knowledge into one model, respectively. The integrated
model can be used directly for inference or for further finetuning. Extensive experiments on various recommendation
and language datasets show that CKI can effectively optimize
incompatible parameters under multiple tasks and settings to
break through the training limit of the original model without
increasing the inference cost.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have excelled across various domains
including natural language processing (Liu et al. 2019; Devlin et al. 2018), recommender systems (Hidasi et al. 2016;
Kang and McAuley 2018), etc. The work on the lottery ticket
hypothesis (Frankle et al. 2020; Frankle 2023) shows that
there exist subnetworks that can be trained in isolation to
achieve full accuracy. However, the parameters except these
subnetworks, when applied to specific data distributions, often contain parameters that contribute minimally or even
negatively to task performance (Wang et al. 2021; Raedt
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19233

