The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Controllable Protein Sequence Generation with LLM Preference Optimization
Xiangyu Liu1 , Yi Liu1 , Silei Chen2,3 , Wei Hu1,3, *
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Medical School, Nanjing University, China
3
National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University, China
{xyl, yiliu07}.nju@gmail.com, {chensl, whu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Designing proteins with specific attributes offers an important solution to address biomedical challenges. Pre-trained
protein large language models (LLMs) have shown promising results on protein sequence generation. However, to control sequence generation for specific attributes, existing work
still exhibits poor functionality and structural stability. In
this paper, we propose a novel controllable protein design
method called CtrlProt. We finetune a protein LLM with a
new multi-listwise preference optimization strategy to improve generation quality and support multi-attribute controllable generation. Experiments demonstrate that CtrlProt can
meet functionality and structural stability requirements effectively, achieving state-of-the-art performance in both singleattribute and multi-attribute protein sequence generation.

Figure 1: Gene Ontology (GO) terms analysis

tasks remains essential to ensure the generation of specific
functional proteins (Lv et al. 2024).
Finetuning LLMs for controllable protein generation has
two major challenges. First, existing works based on finetuning do not explicitly constrain structural stability and functionality during training. As a result, the finetuned model
may still generate proteins that are functionally irrelevant
or incapable of folding into stable structures. Second, the
effectiveness of finetuning depends heavily on the quality
and quantity of the dataset. We analyze the protein number
of each term in Gene Ontology (GO) annotations1 , which
provides descriptions of a protein’s molecular functions, biological processes, and cellular components. As shown in
Fig. 1(a), most terms have data quantities concentrated below 5,000, and there are very few terms with a sufficient
number of proteins. Furthermore, we randomly sample 100
terms and count the number of proteins with shared attributes between any two terms. The results in Fig. 1(b)
show that fewer proteins meet both attributes, as indicated
by the lighter color in the intersection of the heatmap. So,
it is harder to construct sufficiently large data for finetuning
when aiming to generate proteins with multiple attributes.
To address the issues mentioned above, we propose a preference optimization-based method to enhance the quality
of controllable protein sequence generation. We design two
metrics to assess the protein’s structural stability and functionality. For functionality, given the critical relationship be-

Introduction
The objective of protein design (Jumper et al. 2021; Zheng
et al. 2023) is to create proteins with specific biochemical functions. Designing and exploring novel proteins offers a highly promising approach to addressing challenges
in various fields, e.g., drug discovery (Śledź and Caflisch
2018; Cao et al. 2022), vaccine and enzyme design (Correia et al. 2014; Richter et al. 2011). Generating highquality proteins that not only possess the desired functions
but also exhibit structural stability has become increasingly
important. Recently, several works based on deep models
have achieved notable success in protein sequence generation (Ferruz, Schmidt, and Höcker 2022; Nijkamp et al.
2023) using protein large language models (LLMs). They
leverage the similarities between protein sequences and natural language to generate biologically relevant and functional protein sequences with high accuracy.
Directly finetuning protein language models is an effective way to constrain their outputs to meet the specific function attributes (Luo et al. 2023; Nathansen et al. 2024).
While some works (Wang et al. 2023; Fang et al. 2024) align
protein space with natural language space to achieve controllable outputs, yielding promising results in protein sequence
understanding (Zhuo et al. 2024), finetuning on downstream
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

505

https://current.geneontology.org/annotations/

