The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RP-PGD: Boosting Segmentation Robustness with a Region-and-Prototype Based
Adversarial Attack
Yuxuan Zhang1 , Zhenbo Shi1, 2, 5∗ , Shuchang Wang1 , Wei Yang1, 2, 3∗ , Shaowei Wang4 , Yinxing Xue1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Hefei National Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Blockchain, Guangzhou University
5
Laboratory for Advanced Computing and Intelligence Engineering, Wuxi, China
Abstract

cross-entropy loss to fool the model is inappropriate for
segmentation, as the gradient is dominated by the alreadymisclassified pixels. Attacking these pixels does not work
well, since the attack target is to mislead as many pixels as
possible to produce incorrect predictions, considering the inherent property of the dense-prediction task.
To defend against adversarial attacks, DDC-AT (Xu,
Zhao, and Jia 2021) adopts adversarial training (AT) to enhance segmentation robustness. Subsequently, SegPGD (Gu
et al. 2022) demonstrates that enhancing the attack capability can further boost the segmentation robustness with AT.
However, these methods are still vulnerable to strong attacks like Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) (Madry et al.
2017) with 100 iterations. This vulnerability arises from
their failure to fully consider the inherent properties of generating strong underlying adversaries tailored for segmentation. Consequently, AT with weak attacks gives a false sense
of segmentation robustness.
To address this issue, on the one hand, we propose a
novel region-based attack. Specifically, we employ a spatialtemporal way to classify the pixels into three disjoint regions: True Region, False Region, and Boundary Region.
The True Region consists of pixels that consistently maintain accurate predictions during previous attack iterations.
We focus on attacking the pixels in this region to increase
the number of misclassified pixels, which can greatly enhance the attack capability. The False Region comprises pixels that are initially mispredicted and are difficult to transform to correct predictions even with successive iterations.
Recognizing the limited potential for improvement, we allocate less attention to this region during the attack process.
Finally, the Boundary Region includes pixels near the decision boundary, which initially produce correct predictions
but can be misled afterwards. We consider this region as crucial because the pixels may revert to their benign state if they
are not sufficiently targeted during the attack. Thus, we place
significant emphasis on preventing the pixels in this region
from becoming benign throughout the attack iterations.
On the other hand, we introduce a prototype-based approach to enhance the attack efficacy from the feature space.
Motivated by (Zhou et al. 2022; Zhang, Yang, and Wang
2023), we leverage a prototype to represent the distinguishable feature of each category. Note that, the inter-class proto-

Adversarial attack and defense have been extensively explored in classification tasks, but their study in semantic segmentation remains limited. Moreover, current attacks fail to
act as strong underlying attacks for adversarial training (AT),
making it difficult to achieve segmentation robustness against
strong attacks. In this paper, we present RP-PGD, a novel
Region-and-Prototype based Projected Gradient Descent attack tailored to fool segmentation models. In particular, we
propose a region-based attack, which leverages a spatialtemporal way to separate the pixels into three disjoint regions, and highlights the attack on the crucial True Region
and Boundary Region. Moreover, we introduce a prototypebased attack to disrupt the feature space, further enhancing
the attack capability. To boost the robustness of segmentation models, we inject adversaries generated by RP-PGD
into the clean data and perform AT. Extensive experiments
on multiple datasets showcase that RP-PGD generates adversaries with faster convergence and stronger attack effectiveness, surpassing state-of-the-art attacks by a large margin.
Consequently, RP-PGD serves as a strong underlying attack
for segmentation models to perform AT, assisting them in defending against a variety of strong attacks without incurring
additional computational costs during inference.

Introduction
Deep neural networks are susceptible to quasi-imperceptible
adversarial perturbations. To address this issue, great efforts
(Szegedy et al. 2013; Zhang and Wang 2019; Liao et al.
2018; Tramer et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020) have been made
to defend against adversarial attacks on classification tasks.
As an extension task, semantic segmentation has broad applications in various fields. However, the study of adversarial
attack and defense in semantic segmentation remains limited
(Hendrik Metzen et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2020), resulting in
ample room for enhancing segmentation robustness.
Previous methods (Arnab, Miksik, and Torr 2018; Hendrik Metzen et al. 2017; Poursaeed et al. 2018) primarily
focus on transferring attack patterns from classification and
evaluating the segmentation performance. However, unlike
the classification task, merely maximizing the pixel-wise
∗

Corresponding authors, E-mail: {zbshi,qubit}@ustc.edu.cn
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10338

