The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Denoising Pre-training Framework for Accelerating Novel Material Discovery
Shuaike Shen * , Ke Liu * † , Muzhi Zhu, Hao Chen
Zhejiang University
shuaikeshen@zju.edu.cn, kliu@zju.edu.cn, haochen.cad@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Crystal materials play an important role in the development of
society. The discovery of new materials is critical to achieving sustainable development goals (SDGs), such as climate
change mitigation, affordable and clean energy, and fostering
innovation in industry and infrastructure. Recent advances in
deep learning for crystal property prediction have accelerated
material discovery, but these methods typically rely on labeled data, which is often limited and varies across different
properties. This limitation hinders the full utilization of the
vast amount of unlabeled data in materials science. To overcome this challenge, we introduce an unsupervised Denoising
Pre-training Framework (DPF) tailored for crystal structures.
DPF trains a model to reconstruct the original crystal structure by recovering the masked atom types, perturbed atom positions, and perturbed crystal lattices. Through pre-training,
models learn the intrinsic features of crystal structures and
capture the key features influencing crystal properties. We
pre-train models on a dataset of 380,743 unlabeled crystal
structures and fine-tune them on downstream property prediction tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, showing its potential to significantly
advance material science and contribute to the development
of society by accelerating the discovery of materials crucial
for sustainable technologies.

𝑢#

𝑢$
𝑢!

𝑢&
𝑢%

𝑢"

Figure 1: Illustration of a crystal unit cell structure. The circles represent the atoms and their respective locations. The
parallelepiped indicates the Bravais lattice. The lattice vectors, depicted as red lines, determine the orientation and periodicity of the lattice. The arrangement of atoms and the geometry of the lattice play a critical role in shaping the properties of crystalline materials, as the interactions between
atoms and the overall structure directly influence the material’s behavior.

Introduction
Materials science plays a crucial role in advancing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), from advanced technologies like superconductors to everyday applications such
as solar energy devices (Kittel, McEuen, and McEuen 1996).
Crystals are an important component of materials, making
accurate predictions of crystal properties crucial for material
discovery, which in turn drives technological innovation and
social progress. Physics theory guarantees that the structure
of a crystal profoundly influences its properties, which sheds
light on the modeling of crystal structures with geometric
deep learning (LeSar 2013). Benefiting from publicly available data from physical experiments and in silico simulations, crystal models based on geometric deep learning have

been vigorously developed (Choudhary and DeCost 2021;
Xie and Grossman 2018; Liu et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2019; Liu, Yang, and Gao 2024). These advancements are key to overcoming challenges in fields such as
superconductivity, where precise modeling is essential for
progress.
However, the labeled data for crystal property prediction
are notably scarce and the number of data points varies
with different properties. For example, JARVIS (Choudhary et al. 2020) only consists of 55,714 labeled crystals. For
properties, like Shear Moduli, there are only 4,664 entries.
Compared to the 14,197,122 annotated data in the ImageNet
(Russakovsky et al. 2015) dataset in the field of computer
vision, such an amount of data is quite not enough to train
a deep learning model. Therefore, making full use of unla-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Correspondence to: Ke Liu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28368

