The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LDP: Generalizing to Multilingual Visual Information Extraction by Language
Decoupled Pretraining
Huawen Shen1,3 , Gengluo Li1,3 , Jinwen Zhong1 * , Yu Zhou2 *
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{shenhuawen, ligengluo, zhongjinwen}@iie.ac.cn, yzhou@nankai.edu.cn
Vision
Invariance

Abstract
Visual Information Extraction (VIE) plays a crucial role in
the comprehension of semi-structured documents, and several pre-trained models have been developed to enhance performance. However, most of these works are monolingual
(usually English). Due to the extremely unbalanced quantity and quality of pre-training corpora between English and
other languages, few works can extend to non-English scenarios. In this paper, we conduct systematic experiments
to show that vision and layout modality hold invariance
among images with different languages. If decoupling language bias from document images, a vision-layout-based
model can achieve impressive cross-lingual generalization.
Accordingly, we present a simple but effective multilingual
training paradigm LDP (Language Decoupled Pre-training)
for better utilization of monolingual pre-training data. Our
proposed model LDM (Language Decoupled Model) is first
pre-trained on the language-independent data, where the language knowledge is decoupled by a diffusion model, and then
the LDM is fine-tuned on the downstream languages. Extensive experiments show that the LDM outperformed all SOTA
multilingual pre-trained models, and also maintains competitiveness on downstream monolingual/English benchmarks.

Layout
Invariance

Previous
Ours

(a) Origin

(b) Previous

(c) Ours

Figure 1: (a) Original image. (b) The previous method, LiLT,
only decouples the layout modality across different languages, ignoring the vital appearance. (c) Our method remains vision and layout consistent with original image.
Most multilingual works opt to collect more non-English
pre-training data, which can be either synthetic (Kim et al.
2022) or real-life scenarios (Xu et al. 2021a). However,
synthetic data often exhibit template-based structures and
lack meaningful sequences, constraining the effectiveness
of these approaches. Gathering real data can be timeconsuming and costly, and these data are usually limited
to certain languages (Yu et al. 2023). In this context, LiLT
(Wang, Jin, and Ding 2022) initially focuses on pre-training
using available monolingual data and then smoothly transitions to multilingual benchmarks. In pursuit of this objective, LiLT overlooks the visual modality and only decouples the layout information. A pertinent query arises: Does
the visual modality offer benefits in multilingual VIE? Is
it possible to leverage the visual modality to enhance the
pre-training of our multilingual model?
Based on our early attempts, we propose that similar to
the layout, visual features exhibit a comparable level of invariance across various languages. For instance, as shown
in Figure 1(a), though not understanding German words, we
can infer that a text sequence in bold font with a distinct
gray background typically indicates a section title. In contrast, when vision information is completely absent, such as
Figure 1(b), the final performance will largely depend on the
language model’s multilingual capabilities, which might be
inconsistent across different languages.

Introduction
Images with text, such as scanned documents (Shen et al.
2023) and street views (Zeng et al. 2023), are widely used in
our daily life (Shu et al. 2024). Given the intricate layout and
vision clues present in these documents, merely detecting
(Chen et al. 2020) and recognizing (Qiao et al. 2020, 2021)
all text in the images and serializing to a text sequence could
result in a substantial loss of information (Zeng et al. 2024a).
Therefore, Visual Information Extraction (VIE) has been developed, tasking the model with utilizing multi-modal information (including vision, layout, and text) to extract essential information from a variety of documents. Inspired by advancements in the pre-training fine-tuning paradigm (Raffel
et al. 2020), numerous studies have been undertaken to further advance this field. Similar to other tasks, VIE also encounters a significant challenge: English corpus dominates
the pre-training corpus while other languages lack adequate
training.
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6805

