The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Stitch, Contrast, and Segment: Learning a Human Action
Segmentation Model Using Trimmed Skeleton Videos
Haitao Tian*, Pierre Payeur
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa
htian026@uottawa.ca, ppayeur@uottawa.ca

Abstract
Existing skeleton-based human action classification models
rely on well-trimmed action-specific skeleton videos for both
training and testing, precluding their scalability to real-world
applications where untrimmed videos exhibiting concatenated actions are predominant. To overcome this limitation,
recently introduced skeleton action segmentation models involve untrimmed skeleton videos into end-to-end training.
The model is optimized to provide frame-wise predictions for
any length of testing videos, simultaneously realizing action
localization and classification. Yet, achieving such an improvement imposes frame-wise annotated skeleton videos,
which remains time-consuming in practice. This paper features a novel framework for skeleton-based action segmentation trained on short trimmed skeleton videos, but that can
run on longer untrimmed videos. The approach is implemented in three steps: Stitch, Contrast, and Segment. First,
Stitch proposes a temporal skeleton stitching scheme that
treats trimmed skeleton videos as elementary human motions
that compose a semantic space and can be sampled to generate multi-action stitched sequences. Contrast learns contrastive representations from stitched sequences with a novel discrimination pretext task that enables a skeleton encoder to
learn meaningful action-temporal contexts to improve action
segmentation. Finally, Segment relates the proposed method
to action segmentation by learning a segmentation layer
while handling particular data availability. Experiments involve a trimmed source dataset and an untrimmed target dataset in an adaptation formulation for real-world skeletonbased human action segmentation to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Figure 1: (a): Two video sequences from PKU MMD v2
exhibiting multiple actions that can be segmented into several class-specific actions. Four actions (highlighted with
yellow outlines) found in both sequences are permutated in
different orders of occurrence (1,2,3,4 vs. 4,1,2,3). (b): A
well-trained* skeleton-based action segmentation model
may generate very different segmentation results on the two
sequences. We identify this issue as the shortcuts learning
problem which results from learning action permutations
during training. [*The MS-GCN (Filtjens et al. 2022) model
was trained over the small PKU MMD v2 skeleton videobased dataset using the official Cross-View protocol after
removing the training sequences with action permutation
order: “4,1,2,3”. See more details in “Ablation Studies”.]

Introduction

(Feichtenhofer et al. 2016). Early research (Yan et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021) uses trimmed skeleton videos (i.e., class-specific action sequences as shown in Figure
1) to train human action recognition models, e.g., the endto-end learning method (Yan et al. 2018) uses Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) (Zhang et al. 2019) to parse human action dynamics from skeleton graphs, demonstrating
high success rates in human-centered video analysis tasks
(Niu et al. 2004). However, the scalability of existing human
action recognition methods remains limited in the testing

Skeleton videos represent the trajectories of human body
key joints captured by skeleton acquisition systems that leverage 2D and 3D computer vision with specialized software
to estimate the spatial configuration of a human body skeleton model in a pre-calibrated environment. Such sensing
systems offer the merit of being robust to variations in the
environment compared to other modalities such as RGB
frames (Carreira and Zisserman 2017) and optical flows
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7365

