The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Generative Model for Mechanical System Configuration Design
Yasaman Etesam1,2 , Hyunmin Cheong1 , Mohammadmehdi Ataei1 , Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman1
1

Autodesk Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada
yetesam@sfu.ca, {hyunmin.cheong, mehdi.ataei, pradeep.kumar.jayaraman}@autodesk.com
2

Abstract

Evaluating these objectives or constraints frequently necessitates the use of black-box physics simulation tools. Due
to these aspects, configuration design problems have traditionally been approached using gradient-free, meta-heuristic
optimization methods like evolutionary algorithms (Deb and
Jain 2003; Angelov et al. 2003; Grignon and Fadel 2004;
Cheong et al. 2019) or simulated annealing (Schmidt and
Cagan 1998; Shea, Cagan, and Fenves 1997). In certain
problems, search methods such as Monte Carlo tree search
(Zhao et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2022) or heuristic search
(Campbell, Cagan, and Kotovsky 1998; Piacentini et al.
2020; Zhao et al. 2020) have been employed. While these
methods have shown some success, they are computationally expensive and time-consuming, limiting their practical
adoption by engineers who ideally seek real-time recommendation of solutions to perform multiple design iterations
within constrained time-frames (Cagan and Vogel 2002).
The need for a fast, interactive tool motivated our investigation into deep generative models for mechanical system
configuration design. Recent progress in generative models, particularly Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017), offers a
promising approach to the problem. Originally designed for
natural language processing, Transformers excel at generating complex sequences and have proven effective in solving
combinatorial problems, such as AlphaFold’s protein structure predictions (Varadi et al. 2022; Jumper et al. 2021). In
contrast to traditional methods, these generative models can
instantly predict solutions given the user input.
Mechanical systems have domain-specific languages similar to the natural language, consisting of grammar and lexicon. Just as sentences must follow syntactic rules with comprehensible words, valid mechanical configurations must
consist of specific parts that adhere to compatibility constraints. For example, constructing a basic mechanical linkage involves a sequence such as [pivot point] - [connecting
rod] - [pin joint]. Each component must be compatible with
the next for the linkage to be physically realizable and function correctly. While this is a simple example, more complex
systems follow similarly structured rules. This parallel further motivated us to investigate applying Transformer models for generating valid and functional mechanical designs.
To explore this premise, a novel Transformer-based generative model is developed for gear train synthesis. Gear trains
are complex and ubiquitous mechanical systems, consisting

Generative AI has made remarkable progress in addressing
various design challenges. One prominent area where generative AI could bring significant value is in engineering design. In particular, selecting an optimal set of components
and their interfaces to create a mechanical system that meets
design requirements is one of the most challenging and timeconsuming tasks for engineers. This configuration design task
is inherently challenging due to its categorical nature, multiple design requirements a solution must satisfy, and the reliance on physics simulations for evaluating potential solutions. These characteristics entail solving a combinatorial optimization problem with multiple constraints involving blackbox functions. To address this challenge, we propose a deep
generative model to predict the optimal combination of components and interfaces for a given design problem. To demonstrate our approach, we solve a gear train synthesis problem
by first creating a synthetic dataset using a domain-specific
language, a parts catalogue, and a physics simulator. We then
train a Transformer-based model using this dataset, named
GearFormer, which can not only generate quality solutions
on its own, but also augment traditional search methods such
as an evolutionary algorithm and Monte Carlo tree search.
We show that GearFormer outperforms such search methods
on their own in terms of satisfying the specified design requirements with orders of magnitude faster generation time.
Additionally, we showcase the benefit of hybrid methods that
leverage both GearFormer and search methods, which further
improve the quality of the solutions.

Introduction
Configuration design of mechanical systems in engineering
(Mittal and Frayman 1989; Wielinga and Schreiber 1997) is
a time-consuming task that relies on the domain expertise
of engineers. Typically, engineers manually select the optimal combination of components to meet multiple design
requirements based on their experience and knowledge, often leading to sub-optimal solutions that negatively impacts
product development (Suh 1990; Dym 1994).
Computationally, configuration design can be defined as
a combinatorial optimization problem with categorical design variables (e.g., component choices) and design requirements expressed as objectives and constraints (Levin 2009).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16496

