The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimising Spatial Teamwork Under Uncertainty
Gregory Everett1 , Ryan J. Beal2 , Tim Matthews2 , Timothy J. Norman1 , Sarvapali D. Ramchurn1
1

School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom
2
Sentient Sports, United Kingdom
gae1g17@soton.ac.uk, ryan.beal@sentientsports.com, tim.matthews@sentientsports.com,
T.J.Norman@soton.ac.uk, sdr1@soton.ac.uk

Abstract

In many real-world teams, agents form spatial arrangements to optimise team dominance across an area. For example, Orcas encircle prey to minimise the chance of escape and officers spread to cover criminal hot spots in security settings. While previous TF models have explored agent
proximity and spatial constraints, such as information limitations (Bulka, Gaston, and Desjardins 2007) or the impact
of spatial dispersion on agent communication (O’Leary and
Cummings 2007), they do not focus on optimising agent
communication. Studies in UAV teams consider agent coordination to maximise task coverage in an area (Baker et al.
2016), however, no existing model studies optimising agent
interactions to maximise spatial dominance against an adversary. We define this concept as spatial teamwork.
Against this background, we develop a novel spatial teamwork model focused on nearby agents, addressing agent uncertainties regarding the intentions of teammates and adversaries. We use a stochastic Multi-agent Markov Decision Process (MMDP) to model these dynamics. To navigate these uncertainties, Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
is used to explore future scenarios and determine effective
spatial teamwork in dynamic conditions. This approach allows agents to act individually or as subteams, where they
coordinate actions with a shared objective function.
We validate our approach using Association football data,
focusing on defensive strategies to minimise goal concession probability. Players are modelled as agents with their
own actions, ability to coordinate with teammates and objectives. They operate with incomplete information regarding
future ball and player positions. Football transitions, including player movements, are learned from real-world data.
This paper advances the state of the art as follows:

We introduce a novel method for assessing agent teamwork
based on their spatial coordination. Our approach models the
influence of spatial proximity on team formation and sustained spatial dominance over adversaries using a Multi-agent
Markov Decision Process. We develop an algorithm to derive
efficient teamwork strategies by combining Monte Carlo Tree
Search and linear programming. When applied to team defence in football (soccer) using real-world data, our approach
reduces opponent threat by 21%, outperforming optimised individual behaviour by 6%. Additionally, our model enhances
the predictive accuracy of future attack locations and provides
deeper insights compared to existing teamwork models that
do not explicitly consider the spatial dynamics of teamwork.

1

Introduction

Team Formation (TF) problems in multi-agent systems involve heterogeneous agents collaborating to achieve common goals such as task completion or risk minimisation. In
TF problems, the environment is often dynamic and agents
face uncertainties about the positions and intentions of other
agents. In some settings, agents compete against adversaries,
adding complexity to decision-making. Understanding these
uncertainties and choosing the characteristics of optimal
teams is crucial for developing efficient TF systems.
Recent research explores various criteria for team formation, such as task proximity (Capezzuto, Tarapore, and
Ramchurn 2021), agent waiting times (Amador, Okamoto,
and Zivan 2014), and the alignment of agent roles to
tasks (Aswale and Pinciroli 2023). For example, in social
ridesharing, agents form teams to minimise travel times
(Bistaffa et al. 2017), while in fire response, teams are
formed within spatial and temporal constraints to minimise
job completion time (Chen et al. 2021). These methods assess team value using predefined metrics such as task completion time or team suitability for nearby tasks (Parker
et al. 2016), often overlooking specific agent-to-agent interactions. Beal et al. (2020) studies directed agent interactions
in past teams to predict future team performance. However,
the approach does not consider spatial constraints commonly
found in TF problems (O’Leary and Cummings 2007).

• We propose a novel model of spatial teamwork where a
dynamic defence domain with incomplete information is
modelled as an MMDP.
• An algorithm based on MCTS and linear programming
is proposed to optimise individual and teamwork-based
decision-making.
• We learn agent behaviour from real-world data and use it
to simulate future scenarios in a dynamic environment.
• We compare our algorithm to real-world outcomes and
show that our model reduces opponent threat by ∼21%,
outperforming optimised individual behavior by ∼6%.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23168

