The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mesh Watermark Removal Attack and Mitigation: A Novel Perspective of
Function Space
Xingyu Zhu1,2 , Guanhui Ye1 , Chengdong Dong2 , Xiapu Luo2 , Shiyao Zhang1 , Xuetao Wei1 *
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
12150086@mail.sustech.edu.cn, 12132370@mail.sustech.edu.cn, chengdong.dong@connect.polyu.hk,
csxluo@comp.polyu.edu.hk, zhangsy@sustech.edu.cn, weixt@sustech.edu.cn
FuncEvade

Abstract
Watermark

Mesh watermark embeds secret messages in 3D meshes and
decodes the message from watermarked meshes for ownership verification. Current watermarking methods directly hide
secret messages in vertex and face sets of meshes. However, mesh is a discrete representation that uses vertex and
face sets to describe a continuous signal, which can be discretized in other discrete representations with different vertex
and face sets. This raises the question of whether the watermark can still be verified on the different discrete representations of the watermarked mesh. We conduct this research
in an attack-then-defense manner by proposing a novel function space mesh watermark removal attack F U N C E V A D E and
then mitigating it through function space mesh watermarking F U N C M A R K . In detail, F U N C E V A D E generates a different
discrete representation of a watermarked mesh by extracting
it from the signed distance function of the watermarked mesh.
We observe that the generated mesh can evade ALL previous
watermarking methods. F U N C M A R K mitigates F U N C E V A D E
by watermarking signed distance function through messageguided deformation. Such deformation can survive isosurfacing and thus be inherited by the extracted meshes for further
watermark decoding. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
F U N C E V A D E achieves 100% evasion rate among all previous watermarking methods while achieving only 0.3% evasion rate on F U N C M A R K . Besides, our F U N C M A R K performs
similarly on other metrics compared to state-of-the-art mesh
watermarking methods.

1

Watermark
Lost

Original Mesh Watermarked Mesh SDF Extracted Mesh
FuncMark
Watermark
Verified
Original Mesh

SDF Watermarked SDF Extracted Mesh

Figure 1: Top: F U N C E V A D E fits the signed distance function
(SDF) of the watermarked mesh. It gets an extracted mesh
from SDF through isosurfacing, where the extracted mesh
successfully evades ALL previous watermarking methods.
Bottom: To mitigate F U N C E V A D E , F U N C M A R K watermark
SDF instead of mesh, where the watermark can be verified
on SDF and the mesh extracted from it.

source tracking, and authentication. The watermark is traditionally embedded in the discrete representation of the digital contents. For example, image watermarking embeds a
watermark by perturbating image pixels, and mesh watermarking embeds a watermark by perturbing vertex coordinates. However, the underlying signal represented by digital
content is continuous. A mesh can be viewed as a discrete
representation of a continuous signal, i.e., signed distance
function (SDF) (Dupont et al. 2022; Mescheder et al. 2019;
Sitzmann et al. 2020), from which a high-quality mesh can
be extracted as a different discrete representation. Such a
different discrete representation shares the same perceptual
quality while having a different vertex and face set (or topology). If we obtain a watermarked mesh, the question is: can
the watermark be verified on its other discrete representations?
A watermarking method (Zhu et al. 2024; Wang et al.
2022; Al-Khafaji and Abhayaratne 2019; Peng, Long, and
Long 2021; Peng, Liao, and Long 2022; Tsai and Liu 2022;
Tsai 2020; Hou, Kim, and Lee 2017; Hou et al. 2023) consists of embedding, decoding and detection phase. In the embedding phase, the mesh owner embeds a secret message
into the original mesh to produce a watermarked mesh. In
the decoding phase, a message is decoded from an input
mesh (a watermarked mesh or an original mesh without a

Introduction

Triangle meshes are the primary representation of 3D geometry in computer graphics. They predominantly represent
3D assets used in video games, movies, manufacturing, and
virtual reality interfaces (Siddiqui et al. 2023; Pavllo et al.
2020). Losing a high-fidelity mesh can raise ethical challenges. For example, a mesh stealer can falsely claim ownership of the high-fidelity mesh. One way to address such a
challenge is by leveraging digital watermarking techniques
(Zhu et al. 2024; Fernandez et al. 2023).
Digital watermarking hides secret messages on digital
content like images and meshes for copyright protection,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11004

