The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sharpening Neural Implicit Functions with Frequency Consolidation Priors
Chao Chen1 , Yu-Shen Liu1 * , Zhizhong Han2
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
chenchao19@tsinghua.org.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu
2

Abstract
Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) are vital implicit representations to represent high fidelity 3D surfaces. Current methods mainly leverage a neural network to learn an SDF from
various supervisions including signed distances, 3D point
clouds, or multi-view images. However, due to various reasons including the bias of neural network on low frequency
content, 3D unaware sampling, sparsity in point clouds, or
low resolutions of images, neural implicit representations still
struggle to represent geometries with high frequency components like sharp structures, especially for the ones learned
from images or point clouds. To overcome this challenge, we
introduce a method to sharpen a low frequency SDF observation by recovering its high frequency components, pursuing a
sharper and more complete surface. Our key idea is to learn a
mapping from a low frequency observation to a full frequency
coverage in a data-driven manner, leading to a prior knowledge of shape consolidation in the frequency domain, dubbed
frequency consolidation priors. To better generalize a learned
prior to unseen shapes, we introduce to represent frequency
components as embeddings and disentangle the embedding
of the low frequency component from the embedding of the
full frequency component. This disentanglement allows the
prior to generalize on an unseen low frequency observation
by simply recovering its full frequency embedding through
a test-time self-reconstruction. Our evaluations under widely
used benchmarks or real scenes show that our method can recover high frequency component and produce more accurate
surfaces than the latest methods.

Frequency

Input

Frequency

Frequency

Ours

Frequency

Frequency

GT

Frequency

Figure 1: The concept of frequency consolidation priors. We
also show averaged frequency weights across a band.

Recent methods (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Oechsle, Peng,
and Geiger 2021; Takikawa et al. 2021) use neural networks
to learn SDFs from 3D supervision (Jiang et al. 2020a; Park
et al. 2019; Ouasfi and Boukhayma 2022; Takikawa et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021), 3D point clouds (Genova et al. 2019),
or multi-view images (Fu et al. 2022; Oechsle, Peng, and
Geiger 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2020b; Wang
et al. 2021; Vicini, Speierer, and Jakob 2022; Wang et al.
2022a), turning neural networks into neural implicit functions. However, due to issues like neural networks’ bias towards low-frequency signals, 3D unaware sampling, sparsity in point clouds, and low-resolution images, neural SDFs
still struggle with sharp or high-frequency geometries, particularly when inferred from point clouds or multi-view images. Techniques like positional encodings (Mildenhall et al.
2020) or feature grids (Sara Fridovich-Keil and Alex Yu
et al. 2022; Chen, Liu, and Han 2023) attempt to recover
high-frequency details, but often lead to unstable optimization (Jiang, Hua, and Han 2023) or discontinuous representations (Chen, Liu, and Han 2023), causing artifacts or noisy
surfaces. Thus, recovering high-frequency components in
neural implicit functions remains a challenge.
To address this challenge, we propose frequency consolidation priors to sharpen a neural SDF observation, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Since sharper features are usually represented by high frequency components, our key idea is
to learn a mapping from a low frequency observation to
its full frequency coverage in a data-driven manner. The
prior knowledge learned by the mapping, dubbed frequency

Code — https://github.com/chenchao15/FCP

Introduction
Singed distance Functions (SDFs) can represent high fidelity
3D surfaces with arbitrary topology. An SDF is an implicit
function that can predict signed distances at arbitrary 3D
query locations. It describes a distance field in the 3D space
hosting a surface, where we have iso-surfaces or level sets,
each of which has the same signed distance values. One can
extract the surface as the zero level set of the SDF using the
marching cubes algorithm (Lorensen and Cline 1987).
* The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2025

