The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Foundation Models on Heterogeneous Time Series
Shengchao Chen1 , Guodong Long1 , Jing Jiang1 , Chengqi Zhang2
2

1
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney
Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
shengchao.chen.uts@gmail.com, {guodong.long, jing.jiang}@uts.edu.au
chengqi.zhang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

In comparison to text and images, a unique challenge for
time series foundation models is the increasing heterogeneHeartRate
ity of tokens. The token, a subsequence
of a time series, can
Precipitation
represent distinct physical meanings in
different application
scenarios while the words or image objects usually represent similar meanings in different domains. Lack of crossdomain invariant and increasing heterogeneity of time series
significantly impact the performance of foundation models.

Training a general-purpose time series foundation models
with robust generalization capabilities across diverse applications from scratch is still an open challenge. Efforts are primarily focused on fusing cross-domain time series datasets
to extract shared subsequences as tokens for training models
on Transformer architecture. However, due to significant statistical heterogeneity across domains, this cross-domain fusing approach doesn’t work effectively as the same as fusing
texts and images. To tackle this challenge, this paper proposes a novel federated learning approach to address the heterogeneity in time series foundation models training, namely
FFTS. Specifically, each data-holding organization is treated
as an independent client in a collaborative learning framework with federated settings, and then many client-specific
local models will be trained to preserve the unique characteristics per dataset. Moreover, a new regularization mechanism will be applied to both client-side and server-side, thus
to align the shared knowledge across heterogeneous datasets
from different domains. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed federated learning approach. The newly learned time series foundation models achieve superior generalization capabilities on
cross-domain time series analysis tasks.

HeartRate (top)
Precipitation (bottom)

Convergence Curve
(smoothing)

Slower

HeartRate
Precipitation
Faster

Cross-domain Forecasting Results Between Similar Patterns

Historical Observation (Reddish masking: similar pattern) Forecasting

Figure 1: Examples of statistical heterogeneity across time
series data. HeartRate: healthcare, Precipitation: weather.

Code — https://github.com/shengchaochen82/FFTS
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08906

Healthcare

Heterogeneity arises as cross-domain time series often exhibit significant variations in temporal patterns, including
Forecasting
trendsWeather
and timescales. This leads to two main issues: (1) inconsistent convergence rates across different domains (refer
to Fig. 1, top): models trained on complex healthcare data
converge more slowly compared to those trained on simpler
weather data, despite similar underlying trends; and (2) inability of models to leverage heterogeneous data with analogous patterns effectively (refer to Fig. 1, bottom): models trained on weather data underperform when applied to
healthcare data and vice versa, even though both datasets exhibit similar patterns. Additionally, distinct domain-specific
contextual meanings within different timescales often imply unique interpretations, such as fluctuations in weather
or health status changes, imply unique interpretations. Despite uniform observation periods, these timescale differences can skew meanings and complicate data integration
for training, often causing models to misinterpret underlying
patterns when trained on fused cross-domain time series.

Introduction
Training time series foundation models (TSFMs) requires
access to numerous publicly available datasets and a large
number of datasets provided by various organizations. Federated learning for Foundation Models (Zhuang, Chen, and
Lyu 2023) is a new pathway to achieve this utilizing both
public and private datasets. Existing efforts focus on training TSFMs in a centralized manner, which is unsuitable for
accessing datasets in the private domain (Liu et al. 2024c;
Goswami et al. 2024; Das et al. 2023; Woo et al. 2024).
For example, cross-silo federated learning (McMahan et al.
2017) explores cross-institutional collaborations among hospitals or financial institutions. Moreover, many end-users
with wearable devices and self-driving cars are highly concerned about the use of data collected by these devices.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15839

