The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PSReg: Prior-guided Sparse Mixture of Experts for Point Cloud Registration
Xiaoshui Huang1,5 * , Zhou Huang2,6 * , Yifan Zuo2,6† , Yongshun Gong3 ,
Chengdong Zhang1 , Deyang Liu4 , Yuming Fang2,6
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics,
3
Shandong University,
4
Anqing Normal University,
5
Huaihua University,
6
Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimedia Intelligent Processing
2

Overlap: 14.5%

Abstract
The discriminative feature is crucial for point cloud registration. Recent methods improve the feature discriminative
by distinguishing between non-overlapping and overlapping
region points. However, they still face challenges in distinguishing the ambiguous structures in the overlapping regions. Therefore, the ambiguous features they extracted resulted in a significant number of outlier matches from overlapping regions. To solve this problem, we propose a priorguided SMoE-based registration method to improve the feature distinctiveness by dispatching the potential correspondences to the same experts. Specifically, we propose a priorguided SMoE module by fusing prior overlap and potential
correspondence embeddings for routing, assigning tokens to
the most suitable experts for processing. In addition, we propose a registration framework by a specific combination of
Transformer layer and prior-guided SMoE module. The proposed method not only pays attention to the importance of
locating the overlapping areas of point clouds, but also commits to finding more accurate correspondences in overlapping
areas. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, achieving state-of-the-art registration recall (95.7%/79.3%) on the 3DMatch/3DLoMatch benchmark.
Moreover, we also test the performance on ModelNet40 and
demonstrate excellent performance.

Inlier ratio: 9.8%

Overlap: 14.5%

Inlier ratio: 23.6%

(a) Vanilla SMoE, Patch Correspondences (b) Vanilla SMoE, Point Correspondences
Overlap: 14.5%

Inlier ratio: 71.1%

Overlap: 14.5% Inlier ratio: 64.6%

(c) PSMoE, Patch Correspondences

(d) PSMoE, Point Correspondences

Figure 1: Performance gaps in applying vanilla SMoE and
our PSMoE. Fig. (a) and (c) show coarse patch correspondences, (b) and (d) show fine point correspondences.

Learning-based works on partial overlap point cloud
registration can be classified into two categories: nonTransformer-based methods and transformer-based methods. Non-Transformer-based methods (Zeng et al. 2017;
Huang, Mei, and Zhang 2020; Choy, Park, and Koltun
2019; Ao et al. 2021) directly utilize existing networks for
single-stage feature extraction and estimate the transformation matrix. However, they face challenges in integrating
global information and feature alignment. In comparison,
the Transformer-based methods (Wang and Solomon 2019;
Huang et al. 2021, 2022a; Yu et al. 2021; Mei et al. 2022;
Yew and Lee 2022; Qin et al. 2022) utilize a Transformer
module to further enhance the features extracted by the existing backbones. Nevertheless, in scenarios with a large
number of similar structures or textureless structures, these
methods face the issue of ambiguous matching. Among
them, PEAL (Yu et al. 2023) explicitly encodes intra-frame
overlapping and non-overlapping regions using prior information, which alleviates the above ambiguous matching to
a certain extent. However, if the overlapping region between
the two point clouds contains a large amount of ambiguous
structures (floor or wall without obvious texture), PEAL still
faces difficulty. This is because it cannot distinguish the am-

Introduction
Point cloud registration is fundamental in computer vision
and widely applies in domains such as 3D reconstruction
(Groß, Ošep, and Leibe 2019; Izadi et al. 2011), autonomous
driving (Nagy and Benedek 2018), and augmented reality
(Huang et al. 2016). The objective is to estimate the optimal rigid transformation between two point clouds, thereby
establishing their correspondences within the same coordinate system. Currently, learning-based methods are leading
the task of point cloud registration. However, successfully
registering them remains challenging when the point clouds
only partially overlap.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3788

