The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Commitment to Sparse Strategies in Two-Player Games
Salam Afiouni1 , Jakub Černý1 , Chun Kai Ling2 , Christian Kroer1
1
Columbia University, USA
National University of Singapore, Singapore
sa4316@columbia.edu, chunkail@nus.edu.sg, jakub.cerny@columbia.edu, christian.kroer@columbia.edu
2

Abstract

by practitioners seeking to apply game theoretic solutions
into the real world is that such solutions exhibit dense support, i.e., they could randomize over a large number of actions. Strategies with dense support are undesirable for many
reasons; for instance, they are difficult to interpret and implement in practice, and are often faced with numerical issues if used for downstream processing.
In this paper, we propose overcoming these limitations by
computing k-sparse solutions as opposed to Nash equilibria.
Loosely speaking, a distinguished player termed the sparse
player (representing the practitioner) is restricted to playing
a mixed strategy with a support size at most k. The other
player is free to play any mixed strategy they desire. We
argue that in many practical use-cases, sparse strategies can
almost match the performance of dense strategies, as long as
the support of the sparse player is carefully chosen.
The problem of finding sparse solutions has been studied from various angles. Althöfer (1994) show that sparse
approximations to strategies exist in zero-sum games without too much degradation, while seminal work by Lipton, Markakis, and Mehta (2003) show that approximate
sparse Nash equilibria always exist via a sampling argument
(Feder, Nazerzadeh, and Saberi (2007) show the optimality
of these results); follow up work extends this argument to
correlated and other equilibria (Babichenko, Barman, and
Peretz 2014). Nonetheless, these arguments are nonconstructive in nature, and finding “good” sparse equilibria can
be difficult. Indeed, finding the optimal k-sparse commitment even for zero-sum games is in general intractable (McCarthy et al. 2018). Foster, Golowich, and Kakade (2023)
study a variant of sparsity in Markov games where correlated
equilibria distributions are expressible as a mixture of k uniform product distributions, while Anagnostides et al. (2023)
show hardness of computing sparse correlated equilibria for
extensive form games. The line of work closest to ours is
by McCarthy et al. (2018), who study k-sparse solutions under the name of operationalizable strategies, mainly from
the perspective of security games. Our work differs from
them in several ways. First, our algorithm is not restricted
to finding k-uniform strategies, i.e., each of the k actions
(possibly repeated) must be chosen with equal probability.
Crucially, we significantly expand the scope of applications
beyond that of security games, including large games with
MILP representable strategy spaces.

While Nash equilibria are guaranteed to exist, they may exhibit dense support, making them difficult to understand and
execute in some applications. In this paper, we study k-sparse
commitments in games where one player is restricted to
mixed strategies with support size at most k. Finding k-sparse
commitments is known to be computationally hard. We start
by showing several structural properties of k-sparse solutions, including that the optimal support may vary dramatically as k increases. These results suggest that naive greedy
or double-oracle-based approaches are unlikely to yield practical algorithms. We then develop a simple approach based on
mixed integer linear programs (MILPs) for zero-sum games,
general-sum Stackelberg games, and various forms of structured sparsity. We also propose practical algorithms for cases
where one or both players have large (i.e., practically innumerable) action sets, utilizing a combination of MILPs and
incremental strategy generation. We evaluate our methods on
synthetic and real-world scenarios based on security applications. In both settings, we observe that even for small support
sizes, we can obtain more than 90% of the true Nash value
while maintaining a reasonable runtime, demonstrating the
significance of our formulation and algorithms.

Code — github.com/CoffeeAndConvexity/SparseEquilibria
Extended version — arxiv.org/abs/2412.14337

1

Introduction

Equilibrium finding in games has emerged as a key component of artificial intelligence, owing to applications in recreational game playing such as poker, Stratego, and Diplomacy, numerous applications in security, as well as logistics (Bowling et al. 2015; Brown and Sandholm 2018; Perolat et al. 2022; Bakhtin et al. 2022; Pita et al. 2008; Fang,
Stone, and Tambe 2015; Tambe 2011; Jain et al. 2010; Černý
et al. 2024). Central to the success of these applications are
efficient approaches towards finding the optimal randomized, or mixed equilibria in their respective settings. Not only
are randomized equilibria typically guaranteed to exist, they
allow for the prescription of behavior that hedges over all
possible opponent actions, making them particularly useful
in zero-sum games. Nonetheless, a persistent difficulty faced
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13502

