The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Toward Falsifying Causal Graphs Using a Permutation-Based Test
Elias Eulig1,2, * ,† , Atalanti A. Mastakouri3 , Patrick Blöbaum3 ,
Michaela Hardt4,* , Dominik Janzing3
1

German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
2
Heidelberg University
3
Amazon Research Tübingen
4
University Hospital Tübingen
elias.eulig@dkfz.de, {atalanti,janzind}@amazon.de, bloebp@amazon.com, michaela.hardt@uni-tuebingen.de
Call DAG of microservices

Abstract

B

Understanding causal relationships among the variables of a
system is paramount to explain and control its behavior. For
many real-world systems, however, the true causal graph is
not readily available and one must resort to predictions made
by algorithms or domain experts. Therefore, metrics that
quantitatively assess the goodness of a causal graph provide
helpful checks before using it in downstream tasks. Existing
metrics provide an absolute number of inconsistencies
between the graph and the observed data, and without a
baseline, practitioners are left to answer the hard question of
how many such inconsistencies are acceptable or expected.
Here, we propose a novel consistency metric by constructing
a baseline through node permutations. By comparing the
number of inconsistencies with those on the baseline, we
derive an interpretable metric that captures whether the
graph is significantly better than random. Evaluating on both
simulated and real data sets from various domains, including
biology and cloud monitoring, we demonstrate that the true
graph is not falsified by our metric, whereas the wrong
graphs given by a hypothetical user are likely to be falsified.

A

Domain expert

Causal DAG of latencies

B

C

A

C

(a) Domain expert estimates causal DAG
1. Unidentiﬁed confounding
Cluster workload

B

A

3. B's latency increases

B

A

2. Unknown type I error rate
see Figure 2

C
A skips call to C

C

leads to

B

C's latency decreases

A

C

(b) Possible sources of CI violations of

Figure 1: (a) For monitoring micro-service architectures,
domain experts may invert the call graph to obtain a causal
graph of latencies and error rates (Budhathoki et al. 2022);
(b) However, there are multiple reasons why this graph
might violate independence statements on observed data.

Project — https://eeulig.github.io/dag-falsification

1

(Shimizu et al. 2006; Peters and Bühlmann 2014; Chickering
1996; Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek 2004; Claassen,
Mooij, and Heskes 2013; Mooij et al. 2016). These assumptions are often violated in practice. Instead of relying on
discovery from observational data, domain experts can describe known dependencies in a system (Fig. 1; (a)). This
approach, however, is subject to human error and incomplete
knowledge. This is particularly problematic for applications
in causal inference, where a wrong graph structure will lead
to wrong conclusions about the effect of interventions.
Efforts towards quantitatively evaluating the consistency
of a given graph (either originating from a domain expert
or a causal discovery algorithm) using observational data
alone are of utmost importance. However, existing attempts
towards this direction report the raw number of inconsistencies between DAG and observed data without a baseline of
how many such inconsistencies are to be expected in the first
place (Textor et al. 2016; Reynolds et al. 2022). Striving for
zero is unrealistic and the acceptable number of violations
depends on many factors including the size and complexity of the graph. On real-world data, the fraction of conditional independence violations for expert-elicited graphs

Introduction

Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) are a core concept of
causal reasoning as they form the basis of structural causal
models (SCMs) which can be used to predict the effect of
interventions in a causal system or even to answer counterfactual questions. For that reason, they have numerous applications, including biology (Sachs et al. 2005; Huber et al.
2007; Pingault et al. 2018), medicine (Shrier and Platt 2008)
and computer vision (Wang and Sahbi 2013; Chalupka, Perona, and Eberhardt 2015; Wang et al. 2020).
Nevertheless, for many real-world systems the true causal
relationships, represented in the form of a DAG, are often not readily available. If randomized controlled trials are
not possible, inferring the DAG from passive observational
data alone is a hard problem that rests on strong assumptions on statistical properties (e.g. causal faithfulness), functional relationships, noise distributions, or graph constraints
* Work done at Amazon Research Tübingen.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
26778

