The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Situation Calculus Temporally Lifted Abstractions for Generalized Planning
Giuseppe De Giacomo1,2 , Yves Lespérance3 , Matteo Mancanelli2
1
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
University of Rome La Sapienza, Rome, Italy
3
York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk, lesperan@eecs.yorku.ca, mancanelli@diag.uniroma1.it
2

Abstract

outcome, e.g., a flipped coin may fall head or tail. (Banihashemi, De Giacomo, and Lespérance 2023) (BDL23) have
proposed an account of abstraction for nondeterministic basic action theories (NDBATs) in this language. They relate
a high-level NDBAT to a low-level NDBAT through a refinement mapping that specifies how a high-level action is
implemented by a ConGolog program at the low level and
how a high-level fluent can be defined by low-level state formula. They then define notions of sound and/or complete
abstraction for such NDBATs in terms of a notion of bisimulation wrt such a mapping between their models. (Cui, Liu,
and Luo 2021; Cui, Kuang, and Liu 2023) have adapted this
kind of approach to solve GP, focusing on QNP abstractions.
Here, we assume that the modeler specifies a propositional high-level (HL) action theory/model with a limited set
of HL fluents and nondeterministic actions, which abstracts
over a concrete low-level (LL) action theory with multiple
models, with a given refinement mapping m. At the LL, in
each model we have complete information about the state of
the world, while at the HL, we have actions that may have
several outcomes, e.g., after advancing to the next item in
a list, we may or may not reach the list’s end. But we also
have some HL LTL trace constraints, e.g., ensuring that if
we keep advancing we will eventually reach the list’s end.
We define a notion of temporally lifted abstraction for such
theories, where every LL trace that is a refinement of a sequence of HL actions is an m-simulation of a trace involving this action sequence in the HL model, and where the LTL
trace constraints are satisfied by the LL theory. The NDBATs
represent our GP problem, where each LL model specifies
the planning problem instances, and the HL model abstracts
away the LL details, retaining only the shared features. We
then provide a method for solving all the planning problem
instances simultaneously. In particular, we show that given
such an abstraction, if we can use LTL synthesis on the HL
model to obtain a HL strategy to achieve a LTL goal under
the given trace constraints, then we can automatically refine
it to get a LL strategy that achieves the mapped LTL goal in
all concrete instances of the problem.
We illustrate how our approach works by using it to synthesize a program to find the minimum value of a list. This
application is inspired by (Bonet et al. 2020) (B20), which
proposed an approach for solving program synthesis tasks
(Green 1969; Waldinger and Lee 1969; Church 1963; Abadi,

We present a new formal framework for generalized planning
(GP) based on the situation calculus extended with LTL constraints. The GP problem is specified by a first-order basic
action theory whose models are the problem instances. This
low-level theory is then abstracted into a high-level propositional nondeterministic basic action theory with a single
model. A refinement mapping relates the two theories. LTL
formulas are used to specify the temporally extended goals as
well as assumed trace constraints. If all LTL trace constraints
hold at the low level and the high-level model can simulate
all the low-level models with respect to the mapping, we say
that we have a temporally lifted abstraction. We prove that
if we have such an abstraction and the agent has a strategy
to achieve a LTL goal under some trace constraints at the
abstract level, then there exists a refinement of the strategy
to achieve the refinement of the goal at the concrete level.
We use LTL synthesis to generate the strategy at the abstract
level. We illustrate our approach by synthesizing a program
that solves a data structure manipulation problem.

Introduction
In generalized planning (GP), one tries to generate a typically iterative policy that solves an infinite set of similar planning problem instances (Srivastava, Immerman, and
Zilberstein 2008; Hu and De Giacomo 2011; Belle and
Levesque 2016). For example, we may want to synthesize
a program for finding the minimum value in a list, for lists
of any lengths. Many approaches to GP involve constructing an abstraction and finding a solution for this abstraction
which handles all the actual problem instances.
We propose a new formal framework for GP based on
the situation calculus (McCarthy and Hayes 1969; Reiter
2001) that allows one to provide an abstract description of
the domain and associated LTL trace constraints (Bonet et al.
2017; Aminof et al. 2019), and prove that a controller synthesized for the abstract theory can be refined into one that
achieves the goal at the concrete level.
Our framework is based on the nondeterministic situation
calculus (De Giacomo and Lespérance 2021) (DL21), where
each agent action is accompanied by an environment reaction outside the agent’s control that determines the action’s
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14848

