The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revolutionizing Encrypted Traffic Classification with MH-Net: A Multi-View
Heterogeneous Graph Model
Haozhen Zhang1,2,3 * , Haodong Yue1,2,3 * , Xi Xiao1,2,3† , Le Yu4 , Qing Li2 , Zhen Ling5 , Ye Zhang6
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education of China, Zhengzhou, China
4
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
5
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
6
National University of Singapore, Singapore
zhang-hz21@tsinghua.org.cn, yhd24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xiaox@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, yulele08@njupt.edu.cn,
liq@pcl.ac.cn, zhenling@seu.edu.cn, e1124294@u.nus.edu
Abstract

ing or application usage) from encrypted traffic remains a
formidable challenge.
In the past few years, many methods have been proposed
to enhance the capability of encrypted traffic classification
techniques. Among them, statistic-based methods (Taylor
et al. 2016; Hayes and Danezis 2016; van Ede et al. 2020;
Panchenko et al. 2016; Xu, Geng, and Jin 2022) generally
rely on hand-crafted traffic statistical features and then leverage a traditional machine learning model for classification.
However, they require heavy feature engineering and are
susceptible to unreliable flows (Zhang et al. 2023). With the
burgeoning of representation learning (Le-Khac, Healy, and
Smeaton 2020), some methods also use deep learning models to conduct traffic classification, such as pre-trained language models (Lin et al. 2022; Meng et al. 2022), neural
networks (Liu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2023; Zhao et al.
2023), etc. Although these methods demonstrate competitive performance, they fail to sufficiently uncover the finegrained correlations between traffic bytes, which can be attributed to the following two disadvantages. (1) Rigid information granularity constrained by bytes. Most existing
methods treat a byte as an indivisible unit by default, which
ignores the diverse granularity of information contained in
traffic data. To give a practical example, a Chinese character is represented by two bytes, while an English character is
represented by only one byte, indicating that traffic data contains information of different granularities universally (note
that the granularity is not necessarily bytes, it may also be
bits). (2) Lack of consideration of multiple correlation
types between bytes. Current methods mix the correlation
of bytes at different positions in the byte sequence, which
overlooks and fails to utilize the differences between diverse
types of correlation (e.g., the correlation types between bytes
in the header and bytes in the payload are different). Consequently, how to uncover and leverage the potential finegrained correlations between traffic bytes to enhance traffic
classification is a salient problem.
To address the above challenges, in this paper, we propose a novel model named MH-Net, which classifies network traffic using multi-view heterogeneous traffic graphs.

With the growing significance of network security, the classification of encrypted traffic has emerged as an urgent challenge. Traditional byte-based traffic analysis methods are
constrained by the rigid granularity of information and fail
to fully exploit the diverse correlations between bytes. To address these limitations, this paper introduces MH-Net, a novel
approach for classifying network traffic that leverages multiview heterogeneous traffic graphs to model the intricate relationships between traffic bytes. The essence of MH-Net lies in
aggregating varying numbers of traffic bits into multiple types
of traffic units, thereby constructing multi-view traffic graphs
with diverse information granularities. By accounting for different types of byte correlations, such as header-payload relationships, MH-Net further endows the traffic graph with heterogeneity, significantly enhancing model performance. Notably, we employ contrastive learning in a multi-task manner
to strengthen the robustness of the learned traffic unit representations. Experiments conducted on the ISCX and CIC-IoT
datasets for both the packet-level and flow-level traffic classification tasks demonstrate that MH-Net achieves the best
overall performance compared to dozens of SOTA methods.

Code — https://github.com/ViktorAxelsen/MH-Net

Introduction
As advancements in computer network technology continue
and various devices connect to the Internet, user privacy becomes increasingly vulnerable to malicious attacks. While
encryption technologies like VPNs and Tor (Ramadhani
2018) offer protection to users (Sharma, Dangi, and Mishra
2021; Xiao et al. 2024), they can paradoxically serve as
tools for attackers to conceal their identities. Traditional
data packet inspection (DPI) methods have lost effectiveness against encrypted traffic (Papadogiannaki and Ioannidis 2021). Designing a universally effective method to classify an attacker’s network activities (e.g., website brows* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1048

