The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffCorr: Conditional Diffusion Model with Reliable Pseudo-Label Guidance for
Unsupervised Point Cloud Shape Correspondence
Jiacheng Deng1 , Jiahao Lu1 , Zhixin Cheng1 , Wenfei Yang1, 2 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China
Jianghuai Advance Technology Center, Hefei, China
{dengjc,lujiahao,chengzhixin}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yangwf@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Input Shape Pair

Unsupervised point cloud shape correspondence aims to establish dense correspondences between source and target
point clouds. Existing methods universally follow a one-step
paradigm to obtain shape correspondence directly, but it often
fails in large-scale motions of humans and animals. To address
this challenge, we propose a conditional Diffusion model with
reliable pseudo-label guidance for unsupervised point cloud
shape Correspondence (DiffCorr), including a transformerbased conditional diffusion model and a reliable pseudo-label
generator. The proposed DiffCorr enjoys several merits. Firstly,
the transformer-based conditional diffusion model implements
a coarse-to-fine optimization for coarse correspondences. Secondly, we design a reliable pseudo-label generator to provide
high-quality pseudo-labels for training. Extensive experiments
on four human and animal datasets demonstrate that DiffCorr
surpasses state-of-the-art methods and exhibits favorable generalization capabilities.

Source

Target

Error map
Error map
(baseline)
(Ours)
(a) Difficult to Predict Large-Scale Displacements

Displacement map

Introduction
Point cloud shape correspondence aims to identify dense
mappings between two non-rigid point clouds with deformable shapes. The shape correspondence is essential for
various practical applications, such as articulated motion
transfer (Noguchi et al. 2022) and shape editing (Zwicker
et al. 2002). However, non-rigid bodies exhibit significant
motion variability. The motions lead to large-scale displacements between corresponding parts across shapes. Besides,
as a primitive representation of 3D space, the sparse and
irregular nature of point clouds introduces significant local
noise, leading to neighborhood perturbations.
To address the aforementioned challenges, a variety of
point cloud shape correspondence methods (Zeng et al.
2021; Lang et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2023; He et al. 2023)
have been developed. To reduce the burden of resourceintensive labeling in fully supervised methods (Deprelle
et al. 2019; Marin et al. 2020), researchers are increasingly focusing on unsupervised methods that leverage unlabeled data for model training and inference. Current unsupervised point cloud shape correspondence methods (Zeng
et al. 2021; Lang et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2023; He et al.

(b) Strong Positive Correlation between Displacement and Error

Figure 1: The correlation between displacement and error.
Figure (a) visualizes the point-to-point displacement map
between the source and target point clouds (the bluer, the
larger) and the error maps predicted by the baseline method
and our DiffCorr (the redder, the larger). Figure (b) is a scatter plot showing the strong statistical correlation between
displacement and error in the point cloud.
2023) achieve state-of-the-art results by directly obtaining
matching outcomes by independently calculating similarity
scores between point embeddings. This one-step matching
demonstrates performance improvements in areas with minor motion. However, the one-step paradigm may struggle to
precisely match corresponding points with large-scale displacements, providing only an approximate estimate.

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2690

