The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Iterative Counterfactual Data Augmentation
Mitchell Plyler
Min Chi
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University
mlplyler@ncsu.edu, mchi@ncsu.edu

Abstract

another portion of the network, a classifier, makes a decision
using the extracted text. The network learns to select subsets
of text that make better predictions than other subsets of text
(Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016). Prior work (Chen et al.
2018) has shown that these networks are seeking the subset
of text that maximizes the mutual information between the
selected text and the prediction task. Often, this maximum
mutual information (MMI) signal aligns with human reasoning and the ideal rationale network will find a policy that
mimics the behaviour of human experts (Lei, Barzilay, and
Jaakkola 2016). With an aligned rationale model, we can use
CDA to maintain a training dataset’s information that aligns
with human reasoning and we can reduce information that
does not align (Plyler, Green, and Chi 2021). This makes rationale networks a potentially ideal candidate for selecting
where to make counterfactual interventions on documents.
Unfortunately, a core challenge for rationale networks are
co-varying or spurious signals that cause the rationale network to converge to a policy where, in some cases, the spurious signals are used to make the prediction (Chang et al.
2019). Plyler, Green, and Chi showed that CDA with rationale derived interventions can help lower the mutual information between spurious text and a target label, and help
the rationale network get closer to the optimal, MMI policy. Plyler, Green, and Chi argued the benefits of CDA are
dependent on the error rate of the rationale selector used to
make the interventions, and empirically, they showed a second rationale model, trained on the augmented dataset, had
a lower rationale error rate. If the second rationale model,
the one trained on the augmented dataset, has a lower error
rate than the initial model, we should see more benefits from
CDA using that second rationale model instead of the initial.
In fact, it stands to reason we can iteratively apply CDA with
a new rationale model that is improving with each iteration.
This work builds on the ideas of rationalization (Lei,
Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016), counterfactual data augmentation (Lu et al. 2020), their combination (Plyler, Green, and
Chi 2021), and fixed-point processes to show the potential
benefits of applying counterfactual data augmentation iteratively. Starting from an initial, noisy rationale model, we
create a counterfactual dataset, train a new rationale network
on the augmented data, and use that new network to create
counterfactuals for the next iteration. We present information theoretic analysis, in a simplified setting, showing this

Counterfactual data augmentation (CDA) is a method for controlling information or biases in training datasets by generating a complementary dataset with typically opposing biases.
Prior work often either relies on hand-crafted rules or algorithmic CDA methods which can leave unwanted information
in the augmented dataset. In this work, we show iterative
CDA (ICDA) with initial, high-noise interventions can converge to a state with significantly lower noise. Our ICDA procedure produces a dataset where one target signal in the training dataset maintains high mutual information with a corresponding label and the information of spurious signals are reduced. We show training on the augmented datasets produces
rationales on documents that better align with human annotation. Our experiments include six human produced datasets
and two large-language model generated datasets.

Code — https://github.com/mlplyler/ICDA

Introduction
Counterfactual data augmentation (CDA) is a method that
can reduce targeted biases in training datasets, and ideally,
reduces those biases in models trained on those datasets
(Lu et al. 2020). During CDA, counterfactuals are generated with roughly speaking the opposite bias of some original dataset. The original and counterfactual samples are
concatenated into an augmented dataset where ideally their
unwanted biases are balanced and canceled. In the literature, CDA can target specific biases through hand-crafted
rules (Lu et al. 2020), or general, unwanted biases with human annotators (Kaushik, Hovy, and Lipton 2020). Both of
these methods are costly either in expert knowledge or in
annotator labor. Alternatively, cheaper, model-driven interventions can be noisy, both in where the interventions are
made on source documents and how the interventions are
made (Plyler, Green, and Chi 2021). In this work, we leverage rationale networks (Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016) to
decide where to make counterfactual interventions (Plyler,
Green, and Chi 2021).
Given a sample, rationale networks seek a subset of the
input with which to make a decision. Typically a portion of
the network, the rationale selector, extracts some text, and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19931

