The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Medical MLLM is Vulnerable: Cross-Modality Jailbreak and Mismatched Attacks
on Medical Multimodal Large Language Models
Xijie Huang1 * , Xinyuan Wang1 * , Hantao Zhang2 * , Yinghao Zhu1 * , Jiawen Xi1 ,
Jingkun An1 , Hao Wang1 , Hao Liang1 , Chengwei Pan1,3†
2

1
Beihang University, Beijing, China
University of Science and Technology of China, Beijing China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing China
jeix782@gmail.com, pancw@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2009). The historical shortage of medical personnel has compounded these issues. However, Medical Multimodal LLMs (MedMLLMs) like Med-PaLM and M3DLaMed show promise for more accurate clinical data analysis and advanced 3D imaging diagnostics (Moor et al. 2023a;
Thirunavukarasu et al. 2023; Singhal et al. 2023a; Tu et al.
2024; Qian et al. 2024; Singhal et al. 2023b; Bakhshandeh
2023; Bai et al. 2024). Challenges such as modality misalignments and malicious data manipulation persist, leading
to diagnostic discrepancies and erroneous conclusions (Yao
et al. 2024). Additionally, the high semantic density and specialized terminology in clinical diagnostics can cause ”clinical mismatches,” especially when text and images misalign.
These mismatches can result from healthcare provider errors
or variations in storage methods across institutions, leading to discrepancies in imaging annotations, anatomical regions, or diagnostic processes (Liu et al. 2023a; Lee et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2023c). Further studies (Liu et al. 2024;
Zhang et al. 2024) show that MedMLLMs can be misused
for harmful activities, such as facilitating illegal drug production or accelerating disease progression without patient
consent. These issues stem from malicious queries. We categorize the interfering factors in medical Q&A tasks into two
types: clinical mismatch and clinical malicious queries, as
illustrated in Figure 2(a).
For the two types of tasks that MedMLLMs might encounter, as shown in Figure 2(b), we classify the inputs into
two types of attacks: 2M-attack (Mismatched Malicious Attack) and O2M-attack (Optimized Mismatched Malicious
Attack). The 2M-attack involves injecting inputs where images and query attributes are deliberately mismatched. In
contrast, the O2M-attack extends the 2M-attack by employing jailbreak optimization techniques before injecting the inputs into MedMLLMs.
Building on the two types of attacks identified through
our re-modeling of the phenomena and tasks, we present
the Multimodal Medical Model Attack Dataset (3MAD) to
evaluate the vulnerabilities of MedMLLMs and demonstrate
the efficacy of our jailbreak methods. The dataset categorizes challenges into malicious or mismatched types. By
pairing GPT-4-generated prompts with corresponding images, 3MAD is used to assess the resilience of MedM-

Security concerns related to Large Language Models (LLMs)
have been extensively explored; however, the safety implications for Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs),
particularly in medical contexts (MedMLLMs), remain inadequately addressed. This paper investigates the security vulnerabilities of MedMLLMs, focusing on their deployment in
clinical environments where the accuracy and relevance of
question-and-answer interactions are crucial for addressing
complex medical challenges. We introduce and redefine two
attack types: mismatched malicious attack (2M-attack) and
optimized mismatched malicious attack (O2M-attack), by integrating existing clinical data with atypical natural phenomena. Using the comprehensive 3MAD dataset that we developed, which spans a diverse range of medical imaging modalities and adverse medical scenarios, we performed an indepth analysis and proposed the MCM optimization method.
This approach significantly improves the attack success rate
against MedMLLMs. Our evaluations, which include whitebox attacks on LLaVA-Med and transfer (black-box) attacks
on four other SOTA models, reveal that even MedMLLMs
designed with advanced security mechanisms remain vulnerable to breaches. This study highlights the critical need for
robust security measures to enhance the safety and reliability
of open-source MedMLLMs, especially in light of the potential impact of jailbreak attacks and other malicious exploits
in clinical applications. Warning: Medical jailbreaking may
generate content that includes unverified diagnoses and treatment recommendations. Always consult professional medical
advice.

Code — https://github.com/JeixHuang/MCM

1

Introduction

Recent research highlights diagnostic errors in pulmonary
embolism and cancer detection, where radiologists face
matching errors while managing large volumes of diverse
imaging data (see Figure 1(a)). These errors, affecting 1015% of clinical decisions, are significant yet underemphasized (Graber 2013; Berner and Graber 2008; Schiff
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3797

