The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting Causal Structure Learning: An Asymmetric Exponential Modulation
Gaussian-Based Adaptive Sample Reweighting Framework
Wei Xiao, Hongbin Wang* , Ming He, Nianbin Wang
College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
{ xiaowei , wanghongbin, heming, wangnianbin}@hrbeu.edu.cn

Abstract

hotspot in recent years (Ng et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2020).
Current methods for causal structure learning can be
divided into constraint-based and score-based approaches
(Vowels, Camgoz, and Bowden 2022). Constraint-based
methods, such as the PC (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines
2001) and FCI (Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson 2013) algorithms, use conditional independence tests and a series
of rules to identify causal directions. Score-based methods
leverage predefined score functions to evaluate all candidate
graphs in the DAG space to find the optimal causal graph.
However, due to the combinatorial acyclicity constraint of
causal graphs, finding the score-optimal causal graph is usually NP-hard (Chickering, Heckerman, and Meek 2004). Recently, (Zheng et al. 2018) proposed a new smooth acyclicity constraint, transforming the combinatorial optimization
problem into a continuous one, making it possible to optimize the score function through gradient descent. Subsequent differentiable causal discovery methods have extended
this approach to nonlinear problems by utilizing various neural network models (Yu et al. 2019; Zhu, Ng, and Chen 2019;
Ng et al. 2019; Lachapelle et al. 2019; Ng, Ghassami, and
Zhang 2020; Yu et al. 2021; Gao, Shen, and Xia 2021; Ng
et al. 2022). Consequently, differentiable score-based causal
discovery methods have garnered significant attention in recent research.
Although current differentiable score-based causal discovery methods have achieved significant success, there are
still challenges to be addressed:

Recent advances in differentiable score-based methods for
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) structure learning have revolutionized the problem of combinatorial structure learning,
transforming it into a continuous optimization task. Despite
their remarkable success, these methods rely on a key assumption that all samples have the same level of difficulty and
no data heterogeneity. When this assumption does not hold,
causal discovery algorithms based on it inevitably return networks with many spurious edges. Despite existing research,
the current method ignores the reality of outliers in the samples, introducing certain limitations that still result in erroneous edges. Inspired by the rapid decay of the Gaussian distribution as distance from the center increases, we propose an
innovative adaptive sample reweighting framework based on
asymmetric exponential modulation Gaussian, coined DAGAEG. DAG-AEG boosts DAG structure learning by analyzing the distribution of sample losses and employing the proposed method for adaptive sample attention. Additionally, it
can be adapted to heterogeneous data. We used various causal
structure learning methods to test the performance of DAGAEG on synthetic and real datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed framework significantly
improves the performance across all methods, outperforming
existing methods.

Introduction
Causal structure learning aims to identify causal relationships between variables from observational data, serving as a
foundation for research in many scientific fields (Pearl 2009;
Liang et al. 2024). It has significant applications across various domains(Sachs et al. 2005; Pearl 2019; Locatello et al.
2019; Castro, Walker, and Glocker 2020). Additionally, the
discovery of causal relationships is considered one of the
essential tools for advancing from current Artificial Narrow
Intelligence to Artificial General Intelligence (Pearl 2018).
An effective method for discovering causal relationships
between variables is to conduct randomized experiments
(Boruch 1997). However, in practical applications, this can
be quite costly and may even be prohibited in some cases
due to ethical concerns. Therefore, learning causal structures from purely observational data has become a research

1. Current score-based methods use an average scoring approach, assuming that the model’s fitting ability is the
same for all samples. This assumption neglects the varying difficulty levels among samples, leading to the learning of spurious edges between variables when using average scoring methods (Zhang et al. 2023).
2. Most current score-based methods assume that the collected data is homogeneous, which contradicts realworld situations. When heterogeneous data is present,
methods based on this assumption experience a decline
in performance (Huang et al. 2020).
Although (Zhang et al. 2023) proposed a model-agnostic
adaptive sample reweighting method, it overlooks the presence of outliers in the samples, which limits its effectiveness

* Hongbin Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21661

