The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SRDC: Semantics-based Ransomware Detection and Classification
with LLM-assisted Pre-training
Ce Zhou1∗ , Yilun Liu2 B , Weibin Meng2 , Shimin Tao2 , Weinan Tian2 , Feiyu Yao2
Xiaochun Li2 , Tao Han2 , Boxing Chen3 , Hao Yang2
1

Northeastern University, China
2
Huawei, China
3
Huawei Canada, Canada

Abstract

Internet has accelerated the spread of ransomware. In the
past three decades, ransomware attacks have evolved into a
significant threat, affecting economies and societies worldwide. Toyota Motor Corp. halted 28 production lines across
14 plants in Japan due to an attack on a supplier, impacting
about one-third of its global production and resulting in a
loss of approximately 13,000 vehicles. In February 2024, a
ransomware gang that had infiltrated Hamilton’s city government in Canada for months launched a large-scale attack on its IT system. This attack disrupted key IT facilities, including transportation, healthcare, public services,
and emergency services, leaving the city in a state of shutdown (itworldcanada 2024). As ransomware attacks increasingly impact society, enhancing detection and classification
mechanisms has become urgent.
Windows remains widely used by many companies and
individuals (StatCounter 2024). Numerous studies have proposed solutions for detecting ransomware on Windows systems. Using natural language processing (NLP) algorithms
to analyze dynamic software features is a promising approach. However, current methods have not fully leveraged
the rich internal and external semantics in these features for
ransomware detection and classification. This limitation increases dependency on training data and restricts the practical application of these methods in real-world scenarios.
Specifically:
1) Inadequate use of the internal semantics of ransomware dynamic features. As shown in Fig. 1, the dynamic features of software runtime are rich in semantics. For
example, some API names seem like a combination of symbols (“GetSystemInfo”), but actually represent a meaningful sentence (“Get information about the current system”).
These shorthand naming styles are convenient for human experts to use, but they increase the difficulty for AI models in
understanding these semantics in ransomware detection and
classification tasks (Lin et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024). Some
existing methods merely use NLP modules as feature encoders for subsequent classification tasks but fail to grasp
the intent behind these software behaviors or the security
risks they may pose (Li et al. 2022).
2) Inadequate use of the external semantics in preexisting knowledge and experience related to ransomware detection tasks. Besides the internal semantics
present in dynamic features, external semantics (Table 1) re-

In recent years, ransomware has emerged as a formidable
data security threat, causing significant data privacy breaches
that inflict substantial financial, reputational, and operational
damages on society. Many studies employ dynamic feature
analysis for ransomware detection. However, these methods
utilize neither the internal semantic information (semantic
information inherent in the features), nor external semantics (the wealth of existing knowledge and expert experience
with regard to ransomware detection). Moreover, conventional methods rely on training data from known ransomware
families, while zero-day ransomware often has unknown data
distribution patterns, posing detection challenges. In this paper, we propose a Semantics-based Ransomware Detection
and family Classification (SRDC) framework that can utilize both internal and external semantics of software. To bolster semantic analysis in zero-day attacks, we also design
a procedure called LLM-assisted task-adaptive pre-training
(LATAP). In LATAP, ransomware semantics from human experts and LLMs are employed to pre-train the detection model
(GPT-2). By fully utilizing semantics, the proposed SRDC
framework outperforms the SOTA methods by 12.15% for
ransomware family classification tasks, and by 4.03% for
zero-day ransomware detection tasks. SRDC also exhibits excellent data efficiency, requiring only two ransom families
for training, which is only 35% of the data required by existing methods, to achieve a 90%+ accuracy of zero-day ransomware detection in nine unseen ransom families.

Code — https://github.com/Michael-zhouce/SRDC
Datasets — https://github.com/Michaelzhouce/SRDC/tree/main/Pretraining Corpus

1

Introduction

Ransomware is a type of malware that primarily aims to
extort victims by encrypting their files or systems, subsequently demanding payment for decryption keys or data
restoration. The rise and spread of this software pose a serious threat to societal security and data privacy. Ever since
1989 when AIDS Trojan, the first ransomware emerged, ransomware has diversified significantly (Bridges 2008). The
∗ Work done during an internship at Huawei.
B Corresponding author (liuyilun3@huawei.com).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28566

