The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SpikingSSMs: Learning Long Sequences with Sparse and Parallel Spiking State
Space Models
Shuaijie Shen* ,1,2 , Chao Wang* ,1,2 , Renzhuo Huang1,2 , Yan Zhong2,3 , Qinghai Guo2 , Zhichao Lu4 ,
Jianguo Zhang †,1,5 , Luziwei Leng†,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen
2
ACSLab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Shenzhen
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
5
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
{shensj2024, wangc2023, huangrz2023}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, zhongyan@stu.pku.edu.cn, guoqinghai@huawei.com,
zhichao.lu@cityu.edu.hk, zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn, lengluziwei@huawei.com
Abstract

performance across diverse modalities, encompassing text,
vision, audio, and video (Gu, Goel, and Re 2022). Among
these methods, growing attention has been given to Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), since this architecture has
led to remarkable developments in the areas of vision and
speech. However, for an input sequence of length L, it requires the high-cost computational complexity of O(L2 )
during training and inference in the module of self-attention,
which is one of the core contextualizing components in
the Transformer model. Although some Transformer variants (Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020; Zaheer et al. 2020;
Katharopoulos et al. 2020; Choromanski et al. 2021) are
proposed to reduce the compute and memory requirements,
their performances on performing long-range reasoning remain considerably suboptimal (Gu, Goel, and Re 2022).

Known as low energy consumption networks, spiking neural networks (SNNs) have gained a lot of attention within the
past decades. While SNNs are increasing competitive with
artificial neural networks (ANNs) for vision tasks, they are
rarely used for long sequence tasks, despite their intrinsic
temporal dynamics. In this work, we develop spiking state
space models (SpikingSSMs) for long sequence learning by
leveraging on the sequence learning abilities of state space
models (SSMs). Inspired by dendritic neuron structure, we
hierarchically integrate neuronal dynamics with the original
SSM block, meanwhile realizing sparse synaptic computation. Furthermore, to solve the conflict of event-driven neuronal dynamics with parallel computing, we propose a lightweight surrogate dynamic network which accurately predicts
the after-reset membrane potential and compatible to learnable thresholds, enabling orders of acceleration in training
speed compared with conventional iterative methods. On the
long range arena benchmark task, SpikingSSM achieves competitive performance to state-of-the-art SSMs meanwhile realizing on average 90% of network sparsity. On language
modeling, our network significantly surpasses existing spiking large language models (spikingLLMs) on the WikiText103 dataset with only a third of the model size, demonstrating its potential as backbone architecture for low computation
cost LLMs.

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Schuster and Paliwal 1997; Sherstinsky 2020) have emerged early for learning on the variable-length input sequences, which requires only O(1) operations with respect to the sequence
length. However, constrained hidden state space and gradient vanish problem have limited their learning of long sequences. To address this problem, innovative works such
as RWKV (Peng et al. 2023) and state space models
(SSMs) (Gu, Goel, and Re 2022; Gu and Dao 2023) are proposed by introducing an appropriate design of hidden states
for handling LRDs with both training parallelizability and
inference efficiency. RNNs owes part of its inspiration to
cognitive and neurological computational principles (Lipton, Berkowitz, and Elkan 2015), which also serve as the
foundation for another class of biologically-grounded architectures known as Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) (Maass
1997). With their potential in low-energy computing, SNNs
have gained a lot of attention within the past decades. Recently, they have been shown to be as efficient as artificial
neural networks (ANNs) for vision tasks (Che et al. 2022;
Zhou et al. 2022; Yao et al. 2024; Che et al. 2024) under convolution or Transformer architectures. However, despite the
intrinsic temporal dynamics, SNNs are rarely used for long
sequence tasks. Note that SNNs under convolution or Transformer architectures often need a certain simulation time

Code — https://github.com/shenshuaijie/SDN
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14909

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the proliferation of real-world
time-series datasets in various domains, which often require
reasoning over tens of thousands of time steps (Tay et al.
2021a). Therefore, plenty of sequence models have emerged
in recent years, which aim to model the long-range dependencies (LRDs) in sequential data to achieve human-level
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20380

