The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Behavior Preference Regression for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Padmanaba Srinivasan, William Knottenbelt
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
{ps3416, wjk}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

distribution shift between the learned policy and behavior
policy can cause training instability and subsequent failure
when deployed in the real environment (Fujimoto, Meger,
and Precup 2019).
Offline RL algorithms address the challenges of offline
off-policy evaluation in one of three ways: 1) incorporating pessimism into value estimation, 2) imposing policy
constraints or 3) avoiding off-policy evaluation altogether
by learning an on-policy value function. Pessimism offers
performance guarantees (Jin, Yang, and Wang 2021), policy constraints may make better use of the representational
power of neural networks (Geng et al. 2022) and learning on-policy values is more stable and avoids the overestimation and iterative exploitation associated with off-policy
evaluation (Brandfonbrener et al. 2021).
Another approach to learning aims to align policy rollouts
with human preferences (Akrour, Schoenauer, and Sebag
2011; Cheng et al. 2011; Christiano et al. 2017). Preferencebased RL is popular in language modeling under the banner
of RL from human feedback. Recent methods take models
trained using supervised learning and finetune them using an
offline dataset by directly increasing the likelihood of generating preferred sequences (Rafailov et al. 2024).
The principle of aligning policies with human preferences
has been explored in offline RL (Kim et al. 2023; Rafailov
et al. 2024; Hejna et al. 2023). While they aim to solve the
same tasks, preference-based methods must either directly
learn to generate aligned sequences (Kim et al. 2023) or
must train a preference model (Rafailov et al. 2024; Hejna
et al. 2023) on specially crafted datasets of human preferences. These methods typically eschew more traditional reward modeling (RM) and perform in-sample learning using
pairs of trajectories.

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) methods aim to learn
optimal policies with access only to trajectories in a fixed
dataset. Policy constraint methods formulate policy learning
as an optimization problem that balances maximizing reward
with minimizing deviation from the behavior policy. Closed
form solutions to this problem can be derived as weighted
behavioral cloning objectives that, in theory, must compute
an intractable partition function. Reinforcement learning has
gained popularity in language modeling to align models with
human preferences; some recent works consider paired completions that are ranked by a preference model following
which the likelihood of the preferred completion is directly
increased. We adapt this approach of paired comparison. By
reformulating the paired-sample optimization problem, we fit
the maximum-mode of the Q function while maximizing behavioral consistency of policy actions. This yields our algorithm, Behavior Preference Regression for offline RL (BPR).
We empirically evaluate BPR on the widely used D4RL Locomotion and Antmaze datasets, as well as the more challenging V-D4RL suite, which operates in image-based state
spaces. BPR demonstrates state-of-the-art performance over
all domains. Our on-policy experiments suggest that BPR
takes advantage of the stability of on-policy value functions
with minimal perceptible performance degradation on Locomotion datasets.

Introduction
As reinforcement learning (RL) sees increasing application
in a variety of fields, from control (Razzaghi et al. 2022)
to language modeling (Christiano et al. 2017), it has also
become increasingly data-hungry (Shalev-Shwartz, Shamir,
and Shammah 2017). The need to acquire data through online interaction can make deep reinforcement learning infeasible in many domains. In response, one direction of research develops offline RL algorithms that aim to learn from
a static dataset of pre-collected interactions (Lange, Gabel,
and Riedmiller 2012).
Standard off-policy algorithms can be directly applied on
offline datasets (Haarnoja et al. 2018; Gulcehre et al. 2020),
though in practice the combined effect of off-policy learning, bootstrapping, and function approximation (Sutton and
Barto 2018) introduces extrapolation error. The resulting

Contributions Motivated by finetuning approaches to
align language models (Rafailov et al. 2024; Gao et al.
2024), in this work we develop a policy objective for offline
RL that directly learns the policy density: our algorithm performs Behavior Preference Regression for offline RL (BPR).
We analyze BPR with respect to regularized value functions
in the context of preference models to demonstrate theoretical performance improvement. Evaluation on D4RL (Fu
et al. 2020) demonstrates that BPR achieves SOTA performance on Locomotion and Antmaze datasets. Additional

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20575

