The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explicitly Guided Difficulty-Controllable Visual Question Generation
Jiayuan Xie1* , Mengqiu Cheng6 * , Xinting Zhang4 , Yi Cai2 , Guimin Hu3† , Mengying Xie5 , Qing Li1
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
4
Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
5
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
6
Guangdong Neusoft University, Foshan, China
jiayuan.xie@polyu.edu.hk

2

Abstract

is essential for effective learning, as appropriately challenging questions can better assess students’ comprehension levels and provide personalized learning experiences. Questions with suitable difficulty can stimulate learning interest,
enhance cognitive training outcomes, and improve user experience in intelligent human-computer interaction. Therefore, it is crucial to focus on generating questions with appropriate levels of difficulty to maximize the effectiveness
and applicability of VQG systems.
Although the mainstream VQG task (Xie et al. 2021) has
made significant research progress, the challenge of controlling question difficulty remains substantial. This is primarily because formally defining question difficulty is inherently subjective and involves multiple complexities (Bramley 2011). To the best of our knowledge, the only existing work on difficulty-controllable VQG (DVQG) is by
Chen et al. (2023). Their approach defines question difficulty
based on whether certain existing visual question answering
(VQA) models can correctly answer the questions. In their
definition, a question is considered “easy” if VQA models
can answer it correctly and “hard” if they cannot. However, this work has three limitations. Firstly, it only provides
two levels of difficulty (easy and hard), failing to capture
the nuanced spectrum of question difficulty. Secondly, this
definition is heavily dependent on the chosen VQA models,
thus lacking generalizability. More importantly, it lacks interpretability regarding what makes a question difficult and
how the difficulty changes, which is crucial for practical applications in education and cognitive training. Thus, there is
an urgent need for a more reasonable and robust definition
of difficulty for the DVQG task.
To address the aforementioned three limitations, we propose a new difficulty level definition for the DVQG task.
Inspired by research about multi-hop questions (Fang et al.
2020; Sui et al. 2022), we define difficulty levels based on
the number of reasoning steps required to answer the questions. As the number of reasoning steps increases, the questions become more difficult, thus overcoming the first limitation of having only “easy” or “hard” levels. As shown in the
example in Figure 1, answering Q1 only requires a one-hop
chain of reasoning, i.e. N0 →N1 ; While answering Q2 , the
two hops of the reasoning chain N0 →N1 and N1 →N2 need
to be considered step-by-step, which increases the complex-

Visual question generation (VQG) aims to generate questions
from images automatically. While existing studies primarily
focus on the quality of generated questions, such as fluency
and relevance, the difficulty of the questions is also a crucial factor in assessing their quality. Question difficulty directly impacts the effectiveness of VQG systems in applications like education and human-computer interaction, where
appropriately challenging questions can stimulate learning interest and improve interaction experiences. However, accurately defining and controlling question difficulty is a challenging task due to its multidimensional and subjective nature. In this paper, we propose a new definition of the difficulty of questions, i.e., being positively correlated with the
number of reasoning steps required to answer a question. For
our definition, we construct a corresponding dataset and propose a benchmark as a foundation for future research. Our
benchmark is designed to progressively increase the reasoning steps involved in generating questions. Specifically, we
first extract the relationships among objects in the image to
form a reasoning chain, then gradually increase the difficulty
by rewriting the generated question to include more reasoning
sub-chains. Experimental results on our constructed dataset
show that our benchmark significantly outperforms existing
baselines in controlling the reasoning chains of generated
questions, producing questions with varying difficulty levels.

Introduction
Visual Question Generation (VQG) aims to automatically
generate questions from images, a task that has garnered significant attention in the vision and language communities in
recent years (Xie et al. 2023). The ability to generate questions automatically has substantial implications across various domains, such as providing dynamic demonstrations in
children’s education (Kunichika et al. 2004) and initiating
conversations in chatbots (Xie et al. 2024b). However, existing studies primarily focus on the quality of generated
questions, such as fluency and relevance, while neglecting
the crucial factor of question difficulty. Educational research
(Ha et al. 2019) indicates that controlling question difficulty
* equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25552

