The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scalable One-Pass Incomplete Multi-View Clustering by Aligning Anchors
Yalan Qin, Guorui Feng * , Xinpeng Zhang * ,
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
{ylqin, grfeng, xzhang}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

with single view (Qin, Wu, and Feng 2021; Qin et al. 2023d;
Pu et al. 2024; Qin et al. 2023a, 2022d). For instance, a clip
of the video can be decomposed into the text descriptions,
sound records and pictures, which are achieved by producer,
microphone and camera, respectively. Multi-view information of the data can be widely employed to improve the expressive ability of the model. Due to the promising capability in revealing the intrinsic structure of data, multi-view
clustering has drawn increasing attentions by leveraging the
consensus and complementary information across views in
learning a desired representation. Consequently, how to utilize the information from multiple views is the key to increase the final performance for clustering.

Multi-view clustering has gained increasing attention by utilizing the complementary and consensus information across
views. To alleviate the computation cost for the existing
multi-view clustering approaches on datasets with large
scales, studies based on anchor have been presented. Although extensively adopted in the real scenarios, most of
these works ignore to learn an integral subspace revealing
the cluster structure with anchors from different views being
aligned, where the centroid and cluster assignment matrix can
be directly achieved based on the integral subspace. Moreover, these works neglect to perform the alignment among
anchors and integral subspace learning in a unified model on
the incomplete multi-view dataset. Then the mutual improvements among aligning anchors and learning integral subspace are not guaranteed in optimizing the objective function,
which inevitably limit the representation ability of the model
and result in the suboptimal clustering performance. In this
paper, we propose a novel anchor learning method for incomplete multi-view dataset termed Scalable One-pass incomplete Multi-view clustEring by Aligning anchorS (SOMEAS). Specifically, we capture the complementary information
among multiple views by building the anchor graph for each
view on the incomplete dataset. The integral subspace reflecting the cluster structure is learned with the alignment among
anchors from different views being considered. We build the
cluster assignment and centroid representation with orthogonal constraint to approximate the integral subspace. Then
the subspace itself and the partition are simultaneously taken
into account in this manner. Besides, the mutual improvements among aligning anchors and learning integral subspace
are able to be ensured. Experiments on several incomplete
multi-view datasets validate the efficiency and effectiveness
of SOME-AS.

The existing algorithms for multi-view clustering can be
roughly classified into several classes including subspace
clustering (Zhang et al. 2020), methods based on kernel
(Liu 2021), non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) (Cai,
Nie, and Huang 2013) and methods built on graph (Liu
et al. 2022). To be specific, subspace clustering methods
aim to learn consistent subspace representation across views.
Methods based on kernel adopt the specified kernel learning
framework, which apply the kernel matrix from the predefined kernel matrices. NMF is able to utilize the multi-view
data in matrix factorization. Methods built on graph employ
a unified graph structure to explore the multi-view data. Although these methods can achieve promising performance,
their capabilities in scaling up are heavily restricted by the
high complexity. Then, it is necessary to give efficient algorithms for dealing with multi-view clustering issues of
large-scale data. To alleviate the computation cost for the
existing multi-view clustering, studies based on anchor have
been recently presented (Li et al. 2022c; Kang et al. 2020;
Sun et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2023). Instead of building the full
graph, these methods aim to construct the anchor graph between the entire dataset and anchors. Then the time complexity reduces from O(n3 ) to O(n2 ) in this manner. For
instance, Li et al. (Li et al. 2022c) attempted to achieve a
joint graph based on an adaptive weighted and parameterfree fusion framework. Kang et al. (Kang et al. 2020) independently obtained the anchor graph of each view by employing the pre-defined clustering centers as anchors. Sun et
al. (Sun et al. 2021) incorporated the anchor into the optimization process, resulting in a unified anchor graph among
different views. Despite numerous methods proposed for im-

Introduction
Multi-view data are usually extracted from different sensors
in real applications (Li et al. 2022a; Wu et al. 2023a; Qin
et al. 2022a; Sun et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2022c,b, 2023b; Li
et al. 2022b; Qin et al. 2023c; Yuan et al. 2024; Qin, Pu,
and Wu 2023a,b; Sun et al. 2024; Qin et al. 2024d; Li et al.
2023b; Qin and Qian 2024; Qin et al. 2024a, 2025; Li et al.
2023a; Qin et al. 2024b,c), which is different for the data
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20042

