The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Adaptive Q-Network for Recommendation Tasks with Dynamic Item Space
Jianxiang Zhu1 , Dandan Lai1 , Zhongcui Ma1 , Yaxin Peng1,2,*
1

the Department of Mathematics, College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
2
the School of Future Technology, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
zjx0828@shu.edu.cn, 2328140942@shu.edu.cn, mzc1217@shu.edu.cn, yaxin.peng@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

effectively and give feedback, achieving self-optimization
of personalized recommendations. This means that methods
based on RL can further enhance the long-term performance
of traditional recommendation methods (Ge et al. 2021).
However, the current application of RL in recommendation tasks overlooks the dynamic of the environment, maintaining a constant action space that represents an overly idealized scenario. For example, users are uploading new short
videos created by themselves all the time, but it is unacceptable for the model to constantly recommend outdated
videos. Therefore, the pool of recommendable items should
be subject to change in the recommendation contexts.
To meet this demand, we have introduced a novel task
called dynamic recommendation, which requires a dynamic
action space to effectively simulate real-world recommendation environments. Specifically, new items are continually
added to the recommendation pool, while obsolete ones are
removed to ensure that the recommendations remain up-todate. Based on this concept, we update the action space during the testing phase to recommend the most recent items.
Besides, the items in the training and testing phases are mutually exclusive.
Nevertheless, standard RL is incapable of addressing
the dynamic recommendation task. The current algorithms
based on RL are unable to predict the level of user satisfaction with newly emerging items. One of the problems stems
from methods based on discrete action space (Zhao et al.
2018; Zheng et al. 2018) neglect the connections between
items for treating each item as an independent action. Additionally, some approaches based on continuous action space
(Liu et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2018) look for similar items in
the test environment as those in the training one, overlooking
the long-term impact of new items on the test environment.
Overall, the above oversights will lead to poor generalization of the traditional RL algorithms for recommendation.
In this paper, we propose an original algorithm to deal
with the dynamic recommendation task, termed Adaptive QNetwork (AdaQN). Specifically, AdaQN first learns a value
function based on states and item characteristics, as well as
effectively predicts the values of new items during the testing phase, which not only aids our algorithm in completely
utilizing the relationships between items but also enhances
its adaptability to the dynamic item space. Subsequently,
we discuss how to establish a mapping from the discrete

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can improve recommendation performance by capturing long-term usersystem interaction. However, current RL-based recommendation tasks seldom consider the dynamism of the environment, and standard RL algorithms are ineffective in recommending items dynamically. In addressing these issues, we
design a novel task termed dynamic recommendation, which
takes the emergence of real-world recommendable items into
consideration. Meanwhile, we propose Adaptive Q-Network
(AdaQN) to tackle the dynamic recommendation task. Firstly,
AdaQN predicts the value of different action characteristics, particularly during the testing phase, which can capture emerging new action characteristics. The above procedure helps AdaQN in effectively adapting to the dynamic action space. Secondly, AdaQN establishes a stable mapping
that projects the discrete action space onto a continuous characteristic space. Finally, AdaQN employs a lightweight QNetwork design, which mitigates the complexity of the optimization process. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our approach has achieved state-of-the-art performance in the
dynamic recommendation task.

Introduction
Recommender System (RS) (Jiang et al. 2022; Guo et al.
2017) typically relies on supervised learning to understand
users’ interests and predict their immediate reactions. Existing RS methods provide strong supervision signals that
help the model acquire preferences accurately and provide
reliable predictions on known data. They have been widely
applied in fields such as social networks (Qin et al. 2020),
online advertising (Hansen et al. 2020), and e-commerce
(Smith and Linden 2017; Rohde et al. 2018). However, these
methods struggle to effectively capture long-term impacts
and may not fully consider the complex interactions between
users and recommendation models, which can result in suboptimal recommendation outcomes.
Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) has been applied
to RS owing to its capabilities in long-term planning (Lee
et al. 2022; Yu and Zhang 2023; Wagenmaker and Pacchiano
2023). Through a long-term and continuous learning process, RL helps RS handle complex user interactions more
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13437

