The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VOILA: Complexity-Aware Universal Segmentation of CT images
by Voxel Interacting with Language
Zishuo Wan1 , Yu Gao1 , Wanyuan Pang1 , Dawei Ding1, 2 *
1

School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
2
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Automation for Industrial Processes, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100083, China
d202410372@xs.ustb.edu.cn, dingdawei@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract

However, most existing models lack generalization, requiring separate training on each dataset to achieve good
performance on their respective test sets. This approach is
significantly less meaningful, compared to training a single
model on one dataset that can perform well across multiple datasets. The issue is further compounded in methods
that necessitate separate training sessions for each organ,
which is even less efficient and practical. Since the introduction of Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (Radford
et al. 2021), which marked a milestone in combining the
modalities of computer vision and natural language, there
has been substantial success across several vision-language
tasks (Li et al. 2022; Gu et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022).
By constructing a text prompt using a template following
a certain pattern, such as ”A photo of a {label}” where
{label} is typically filled with the class name, every image
input is paired with a corresponding language input. This
approach allows traditional visual tasks to benefit from the
additional input dimension provided by language. However,
the essence of contrastive learning lies in the one-to-one
pairing between vision and language inputs. Consequently,
text prompts constructed from templates cannot achieve the
uniqueness required, limiting their effectiveness in visualonly tasks. Moreover, the information density of a template
is significantly lower than that of an image, further hindering
its broader application.

Satisfactory progress has been achieved recently in universal
segmentation of CT images. Following the success of visionlanguage methods, there is a growing trend towards utilizing text prompts and contrastive learning to develop universal
segmentation models. However, there exists a significant imbalance in information density between 3D images and text
prompts. Moreover, the standard fully connected layer segmentation approach faces significant challenges in handling
multiple classes and exhibits poor generalizability. To address these challenges, we propose the VOxel Interacting with
LAnguage method (VOILA) for universal CT image segmentation. Initially, we align voxels and language into a shared
representation space and classify voxels on the basis of cosine
similarity. Subsequently, we develop the Voxel-Language Interaction framework to mitigate the impact of class imbalance
caused by foreground-background discrepancies and variations in target volumes. Furthermore, a Complexity-Aware
Sampling method is proposed to focus on region hard to
segment, achieved by generating pseudo-heatmaps from a
trainable Gaussian mixture distribution. Our results indicate
the proposed VOILA is capable to achieve improved performance with reduced parameters and computational cost
during training. Furthermore, it demonstrates significant generalizability across diverse datasets without additional finetuning.

Code — https://github.com/ZishuoWan/VOILA

In medical segmentation tasks, the objective is to establish
a mapping function, where pixels (or voxels, in the case of
3D CT images) are assigned to specific categories. This process typically involves two steps: (i) Extracting a hidden representation for each voxel; (ii) Classifying the voxel based
on its hidden representation. In encoder-decoder structured
deep learning models, these steps are executed consecutively, where the encoder extracts a hierarchical high-level
representation and the decoder maps it to the class probabilities of each voxel. However, most models place a strong
emphasis on the first step by increasing the complexity of
the encoding process or replacing the encoder with new
architectures such as TransUNet(Chen et al. 2021), SwinUNet(Cao et al. 2023) and Swin-UNetr(Hatamizadeh et al.
2022), while the second step is often simplified to a basic
fully connected layer. In models like the UNet series, where
skip connections and hierarchical decoders are employed,
these components primarily serve to further refine the en-

Introduction
The accurate segmentation of anatomical structures in medical images is a fundamental task in clinical practice and
biomedical research, including diagnosis, treatment planning, and the monitoring of disease progression. However,
manual segmentation is labor-intensive, time-consuming,
and in need of expertise, necessitating the development
of automated segmentation methods. With the success of
UNet (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) and its variants (Chen et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2023), the end-to-end deep
learning models has become the baseline for the segmentation.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7482

