The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Kernel-Aware Graph Prompt Learning for Few-Shot Anomaly Detection
Fenfang Tao1 , Guo-Sen Xie1 * , Fang Zhao2 , Xiangbo Shu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
{fenfangtao294, gsxiehm, zhaofang0627, shuxb104}@gmail

Abstract

T1 … TE [CLS]

Normal Texts

Few-shot anomaly detection (FSAD) aims to detect unseen
anomaly regions with the guidance of very few normal support images from the same class. Existing FSAD methods
usually find anomalies by directly designing complex text
prompts to align them with visual features under the prevailing large vision-language model paradigm. However, these
methods, almost always, neglect intrinsic contextual information in visual features, e.g., the interaction relationships
between different vision layers, which is an important clue
for detecting anomalies comprehensively. To this end, we
propose a kernel-aware graph prompt learning framework,
termed as KAG-prompt, by reasoning the cross-layer relations among visual features for FSAD. Specifically, a kernelaware hierarchical graph is built by taking the different layer
features focusing on anomalous regions of different sizes as
nodes, meanwhile, the relationships between arbitrary pairs
of nodes stand for the edges of the graph. By message passing over this graph, KAG-prompt can capture cross-layer contextual information, thus leading to more accurate anomaly
prediction. Moreover, to integrate the information of multiple
important anomaly signals in the prediction map, we propose
a novel image-level scoring method based on multi-level information fusion. Extensive experiments on MVTecAD and
VisA datasets show that KAG-prompt achieves state-of-theart FSAD results for image-level/pixel-level anomaly detection.

(a)

W1 … WE [CLS]
Abnormal Texts

Text
Encoder

Prediction

Simple
Adapters

Image
Encoder

𝒄

Image
Encoder

Query

Support

Normal Texts
Abnormal Texts

Text
Encoder

Prediction

KAG-prompt
(b)
𝒄

Image
Encoder

Query

Image
Encoder
Support

Figure 1: Comparisons of KAG-prompt and existing
FSAD models. (a) Existing FSAD methods usually design
complex text prompts, i.e., Ti , Wi are manually designed
and/or learnable text prompts. For query image branches,
they only learn simple adapters to extract visual features for
downstream tasks. However, this paradigm segments normal
backgrounds into anomaly ones. (b) Our KAG-prompt can
well predict the anomalies in the query image by constructing a kernel-aware hierarchical graph to capture cross-layer
multi-level relationships.

Code — https://github.com/CVL-hub/KAG-prompt.git

Introduction
Industrial anomaly detection (AD) (Roth et al. 2022), as an
important task in the computer vision field, plays a crucial
role in modern manufacturing and production. The AD task
aims to detect and localize anomalies in industrial product
images. Since real-world anomalies from different scenarios (Bergmann et al. 2019; Zou et al. 2022) usually differ in
texture, color, shape, size, etc., acquiring and labeling these
defects is costly and labor-intensive. Typically, AD models
are directly trained on normal samples to identify anomalous samples (Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2021). However, this ideal setting seldom exists in real-world situations,

e.g., when there is rare or even no relevant training data in
a new industry chain, inspecting product defects becomes
infeasible by the aforementioned routine. As such, FSAD is
proposed to alleviate the annotation costs and novel anomaly
detection issues.
FSAD aims to detect the anomaly region in a query image
by additionally utilizing a few normal support images, where
the object class of the support/query images is the same. Recently, large vision-language models (LVLMs) (Zhu et al.
2023; Su et al. 2023), e.g., CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), have
demonstrated robust capabilities in recognizing unknown
objects (Gu et al. 2021; Kuo et al. 2022) and detecting out-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7347

