The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Graph-Level Clustering Network
Jingxin Liu1 , Jieren Cheng2,3 , Renda Han2 , Wenxuan Tu2,3 , Jiaxin Wang2 , Xin Peng4
1
School of Cyberspace Security, Hainan University, Haikou, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hainan University, Haikou, China
3
Hainan Blockchain Technology Engineering Research Center, Haikou, China
4
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{ljx 0417, cjr22, wenxuantu}@163.com
2

Abstract

to acquire enough annotations for large amounts of graph
data. To alleviate this issue, recent federated multi-view
graph learning methods first allocate a single view with a
fixed topology to each client and subsequently integrate uploaded multi-source sample representations or cluster assignments into a unified consensus for improved clustering
performance (Yan, Wang, and Jin 2024; Ren et al. 2024).
However, the above studies have one of the least following
non-negligible limitations: they 1) are not tailored for learning cross-domain graphs, which are commonly encountered
in practical applications (Tan et al. 2023); 2) suffer from privacy leakage for graph data, as the attribute information uploaded to the server can be easily reconstructed into its original form (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015). This factor
may potentially increase the risk of violating the federated
learning principle. Consequently, it is crucial to develop a
novel unsupervised FGL paradigm that can not only flexibly handle the cross-domain non-IID graphs without annotations but also has a more effective and safer collaborative
learning capacity to protect graph data privacy.
An intuitive solution is to allocate different graph datasets
to each client and upload multi-source information that is
difficult to mutually reconstruct. Following this principle,
we make one step toward unsupervised federated graph
learning with cross-domain datasets, specifically focusing
on federated graph-level clustering. To fulfill this, there are
two key challenges to be addressed, i.e., 1) the information
that is well-protected for privacy within graphs needs to be
collected and preserved in the unsupervised local model; 2)
it is difficult to capture consensus characteristics from crossdomain graphs to boost the quality of collaborative learning.
For the first challenge, inspired by the previous work (Tan
et al. 2023), we propose that extracting and uploading the
structure-oriented information not only effectively protects
privacy but also safely reflects the proximity of sample correlations. For the second challenge, we assume that the features learned by deep neural networks can be approximated
with a mixture of Gaussian distribution (Luo et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2020). With this assumption, it has the potential to generate consensus graph embeddings by exploiting
the clustering hints from multiple structure-oriented information.
Based on the above observations, we propose a novel unsupervised FGL framework for both cross-dataset and cross-

Federated graph learning (FGL), which excels in analyzing
non-IID graphs as well as protecting data privacy, has recently emerged as a hot topic. Existing FGL methods usually
train the client model using labeled data and then collaboratively learn a global model without sharing their local graph
data. However, in real-world scenarios, the lack of data annotations impedes the negotiation of multi-source information at
the server, leading to sub-optimal feedback to the clients. To
address this issue, we propose a novel unsupervised learning
framework called Federated Graph-level Clustering Network
(FedGCN), which collects the topology-oriented features of
non-IID graphs from clients to generate global consensus representations through multi-source clustering structure sharing. Specifically, in the client, we first preserve the prototype
features of each cluster from the structure-oriented embedding through clustering and then upload the learned multiple prototypes that are hard to be reconstructed into the raw
graph data. In the server, we generate consensus prototypes
from multiple condensed structure-oriented signals through
Gaussian estimation, which are subsequently transferred to
each client to promote the great encoding capacity of the local model for better clustering. Extensive experiments across
multiple non-IID graph datasets have demonstrated the effectiveness and superiority of FedGCN against its competitors.

Introduction
Federated graph learning (FGL) (Huang et al. 2024; Wan,
Huang, and Ye 2024; Huang et al. 2024) has emerged as a
prominent research direction in graph machine learning in
recent years. Its key advantage is that it enables distributed
learning on non-IID graph data through collaborative training without sharing the raw data. FGL methods have been
widely applied to various graph analysis tasks, including
graph-level classification (Tan et al. 2023), link prediction
(Hu et al. 2022), and node classification (Cheung, Dai, and
Li 2021).
The main idea of most current FGL methods is to utilize annotated graph data to learn high-quality representations within each client for effective collaborative learning
at the server. Despite their great successes, the assumption
of available labeled graphs may not always hold in practical scenarios since it is time-consuming and cost-expensive
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18870

