The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AIR: Unifying Individual and Collective Exploration
in Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Guangchong Zhou1,2 , Zeren Zhang1,2 , Guoliang Fan1
1

The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhouguangchong2021, zhangzeren2021, guoliang.fan}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

et al. 2019) and EMC (Zheng et al. 2021) refer to the concept
of “curiosity”, which is measured by the model prediction
error in practice and used as an intrinsic reward to facilitate
exploration. These approaches introduce perturbations into
individual policies but do not explicitly consider coordination, and we call them individual exploration.
Compared to single-agent domain, multi-agent cooperative tasks typically require various skills and have vastly
larger policy space, rendering comprehensive exploration
infeasible for a single agent. An ideal solution is to keep
the diversity of agents’ behaviors, which enables individuals to acquire distinct skills, explore disparate regions of
the policy space, and share their experiences by parameter
sharing technique. Recently, a group of methods revealed
the importance of behavioral diversity in collective exploration. As shown in Figure 1(a), all agents learn to compete for the ball and form terrible cooperation, while the
globally optimal policy in Figure 1(b) induces different behaviors among agents for tacit cooperation (Li et al. 2021).
Such sub-optimal situations arise exclusively in multi-agent
tasks and can not be alleviated through individual exploration. MAVEN (Mahajan et al. 2019) proposes committed exploration that learns a diverse ensemble of monotonic
approximations with the help of a latent space to explore.
CDS (Li et al. 2021) maximizes an information-theoretical
regularizer to produce diverse individualized behaviors for
extensive exploration. In role-based methods (Wang et al.
2020b,c; Yang et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023), agents are required to deal with distinct subtasks based on their assigned
roles, thereby reducing conflicts and accelerating the formation of cooperation.
Both individual skills and group collaboration are crucial
in cooperative tasks. However, even without methodological
conflicts, a direct integration of the above individual and collective exploration methods is infeasible, as excessive extra
modules make the overall model too heavy to train. To the
best of our knowledge, no research has integrated individual and collective exploration into a unified framework. To
address this gap, we propose Adaptive exploration via Individual Recognition (AIR). We first learn an identity classifier that distinguishes corresponding agents based on given
trajectories. Based on the classifier, we conduct theoretical
analysis and design a unified exploration mechanism that
can switch the exploration mode between individual and col-

Exploration in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) remains challenging for value-based agents due
to the absence of an explicit policy. Existing approaches include individual exploration based on uncertainty towards the
system and collective exploration through behavioral diversity among agents. However, the introduction of additional
structures often leads to reduced training efficiency and infeasible integration of these methods. In this paper, we propose
Adaptive exploration via Identity Recognition (AIR), which
consists of two adversarial components: a classifier that recognizes agent identities from their trajectories, and an action
selector that adaptively adjusts the mode and degree of exploration. We theoretically prove that AIR can facilitate both
individual and collective exploration during training, and experiments also demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness
of AIR across various tasks.

Code — https://github.com/Jugg1er/AIR

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved
outstanding results in complex cooperative tasks, such as
flocking control (Xu et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2023), autonomous
driving (Shamsoshoara et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2023b), and
sensor network (Zhao et al. 2023). To deal with the partial observability and the vast joint spaces of agents, most
MARL methods follow the centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm. Especially, valuebased approaches (Sunehag et al. 2017; Rashid et al. 2018;
Yang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020a) enjoy high sample efficiency and great scalability, ultimately achieving superior
performance in popular benchmarks. However, most valuebased methods suffer from insufficient exploration due to
the adoption of the vanilla ϵ-greedy exploration strategy, and
how to effectively enhance the exploration of value-based
agents in cooperative tasks remains a challenging problem.
In some studies, the exploration of an agent is guided by
its uncertainty towards the system. Zhang et al. (2023a) define the uncertainty as the correlation between an agent’s
action and other agents’ observations, based on which they
adjust exploration rate ϵ dynamically. EITI & EDTI (Wang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22919

