The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

G RA SP: Simple yet Effective Graph Similarity Predictions
Haoran Zheng1 * , Jieming Shi2† , and Renchi Yang1
1

Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
cshrzheng@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, jieming.shi@polyu.edu.hk, renchi@hkbu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

et al. 2020). As revealed in (Blumenthal and Gamper 2020),
calculating the exact GED between graphs containing over
just 16 nodes is infeasible.
Early attempts have been made to trade accuracy for efficiency via combinatorial approximation (Neuhaus, Riesen,
and Bunke 2006; Riesen and Bunke 2009; Fankhauser,
Riesen, and Bunke 2011). However, such methods still incur sub-exponential or cubic asymptotic complexities, rendering them impractical for sizable graphs or a large collection of graphs. In recent years, inspired by the powerful
capabilities of graph neural networks (GNNs) in capturing
graph structures, a series of GNN-based data-driven models
(Bai et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Bai et al. 2020; Ling et al.
2021; Tan et al. 2023; Piao et al. 2023) have been developed for GSC prediction. At a high level, most of them usually encompass three components, including the node/graph
embedding module, the cross-graph node-level interaction
module, as well as the similarity computation module. Amid
them, modeling the node-level interactions that cross graphs
leads to a quadratic time complexity in offline training or
online inference, significantly impeding the efficiency and
scalability of such models. Efforts have been made to alleviate this (Qin et al. 2021; Zhuo and Tan 2022; Ranjan et al.
2022), but there is still significant space for improvement.
In this paper, to achieve superior efficacy, we present
G RA SP (short for GRAph Similarity Prediction), a simple
but effective approach for GED/MCS prediction. Notably,
G RA SP can achieve efficient training and inference while
offering superb performance in GED/MCS predictions. The
design recipes for G RA SP include several major ingredients.
G RA SP first utilizes positional encoding to inject global
topological patterns in graphs for enhanced node features.
The augmented node features are then fed into a carefully
crafted graph embedding architecture, which comprises an
optimized GNN backbone for learning node representations
and additionally, a multi-scale pooling trick that capitalizes
on the merits of different pooling schemes to transform the
node representations into high-caliber graph-level embeddings. As such, the GED/MCS prediction can be directly
solved with such graph embeddings, without acquiring all
pair-wise node interactions for node embeddings or crosslevel similarities required in previous methods. Furthermore,
compared to conventional GNN models (Kipf and Welling
2017; Xu et al. 2019) with expressive power bounded by the

Graph similarity computation (GSC) is to calculate the similarity between one pair of graphs, which is a fundamental
problem with fruitful applications in the graph community.
In GSC, graph edit distance (GED) and maximum common
subgraph (MCS) are two important similarity metrics, both of
which are NP-hard to compute. Instead of calculating the exact values, recent solutions resort to leveraging graph neural
networks (GNNs) to learn data-driven models for the estimation of GED and MCS. Most of them are built on components
involving node-level interactions crossing graphs, which engender vast computation overhead but are of little avail in effectiveness. In the paper, we present G RA SP, a simple yet effective GSC approach for GED and MCS prediction. G RA SP
achieves high result efficacy through several key instruments:
enhanced node features via positional encoding and a GNN
model augmented by a gating mechanism, residual connections, as well as multi-scale pooling. Theoretically, G RA SP
can surpass the 1-WL test, indicating its high expressiveness. Empirically, extensive experiments comparing G RA SP
against 10 competitors on multiple widely adopted benchmark datasets showcase the superiority of G RA SP over prior
arts in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency.

Code — https://github.com/HaoranZ99/GraSP
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09968

Introduction
Graphs are an omnipresent data structure to model complex
relationships between objects in nature and society, such as
social networks, transportation networks, and biological networks. Graph similarity calculation (hereinafter GSC) is a
fundamental operation for graphs and finds widespread use
in applications, e.g., ranking documents (Lee, Jin, and Jain
2008), disease prediction (Borgwardt and Kriegel 2007), and
code similarity detection (Li et al. 2019). In GSC, graph edit
distance (GED) (Bunke and Allermann 1983) and maximum
common subgraph (MCS) (Bunke and Shearer 1998) are two
popular similarity metrics. However, the exact computations
of GED and MCS are both NP-hard (Zeng et al. 2009; Liu
* Work partially done at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22884

