The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attribution Analysis Meets Model Editing: Advancing Knowledge Correction in
Vision Language Models with VisEdit
Qizhou Chen1 , Taolin Zhang2 , Chengyu Wang3 * , Xiaofeng He1 * , Dakan Wang4 , Tingting Liu2
1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
Alibaba Cloud Computing, Hangzhou, China
4
Exacity Inc., Shanghai, China
52265901009@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, chengyu.wcy@alibaba-inc.com, hexf@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract

2024) typically locate and modify the MLP weights important for token prediction. (2) Methods which add extra modules (Huang et al. 2023; Hartvigsen et al. 2024; Yu et al.
2024) make response correction by constructing additional
bypass modules for the model. (3) Methods which use prefix editing (Zheng et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2024; Chen et al.
2024) aim to make the model follow editing instructions inserted before the input text.
Compared to single-modality cases, editing Vision-LLMs
(VLLMs) that incorporate both visual and text inputs poses
unique challenges, and have not been widely explored.
Cheng et al. (2023) attempted to adapt LLM editors to
VLLMs and established quantitative metrics for VLLM editing. Their experiments suggest that LLM editors are not very
suitable for VLLMs. They hypothesize that the cause of response errors may not only stem from the weights of the
LLM decoder but also from the interactions between the two
modalities. In exploring the connections between text and
visual modalities, some efforts (Schwettmann et al. 2023;
Pan et al. 2023) focus on identifying visual neurons within
the LLM decoder. Basu et al. (2024) reveal that a few final output representations of the visual encoder significantly
contribute to visual constraints in the prompt at the LLM’s
first layer. Nonetheless, it is still unknown how visual representations affect the final predictions within the whole computation graph of VLLMs. Understanding this can better elucidate the response generation process of VLLMs and benefit VLLM editing.
To address these challenges, we first analyze the impact of
visual representations on token predictions in VLLMs based
on contribution allocation and noise perturbation methods.
Based on the analysis results, we introduce a novel VLLM
editor named VisEdit. Our works are summarized below.
Visual Representation Attribution: The middle part of
Figure 1 illustrates the dependencies between hidden states
in the computation graph of a typical VLLM. Firstly, we
measure the contributions of each layer’s MLP and attention
modules to the key token (e.g., “bear”) prediction by mapping each module’s output to the predicted probability of the
key token. Subsequently, we employ a noise perturbationbased attribution method (Ribeiro et al. 2016; Fong et al.
2017; Meng et al. 2022) to assess each visual representation’s contribution to the subsequent layer’s attention mod-

Model editing aims to correct outdated or erroneous knowledge in large models without costly retraining. Recent research discovered that the mid-layer representation of the
subject’s final token in a prompt has a strong influence on
factual predictions, and developed Large Language Model
(LLM) editing techniques based on this observation. However, for Vision-LLMs (VLLMs), how visual representations
impact the predictions from a decoder-only language model
remains largely unexplored. To the best of our knowledge,
model editing for VLLMs has not been extensively studied
in the literature. In this work, we employ the contribution allocation and noise perturbation methods to measure the contributions of visual representations for token predictions. Our
attribution analysis shows that visual representations in midto-later layers that are highly relevant to the prompt contribute
significantly to predictions. Based on these insights, we propose VisEdit, a novel model editor for VLLMs that effectively
corrects knowledge by editing intermediate visual representations in regions important to the edit prompt. We evaluated
VisEdit using multiple VLLM backbones and public VLLM
editing benchmark datasets. The results show the superiority of VisEdit over the strong baselines adapted from existing
state-of-the-art editors for LLMs.

1

Introduction

With increasing number of LLM applications (Touvron et al.
2023; Roumeliotis et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2023), there’s
a rising demand for updating the static knowledge inside
the LLM using model editing techniques (Cao et al. 2021;
Mitchell et al. 2022a; Yao et al. 2023). It aims to efficiently
correct knowledge within LLMs without the necessity for
retraining. This technology plays a key role in eliminating
illusions (Mishra et al. 2024; Yin et al. 2023), reducing bias
(Limisiewicz et al. 2023; Akyürek et al. 2023), and protecting privacy (Ishibashi et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023) for LLMs.
Recent model editing works primarily focus on the
text modality only. They can be broadly categorized into
three types: (1) Methods which directly modify parameters
(Mitchell et al. 2022a; Meng et al. 2022, 2023; Hu et al.
* Co-corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2168

