The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spurious Feature Eraser: Stabilizing Test-Time Adaptation
for Vision-Language Foundation Model
Huan Ma1 * † , Yan Zhu1 * , Changqing Zhang1‡ , Peilin Zhao2 ,
Baoyuan Wu2 , Long-Kai Huang2 , Qinghua Hu1 , Bingzhe Wu2†
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
AI Lab, Tencent, Shenzhen, China

Abstract

CLIP and its variants (Agarwal et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2023b;
Cao et al. 2015; Bai et al. 2024a), their application to certain
downstream tasks, such as fine-grained image classification,
reveals significant limitations (Yang et al. 2022; Shi et al.
2023; Ma et al. 2023b). The presence of “decision shortcuts”
— the model’s tendency to rely on simple, potentially superficial features for decision-making — severely hinders their
generalization capabilities (Fan et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023).
These shortcuts, often emerging as a byproduct of the training process, lead to a model that, while robust in familiar
scenarios, fails to effectively adapt to more fine-grained or
less common tasks. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, due
to the existence of the shortcut of using the background for
classification, the CLIP tends to predict the spider as a crab
when the background is the beach.

Vision-language foundation models have exhibited remarkable
success across a multitude of downstream tasks due to their
scalability on extensive image-text paired data. However, these
models also display significant limitations when applied to
downstream tasks, such as fine-grained image classification,
as a result of “decision shortcuts” that hinder their generalization capabilities. In this work, we find that the CLIP model
possesses a rich set of features, encompassing both desired
invariant causal features and undesired decision shortcuts.
Moreover, the underperformance of CLIP on downstream
tasks originates from its inability to effectively utilize pretrained features in accordance with specific task requirements.
To address this challenge, we propose a simple yet effective
method, Spurious Feature Eraser (SEraser), to alleviate the
decision shortcuts by erasing the spurious features. Specifically, we introduce a test-time prompt tuning paradigm that
optimizes a learnable prompt, thereby compelling the model to
exploit invariant features while disregarding decision shortcuts
during the inference phase. The proposed method effectively
alleviates excessive dependence on potentially misleading spurious information. We conduct comparative analysis of the
proposed method against various approaches which validates
the significant superiority.

Introduction
Vision-Language Foundation Models (VLFMs) such as
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), have achieved remarkable success across a diverse range of downstream tasks (Chen et al.
2023a; Gu et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2023). This success can
largely be attributed to their scalability on massive image-text
pair data, enabling the model to capture high-quality representation of both image and text. Such a capability further
facilitates zero-shot learning on out-of-distribution (OOD)
data, not limited to the original training set (Kamath et al.
2021; Patashnik et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023a).
However, despite the powerful zero-shot learning abilities of
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The project was conducted during the internship in AI Lab,
Tencent with the mentor Bingzhe Wu (bingzhewu@tencent.com).
‡
Corresponding to zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19296

To improve the zero-shot generalization ability of VLFMs,
several methodologies have been proposed. These methods
aim to enforce the model to employ invariant features during
test phases, thereby alleviating the effect of decision shortcuts.
Currently, two mainstream approaches worthy of consideration are: (1) Region-aware CLIP (Liang et al. 2023; Wei et al.
2023; Sun et al. 2023): This line introduces additional region
information to the CLIP, encouraging it to avoid interference
from spurious features. However, a significant limitation of
these methods is the necessity to finetune the CLIP’s weights
or even alter its original architecture (Sun et al. 2023). Such
alterations are costly and may also detrimentally affect the
model’s generalization abilities on in-distribution data due to
changes in the model’s architecture and weights. (2) Prompt
Tuning (Shu et al. 2022): This strategy involves test-time
optimization of task prompts using data from downstream
tasks. The optimization goal is to force the model to learn
invariant representations across various augmented versions
of the original visual context (e.g., rotations & cropping),
thereby mitigating the impact of visual shortcuts. Compared
to the first approach, prompt tuning is advantageous as it
does not require changing the original model’s architecture
or weights and can be applied out-of-the-box. However, these
methods attempt to improve VLFMs’ robustness by telling
the models on which features to rely upon through various
approaches, which heavily depends on the annotations of
the invariant features. What’s worse, forcing the model to

