The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-modulated Attention Transformer for RGBT Tracking
Yun Xiao1,4,5 , Jiacong Zhao1 , Andong Lu2 , Chenglong Li1,4,5 * , Bing Yin3 , Yin Lin3 , Cong Liu3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
3
iFLYTEK CO.LTD., Hefei, China
4
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Security Artificial Intelligence, Hefei, China
5
Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, Hefei, China
xiaoyun@ahu.edu.cn, JiacongZhao2022@163.com, adlu ah@foxmail.com, lcl1314@foxmail.com, bingyin@iflytek.com,
yinlin@iflytek.com, congliu2@iflytek.com
2

Abstract
Existing Transformer-based RGBT trackers achieve remarkable performance benefits by leveraging self-attention to
extract uni-modal features and cross-attention to enhance
multi-modal feature interaction and search-template correlation. Nevertheless, the independent search-template correlation calculations are prone to be affected by low-quality
data, which might result in contradictory and ambiguous
correlation weights. It not only limits the intra-modal feature representation, but also harms the robustness of crossattention for multi-modal feature interaction and searchtemplate correlation computation. To address these issues,
we propose a novel approach called Cross-modulated Attention Transformer (CAFormer), which innovatively integrates
inter-modality interaction into the search-template correlation
computation within typical attention mechanism, for RGBT
tracking. In particular, we first independently generate correlation maps for each modality and feed them into the designed
correlation modulated enhancement module, which can modify inaccurate correlation weights by seeking the consensus
between modalities. Such kind of design unifies self-attention
and cross-attention schemes, which not only alleviates inaccurate attention weight computation in self-attention but also
eliminates redundant computation introduced by extra crossattention scheme. In addition, we design a collaborative token elimination strategy to further improve tracking inference
efficiency and accuracy. Experiments on five public RGBT
tracking benchmarks show the outstanding performance of
the proposed CAFormer against state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Comparison of performance and speed for state-ofthe-art tracking methods on RGBT234 (Li et al. 2019a). We
visualize the Success Rate (SR) against Frames Per Second
(FPS). Closer to the top indicates higher performance, and
closer to the right indicates faster speed. CAFormer ranks
first in SR while running at 83.6 FPS.

The Transformer is successfully applied in RGBT tracking due to its attention mechanism, which allows it to selectively focus on relevant information and ignore irrelevant information. Existing Transformer-based RGBT trackers (Hui et al. 2023; Hou et al. 2024; Hou, Ren, and Wu
2022) achieve remarkable performance by leveraging selfattention to extract uni-modal features and cross-attention
to enhance multi-modal feature interaction. However, we
observe that the calculation of correlations in self-attention
is sensitive to low-quality data. Even state-of-the-art trackers (Hui et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023) that use feature fusion suffer from the same problem, resulting in ambiguous
and inappropriate correlation weights. This phenomenon is
illustrated in Figure 2. Importantly, existing works (Ye et al.
2022; Gao et al. 2022; Fu et al. 2022) suggest that proper
correlation is crucial for tracking. Therefore, we believe
there are limitations in the modality self-attention independent modeling strategy widely adopted in existing methods.
This limitation not only impairs intra-modality feature rep-

Code — https://github.com/opacity-black/CAFormer

Introduction
RGBT tracking (Li et al. 2020, 2021; Lu et al. 2022; Hui
et al. 2023; Hou et al. 2024), which fuses information from
visible and thermal infrared (TIR) modalities for visual
tracking, has become an active research field in the computer
vision community. Recently, with the success of Transformers in visual object tracking (Chen et al. 2021; Ye et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2022), Transformer-based RGBT trackers have
gradually gained advantages in both speed and performance.
* Chenglong Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8682

