The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fairness Issues and Mitigations in (Differentially Private)
Socio-Demographic Data Processes
Joonhyuk Ko1 , Juba Ziani2 , Saswat Das1 , Matt Williams3 , Ferdinando Fioretto1
1
University of Virginia
Georgia Institute of Technology
3
RTI International
tah3af@virginia.edu, jziani3@gatech.edu, duh6ae@virginia.edu,
mrwilliams@rti.org, fioretto@virginia.edu
2

Abstract
Statistical agencies rely on sampling techniques to collect
socio-demographic data crucial for policy-making and resource allocation. This paper shows that surveys of important
societal relevance introduce sampling errors that unevenly impact group-level estimates, thereby compromising fairness in
downstream decisions. To address these issues, this paper introduces an optimization approach modeled on real-world survey design processes, ensuring sampling costs are optimized
while maintaining error margins within prescribed tolerances.
Additionally, privacy-preserving methods used to determine
sampling rates can further impact these fairness issues. This
paper explores the impact of differential privacy on the statistics informing the sampling process, revealing a surprising
effect: not only is the expected negative effect from the addition of noise for differential privacy negligible, but also this
privacy noise can in fact reduce unfairness as it positively
biases smaller counts. These findings are validated over an
extensive analysis using datasets commonly applied in census
statistics.

1

Introduction

Statistical agencies across various countries gather,
anonymize, and disseminate socio-demographic data, which
is foundational to high-impact applications such as policy
development, urban planning, and public health initiatives
(USCB 2023b; FHWA 2023; USCB 2022). In the United
States, for example, Census Bureau data guide more than
$2.8 trillion in federal funding yearly (U.S. Census Bureau
2023; Tran et al. 2021). Major surveys such as the American Community Survey (ACS) (USCB 2024), the Current
Population Survey (CPS) (USCB 2023a), and the National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS) (CDC 2024) are central to
gathering essential demographic data. The ACS, for example, annually collects data from approximately 3.54 million
housing unit addresses across the United States (about a 1%
sample of the U.S. population). This sample-based approach
allows the ACS to provide detailed insights into the population’s living conditions, educational attainment, employment,
and health status, among other factors.
The accuracy of these demographic reports is thus crucial
to ensure that resources and policy measures are effectively
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28160

targeted toward appropriate population segments. However,
despite their critical role, the collection of these statistics typically involves surveying a small fraction of the population,
inherently introducing sampling errors. While these surveys
strive to provide estimates with controlled error rates and
confidence intervals, such control is typically applied across
the entire survey population. However, this approach can lead
to varying error rates among population groups, particularly
those distinguished by ethnicity, introducing biases in critical
downstream tasks relying on this data.
Therefore, the first major contribution of this paper is to
address the need for developing sampling schemes that not
only aim to reduce costs but also meet acceptable errors
within each demographic group. The approach explored recasts the sampling process as an optimization program, ensuring that statistical accuracy is maintained across diverse
sub-populations within prescribed confidence errors.
The second major contribution of this work is to analyze
the impacts of privacy-enhancing technologies on the biases
of demographic data. In particular, we focus on differential
privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006) as implemented by the
U.S. Census Bureau. Interestingly, contrary to prevailing intuition in the literature (Fioretto et al. 2022), our findings
suggest that these privacy measures do not necessarily exacerbate disparities under Laplace mechanism. In fact, it is
possible that differential privacy can surprisingly mitigate the
observed unfairness by boosting the representation of smaller
populations (minorities) due to positive biases introduced
during the DP post-processing phase. This observation provides a novel perspective on the tradeoffs between privacy
and fairness, demonstrating that DP can contribute positively
to fairness when implemented in contexts similar to those analyzed in this work. A schematic illustration of the proposed
framework is provided in Figure 1.
Contributions. This paper makes several contributions:
1. First, we show that conventional sampling strategies may
overlook potential disparate impacts on crucial ethnic
demographic groups. This aspect, illustrated in more detail
in Section 3, provides the basis for the proposed work.
2. We then introduce an optimization approach aimed at mitigating these disparate errors, detailed in Section 4. The
proposed approach is modeled on real-world survey design processes, such as those employed by the ACS, which

