The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Disentangled Metric Learning
Jinhee Park1 , Jisoo Park2 , Dagyeong Na2 , Junseok Kwon1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
{iv4084em, susiehome, dakunglove, jskwon}@cau.ac.kr

Abstract
Proxy-based metric learning has enhanced semantic similarity with class representatives and exhibited noteworthy performance in deep metric learning tasks. While these methods alleviate computational demands by learning instance-toclass relationships rather than instance-to-instance relationships, they often limit features to be class-specific, thereby
degrading generalization performance for unseen class. In
this paper, we introduce a novel perspective called Disentangled Deep Metric Learning (DDML), grounded in the framework of information bottleneck, which applies class-agnostic
regularization to existing DML methods. Unlike conventional
NormSoftmax methods, which primarily emphasize distinct
class-specific features, our DDML enables a diverse feature representation by seamlessly transitioning between classspecific features with the aid of class-agnostic features. It
smooths decision boundaries, allowing unseen classes to have
stable semantic representations in the embedding space. To
achieve this, we learn disentangled representations of both
class-specific and class-agnostic features in the context of
DML. Our method easily integrates into existing proxy-based
algorithms, consistently delivering improved performance.

Figure 1: Motivation of the proposed DDML. (a) shows
Grad-cam (Selvaraju et al. 2017) results for the same unseen
class. While the conventional NormSoftmax (Zhai and Wu
2018) method induces inconsistent activations for unseen
classes, our method demonstrates consistent activations. (b)
illustrates the positioning of training samples (i.e., red and
blue points) and test samples (i.e., gray points) in both the
embedding space and the input space for 2D synthesized
data. The NormSoftmax approach places testing samples in
either the red or blue regions due to the narrow uncertain region (i.e., white regions) caused by emphasizing only classspecific features. In contrast, our method semantically distributes the testing samples gradually within the smoothed
uncertain region by leveraging class-agnostic features.

Introduction
Owing to the remarkable representation capabilities of deep
neural networks, recent deep metric learning (DML) methods have achieved significant performance advancements.
These advancements have facilitated various practical applications in computer vision tasks, including image retrieval
(Yi et al. 2014; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015;
Movshovitz-Attias et al. 2017; Oh Song et al. 2016), clustering (Xing et al. 2002; Hershey et al. 2016), and classification
(Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Sung et al. 2018).
The goal of DML is to learn a low-dimensional embedding space using DNNs, in which semantically similar images are positioned close to each other, while dissimilar images are placed farther apart. In other words, the distance
in the embedding space plays an important role in representing semantic relationships. To achieve this goal, proxybased methods have emerged, involving the comparison of
instances to a proxy sample that represents specific classes
(Zhai and Wu 2018; Kim et al. 2020). These methods reduce

computational complexity by considering instance-to-class
relationships rather than instance-to-instance relationships.
However, learning instance-to-class relations limits the diversity of image features, making them overly class-specific.
Consequently, several studies (Milbich et al. 2020; Zheng
et al. 2021a,b; Gu, Ko, and Kim 2021) have advanced to address this issue through feature diversification, with the goal
of improving generalization for unseen classes.
Our insight stems from observing the NormSoftmax (Zhai
and Wu 2018) method, which is frequently used as a baseline in proxy-based DML. In Fig.1(a), the NormSoftmax approach induces inconsistent gradient activations for samples
belonging to the same unseen class in the CUB dataset (Wah
et al. 2011). This observation is evident from the experiment
with 2D synthesized data. In Fig.1(b), red and blue points
denote the training samples from two distinct classes in

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19830

