The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Scalable and Effective Alternative to Graph Transformers
Kaan Sancak1 , Zhigang Hua2 , Jin Fang2 , Yan Xie2 , Andrey Malevich2 , Bo Long2 ,
Muhammed Fatih Balın1 , Ümit V. Çatalyürek* 1
1

School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
2
Meta AI
kaan@gatech.edu, {zhua, fangjin, yanxie, amelevich, bolong}@meta.com, {balin, umit}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown impressive performance in graph representation learning, but they face challenges in capturing long-range dependencies due to their limited expressive power. To address this, Graph Transformers
(GTs) were introduced, utilizing self-attention mechanism to
effectively model pairwise node relationships. Despite their
advantages, GTs suffer from quadratic complexity w.r.t. the
number of nodes in the graph, hindering their applicability
to large graphs. In this work, we present Graph-Enhanced
Contextual Operator (GECO), a scalable and effective alternative to GTs that leverages neighborhood propagation and
global convolutions to effectively capture local and global
dependencies in quasiliniear time. Our study on synthetic
datasets reveals that GECO reaches 169× speedup on a graph
with 2M nodes w.r.t. optimized attention. Further evaluations
on diverse range of benchmarks showcase that GECO scales
to large graphs where traditional GTs often face memory and
time limitations. Notably, GECO consistently achieves comparable or superior quality compared to baselines, improving
the SOTA up to 4.5%, and offering a scalable and effective
solution for large-scale graph learning.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.12059
Code — https://github.com/kaansancak/GECO

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been state-of-the-art
(SOTA) models for graph representation learning showing
superior quality across different tasks spanning node, link,
and graph level prediction (Gori, Monfardini, and Scarselli
2005; Scarselli et al. 2009; Kipf and Welling 2017; Zhang
and Chen 2018; Zhang et al. 2018). Despite their success,
GNNs have fundamental limitations that affect their ability
to capture long-range dependencies in graphs. These dependencies refer to nodes needing to exchange information over
long distances effectively, especially when the distribution
of edges is not directly related to the task or when there are
missing edges in the graph (Dwivedi et al. 2022b). This limitation can further lead to information over-squashing caused
*Amazon Web Services. This publication describes work performed at the Georgia Institute of Technology and is not associated
with AWS.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20255

by repeated propagations within GNNs (Li, Han, and Wu
2018; Alon and Yahav 2020; Topping et al. 2022).
Graph Transformers (GTs) (Dwivedi and Bresson 2020;
Ying et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021) were introduced to overcome
the limitations of GNNs by incorporating the self-attention
mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017), and achieved SOTA across
various benchmarks. GTs can model long-range dependencies by attending to potential neighbors among the entire set
of nodes. However, GTs suffer from quadratic complexity
which stems from that each node needs to attend to every
other node, preventing GTs’ widespread adoption in largescale real-world scenarios. As mini-batch sampling methods for GTs remain under-explored, the primary application of GTs has been on smaller datasets, such as molecular
ones (Freitas et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2021; Dwivedi et al. 2022b,
2023a). Consequently, exploring novel efficient and highquality attention replacements remains a crucial research
direction to unlock the full potential of GTs for large-scale
graphs. Recently, global convolutional language models have
emerged as promising alternatives for attention (Romero et al.
2022; Li et al. 2023). Specifically, Hyena (Poli et al. 2023)
has demonstrated impressive performance, offering efficient
processing of longer contexts with high quality.
In this work, we aim to find an efficient alternative to dense
attention mechanisms to scale graph transformers without
sacrificing the modeling quality. The key challenge lies in
designing an efficient model that can effectively capture both
local and long-range dependencies within large graphs. To
address this, we propose a novel compact layer called GraphEnhanced Contextual Operator (GECO), which combines
local propagations and global convolutions. The convolution
filters in GECO encompass all nodes, serving as a substitute
for dense attention in the graph domain. GECO consists of
four main components: (1) local propagation to capture local
context, (2) global convolution to capture global context with
quasilinear complexity, (3) data-controlled gating for contextspecific operations on each node, and (4) positional/structural
encoder for feature encoding and graph ordering.
Our evaluation has two main objectives: (O1): Matching
SOTA GT quality on small graph datasets emphasized by the
community. (O2): Scaling to larger graphs where traditional
attention mechanisms are impractical due to computational
constraints. Extensive evaluations across diverse benchmarks
demonstrate that GECO scales to larger datasets and con-

