The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Relaxed Rotational Equivariance via G-Biases in Vision
Zhiqiang Wu1 * , Yingjie Liu1 , Licheng Sun1 * , Jian Yang2 , Hanlin Dong1 , Shing-Ho J. Lin3 ,
Xuan Tang4 , Jinpeng Mi5 , Bo Jin6 , Xian Wei1†
1
Software Engineering Institute, East China Normal University
School of Geospatial Information, Information Engineering University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Communication and Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University
5
Institute of Machine Intelligence, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
{51265902095, lcsun}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, xwei@tum.de
2

Abstract
Group Equivariant Convolution (GConv) can capture rotational equivariance from original data. It assumes uniform and strict rotational equivariance across all features as
the transformations under the specific group. However, the
presentation or distribution of real-world data rarely conforms to strict rotational equivariance, commonly referred to
as Rotational Symmetry-Breaking (RSB) in the system or
dataset, making GConv unable to adapt effectively to this
phenomenon. Motivated by this, we propose a simple but
highly effective method to address this problem, which utilizes a set of learnable biases called G-Biases under the
group order to break strict group constraints and then achieve
a Relaxed Rotational Equivariant Convolution (RREConv).
To validate the efficiency of RREConv, we conduct extensive ablation experiments on the discrete rotational group Cn .
Experiments demonstrate that the proposed RREConv-based
methods achieve excellent performance compared to existing
GConv-based methods in both classification and 2D object
detection tasks on the natural image datasets.

A strict 90 degree turn
is difficult to occur!

A relaxed 90 degree turn
is common to occur!

(a) Less common scenarios

(b) More common scenarios

Figure 1: (a) A car turning right at an angle of exactly 90
degrees denotes the strict adherence to the motion rules on
the group C4 . (b) Another car turning right at an angle of
approximately 90 degrees represents a deviation from strict
rotational symmetry on the group C4 , leading to Rotational
Symmetry-Breaking (RSB) within a car’s motion. Note that
the figure emphasizes the symmetry of an object’s potential
motion, not the symmetry of an object itself on the group C4 .

Code — https://github.com/wuer5/rrenet
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.12454

absolute motion in the world, a phenomenon commonly
termed Symmetry-Breaking (Wang, Walters, and Yu 2022;
Barone and Theophilou 2008; Wang et al. 2024; Vernizzi
and Wheater 2002; Ghosh et al. 2022; Kaba and Ravanbakhsh 2023). In fact, Symmetry-Breaking is a broad concept that involves different definitions of objects or systems.
Usually, one definition can refer to breaking the symmetry
of an object or system itself. Another definition can be the
motion of an object or system that cannot precisely conform
to the rules of a strict symmetry group (e.g., the typical rotational group Cn ), thereby breaking its strict symmetry state.
This paper specifically focuses on the second definition
of Symmetry-Breaking in the following context. We observe
that this type of Symmetry-Breaking often occurs within an
object’s potential motion in 2D vision. A common example
of breaking the strict symmetry state on the group C4 within
a car can be seen in Figure 1. In (a), a car turns by 90 degrees,
which can be challenging to achieve precisely in practical
situations. Conversely, in (b), a car turns by more or less than
90 degrees, often with a slightly randomized angle change,

Introduction
Symmetry prior, such as equivariance, plays a vital role in
deep learning (Bogatskiy et al. 2022; He et al. 2021; Esteves
2020; Ravanbakhsh, Schneider, and Poczos 2017). Given
the assumption of perfect symmetry in data, recent works
on equivariant networks are constrained to operate as strict
equivariant or invariant functions. These works have been
shown to learn potential equivariance or symmetry information without additional data, achieving excellent results with
improved efficiency and generalization ability (Cohen and
Welling 2016, 2017; Kondor and Trivedi 2018; Ghosh et al.
2022; Kaba et al. 2023; Kaba and Ravanbakhsh 2023).
However, real-world physical systems seldom conform
to perfect or strict symmetry due to the natural laws of
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8541

