The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SoundBrush: Sound as a Brush for Visual Scene Editing
Kim Sung-Bin1 , Kim Jun-Seong1 , Junseok Ko2 , Yewon Kim1 , Tae-Hyun Oh1,3,4
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
2
Department of Statistics, Inha University, Korea
3
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Korea
4
Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University, Korea
sungbin@postech.ac.kr, junseong.kim@postech.ac.kr, thoh.kaist.ac.kr@gmail.com
Abstract
We propose SoundBrush, a model that uses sound as a brush to
edit and manipulate visual scenes. We extend the generative capabilities of the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) to incorporate
audio information for editing visual scenes. Inspired by existing image-editing works, we frame this task as a supervised
learning problem and leverage various off-the-shelf models
to construct a sound-paired visual scene editing dataset for
training. This richly generated dataset enables SoundBrush to
learn to map audio features into the textual space of the LDM,
allowing for visual scene editing guided by diverse in-the-wild
sound. Unlike existing methods, SoundBrush can accurately
manipulate the overall scenery or even insert sounding objects
to best match the input sound semantics while preserving the
original content. Furthermore, by integrating with novel view
synthesis techniques, our framework can be extended to edit
3D scenes, facilitating sound-driven 3D scene manipulation.

Introduction
Visual scene editing extends beyond image generation by
modifying existing images to meet specific user requirements.
With its promising applications, this field has evolved to include tasks, such as style transfer (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge
2016) and translation between image domains (Zhu et al.
2017; Huang et al. 2018). Recently, the remarkable capabilities of text-based generative models have significantly
broadened the scope of visual scene editing to include not
only 2D images (Tumanyan et al. 2023; Hertz et al. 2023;
Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023) but also 3D scenes (Haque
et al. 2023), guided by text descriptions as control signals.
Although text descriptions are effective, sound has become
a unique control signal for visual scene editing (Lee et al.
2022; Li et al. 2022; Li, Singh, and Grover 2023). Unlike
text, sound shares the natural association with visual scenes
and can provide rich information that text may overlook.
For example, the intensity of rainfall can range from light
to heavy in sound, whereas a text description might simply
note it as “raining.” Despite these advantages, existing soundguided editing methods face significant challenges, such as
being limited to generating entirely new scenes rather than
editing existing ones (Sung-Bin et al. 2023; Yariv et al. 2023;
Qin et al. 2023; Sung-Bin et al. 2024), struggling to insert

Figure 1: Sound-guided visual scene editing. We propose
SoundBrush, a model that can edit visual scenes by adding
sounding objects or manipulating the scene to align with the
input sound (top). Furthermore, it can be extended to edit 3D
visual scenes using the input sound (bottom).
new objects while only manipulating styles (Lee et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2022), and altering the structure of the source image
after editing (Li, Singh, and Grover 2023).
Addressing these limitations requires overcoming several
challenges. First, effectively capturing informative audio signals to determine how to manipulate or edit the given image
is difficult due to the significant information gap between audio and visual signals. Secondly, the scarcity of sound-paired
image editing datasets and the difficulty in acquiring them
further amplify these challenges, becoming a bottleneck for
learning the capabilities of sound-guided visual scene editing.
In this work, we propose SoundBrush, a model that tackles these challenges and uses sound as a brush to edit visual scenes. Specifically, we extend the generative capabil-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7167

