The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DFF: Decision-Focused Fine-Tuning for
Smarter Predict-Then-Optimize with Limited Data
Jiaqi Yang 1 * , Enming Liang 2 * , Zicheng Su 1† , Zhichao Zou 3 , Peng Zhen 3 , Jiecheng Guo 3 ,
Wanjing Ma 1 , Kun An 1†
1

The Key Laboratory of Road and Traffic Engineering of the Ministry of Education, Tongji University, China
2
Department of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong
3
Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China
2410196@tongji.edu.cn, eliang4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, suzicheng@tongji.edu.cn, zouzhichao@didiglobal.com,
zhenpeng@didiglobal.com, jasonguo@didiglobal.com, mawanjing@tongji.edu.cn, kunan@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

first stage, the generally used loss functions such as MSE
aim to minimize fitting error. However, this may not align
with the objective of the final decision task. The new framework proposed to address this issue is Decision-focused
Learning (DFL), which has been demonstrated to improve
the quality of the final decision by customizing the training
of the predictive model based on the decision task (Kotary
et al. 2021; Mandi et al. 2023; Sadana et al. 2024). However, directly replacing the two-stage PO framework with
DFL still poses significant challenges.
The first challenge is the convergence issues associated with training from scratch based on decision loss1
(DL). This arises from the highly non-convex nature of DL
(e.g., regret), combined with potential discontinuities, leading to substantial computational costs in calculating the gradient of the downstream problem (Elmachtoub and Grigas
2022; Tang and Khalil 2022). A promising solution for this
problem is constructing a surrogate loss for DFL. In existing works, the design of the surrogate losses is based on
Fisher consistency, i.e., the surrogate losses are equivalent
with DL when the data is infinite (Elmachtoub and Grigas
2022; Shah et al. 2024). However, in real-world scenarios
with limited data, DFL may fail to converge or converge to
a sub-optimum.
The second challenge is the significant deviation in
predictions induced by directly minimizing DL through
training. As the accuracy of the predictions becomes less
controllable, this can lead to a loss of the inherent physical
meaning present in the two-stage PO framework. For example, suppose we use a simple linear model with coefficient
matrix β to fit the dataset {X, y}, where X ∈ RN ×p and
y ∈ RN ×d . First, the PO framework adopts the MSE loss,
leading to a closed-form coefficient matrix:

Decision-focused learning (DFL) offers an end-to-end approach to the predict-then-optimize (PO) framework by training predictive models directly on decision loss (DL), enhancing decision-making performance within PO contexts. However, the implementation of DFL poses distinct challenges.
Primarily, DL can result in deviation from the physical significance of the predictions under limited data. Additionally,
some predictive models are non-differentiable or black-box,
which cannot be adjusted using gradient-based methods.
To tackle the above challenges, we propose a novel framework, Decision-Focused Fine-tuning (DFF), which embeds
the DFL module into the PO pipeline via a novel bias correction module. DFF is formulated as a constrained optimization problem that maintains the proximity of the DLenhanced model to the original predictive model within a defined trust region. We theoretically prove that DFF strictly
confines prediction bias within a predetermined upper bound,
even with limited datasets, thereby substantially reducing prediction shifts caused by DL under limited data. Furthermore,
the bias correction module can be integrated into diverse predictive models, enhancing adaptability to a broad range of
PO tasks. Extensive evaluations on synthetic and real-world
datasets, including network flow, portfolio optimization, and
resource allocation problems with different predictive models, demonstrate that DFF not only improves decision performance but also adheres to fine-tuning constraints, showcasing
robust adaptability across various scenarios.

Introduction
Predict-then-Optimize (PO) is a framework that uses machine learning to address decision problems under uncertainty, as the parameters of the optimization problem are
likely unknown before making the decision (Bertsimas and
Kallus 2020). This framework operates in two stages: In the
first stage, auxiliary features are utilized to predict the unknown parameters; in the second stage, decisions are made
based on these predictions. A critical limitation of this twostage framework is that during the training process of the

βPO = (X ⊤ X)−1 X ⊤ y

(1)

As for the DFL, the predictive model is trained with DL,
which is implicitly defined by the decision problem. However, it has been shown that there exists an input-dependent

* These authors contributed equally.
1

†

In this paper, unless otherwise specified, decision loss refers
to loss functions used to measure decision quality, such as regret,
surrogate loss, approximated loss, etc.

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26868

