The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ACPBench: Reasoning About Action, Change, and Planning
Harsha Kokel, Michael Katz, Kavitha Srinivas, Shirin Sohrabi
IBM Research
{Harsha.Kokel,Michael.Katz1,Kavitha.Srinivas}@ibm.com, ssohrab@us.ibm.com

Abstract

Atom
Reachability

There is an increasing body of work using Large Language
Models (LLMs) as agents for orchestrating workflows and
making decisions in domains that require planning and multistep reasoning. As a result, it is imperative to evaluate LLMs
on core skills required for planning. In this work, we present
ACPBench, a benchmark for evaluating the reasoning tasks in
the field of planning. The benchmark consists of 7 reasoning
tasks over 13 planning domains. The collection is constructed
from planning domains described in a formal language. This
allows us to synthesize problems with provably correct solutions across many tasks and domains. Further, it allows us the
luxury of scale without additional human effort, i.e., many
additional problems can be created automatically. Our extensive evaluation of 21 LLMs and OpenAI o1 reasoning models
highlight the significant gap in the reasoning capability of the
LLMs. Our findings with OpenAI o1, a multi-turn reasoning
model, reveal significant gains in performance on multiplechoice questions, yet surprisingly, no notable progress is made
on boolean questions.

Progression

Validation

0

0.4

0.8

1

Action
Applicability

Action
Reachability
Landmark
Justification

Dataset — https://ibm.github.io/ACPBench
Extended version —
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.05669

1

0.2

0.6

Phi-3 128K

Gemma 7B

Granite 3.0 I. 8B

LLAMA-3.1 8B

Mixtral 8x7B

Mixtral 8x22B

Codestral 22B

LLAMA-3.1 70B

GPT-4o

GPT-4o Mini

LLAMA-3.1 405B

Figure 1: Performance of few state-of-the-art LLMs over
different tasks in ACPBench.

Introduction

Recent research has explored the potential of using Large
Language Models (LLMs) as reasoners for solving multistep reasoning problems (Chu et al. 2024). Building on their
success in certain reasoning tasks and benchmarks, there is
a growing interest in using LLMs as agents for orchestrating workflows and making decisions in domains that require
planning (Huang et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024a). This is a
promising area of research, with potential applications in various fields. However, there is a lack of systematic evaluation
of LLMs reasoning and planning capabilities.
This work aims at evaluating and improving language
models’ ability to plan. However, end-to-end evaluation of
planning ability is challenging. One, if an agent reaches a goal
it does not necessarily mean it can plan. Second, evaluating
a plan might be difficult in a domain where there can be
multiple plans to achieve the goal. So, instead of focusing
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26559

on the entire end-to-end planning ability, we distill 7 atomic
reasoning tasks that are critical for reliable planning and
create datasets of such tasks. These tasks focus on reasoning
about Actions, Change (transitions) and Planning; hence,
we call our benchmark as ACPBench. The tasks include
single step reasoning, like evaluating whether an action can
be performed in the described state, as well as multi step
reasoning, like whether a sequence of actions is a valid plan
for the described state and the described goal.
For each task, ACPBench features both boolean (Bool)
and multiple-choice (MCQ) style questions from 13 domains.
All the datasets are generated from a formal representation
of the domain in Planning Domain Definition Language
(PDDL) (McDermott 2000). Twelve of these domains are
well-established benchmarks in both planning and reinforcement learning communities, readily available in PDDL format. Inspired by the shuffle task in BigBenchHard Suite (Suz-

