The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AdaGK-SGD: Adaptive Global Knowledge Guided Distributed Stochastic Gradient
Descent
Hangyu Ye1 , Weiying Xie1 * , Yunsong Li1 * , Leyuan Fang2
1

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China
wagyr@stu.xidian.edu.cn, wyxie@xidian.edu.cn, ysli@mail.xidian.edu.cn, leyuan fang@hnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Distributed machine learning (DML) is promising for training
large models on large datasets. In DML, multiple workers
collaborate on the training of neural networks, significantly
reducing the time required for neural network training. The
efficiency of DML is heavily influenced by communication,
making it crucial to balance the trade-off between communication cost and model performance in current research. Local methods are excellent at reducing communication costs,
yet face degradation in accuracy and generalizability. Indeed,
global knowledge is valuable for improving performance in
local methods. However, the theoretical analysis of global
knowledge validity is lacking, and global knowledge can currently only be used in the global aggregation of local methods
due to communication limitations and staleness. To this end,
in this paper, we establish the mechanism of global knowledge
guidance and propose Adaptive Global Knowledge Guided
Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent (AdaGK-SGD) to
extend the guidance of global knowledge to the whole distributed training process without any additional communication. Specifically, we define the maximum lifetime of global
knowledge based on the mechanism, and establish a correlation between the maximum lifetime and the validity of global
knowledge to circumvent the adverse effects of global knowledge staleness. The Maximum Lifetime of Global Knowledge
module of our algorithm can be applied separately to other algorithms. In addition, considering the application, we provide
a straightforward and efficient strategy for achieving the maximum lifetime adaptive setting. We establish the convergence
rate of AdaGK-SGD for convex and non-convex scenarios. Numerically, we find that AdaGK-SGD can significantly improve
the accuracy and generalizability of distributed algorithms
compared with existing methods.

Code — https://github.com/Yehangyu-XD/AdaGK-SGD

Introduction
Distributed training is an indispensable approach to training large neural network models on large datasets (Liu et al.
2019). In distributed training applications, communication
costs become a bottleneck due to the increasing depth and
width of machine learning models. To address the bottleneck,
* Correspond author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22119

periodic averaging has emerged as a promising strategy in this
regard, known as local methods such as Local SGD (McMahan et al. 2017). For example, in Local SGD, each worker
independently updates its local model and periodically aggregates it with other workers to update the global model,
effectively reducing communication costs in distributed training. However, these methods introduce additional noise into
the training process, resulting in a decline in accuracy and
generalization after an equal number of iterations compared
to plain distributed training (Zinkevich et al. 2010).
To tackle this issue, designing distributed machine learning (DML) algorithms using global knowledge is an effective
approach for contemporary research. For example, Elastic
Averaging SGD (EASGD) (Zhang, Choromanska, and LeCun 2015) verifies that linking computational parameters of
workers to global variables stored in the master worker can be
effective in improving convergence. Cooperative SGD (Wang
and Joshi 2021) combines EASGD with local methods by creating a unified framework. SlowMo (Wang et al. 2019) solves
the heterogeneity problem of local momentum buffers by
using global slow momentum and achieves a communicationefficient training algorithm with momentum to improve the
accuracy of the model. In DML, global knowledge refers
to parameters, models or other information that are shared
across a distributed system, similar to the concept of global
variables in EASGD and global slow momentum in SlowMo.
Thus, algorithms with global knowledge enjoy several advantages: 1) Global knowledge improves the ability of the
optimizer to escape from local saddle points. The concept of
a saddle point in mathematics refers to a stationary point of
a function that is neither an extreme nor an inflection point.
Due to the near-zero gradient around the saddle point, the
plain SGD algorithm is prone to getting trapped and unable
to escape. 2) Global knowledge suppresses the overfitting of
local models. In distributed training, local models are prone
to overfitting due to data imbalance, model complexity, and
local update strategies, especially in federated learning where
the data is distributed non-independently and non-identically
(non-i.i.d). 3) Global knowledge enhances the convergence
rate of the model. Instead of global averaging every τ local
updates, global knowledge produces a proximal term to the
objective function, which allows some slack between models(Wang and Joshi 2021), (Zhang, Choromanska, and LeCun
2015). This is inspired by the alternating direction method

