The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Context-aware Inductive Knowledge Graph Completion with Latent Type
Constraints and Subgraph Reasoning
Muzhi Li1,2 * , Cehao Yang3,2 * , Chengjin Xu2 * , Zixing Song4 , Xuhui Jiang2 , Jian Guo2† ,
Ho-fung Leung‡ , Irwin King1†
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
IDEA Research, International Digital Economy Academy
3
Artificial Intelligence Thrust, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
{mzli,king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {limuzhi,yangcehao,xuchengjin,guojian}@idea.edu.cn,
cyang289@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, zs456@cam.ac.uk, ho-fung.leung@outlook.com
New York City

Washington D.C.

Abstract

work in

Inductive knowledge graph completion (KGC) aims to predict missing triples with unseen entities. Recent works focus
on modeling reasoning paths between the head and tail entity
as direct supporting evidence. However, these methods depend heavily on the existence and quality of reasoning paths,
which limits their general applicability in different scenarios. In addition, we observe that latent type constraints and
neighboring facts inherent in KGs are also vital in inferring
missing triples. To effectively utilize all useful information
in KGs, we introduce CATS, a novel context-aware inductive
KGC solution. With sufficient guidance from proper prompts
and supervised fine-tuning, CATS activates the strong semantic understanding and reasoning capabilities of large language
models to assess the existence of query triples, which consist
of two modules. First, the type-aware reasoning module evaluates whether the candidate entity matches the latent entity
type as required by the query relation. Then, the subgraph
reasoning module selects relevant reasoning paths and neighboring facts, and evaluates their correlation to the query triple.
Experiment results on three widely used datasets demonstrate
that CATS significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in 16 out of 18 transductive, inductive, and few-shot settings
with an average absolute MRR improvement of 7.2%.

city of

work in + city of
= nationality of

Joe
U.S.
nationality
Biden
of city of born in + city of
born in
= nationality of
Scranton, Pennsylvania

work in
António
Guterres

city of

U.S.
nationality of?
Portugal
born in
city of
(missing)
Lisbon

Figure 1: A typical scenario of inductive knowledge graph
completion. The model needs to infer the nationality of the
unseen entity “António Guterres”.

diction) task, which aims to predict the missing head or tail
entity from the query triples.
Existing approaches to the KGC task usually perform well
under an “transductive setting”, where missing entities can
be observed in training triples. Conversely, the “inductive”
KGC task requires the model to handle newly emerged entities, which is more reflective of real-world scenarios, as
KGs are continuously evolving. The inductive setting highlights the importance of three key contexts inherent in KGs,
namely entity types, reasoning paths, and neighboring facts.
First, relations within KGs impose latent type constraints
to head and tail entities being connected, which are crucial in
inferring potential missing triples. For instance, the relation
works in typically connects a person (head) and a location
(tail). Although we have not encountered newly emerged entities during training, a triple can still be considered plausible if the head and tail entities conform to the implicit types
as required by the relation.
Second, reasoning paths provide direct clues for the existence of missing triple (Zha, Chen, and Yan 2022). However,
these paths can be unreliable in certain contexts. For example, in Figure 1, if the training set contains numerous triples
such as (Joe Biden, works in, Washington, D.C.), (Washington, D.C., city of, U.S.), and (Joe Biden, has nationality,
U.S.), the model may come up with some rules like (works
in + city of = has nationality). It should be noted that such
implicit rules do not invariably apply. A notable counterexample is António Guterres, who works in New York City as
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Code — https://github.com/IDEA-FinAI/CATS

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are graph-structured knowledge
bases that represent facts with triples in the form of (head
entity, relation, tail entity). KGs become essential in various
downstream applications such as question answering (Sun
et al. 2024), fact checking (Kim et al. 2023), and recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2019). In practice, most realworld KGs are incomplete, which highlights the significance
of the knowledge graph completion (KGC) (or relation pre* Equal contribution.
†

Corrsponding authors.
Independent researcher.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

12102

