The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Information-Theoretic Generative Clustering of Documents
Xin Du and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii
Waseda University
4-6-1 Okubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 169-8555 Japan
duxin@aoni.waseda.jp, kumiko@waseda.jp

Abstract

The use of an LLM to translate x into y has the further
benefit of opening the possibility to mathematically formulate the information underlying x more accurately. Previously, when clustering a set of documents x directly, not
much could be done statistically, given the bound by a finite number of words and the lack of underlying knowledge.
When using a simple representation such as bag of words,
document vectors are generated by a Gaussian distribution
for each cluster, thus reducing the clustering into a simple
k-means problem. On the other hand, if we incorporate a set
of y produced by an LLM, the clustering problem can be
rigorously formulated using information-theory, according
to the probabilistic pairing information of x $ y.

We present generative clustering (GC) for clustering a set
of documents, X, by using texts Y generated by large language models (LLMs) instead of by clustering the original
documents X. Because LLMs provide probability distributions, the similarity between two documents can be rigorously
defined in an information-theoretic manner by the KL divergence. We also propose a natural, novel clustering algorithm
by using importance sampling. We show that GC achieves
the state-of-the-art performance, outperforming any previous
clustering method often by a large margin. Furthermore, we
show an application to generative document retrieval in which
documents are indexed via hierarchical clustering and our
method improves the retrieval accuracy.

Specifically, y can be defined over the infinite set Y of
all possible word sequences of unlimited length. Each document is represented by a probability distribution over generated texts in Y, denoted as p(Y = y|X = x). The dissimilarity between documents is quantified using the KL divergence between their respective distributions over the generated texts. Clustering then is performed by grouping documents based on the similarity of these distributions.

Code — https://github.com/kduxin/lmgc
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13534

1

Introduction

Document clustering has long been a foundational problem
in data science. Traditionally, every document x 2 X is first
translated into some computational representation y 2 Rn :
in the 90s, as a bag-of-words vector, and more recently, by
using BERT (Devlin et al. 2019). A clustering algorithm,
typically k-means, is then applied.
While large language models (LLMs) have been applied
to diverse tasks, their use in basic document clustering remains underexplored. Traditionally, the translation of a document x into a representation y was considered a straightforward vectorization step. However, texts are often sparse,
with much that is unsaid and based on implicit knowledge.
By using LLMs, like GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023), to generate y
by complementing this missing knowledge, could the content of x be better explicated and yield a better clustering
result?
In this paper we explore the effect of using an LLM to
rephrase each document x 2 X. Previously, the term “generative clustering” was used to refer to approaches where
document vectors appear to be “generated” from clusters
(Zhong and Ghosh 2005; Yang et al. 2022). In this paper,
however, “generative” refers to the use of a generative LLM.

In this paper, we show that large improvements often result for plain document clustering in this new generative
clustering setting. This suggests that the quantity of knowledge underlying a text is indeed large, and that such knowledge can be inferred using generative LLMs.
This gain is already important even under the typical
Gaussian assumption that is often adopted when clustering X directly. Clustering of Y , however, can go much
further. For generative clustering, the Gaussian assumption
can be replaced by a more natural distribution through importance sampling. We empirically show that our proposed
method achieved consistent improvement on four documentclustering datasets, often with large margins.
The proposed method’s possible applications are vast, entailing all problems that involve clustering. Here, we investigate the generative document retrieval (GDR) (Tay et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022). In GDR, documents are indexed
using a prefix code acquired via hierarchical clustering. We
show that, on the MS Marco Lite dataset, GDR with the
proposed generative clustering (GC) method achieved up to
36% improvement in the retrieval accuracy.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
16408

