The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3DMambaIPF: A State Space Model for Iterative Point Cloud Filtering via
Differentiable Rendering
Qingyuan Zhou1 , Weidong Yang1 * , Ben Fei2∗ , Jingyi Xu1 , Rui Zhang1 , Keyi Liu1 , Yeqi Luo1 ,
Ying He3
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
{zhouqy23, jyxu22, ruizhang22, 23210240242, 23212010018}@m.fudan.edu.cn; wdyang@fudan.edu.cn;
benfei@cuhk.edu.hk; yhe@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

realm of 3D vision (Fei et al. 2022, 2023). Additionally, due
to the potential large-scale nature of these real-world scans,
point clouds can exhibit substantial coordinate ranges and
be highly dense, containing a significant number of points.
Traditional point cloud filtering methods rely on expert
priors, but they are limited by the accuracy of these priors
and are not suitable for complex and sparse point clouds. In
recent years, deep learning-based point cloud filtering methods have emerged prominently. These methods commonly
employ iterative modules that consist of stacked encoderdecoder pairs. Such architectures leverage the output of the
previous module as the input for the subsequent module,
thereby demonstrating superior performance. For instance,
IterativePFN (de Silva Edirimuni et al. 2023) employs iterative modules and adaptive loss functions to iteratively
and progressively refine noisy points toward adaptive ground
truth (GT), yielding promising results on both synthetic and
real-world datasets.
However, these point cloud filtering methods are only applicable to small-scale point clouds and not suitable for filtering highly dense and large-scale point clouds. Furthermore, previous works only have demonstrated satisfactory
performance solely in low-noise environments, while limited to handling details in high-noise environments. This
limitation is particularly evident in the generation of unrealistic boundaries, as well as a lack of appropriate constraints.
Consequently, the main challenges are twofold: (i) denoising
for highly dense and large-scale point clouds with complex
geometries, (ii) denoising for high-noise environments.
Recently, State Space Models (SSMs), particularly structured SSMs (S4) (Gu, Goel, and Ré 2021), have shown great
promise in Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Lu et al.
2024). Built upon the S4 framework, Mamba (Gu and Dao
2023) exhibits outstanding performance across many tasks
in NLP and 2D CV (He et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024; Zhao
et al. 2024; Misra, Gala, and Orvieto 2024). The remarkable achievements of Mamba are a testament to its linear
computational complexity and exceptional long-range context learning capabilities on extensive sequences. Moreover,
the integration of time-varying parameters and a hardwareaware algorithm within Mamba marks a significant leap forward in the field of sequence modeling.

Noise is an inevitable aspect of point cloud acquisition, necessitating filtering as a fundamental task within the realm of 3D
vision. Existing learning-based filtering methods have shown
promising capabilities on commonly used datasets. Nonetheless, the effectiveness of these methods is constrained when
dealing with a substantial quantity of point clouds. This limitation primarily stems from their limited denoising capabilities for dense and large-scale point clouds and their inclination to generate noisy outliers after denoising. To deal
with this challenge, we introduce 3DMambaIPF, for the first
time, exploiting Selective State Space Models (SSMs) architecture to handle highly-dense and large-scale point clouds,
capitalizing on its strengths in selective input processing and
large context modeling capabilities. Additionally, we present
a robust and fast differentiable rendering loss to constrain
the noisy points around the surface. In contrast to previous
methodologies, this differentiable rendering loss enhances the
visual realism of denoised geometric structures and aligns
point cloud boundaries more closely with those observed in
real-world objects. Extensive evaluations on commonly used
datasets (typically with up to 50K points) demonstrate that
3DMambaIPF achieves state-of-the-art results. Moreover, we
showcase the superior scalability and efficiency of 3DMambaIPF on highly dense and large-scale point clouds with up
to 500K points compared to off-the-shelf methods.

Code — https://github.com/TsingyuanChou/3DMambaIPF.

Introduction
Point clouds, assemblies of numerous three-dimensional
points denoting spatial positions, play a crucial role in representing scenes across multimedia and computer vision (CV)
domains. Nevertheless, as point clouds from real-world environments are captured by devices such as LiDAR, depth
cameras, or 3D scanners, noises are inevitably introduced
during the scanning process (Fei et al. 2024b). The presence
of these noises undermines the required data consistency and
accuracy in the application scenarios of point clouds, making filtering of point clouds a fundamental task within the
* Corresponding authors

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10843

