The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Joint Behaviors with Large Variations
Tianxu Li, Kun Zhu*
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
{tianxuli, zhukun}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

for the joint action-value function. The factors allow agents
to make action decisions only depending on their historical trajectories, enabling decentralized execution. Moreover,
QMIX monotonically combines these factors with a mixing network and trains them with the global state and joint
behaviors of all agents, leading to stable and robust performance. However, the trade-off for this decentralization
is evident, given that the monotonicity constraint imposes
limitations on QMIX, leading to suboptimal approximations
of values and inefficient exploration (Mahajan et al. 2019).
There have been many recent efforts trying to enhance the
performance of QMIX by improving the network architecture (Sunehag et al. 2017; Rashid et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2020a; Son et al. 2019) or extensive exploration (Mahajan
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Jiang and Lu 2021; Li et al.
2021, 2022; Yu et al. 2023).
MAVEN (Mahajan et al. 2019) realizes the committed exploration by enabling agents to condition their behaviors on
the shared latent variables, controlled by a hierarchical policy, through maximizing mutual information between latent
variables and joint behaviors. This leads the latent variable
to be maximally informative of the joint behavior. Therefore,
optimizing the mutual information objective encourages the
visitations of mutually different joint behaviors. Given the
promising results achieved by mutual information in facilitating exploration, many recent studies also adopt the mutual
information objective to improve the performance of QMIX
(Wang et al. 2019; Jiang and Lu 2021; Li et al. 2021, 2022;
Yu et al. 2023).
Despite their achievements, these mutual informationbased methods may not enable agents to sufficiently explore
the joint behavior space. Since the mutual information remains unaffected by scaling or invertible transformations
of input variables, it inherently possesses infinitely many
optima (Ozair et al. 2019). Consequently, the convergence
tends to occur towards the most easily optimizable maximum, i.e., the mutual information objective can be easily
maximized with only slight differences between joint behaviors, which does not necessarily encourage agents to learn
joint behaviors with large variations for sufficient exploration of the joint behavior space in complex multi-agent
tasks.
In order to resolve the limitation of mutual informationbased methods, we propose a novel multi-agent exploration

Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
has drawn increasing interest in recent works due to its significant achievements. However, there are still some challenges
impeding the learning of optimal cooperative policies, such as
insufficient exploration. Prior works typically adopt mutual
information-based methods to encourage exploration. However, this category of methods does not necessarily encourage
agents to fully explore the joint behavior space. To address
this limitation, we propose a novel objective based on learning a representation function with a Lipschitz constraint to
maximize the traveled distances in the joint behavior space,
encouraging agents to learn joint behaviors with large variations and leading to sufficient exploration. We further implement our method on top of QMIX. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method by conducting experiments on the
LBF, SMAC, and SMACv2 benchmarks. Our method outperforms previous methods in terms of final performance and
state-action space exploration.

Introduction
Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
has demonstrated its potential in addressing diverse multiagent challenges, ranging from multiplayer video games
(Vinyals et al. 2019) to real-world traffic light control (Wu
et al. 2020). MARL facilitates effective cooperation by training multiple agents together to maximize team returns. Due
to partial observation constraints and high scalability demands of multi-agent systems, Centralized Training with
Decentralized Execution (CTDE) framework (Lowe et al.
2017), where decentralized policies are learned for agents
to make action decisions while being trained in a centralized manner to ensure robust and stable performance, has
been widely used in many MARL algorithms, such as valuedecomposition methods (Iqbal et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2020a; Sunehag et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018)
and policy gradients (Ma et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020b;
Ndousse et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021).
One of the most popular algorithms based on CTDE is
QMIX (Rashid et al. 2018). QMIX learns factored value
functions for each agent by optimizing an approximation
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23249

