The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Portcullis: A Scalable and Verifiable Privacy Gateway
for Third-Party LLM Inference
Jiangou Zhan2 § , Wenhui Zhang1 § , Zheng Zhang1 , Huanran Xue1 , Yao Zhang1 † , Ye Wu1 *
1

Bytedance Inc.
Tsinghua University
†
zhangyao.crypto@bytedance.com
2

Abstract

data poses a significant threat (Wu et al. 2025). Centralized
entities operating these models could potentially exploit this
vulnerability to orchestrate targeted attacks. Consequently,
it is important to implement safeguards that ensure the confidentiality of input data while harnessing the functionalities
of LLMs.
To address privacy issues in LLMs, previous studies have
developed techniques such as fine-tuning pre-trained LLMs
to process encrypted prompts, thus maintaining privacy
without restructuring the underlying model (Mishra, Li, and
Deo 2024). Additionally, methods like data obfuscation for
TEE (Zhang et al. 2024; Tramer and Boneh 2018), implementing Differential Privacy (DP) (Du et al. 2023; Hou et al.
2024), Secure Multi-Party Computing (SMPC) (Hou et al.
2023), and hybrid cryptology methods (Lu et al. 2023) have
been used to prevent data leakage. However, these methods require modifications to third-party LLMs, which are
not possible for closed-source models like those from OpenAI (GPT-4o 2024). Modifications can also compromise the
accuracy of their results. Additionally, they complicate deployment and increase operational overhead, leading to reduced Time To First Token (TTFT) and Time Per Output Token (TPOT). Apple Intelligence utilizes Private Cloud Compute (Apple 2024) to host LLMs, which enhances performance but may still pose risks of exposing sensitive information to third-party LLMs. Previous approaches (Chen et al.
2023; Tong et al. 2023) develops privacy-preserving prompt
filters that function in the cloud to prevent the transmission
of sensitive data to third-party LLMs. However, deploying
these privacy filter methods on cloud platforms introduces
inherent risks of data breaches, which could compromise
data security (Huang, Shao, and Chang 2022; Huang et al.
2023).
We introduce Portcullis, a trustworthy gateway that intermediates between customers and third-party LLMs. To our
knowledge, Portcullis is the first of its kind, capable of providing privacy-preserving prompts with accurate LLM responses in a verified fashion. Portcullis enhances privacy
by obfuscating sensitive information in prompts using a
chain of semantic-aware NERs and pattern matchers before
sending them to third-party LLMs. It preserves the efficacy
of LLM responses by securely restoring original meanings
through a Redis Key-Value Store. It processes data within
Intel TDX, where attestation verifies that data is handled

Businesses using third-party LLMs face privacy risks from
exposed prompts. This paper presents Portcullis, a privacypreserving gateway that safeguards sensitive data while supporting efficient and accurate LLM responses. Portcullis
functions as a mediator, anonymizing sensitive data in
prompts through parallel substitution, securely interacting
with LLMs, and accurately reconstructing responses. It ensures that all data processing occurs within secure encrypted
memory. The gateway is attested to ensure trustworthiness
and protect user privacy. Portcullis is the first of its kind,
offering a verifiable and scalable privacy gateway for thirdparty LLM inferences.
We assess Portcullis’s efficiency as a confidential container
platform, demonstrating that its startup time scales linearly,
ensuring scalability. Additionally, we evaluate its runtime
performance using the PII and Enron Email Dataset. For
masking and unmasking workloads, Portcullis outperforms
Hide-and-Seek by 96x speed up, while maintaining equal or
better false positive and false negative rates compared to existing solutions. On the Enron dataset, Portcullis achieves notably higher accuracy, surpassing Hide-and-Seek by over 0.1
for GPT-4o mini.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) offer high-quality responses
across a myriad of tasks and queries. Not all companies
possess LLMs with robustness and superior performance,
so they often use third-party LLMs like OpenAI’s ChatGPT (Brown et al. 2020) to enhance their offerings. For instance, Apple leverages OpenAI APIs to deliver exceptional
results for customers’ prompt queries (OpenAI 2024; Apple
2024), thereby enhancing user experience and operational
efficiency. However, the use of third-party LLMs introduces
substantial privacy concerns. Sensitive information embedded in the prompts, such as personal identifiers (Macioce Jr
2018), financial data, and proprietary business information,
may be inadvertently exposed to external entities. Given that
third-party LLMs do not inherently eliminate sensitive information (Wang et al. 2023a), the potential leakage of such
* † Corresponding author. § Co-first author, work done at
ByteDance.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1022

