The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Identity-Deformation Disentanglement in StyleGAN
for One-Shot Face Video Re-Enactment
Qing Chang,

Yao-Xiang Ding* ,

Kun Zhou

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
12321115@zju.edu.cn, dingyx.gm@gmail.com, kunzhou@acm.org

Abstract

which is commonly done by using generative models like
StyleGAN2 (Karras et al. 2020), Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al. 2022), and neural rendering (Mildenhall et al. 2021). It
is evident that the transfer step is crucial to generation quality.
Among common deformation modeling approaches, the
key points (Siarohin et al. 2019; Mallya, Wang, and Liu
2022; Tao et al. 2022) and 3D morphable face models
(3DMM) (Feng et al. 2021) usually have limited expressive
power, which can result in the generated faces lacking accurate expression and high-fidelity details. The NeRF-based
model (Xu et al. 2023) usually requires training a specific
model for each individual face with numerous images from
different viewpoints. Although some methods (Tran et al.
2024; Deng et al. 2024; Deng, Wang, and Wang 2024) utilize large-scale datasets to realize a one-shot generalization,
these models need a very long training time to converge and
output resolution is limited. In comparison, models based
on latent space (Oorloff and Yacoob 2023; Xu et al. 2023),
which represent deformation with code embeddings in the
learned latent space, can avoid these limitations. As an example, StyleGAN2 (Karras et al. 2020), which is a latent
space model, has shown impressive performance in generating high-resolution and highly realistic human faces under
many face-related generation tasks. Furthermore, its latent
space exhibits good semantic properties and strong editing
capabilities. This makes the latent space model a desirable
choice for face re-enactment.
However, to fully exploit the potential of latent space
models, there are two significant challenges to address. The
first is to precisely disentangle identity-related and identityindependent characteristics. Identity is a relatively abstract
concept, which is represented by complex and distributed
visual characteristics of a face. This makes the extraction
of the identity features a significantly challenging task.
The second challenge is to build expressive features keeping high-frequency facial details, which strongly affects the
generation quality. Although rapid development has been
achieved for latent-based re-enactment approaches (Wu,
Lischinski, and Shechtman 2021; Oorloff and Yacoob 2023),
these two challenges remain unaddressed.
In this work, we propose , which builds the latent-based
face re-enactment generation model based on latent space
of StyleGAN2 (Karras et al. 2020) to deal with the above

The task of one-shot face video re-enactment aims at generating target video of faces with the same identity of one source
frame and facial deformation of the driving video. To achieve
high quality generation, it is essential to precisely disentangle identity-related and identity-independent characteristics,
meanwhile build expressive features keeping high-frequency
facial details, which still remain unaddressed for existing approaches. To deal with these two challenges, we propose a
two-stage generation model based on StyleGAN, whose key
novel techniques lie in better disentangling identity and deformation codes in the latent space through an identity-based
modeling and manipulating intermediate StyleGAN features
at the second stage for augmenting facial details of the generating targets. To further improve identity consistency, a data
augmentation method is introduced during training for enhancing the key features affecting identity such as hair and
wrinkles. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our approach compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://nickchang97.github.io/ViVFace.github.io/

Introduction
Face-related generation is essential in many applications,
spanning from movie production, digital avatars, and games.
Among them, one-shot face video re-enactment studies the
following task: given a source face frame and a driving video
for another face, the task studies generating a video, which
maintains identity of the source frame and the facial deformations from the video. This requires to develop a strong
generation model which accurately integrates source frame
identity and driving video deformations with limited information, thus has been recognized as a significant challenge
in facial generation.
The generation process of the re-enactment task is typically divided into two steps: transfer and rendering. The
transfer step involves extracting deformation information
from the driving video and integrating them with the identity
features from the source frames. The rendering step focuses
on generating target video frames based on these features,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1247

