The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Translation of Emergent Communication
Ido Levy1 , Orr Paradise2 , Boaz Carmeli1 , Ron Meir1 , Shafi Goldwasser2 , Yonatan Belinkov1
1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
2
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
{idolevy, boaz.carmeli}@campus.technion.ac.il, rmeir@ee.technion.ac.il, belinkov@technion.ac.il,
{orr.paradise, shafi.goldwasser}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Our approach is to utilize unsupervised neural machine
translation (UNMT) to translate the emergent languages
developed during referential games of varying complexity.
UNMT is particularly suited for this task as it does not require parallel data (Lample et al. 2018a; Artetxe, Labaka,
and Agirre 2018; Conneau et al. 2017; Lample et al. 2018b;
Xu et al. 2018), which is typically unavailable for AIgenerated languages. To facilitate translation, we generate
an EC corpus from each game by compiling the messages
exchanged between agents. Concurrently, we employ a separate English caption dataset as a linguistic prior, which
provides a resource of image descriptions for images provided to the agents during the game (Naturally, the images
provided to the agents contains no caption). By integrating these distinct datasets, we can adapt existing UNMT
techniques (Chronopoulou, Stojanovski, and Fraser 2020) to
translate the emergent communications into English, showcasing their translatability across varying task complexities.
Leveraging the capabilities of UNMT, our study dives
into the intricacies of structured referential games of varying complexity (Lewis 2008; Lazaridou, Peysakhovich, and
Baroni 2016; Choi, Lazaridou, and De Freitas 2018; Guo
et al. 2019), including Random, Inter-category, Supercategory, and Category image discrimination tasks. In these
games, agents must identify a target image, such as a giraffe, from a set of distractors. Distractors are non-target
images selected based on the game type, adding complexity to the task (Figure 1a). For example, in a Supercategory
game, a distractor for a giraffe target can be cow, whereas
in a Random game, the distractors could be as unrelated as
a fire hydrant (Figure 2), for the same giraffe target. These
games are deliberately designed to simulate diverse communication environments, aimed at constructing ECs that increasingly resemble human languages, and will eventually
be useful for interpretability and usability of AI-generated
languages in real-world scenarios. We hypothesize that, akin
to the evolution of human languages that adapt in response to
social and environmental pressures (Kuhl 2004; Kottur et al.
2017), the complexity inherent in these games will catalyze
similar transformations in the EC.
Through our research, we have established a new benchmark for translating EC into NL. This benchmark leverages a comprehensive suite of metrics designed to capture
the intricacy and diversity of AI-generated languages. These

Emergent Communication (EC) provides a unique window
into the language systems that emerge autonomously when
agents are trained to jointly achieve shared goals. However,
it is difficult to interpret EC and evaluate its relationship
with natural languages (NL). This study employs unsupervised neural machine translation (UNMT) techniques to decipher ECs formed during referential games with varying
task complexities, influenced by the semantic diversity of the
environment. Our findings demonstrate UNMT’s potential
to translate EC, illustrating that task complexity characterized by semantic diversity enhances EC translatability, while
higher task complexity with constrained semantic variability
exhibits pragmatic EC, which, although challenging to interpret, remains suitable for translation. This research marks the
first attempt, to our knowledge, to translate EC without the
aid of parallel data.

1

Introduction

Emergent communication (EC) describes the phenomenon
in which AI agents develop communication protocols to
achieve shared goals (Giles and Jim 2003; Kasai, Tenmoto,
and Kamiya 2008; Boldt and Mortensen 2024; Brandizzi
2023). This capacity has garnered attention due to its significant potential for understanding the complexities of language formation and evolution within multi-agent systems.
Yet, ECs remain largely opaque, difficult to interpret and
translate into human-readable forms.
Although efforts to understand EC have been made, interpretability remains elusive. Traditional approaches, such as
topographic similarity (Brighton and Kirby 2006), measure
the correlation between message and input distances, provide a coarse measure of EC structures, but do not capture
the full nuances of EC compositionality. Recent advancements aim to use natural language (NL) to analyze EC (Xu,
Niethammer, and Raffel 2022; Carmeli, Belinkov, and Meir
2024; Chaabouni et al. 2020). Another line of research aims
to translate EC into NL using parallel data (EC-NL pairs) to
gain a more intuitive understanding (Andreas, Dragan, and
Klein 2017; Yao et al. 2022). However, this approach may
introduce certain biases in the translation process.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23231

