The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PoseMamba: Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation with Bidirectional
Global-Local Spatio-Temporal State Space Model
Yunlong Huang, Junshuo Liu, Ke Xian* , Robert Caiming Qiu
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{huangyunlong, junshuo liu, kxian, caiming}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
44
MPJPE (mm)

Transformers have significantly advanced the field of 3D human pose estimation (HPE). However, existing transformerbased methods primarily use self-attention mechanisms for
spatio-temporal modeling, leading to a quadratic complexity, unidirectional modeling of spatio-temporal relationships,
and insufficient learning of spatial-temporal correlations. Recently, the Mamba architecture, utilizing the state space
model (SSM), has exhibited superior long-range modeling
capabilities in a variety of vision tasks with linear complexity.
In this paper, we propose PoseMamba, a novel purely SSMbased approach with linear complexity for 3D human pose estimation in monocular video. Specifically, we propose a bidirectional global-local spatio-temporal SSM block that comprehensively models human joint relations within individual
frames as well as temporal correlations across frames. Within
this bidirectional global-local spatio-temporal SSM block, we
introduce a reordering strategy to enhance the local modeling
capability of the SSM. This strategy provides a more logical geometric scanning order and integrates it with the global
SSM, resulting in a combined global-local spatial scan. We
have quantitatively and qualitatively evaluated our approach
using two benchmark datasets: Human3.6M and MPI-INF3DHP. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PoseMamba
achieves state-of-the-art performance on both datasets while
maintaining a smaller model size and reducing computational
costs.

42
40
38

0

200

400
MACs/frame (M)

600

MHFormer
MixSTE
P-STMO
Stridedformer
Einfalt
STCFormer
PoseFormerV2
MotionBERT
MotionAGFormer-L
PoseMamba
PoseMamba-B
PoseMamba-L

Figure 1: Comparisons of recent 3D human pose estimation techniques on Human3.6M (Ionescu et al. 2013) (lower
is better). MACs/frame represents multiply-accumulate operations for each output frame. Our PoseMamba method
presents various versions and achieves superior results,
while maintaining computational efficiency.

Recently, transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) have demonstrated significant potential in 3D human pose estimation.
Its self-attention mechanism enables it to efficiently capture
spatio-temporal relationships for this domain. For example,
PoseFormer (Zheng et al. 2021) leverages spatio-temporal
information to estimate more accurate central-frame pose in
video sequence. MHFormer (Li et al. 2022b) learns spatiotemporal representations of multiple pose hypotheses in an
end-to-end manner. MixSTE (Zhang et al. 2022) proposes an
alternating design using a transformer-based seq2seq model
to capture the coherence between sequences. However, applying full attention mechanisms to long 2D keypoints sequence results in a notable rise in computational requirements, due to the quadratic complexity of attention calculations in both computation and memory. This naturally raises
the question: how can a method be designed to function with
linear complexity while still preserving the advantages of
capturing spatio-temporal information?
We observe recent progress in state space models (Gu and
Dao 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Islam and Bertasius 2022), particularly with the emergence of the structured state space
squence model (S4) (Gu, Goel, and Ré 2021) as a promising architecture for sequence modeling. Building upon S4,
Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023) incorporates time-varying parameters into the SSM, introducing an efficient hardware-

Introduction
3D human pose estimation from monocular observations is
a fundamental task in computer vision with various realworld applications (Mehta et al. 2017b; Wiederer et al. 2020;
Czech et al. 2022; Bauer et al. 2023; Munea et al. 2020).
Typically, this involves two separate steps: 2D pose detection to locate keypoints on the image plane, followed by
2D-to-3D lifting to determine joint positions in 3D space
from 2D keypoints. Recovering accurate 3D pose from 2D
keypoints is challenging due to depth ambiguity and selfocclusion in monocular data. To address these challenges,
significant advancements in deep learning approaches have
been made, consistently improving performance (Liu et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2020; Zeng et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3842

