The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VTG-LLM: Integrating Timestamp Knowledge into Video LLMs for Enhanced
Video Temporal Grounding
Yongxin Guo1 * , Jingyu Liu2 , Mingda Li2 , Dingxin Cheng3 , Xiaoying Tang1,4,5† , Dianbo Sui6 ,
Qingbin Liu2 , Xi Chen2† , Kevin Zhao2
1

School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, P.R. China
2
Tencent PCG
3
Shandong University
4
The Shenzhen Future Network of Intelligence Institute, CUHK-Shenzhen, 518172, P.R. China
5
The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence, CUHK-Shenzhen, 518172, P.R. China
6
Harbin Institute of Technology
yongxinguo@link.cuhk.edu.cn, tangxiaoying@cuhk.edu.cn, jasonxchen@tencent.com
Abstract

the VTG task into four primary sub-tasks. For instance,
moment retrieval and dense video captioning tasks (Fabian
Caba Heilbron and Niebles 2015; Zhou, Xu, and Corso
2018) require models to generate one or multiple timestamp
intervals, each accompanied by captions. The video highlight detection task (Lei, Berg, and Bansal 2021) necessitates models to produce a prominent score curve, while the
video summarization task (Song et al. 2015) demands that
models output a series of timestamps, each associated with
their corresponding video frames.
Despite significant efforts by traditional task-specific
models designed for various VTG tasks (Yang et al. 2023;
Luo et al. 2023a; Lei, Berg, and Bansal 2021), these methods are limited in their ability to (1) handle multiple VTG
tasks simultaneously and (2) provide zero-shot capabilities
on VTG tasks, which are crucial for real-world applications.
As a remedy, recent research has begun exploring the use of
video LLMs (Lin et al. 2023a; Zhang, Li, and Bing 2023;
Li et al. 2023a) as generalists (Ren et al. 2023; Huang et al.
2023) for addressing VTG tasks due to their capacity to handle various tasks concurrently in a zero-shot manner. However, several persistent issues hinder the effectiveness of current video LLMs in understanding timestamp knowledge,
which in turn affects their performance on VTG tasks:

Video Temporal Grounding (VTG) strives to accurately pinpoint event timestamps in a specific video using linguistic queries, significantly impacting downstream tasks like
video browsing and editing. Unlike traditional task-specific
models, Video Large Language Models (video LLMs) can
handle multiple tasks concurrently in a zero-shot manner.
Consequently, exploring the application of video LLMs for
VTG tasks has become a burgeoning research area. However, despite considerable advancements in video content understanding, video LLMs often struggle to accurately pinpoint timestamps within videos, limiting their effectiveness
in VTG tasks. To address this, we introduce VTG-LLM, a
model designed to enhance video LLMs’ timestamp localization abilities. Our approach includes: (1) effectively integrating timestamp knowledge into visual tokens; (2) incorporating absolute-time tokens to manage timestamp knowledge
without concept shifts; and (3) introducing a lightweight,
high-performance, slot-based token compression technique
designed to accommodate the demands of a large number of frames to be sampled for VTG tasks. Additionally,
we present VTG-IT-120K, a collection of publicly available
VTG datasets that we have re-annotated to improve upon lowquality annotations. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of VTG-LLM in comparison
to other video LLM methods across a variety of VTG tasks.

• Visual inputs should contain sufficient and accurate
timestamp information to help models understand when
the visual content occurs in the videos.

Code — https://github.com/gyxxyg/VTG-LLM

Introduction

• Concept shifts occur when varying input data produce
identical output targets, potentially obscuring decision
boundaries (Moreno-Torres et al. 2012). This issue arises
when using shared token embedding and classification
heads for all digit-related knowledge. For example, the
number ’20’ can appear in both a counting context, such
as ’There are 20 people,’ and a temporal context like
’From 20-30 seconds.’ Although these digits have different meanings in these situations, they are forced to share
the same decision boundary, making classification more
challenging.

Video Temporal Grounding (VTG) is a crucial component of
video understanding. It requires models to accurately pinpoint event timestamps within a video based on the given
query. This task is essential for subsequent operations such
as video browsing and editing. In this paper, we adopt the
categorization described by Lin et al. (2023b), and divide
* This work was done when Yongxin Guo was an intern at Ten-

cent PCG.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• VTG tasks necessitate sampling more frames compared
3302

