The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

StructSR: Refuse Spurious Details in Real-World Image Super-Resolution
Yachao Li1 , Dong Liang1 * , Tianyu Ding2 , Sheng-Jun Huang1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, MIIT Key Laboratory of
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and
Industrialization, Nanjing 211106, China.
2
Microsoft, Washington, USA
{liyachao, liangdong, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn, tianyuding@microsoft.com
Abstract
Diffusion-based models have shown great promise in realworld image super-resolution (Real-ISR), but often generate content with structural errors and spurious texture details due to the empirical priors and illusions of these models. To address this issue, we introduce StructSR, a simple, effective, and plug-and-play method that enhances structural fidelity and suppresses spurious details for diffusionbased Real-ISR. StructSR operates without the need for additional fine-tuning, external model priors, or high-level semantic knowledge. At its core is the Structure-Aware Screening
(SAS) mechanism, which identifies the image with the highest structural similarity to the low-resolution (LR) input in the
early inference stage, allowing us to leverage it as a historical structure knowledge to suppress the generation of spurious details. By intervening in the diffusion inference process,
StructSR seamlessly integrates with existing diffusion-based
Real-ISR models. Our experimental results demonstrate that
StructSR significantly improves the fidelity of structure and
texture, improving the PSNR and SSIM metrics by an average of 5.27% and 9.36% on a synthetic dataset (DIV2KVal) and 4.13% and 8.64% on two real-world datasets (RealSR and DRealSR) when integrated with four state-of-theart diffusion-based Real-ISR methods.

Figure 1: Comparison of diffusion-based Real-ISR methods
with and without StructSR integration. The original methods
generate spurious details in both English letters and Chinese
characters. Integration with StructSR significantly reduces
these artifacts, resulting in more accurate reconstruction.

data and generally lack the capability to generate realistic
texture details for Real-ISR.
Current diffusion-based Real-ISR methods typically utilize pre-trained text-to-image models, e.g., Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022) as priors and fine-tune them using real-world image super-resolution datasets. These methods (Wang et al. 2023a; Lin et al. 2023b; Yang et al. 2023;
Wu et al. 2024) have shown remarkable proficiency in generating realistic image details. However, they often struggle
with maintaining structural fidelity, and the generated details
may be spurious with the real semantics due to the empirical
priors and illusions of these models, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
We study the changes in the image structure during the
inference process of the diffusion-based Real-ISR method
by using structural similarity (SSIM) (Wang et al. 2004)
between the temporal reconstructed image and the input
LR image (Details see Methodology Section). Our analysis reveals that, the temporal reconstructed images with
high SSIM values can be used to guide the inference process for eliminating structural errors and suppressing spurious details. Based on this finding, we propose a structureaware Real-ISR (StructSR) method, a simple, effective, and
plug-and-play method that enhances structural fidelity for

Code — https://github.com/LYCEXE/StructSR

Introduction
Image super-resolution aims to reconstruct high-resolution
(HR) images from their low-resolution (LR) counterparts.
Traditional image super-resolution methods often rely on
simplistic assumptions about degradation (e.g., Gaussian
noise and bicubic downsampling) and design methods tailored to these degradation models (Chen et al. 2021, 2023a;
Dong et al. 2014; Liang et al. 2021). However, their ability
to generalize to real-world images with complex degradation
is limited. To address the challenges of real-world image
super-resolution (Real-ISR), methods (Zhang et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021) have employed Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2020) to generate HR
images from LR images collected from the real world. However, these methods rely heavily on specific paired training
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5022

