The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalizable Disaster Damage Assessment
via Change Detection with Vision Foundation Model
Kyeongjin Ahn1 , Sungwon Han1 , Sungwon Park1 ,
Jihee Kim2,1,3 , Sangyoon Park4 , Meeyoung Cha5,1 *
1

School of Computing, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
College of Business, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
3
Graduate School of Data Science, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
4
Division of Social Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Kowloon, Hong Kong
5
Data Science for Humanity, Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy (MPI-SP), Bochum, Germany
2

Geographical Difference

Abstract
The increasing frequency and intensity of natural disasters
call for rapid and accurate damage assessment. In response,
disaster benchmark datasets from high-resolution satellite
imagery have been constructed to develop methods for
detecting damaged areas. However, these methods face
significant challenges when applied to previously unseen
regions due to the limited geographical and disaster-type
diversity in the existing datasets. We introduce DAVI
(Disaster Assessment with VIsion foundation model), a
novel approach that addresses domain disparities and detects
structural damage at the building level without requiring
ground-truth labels for target regions. DAVI combines
task-specific knowledge from a model trained on source
regions with task-agnostic knowledge from an image
segmentation model to generate pseudo labels indicating
potential damage in target regions. It then utilizes a two-stage
refinement process, which operate at both pixel and image
levels, to accurately identify changes in disaster-affected
areas. Our evaluation, including a case study on the 2023
Türkiye earthquake, demonstrates that our model achieves
exceptional performance across diverse terrains (e.g., North
America, Asia, and the Middle East) and disaster types
(e.g., wildfires, hurricanes, and tsunamis). This confirms its
robustness in disaster assessment without dependence on
ground-truth labels and highlights its practical applicability.

1

California, Mexico
USA

Brazil

Disaster Difference

Earthquake Flooding Tsunami WildFire

Benchmark Dataset
New Event Area

Figure 1: Collaborative efforts are underway to collect
datasets on natural disasters, yet no single benchmark
dataset covers the entire world. The yellow areas represent
regions with recent disasters not included in the dataset.
geographic regions at a lower cost relative to traditional
ground surveys (Weber and Kané 2020; Wu et al. 2021b;
Gupta and Shah 2021).
Conventional methods rely on change detection approaches that compare visual differences in regional images
taken before and after a disaster. Methods such as image
differentiation (St-Charles, Bilodeau, and Bergevin 2014),
image ratio (Skifstad and Jain 1989), principal component
analysis (Kuncheva and Faithfull 2013), and change vector
analysis (Bruzzone and Prieto 2000) are commonly applied
to these problems. Recent works detect changes using deep
features through thresholding techniques (Saha, Bovolo, and
Bruzzone 2019), specialized convolution networks (Zhao
et al. 2017), and contrastive learning (Wu et al. 2021a).
However, these techniques face significant challenges in
real-world damage assessment due to substantial discrepancies between available training data (source data) and test
data (target data). Figure 1 illustrates this issue, showing
that the regions in the extensive disaster benchmark dataset,
xBD (Gupta et al. 2019), span 45,000 square kilometers
of annotated high-resolution satellite images of natural
disasters, yet cover only a small part of the world. The
limited coverage of these benchmark datasets makes it
difficult to analyze features of previously unseen regions
in terms of visual style. Additionally, the visual features of

Introduction

Natural disasters such as wildfires, hurricanes, floods, and
earthquakes are becoming increasingly prevalent and severe
due to climate change (IPCC 2022). These catastrophic
events significantly impact human lives and cause extensive economic losses, necessitating prompt responses in
rescue operations and financial assistance. With limited
resources available for life-saving relief and infrastructure
recovery, assessing disaster damage at a fine-grained
infrastructure-level becomes critical for effective resource
distribution (Fiedrich, Gehbauer, and Rickers 2000; Field
et al. 2012). Among the various efforts, multi-temporal
remote sensing images have emerged as a valuable resource
for disaster damage assessment, which can cover broad
* The corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27784

