The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Asymmetric Hierarchical Difference-aware Interaction Network for Event-guided
Motion Deblurring
Wen Yang1,2 , Jinjian Wu1,2 ∗ , Leida Li1 , Weisheng Dong1 , Guangming Shi1,2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Huangpu, 510555, China
yangwen@xidian.edu.cn, {jinjian.wu, ldli, wsdong, gmshi}@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that are capable of
capturing motion information with high temporal resolution,
which show potential in aiding image motion deblurring recently. Most existing methods indiscriminately handle feature fusion of two modalities with symmetric unidirectional/bidirectional interactions at different-level layers in feature
encoder, while ignoring the different dependencies between
cross-modal hierarchical features. To tackle these limitations,
we propose a novel Asymmetric Hierarchical Differenceaware Interaction Network (AHDINet) for event-based motion deblurring, which explores the complementarity of two
modalities with differential dependence modeling of crossmodal hierarchical features. Thereby, an event-assisted edge
complement module is designed to leverage event modality
to enhance the edge details of the image features in low-level
encoder stage, and an image-assisted semantic complement
module is developed to transfer contextual semantics of image features to event branch in high-level encoder stage. Benefiting from the proposed differentiated interaction mode, the
respective advantages of image and event modalities are fully
exploited. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance.

Figure 1: Cross-modal fusion strategies of existing eventbased motion deblurring models: (a) Unidirectional interaction; (b) Symmetric bidirectional interaction; (c) Asymmetric bidirectional interaction (Ours). And (d): Some comparison of visualized deblurring results from REFID (Sun et al.
2023), STCNet (Yang et al. 2024), and our AHDINet.

of a large-scale dataset of blurry-sharp image pairs (Nah,
Hyun Kim, and Mu Lee 2017; Zamir et al. 2021; Park et al.
2020; Dong et al. 2023; Kong et al. 2023; Zhang, Xie, and
Yao 2024; Liang et al. 2024). Although DNN-based deblurring methods have achieved promising improvements, they
may fail to deal with severe blur due to the significant loss
of motion information.
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that can record
per-pixel intensity changes asynchronously with high temporal resolution and output a stream of events encoding
time, location and polarity of intensity changes (Gallego
et al. 2020) if the intensity changes surpass a threshold.
Due to the strong connection they possess with motion information, events have been used for motion deblurring recently. Early methods establish a mathematical event-based
model mapping blurry frames to sharp frames (Pan et al.
2019; Scheerlinck, Barnes, and Mahony 2018) ,which are
susceptible to sensor noise. Thus, some efforts utilize deep
neural network to deal with noise corruption. Mainstream
deep learning-based approaches are to model complementarity by elaborating cross-modal fusion schemes in feature encoder, which can be broadly classified into two categories: i) Unidirectional single/multi-level interaction shown

Code — https://github.com/wyang-vis/AHDINet

Introduction
Motion blur often occurs due to the fast motion of the object
and/or the camera over the period of exposure time. Motion deblurring, a classical yet challenging problem, aims
to restore sharp image from blurry input. It is an ill-posed
inverse problem, due to the existence of many possible solutions. Traditional methods for accomplishing this task rely
heavily on manually crafted image priors and various constraints (Bar et al. 2007; Cho, Wang, and Lee 2012; Bahat, Efrat, and Irani 2017; Kotera, Šroubek, and Milanfar
2013) , which limit the model capacity. With the development of deep neural network (DNN), DNN has also been applied for motion deblurring task to directly learn the relation
from blurry images to sharp images under the supervision
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9265

