The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Distilling Structured Rationale from Large Language Models to Small Language
Models for Abstractive Summarization
Linyong Wang1,2 , Lianwei Wu1,2 * , Shaoqi Song1 , Yaxiong Wang3 , Cuiyun Gao4 , Kang Wang1
1

ASGO, School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China.
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
linyongwang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, wlw@nwpu.edu.cn, songshaoqi@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, wangyx15@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
gaocuiyun@hit.edu.cn, wk0 0@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Document

Large Language Models (LLMs) have permeated various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. For the summarization
tasks, LLMs can generate well-structured rationales, which
consist of Essential Aspects (EA), Associated Sentences (AS)
and Triple Entity Relations (TER). These rationales guide
smaller models (≤1B) to produce better summaries. However, their high deployment costs (≥70B), such as substantial
storage space and high computing requirements, limit their
utilization in resource-constrained environments. Furthermore,
effectively distilling these structured rationales from LLMs
into Small Language Models (SLMs) models remains a challenge. To address this, we propose the LLM-based Structured
Rationale-guided Multi-view Weak-gated Fusion framework
(LSR-MWF). The framework initially employs LLMs to dig
structural rationales from a document, considering multiple
viewpoints such as EA, AS, and TER. Then, it develop a multistep summary generation evaluation strategy to select highquality structured rationales. Subsequently, it aligns with these
rationales using additional modules organized in a hierarchical
structure. Finally, the framework integrates the features output
by these modules with original abstractive model through a
weak-gated mechanism. Experimental results on two publicly
available CNN/DailyMail and XSum datasets show that our
method improves the performance of the abstractive model,
outperforming baselines by 11.2% and 5.8%, respectively. In
addition, our method improves the interpretability of summary
generation from the viewpoints of EA, AS and TER.

EAE

Aspects

Aspects

ASE

Sentences
Sentences

TERG

Sentences

Relations

Structure Rationales

Figure 1: A simple demonstration of structured rationales distillation of documents via LLMs, including Essential Aspects
Extraction (EAE), Associated Sentences Extraction (ASE)
and Triples Entity Relations Generation (TERG).

Code — https://github.com/Wangdoudou8/LSR-MWF

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-series (Ouyang
et al. 2022; Achiam et al. 2023), Llama (Touvron et al. 2023),
PaLM (Chowdhery et al. 2023), and Chinchilla (Hoffmann
et al. 2022), have permeated every aspect of natural language processing (NLP), encompassing tasks like questionanswering (QA) systems (Longpre et al. 2023), etc. For summarization tasks, LLMs can generate high-quality structured
rationales from a document, which consist of Essential Aspects (EA), Associated Sentences (AS), and Triple Entity
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25389

Relations (TER), as shown in Figure 1. These rationales
function similarly to Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wang, Zhang,
and Wang 2023; Wen et al. 2023b,a) in guiding Small Language Models (SLMs) to produce better summaries. However,
deploying LLMs (≥70B) requires substantial computational
resources, limiting their utility in resource-constrained environments (≤1B) (Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum 2020).
Furthermore, effectively distilling these structured rationales
from LLMs to SLMs remains a significant challenge due to
the lack of careful rationale extraction, rationale selection, or
training strategies (Pham et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2024; Liu
et al. 2024a).
Abstractive summarization is a pivotal task that condenses
lengthy texts into concise, informative summaries (Radev,
Hovy, and McKeown 2002). BART (Lewis et al. 2019) and
PEGASUS (Zhang et al. 2020) are two prominent pre-trained
Seq2Seq language models widely used in academic research.
GSum (Dou et al. 2020), built upon BART, further enhances
its performance by incorporating guidance from an extractive
summarizer. Recently, SeqCo (Xu et al. 2022) emerged as
a method that harnesses contrastive learning to bolster the
effectiveness of BART in abstractive summarization. However, existing methods for summarization largely focus on
the overall content of the source document, neglecting to
explore its hierarchical structured information. This often
results in coarse-grained, poor-quality summaries (Gekhman
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023). Recognizing the hierarchical
nature of source documents, recent research has indicated
the potential of LLMs in generating structured rationales by
extracting core themes from documents (Min et al. 2023;

