The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spatiotemporal-Aware Neural Fields for Dynamic CT Reconstruction
Qingyang Zhou1 , Yunfan Ye2 * , Zhiping Cai1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
School of Design, Hunan University, Changsha, China

Abstract

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to remove streak
artifacts in the image domain (Zhi et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2022; Deng et al. 2024), achieving promising results in the
field of medical 4D-CT reconstruction. Nevertheless, these
methods require a large amount of training data, and due
to the inherent limitations of CNNs and computational constraints, these methods encounter challenges in capturing 4D
spatiotemporal information and generalizing across different
scenes and is difficult to apply to scenes where the motion
state is unknown (e.g. industrial scene).
Compared to medical scenes, it becomes even more challenging in industrial applications to capture aperiodic object motions. Existing methods for addressing such aperiodic motion (Reed et al. 2021; Mohan et al. 2015) typically
focus on low-resolution reconstruction scenes.
Recently, the success of NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2023; Liao et al. 2024) in natural scene reconstruction has provided a feasible solution for CT reconstruction (Zha, Zhang, and Li 2022; Rückert et al. 2022; Cai
et al. 2024). However, existing NeRF-based 4D-CT reconstruction methods (Reed et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023;
Shao et al. 2024) only support dynamic CT reconstruction
at low resolutions. There are two possible reasons. First,
due to the nature of X-rays to penetrate objects, they usually bring more information than natural light, as shown in
Figure 1. CT scenes need to pay more attention to the entire
reconstruction space (with a higher rank), especially in 4D
high-resolution scenes, thereby imposing greater demands
on model representation capabilities. Secondly, although existing grid-based (Fang et al. 2022; Müller et al. 2022) and
plane-based (Cao and Johnson 2023; Fridovich-Keil et al.
2023; Shao et al. 2023) methods can flexibly improve model
capacity, such discrete features are not fully utilized with the
lack of constraints. Simply expanding the model scale also
brings limited improvement.
To address the above problems, we propose a new
framework, STNF4D. Inspired by plane decomposition (Fridovich-Keil et al. 2023; Cao and Johnson 2023),
we decompose the 4D scene into four orthogonal volumes
that map to hash grids. This approach aims at a more compact and efficient 4D representation. However, in densely
predicted high-resolution dynamic CT scenes, the lack of
constraints and hash conflicts in the hash grid features result in obvious dot-like artifacts and blurring in the recon-

We propose a dynamic Computed Tomography (CT) reconstruction framework called STNF4D (SpatioTemporal-aware
Neural Fields). First, we represent the 4D scene using four
orthogonal volumes and compress these volumes into more
compact hash grids. Compared to the plane decomposition
method, this method enhances the model’s capacity while
keeping the representation compact and efficient. However,
in densely predicted high-resolution dynamic CT scenes, the
lack of constraints and hash conflicts in the hash grid features
lead to obvious dot-like artifact and blurring in the reconstructed images. To address these issues, we propose the Spatiotemporal Transformer (ST-Former) that guides the model
in selecting and optimizing features by sensing the spatiotemporal information in different hash grids, significantly improving the quality of reconstructed images. We conducted
experiments on medical and industrial datasets covering various motion types, sampling modes, and reconstruction resolutions. Experimental results show that our method outperforms the second-best by 5.99 dB and 4.11 dB in medical and
industrial scenes, respectively.

Code — https://qingyangzhou69.github.io/STNF4D

Introduction
Traditional Computed Tomography (CT) reconstruction
technology leverages the penetrating properties of X-rays to
reveal detailed internal structures of objects (Kak and Slaney
2001). In scenes where the scanned object is moving (4DCT), 3D-CT reconstruction technology struggles to capture
the dynamic process, which has various applications ranging
from medical radiation therapy (Jaffray et al. 2002; Zhang
et al. 2024) to industrial material analysis (Reed et al. 2021).
The process of medical 4D-CT scanning generally applies
motion sensors to capture motion state (phase) signals and
collect projections only at specific phases. The vanilla 4D
reconstruction method uses the projections of each phase
for independent reconstruction (gated reconstruction). However, this method will cause streak artifacts under the limited number of projection acquisitions (Vergalasova and
Cai 2020). Existing learning-based methods typically utilize
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10834

