The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multimodal Fusion Using Multi-View Domains for Data Heterogeneity in
Federated Learning
Min Gao1 , Haifeng Zheng1∗ , Xinxin Feng1 , Ran Tao2
1

College of Physics and Information Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
221110027@fzu.edu.cn, zhenghf@fzu.edu.cn, fxx1116@fzu.edu.cn, rantao@bit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

shared data may contain the privacy details of users such as
behavioral preferences, geographical locations, and so on.
Federated learning (FL), as a typical cooperative training paradigm, provides an effective solution for privacy protection by delivering the updated model learned from private data to the server instead of directly uploading the private data (McMahan et al. 2017). Accordingly, FL-oriented
works toward multimodal fusion have attracted more and
more attention. Most existing works focus on improving
model performance by incorporating the complementary information from multiple sensors embedding on decentralized nodes where the multimodal fusion is extended from the
traditional centralized operations (Feng et al. 2023b; Khoa
et al. 2024). These methods do not consider the data heterogeneity especially in modality-based heterogeneity in practical multimodal FL scenarios. Although several FL works
for data heterogeneity consider either long-tail category distribution (Li et al. 2023b; Xiao et al. 2024) or domain shifts (Feng et al. 2023a; Chowdhury et al. 2022) between nodes,
most of them do not consider the aforementioned issues in
the context of coupled modality-based and category-based
data heterogeneity in multimodal FL scenarios. These issues become more complex in multimodal FL scenarios for
the introduction of modality-based heterogeneity between
nodes, which leads to significantly degraded performance
caused by worsening model divergence.
Specifically, domain shifts (same label, different features)
is widespread in real-world FL applications. For example,
different cameras/scanners and imaging protocols of different nodes present heterogeneity, which leads to domain
shift within a single modality (e.g., image) of data (Feng
et al. 2023a). However, the domain shifts in the heterogeneous multimodal FL scenarios become more complex,
which involves from solely intra-modality level to coupled
intra-modality and inter-modality level. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no previous FL works focusing on this
complex domain shifts in heterogeneous multimodal FL scenarios. Furthermore, long-tailed distribution inevitably exists due to the fixed geographical locations or the behavioral
preferences, which forms non-i.i.d. (not independently and
identically distributed) data among nodes and would enables
the global data manifests a long-tailed distribution. Existing works only focus on the category-wise imbalance (Zeng
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b; Xiao et al. 2024), but overlook

Multimodal information plays an important role in the advanced Internet of Things (IoT) in the era of 6G, which provides reliable and comprehensive assistance for downstream
tasks through further fusion and analysis via federated learning (FL). One of the primary challenges in FL is data heterogeneity, which may lead to domain shifts and sharply different local long-tailed category distribution across nodes. These
issues hinder the large-scale deployment of FL in IoT applications equipped with multiple various multimodal sensors
due to performance deterioration. In this paper, we propose
a novel multimodal fusion framework to tackle the aforementioned coupled problems arising during the cooperative
fusion of multimodal information without privacy exposure
among decentralized nodes equipped with diverse sensors.
Specifically, we introduce a flexible global logit alignment (GLA) method based on multi-view domains. This method
enables the fusion of diverse multimodal information with the
consideration of domain shifts caused by modality-based data heterogeneity. Furthermore, we propose a novel local angular margin (LAM) scheme, which dynamically adjusts decision boundaries for locally seen categories while preserving global decision boundaries for unseen categories. This
effectively mitigates severe model divergence caused by significantly different category distributions. Extensive simulations demonstrate the superiority of the proposed framework,
which exhibits significant merits in tackling model degeneration caused by data heterogeneity and enhancing modalitybased generalization for heterogeneous scenarios.

Introduction
The next-generation wireless networks are driving the rapid
development of a series of advanced Internet of Things
(IoT) services, such as smart cities, intelligent factories, autonomous driving, and so on (Li et al. 2023a; Zheng et al.
2021). Toward this vision, numerous heterogeneous IoT nodes equipped with various modal sensors are capable of
sensing information from multiple domains and centralize
the multimodal data at the cloud server for fusion and analysis to aid downstream tasks. However, directly sharing information severely violates privacy protection principles, as the
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16736

