The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Efficient Low-Order Hybrid Optimizer for Language Model Fine-Tuning
Minping Chen1 , You-Liang Huang1 , Zeyi Wen* 1,2
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{mchen779, yhuang142}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, wenzeyi@ust.hk

Abstract

In response to this challenge, several approaches have
been proposed. In-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al.
2020) makes an inference with only forward passes based on
the input prompts (i.e., labeled samples). However, the context sizes of most PLMs are limited and the predictive accuracy of ICL is often much worse than fine-tuning (Brown
et al. 2020). Another type of method, namely parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) (Houlsby et al. 2019; Li and
Liang 2021; Hu et al. 2022), only updates a small number
of model parameters while approaching similar predictive
accuracy of full fine-tuning methods, but it still needs to
store numerous activations (intermediate results of the forward pass) as the trainable parameters are dispersed across
the entire model. To address these problems, MeZO (Malladi et al. 2024) proposes a memory-efficient zeroth-order
(ZO) optimizer to estimate the gradients based on finite differences of function values with just two forward passes,
thus saving a significant amount of memory. Despite its benefits in memory efficiency, MeZO suffers from a significant
accuracy degradation compared with full fine-tuning using
first-order optimizers on various tasks and needs substantially more training steps to converge (Malladi et al. 2024).
We observe that MeZO only requires the same memory as
inference, and the free/unused memory is wasted when the
GPUs are solely occupied to maximize the computation efficiency during fine-tuning. For example, we find that when
using an A800 GPU to fine-tune OPT-13B with MeZO, it
exhibits over 10GB of free memory. It would be beneficial
to use this free memory to mitigate MeZO’s accuracy drop
and convergence issues. To this end, we propose Low-order
Hybrid Optimizer (LoHO), which exploits the memory efficiency of ZO optimizers and the optimization quality of
FO.1 LoHO is equipped with two hybrid optimization strategies, i.e., inter-layer hybrid optimization and intra-layer hybrid optimization. The inter-layer hybrid optimization employs an FO optimizer for fine-tuning a PLM’s several layers, while a ZO optimizer updates its rest layers, avoiding
unnecessary gradient propagation with the suitable setting
of the FO layers. Different from inter-layer hybrid optimization, intra-layer hybrid optimization selects some parame-

As the size of language models notably grows, fine-tuning
the models becomes more challenging: fine-tuning with firstorder optimizers (e.g., SGD and Adam) requires high memory consumption, while fine-tuning with a memory-efficient
zeroth-order optimizer (MeZO) has a significant accuracy
drop and slower convergence rate. In this work, we propose a
Low-order Hybrid Optimizer (LoHO) which merges zerothorder (ZO) and first-order (FO) optimizers for fine-tuning.
LoHO is empowered with inter-layer hybrid optimization and
intra-layer hybrid optimization, which boosts the accuracy of
MeZO while keeping memory usage within a budget. The
inter-layer hybrid optimization exploits the FO optimizer in
deep layers and the ZO optimizer in shallow ones, therefore
avoiding unnecessary gradient propagation to improve memory efficiency. The intra-layer hybrid optimization updates a
proportion of parameters in a layer by the ZO optimizer, and
the rest by the FO optimizer, taking advantage of gradient
sparsity for high efficiency implementation. Our experimental results across common datasets on different pre-trained
backbones (i.e., RoBERTa-large, OPT-13B and OPT-30B)
demonstrate that LoHO can significantly improve the predictive accuracy and convergence rate of MeZO, while controlling the memory footprint during fine-tuning. Moreover,
LoHO can achieve comparable performance with first-order
fine-tuning using substantially fewer memory resources.

Introduction
Fine-tuning with first-order (FO) optimizers, such as
Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014) and AdamW (Loshchilov and
Hutter 2018), has been the standard paradigm to adapt pretrained language models (PLMs) to the specific downstream
tasks (Liu et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2023).
However, with the growth of the number of model parameters, the increasing memory requirement for fine-tuning
with these first-order optimizers becomes a bottleneck, as
the back-propagation process is memory-consuming due to
the storage of gradients, optimizer states, and activations.
For example, Malladi et al. (2024) demonstrate that full
fine-tuning an OPT-13B model with Adam requires approximately 12 times the memory cost as the inference.

1

In this paper, we classify zeroth-order optimizers and firstorder optimizers as low-order optimizers to distinguish them from
high-order optimizers, i.e., second-order optimizers.

* Corresponding Author

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23605

