The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Real-Time Neural Denoising with Render-Aware Knowledge Distillation
Mengxun Kong, Jie Guo* , Chen Wang, Ye Yuan, Yanwen Guo
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{mengxunkong, chenwang}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {guojie, ywguo}@nju.edu.cn, yuanyeorange@gmail.com

Abstract

Shen 2020; Yu et al. 2021), deformable convolution (Wei
et al. 2021), and adversarial training (Xu et al. 2019; Lu
et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021). However, despite their impressive performance, the practical deployment of neural denoising methods in real-time graphical applications is often hindered by the high computational resources and memory requirements. To address this issue, research has increasingly
focused on the development of lightweight neural models
(Meng et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2021). These models, while
beneficial in reducing computational load, typically achieve
lower image quality due to their reduced model capacity and
limited learning ability.
Monte Carlo denoising, particularly in the context of realtime applications, has seen a variety of approaches with
both traditional and neural techniques. Traditional real-time
denoising filters, such as those proposed by Schied et al.
(2017); Zhdan (2021); Nvidia (2022b,a), continue to be
prevalent in scenarios demanding high frame rates, where
computational budgets are constrained. These methods, although non-machine-learning-based, excel in delivering performance under tight computational constraints.
In the real-time context, the focus has been on simplifying model size to meet performance demands. For instance,
Meng et al. (2020) introduced a lightweight network that
predicts a multi-scale pyramid to splat noisy data into a bilateral grid, while Işık et al. (2021) leveraged the pairwise
affinity of per-pixel features for noise reduction and temporal stability. Additionally, Fan et al. (2021) proposed a network encoding of kernel weights to construct filter kernels
using a hand-crafted decoder, and Thomas et al. (2022) combined supersampling and denoising within a U-Net inspired
architecture. Most recently, Balint et al. (2023) introduced a
novel pyramidal filter equipped with adaptable partitioning
and upsampling stages.
While lightweight kernel prediction networks have
demonstrated fast performance with decent denoising results, they often suffer from limited receptive fields and overblurring issues. Our work builds upon these efforts by introducing a lightweight kernel prediction network that leverages knowledge distillation, enabling the network to learn
from the broad receptive fields and detail preservation capabilities of offline teacher denoisers. This approach aims to
balance the trade-off between computational efficiency and
image quality, making it suitable for real-time Monte Carlo

Real-time Monte Carlo (MC) ray tracing with low sampling
rates demands a denoising algorithm that adeptly balances
the trade-off between quality and efficiency. Previous works
have paid much attention on designing delicate denoising architecture while ignoring model compression. In this work,
we present a render-aware knowledge distillation (RAKD)
framework, specifically designed for Monte Carlo denoising. We meticulously delineate the Knowledge Distillation
(KD) process within RAKD, emphasizing three pivotal techniques: the strategic incorporation of an auxiliary unlabeled
dataset, the integration of adversarial learning through generative adversarial network (GAN), and the application of
parameter transfer for robust model initialization. These approaches are harmoniously combined to distill knowledge effectively, enabling our student model to adeptly strike a balance between preserving high-frequency details and reducing low-frequency noise. Finally, our results demonstrate that
RAKD achieves state-of-the-art quality while upholding realtime performance, successfully tackling the computational
constraints faced by resource-limited devices.

Introduction
Monte Carlo (MC) ray tracing can simulate a wide range of
lighting effects by randomly sampling light paths and averaging their contributions in every pixel. Despite its significant computational cost, it has become the de facto standard in offline rendering scenarios (e.g., movie production)
due to its accuracy and flexibility. Recent advances in powerful hardware and GPU ray tracing APIs (Sandy, Andersson, and Barré-Brisebois 2018; Harada 2020; Burgess 2020)
bring real-time ray tracing (RTRT) into reach. Nonetheless,
ray budgets are still limited, particularly on resource-limited
devices. Existing RTRT algorithms can only afford very low
sampling rates (typically 1˜4 spp), resulting in distracting
noise.
Over the past decade, neural networks have demonstrated
remarkable success in image denoising for Monte Carlo
(MC) rendering, offering significant advancements in visual
quality and computational efficiency (Zwicker et al. 2015;
Huo and Yoon 2021), with architectures incorporating advanced techniques like transformer blocks (Lu, Xie, and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4392

