The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Reference Preference Optimization for Large Language Models
Hung Le1 , Quan Hung Tran2 , Dung Nguyen1 , Kien Do1 , Saloni Mittal2 ,
Kelechi Ogueji2 , Svetha Venkatesh1
1

Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
2
ServiceNow Research, USA
{thai.le, dung.nguyen, k.do, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au
{hungquan.tran, saloni.mittal, kelechi.ogueji}@servicenow.com
Abstract

reference LLM model (minimizing a Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence). While RLHF has been successful in enhancing
the helpfulness and accuracy of model-generated content
(Ouyang et al. 2022; Stiennon et al. 2020), it is unstable,
complicated, and resource-intensive.
Recent advancements, such as direct preference
optimization (DPO (Rafailov et al. 2023)) and other
likelihood-based preference learning (Zhao et al. 2023;
Azar et al. 2023; Ethayarajh et al. 2024; Chen et al.
2024), have sought to replace the cumbersome RLHF
with closed-form supervised losses. Although they have
demonstrated impressive performance compared to RLHF
and supervised finetuning (SFT), their exclusive reliance on
a single reference model restricts their potential, overlooking
the advantages of harnessing multiple pretrained LLMs.
Using multiple reference models offers two key benefits:
(i) it enhances robustness and generalization by combining
models that excel at different inputs to improve overall
performance across diverse data and tasks; (ii) multiple
references introduce stronger regularization, leveraging
diverse constraints to build a more resilient system less
prone to overfitting and reward hacking. This is increasingly
important as the open-source community consistently
introduces new pretrained/SFT LLMs of varying scales,
trained on diverse datasets (Touvron et al. 2023; Penedo
et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023). It underscores the necessity
for a solution that employs multiple references for LLM
finetuning, enabling the distillation of knowledge from
existing LLMs to enhance the alignment training stage.
Unfortunately, none of the prior works have proposed a
solution for utilizing multiple reference LLMs in direct
preference optimization.
The absence of such solutions stems from three challenges
in formulating closed-form multiple-reference preference
learning. Firstly, deriving a closed-form solution for the
RLHF objective with multiple referencing constraints is
nontrivial due to the non-linearity of multiple KL terms.
Secondly, reference models with varying architecture, size,
and pretraining data may produce diverging outputs given
the same input. This divergence could potentially confuse
the learning process, leading to unstable training, worse
than single-reference approaches. Thirdly, determining the
contribution of each reference model during training poses
a challenge, requiring extensive tuning. In this paper, we

How can Large Language Models (LLMs) be aligned with
human intentions and values? A typical solution is to gather
human preference on model outputs and finetune the LLMs
accordingly while ensuring that updates do not deviate
too far from a reference model. Recent approaches, such
as direct preference optimization (DPO), have eliminated
the need for unstable and sluggish reinforcement learning
optimization by introducing close-formed supervised losses.
However, a significant limitation of the current approach is
its design for a single reference model only, neglecting to
leverage the collective power of numerous pretrained LLMs.
To overcome this limitation, we introduce a novel closed-form
formulation for direct preference optimization using multiple
reference models. The resulting algorithm, Multi-Reference
Preference Optimization (MRPO), leverages broader prior
knowledge from diverse reference models, substantially
enhancing preference learning capabilities compared to the
single-reference DPO. Our experiments demonstrate that
LLMs finetuned with MRPO generalize better in various
preference data, regardless of data scarcity or abundance.
Furthermore, MRPO effectively finetunes LLMs to exhibit
superior performance in several downstream natural language
processing tasks such as HH-RLHF, GSM8K and TruthfulQA.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful
tools in natural language processing, capable of generating
human-like text and performing a myriad of language-related
tasks (Lewkowycz et al. 2022; Achiam et al. 2023; Touvron
et al. 2023). However, aligning these models with human
intentions and values remains a challenging endeavor (Wang
et al. 2023). Aligning LLMs with curated human feedback
emerges as a critical solution to guide LLM response behavior
and address this challenge. Preference models like the
Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry 1952) are often used
to measure the alignment of reward functions with empirical
preference data, facilitating an alignment framework using
reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF
(Christiano et al. 2017)). The framework aims to optimize
the preference models (maximizing preference reward) while
ensuring that LLM updates do not stray too far from a base
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24375

