The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MASS: Overcoming Language Bias in Image-Text Matching
Jiwan Chung, Seungwon Lim Sangkyu Lee, Youngjae Yu
Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, South Korea
jiwan.chung.research@gmail.com

Abstract
Pretrained visual-language models have made significant advancements in multimodal tasks, including image-text retrieval. However, a major challenge in image-text matching
lies in language bias, where models predominantly rely on
language priors and neglect to adequately consider the visual content. We thus present Multimodal ASsociation Score
(MASS), a framework that reduces the reliance on language
priors for better visual accuracy in image-text matching problems. It can be seamlessly incorporated into existing visuallanguage models without necessitating additional training.
Our experiments have shown that MASS effectively lessens
language bias without losing an understanding of linguistic
compositionality. Overall, MASS offers a promising solution
for enhancing image-text matching performance in visuallanguage models.

ITC

hose carries firewoman

CLIP, ALIGN

compositionality

TL
GIT, OFA

fireman carries hose
language bias

MASS

firewoman carries hose

Figure 1: Captions retrieved with each method given the image, where only MASS succeeds in ruling out the failure
modes. Models trained Image-Text Contrastive (ITC) objectives such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) fail to model linguistic structure. Token Likelihood (TL) of image captioning models including OFA (Wang et al. 2022b) shows overreliance on its language prior. Our MASS amends the language bias of image captioning models for accurate imagetext matching capability.

code — https://github.com/JiwanChung/mass aaai

1

Introduction

image captioning objective features a better understanding
of linguistic structures, including compositionality. The objective fosters language generation capability in the trained
models, inducing stronger linguistic understanding.
Still, there is a caveat in directly using the image captioning models to assess image-text similarity. While training
for the captioning objective, the models inherently build a
prior for language distribution on what text sequence is more
likely regardless of the given image. As shown in Figure 1,
overreliance on this prior leads to weaker visual conditioning and then to incorrect image-text matching. Drawing inspiration from previous research (Niu et al. 2020), we refer
to such phenomenon as language bias. Language bias refers
to the propensity of visual-language models to rely heavily
on language priors in the training data instead of properly
conditioning their output on the given images. It has been
repeatedly reported that language bias is a major bottleneck
in visual question-answering (Agrawal, Batra, and Parikh
2016; Zhang et al. 2016; Agrawal et al. 2018; Si et al. 2022),
and other vision-language tasks (Srinivasan and Bisk 2021;
Salin et al. 2022).
In this paper, we present Multimodal ASsociation Score
(MASS) as an inference-time framework designed to reduce
language bias in image-text matching. MASS aims to measure the strength of the association between image and text
modality without involving the textual prior. Our approach

Recently, pretrained visual-language models have showcased impressive performance across a broad spectrum of
multimodal tasks (Li et al. 2022; Alayrac et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022b), including simple image-text retrieval (Chen
et al. 2015; Young et al. 2014). In particular, CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) has emerged as one of the most popular models
for image-text matching. The image-text similarity score derived from CLIP is shown to be effective for assessing image
caption quality (Hessel et al. 2021), providing reward signals
to train multimodal models (Yu et al. 2023), and building a
large-scale image search system (Beaumont 2022).
However, CLIP falters when the given task requires accurate language modeling. Recent benchmarks have unveiled
CLIP’s deficiency in modeling linguistic compositionality
(Thrush et al. 2022; Nikolaus et al. 2022; Yuksekgonul
et al. 2022). Furthermore, current visual-language models
also have demonstrated inconsistent outcomes on imagetext matching that demand comprehension of linguistic constructs, such as the existence and quantity of objects or
coreference (Parcalabescu et al. 2022; Shekhar et al. 2017).
As an alternative to the contrastive objective in CLIP, recent studies (Petryk et al. 2024; Tschannen et al. 2024) revealed that log-likelihood induced from the autoregressive
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2591

