The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-view Consistent 3D Panoptic Scene Understanding
Xianzhu Liu1 , Xin Sun1 , Haozhe Xie2 , Zonglin Li1 * , Ru Li1 , Shengping Zhang1
1
2

Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

w/o PSA

Abstract

w/ PSA

3D panoptic scene understanding seeks to create novel view
images with 3D-consistent panoptic segmentation, which is
crucial for many vision and robotics applications. Mainstream methods (e.g., Panoptic Lifting) directly use machinegenerated 2D panoptic segmentation masks as training labels.
However, these generated masks often exhibit multi-view inconsistencies, leading to ambiguities during the optimization process. To address this, we present Multi-view Consistent 3D Panoptic Scene Understanding (MVC-PSU), featuring two key components: 1) Probabilistic Semantic Aligner,
which associates semantic information of corresponding pixels across multiple views by probabilistic alignment to ensure
that the predicted panoptic segmentation masks are consistent
across different views. 2) Geometric Consistency Enforcer,
which uses multi-view projection and monocular depth consistency to ensure that the geometry of the reconstructed
scene is accurate and consistent across different views. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed MVC-PSU
surpasses state-of-the-art methods on the ScanNet, Replica,
and HyperSim datasets.

w/ GCE

w/o GCE

(a)

(b)
Contrastive Lift

Ours

RGB

DM-NeRF

Introduction

Semantics

3D panoptic scene understanding refers to the ability of
computer systems to recognize both categorical “stuff” regions and individual “thing” instances within 3D visual
scenes. This capability supports a range of applications (Siddiqui et al. 2023; Hui et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2024; Hui et al.
2024), such as augmented reality, virtual reality, robot navigation, and self-driving.
Over the past few years, there has been extensive research
on understanding 3D scenes. Early approaches (Xie et al.
2021; Miao et al. 2022; Mei et al. 2022) address this challenge by converting it into image or video instance segmentation, typically using pre-trained models for 2D scene understanding to predict panoptic segmentation throughout entire videos. However, image and video segmentation often
face multi-view inconsistency issues, where the instance labels for the same object differ across various views. Mainstream approaches (Zhou et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Su
et al. 2023) have shifted towards point cloud panoptic segmentation, but these methods depend on manually labeled

(c)

Figure 1: (a) The rendered semantics are consistent and accurate across multiple novel views with Probabilistic Semantic Aligner (PSA). (b) The rendered depth maps across
multiple novel views have more accurate geometric details
with Geometric Consistency Enforcer (GCE). (c) Qualitative comparison on novel views with DM-NeRF (Bing et al.
2023) and Contrastive Lift (Bhalgat et al. 2023).

datasets, which are costly and limited in scope, or they require accurately scanned point clouds as inputs. Recent advancements (Liu et al. 2023; Siddiqui et al. 2023; Bhalgat
et al. 2023) focus on performing semantic or panoptic segmentation by extending 2D estimated masks by off-the-shelf
segmentation models to 3D in a neural field manner without

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5613

