The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Direct Routing Gradient (DRGrad): A Personalized Information Surgery for
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) Recommendations
Yuguang Liu 1 , Yiyun Miao 2 , Luyao Xia 3
1

Whisper Bond Technologies Inc.
2
Independent Researcher
3
Tongji University
log whistle@163.com, myothone@gmail.com, luyao.x@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

of seesaw and negative transfer (Lakkapragada et al. 2023),
which means the improvement of a certain task may accompany with others degradation, or some may be affected by
the noise of other tasks.
Many existing studies ignore the importance relationship between tasks in business scenarios, such as adaptive weights method (Navon et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023)
and gradient surgery approaches (Yu et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2021). Well hand-crafted MTL Network, like AC-MMOE
(Li and Xu 2023), solves the seesaw and negative transfer
well. Nevertheless, higher model computation will lead to
performance issues, especially for the online recommendation (Fabbri et al. 2022; Ben-Porat et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2023) with stricter response time. IGBv2 (Dai, Fei, and Lu
2023) introduces reinforcement learning to balance the tasks
weights dynamically, which is alse computation bound and
difficult in convergence. Existing approaches have improved
the ”seesaw” and ”negative transfer” issues, but they also
introduce new problems, such as higher model computation, deficiency of noise processing, or ignore the importance among tasks in business.
To address these problems, we utilize the gradient relationship between tasks to concrete stakes between tasks, defined in Fig 1(a), and split the specific task into two parts
to reduce its noise impact on the overall loss (shown in
Fig 1(b), named Split-MMoE). Motivated by self-supervised
router network (Li et al. 2023), we propose the supervised and end-to-end training router and updater network
to strengthen cooperation and reduce conflict. Furthermore,
we introduce a personalized gate network, similar to PPNet
(Chang et al. 2023), to mitigate gradient conflicts among
users.
In summary, we propose the personalized Direct Routing Gradient (DRGrad) method, which addresses the ”seesaw” and ”negative transfer” problems without compromising performance or causing information distortion. The main
contributions of this work are as follows:
• To solve “seesaw” and “negative transfer” problems,
we propose a router network, which judges the stakes
adaptively according to gradient direction between tasks.
The router autonomously identifies the optimal gradients
from auxiliary tasks and seamlessly integrates them into
the current task.
• To address the performance and information distortion

Multi-task learning (MTL) has emerged as a successful strategy in industrial-scale recommender systems, offering significant advantages such as capturing diverse users’ interests
and accurately detecting different behaviors like “click” or
“dwell time”. However, negative transfer and the seesaw phenomenon pose challenges to MTL models due to the complex
and often contradictory task correlations in real-world recommendations. To address the problem while making better use
of personalized information, we propose a personalized Direct Routing Gradient framework (DRGrad), which consists
of three key components: router, updater and personalized
gate network. DRGrad judges the stakes between tasks in the
training process, which can leverage all valid gradients for the
respective task to reduce conflicts. We evaluate the efficiency
of DRGrad on complex MTL using a real-world recommendation dataset with 15 billion samples. The results show that
DRGrad’s superior performance over competing state-of-theart MTL models, especially in terms of AUC (Area Under
the Curve) metrics, indicating that it effectively manages task
conflicts in multi-task learning environments without increasing model complexity, while also addressing the deficiencies in noise processing. Moreover, experiments on the public
Census-income dataset and Synthetic dataset, have demonstrated the capability of DRGrad in judging and routing the
stakes between tasks with varying degrees of correlation and
personalization.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (Caruana 1997), which leverages information sharing and knowledge transfer between multiple
tasks, is widely applied in recommendation systems (Lim
et al. 2022). In real-world recommendation scenarios, different tasks have varying levels of importance. Some tasks,
such as ”click” or ”dwell time,” significantly impact online
performance and serve as the primary training tasks, despite
being challenging to train. The remaining tasks, named “engagement” or “business” heads, can provide finer-grained
information and easier to converge, such as ” like behavior” reflects the direction and degree of user preference for
items. Although these different tasks each have their own
emphasis, they are not isolated; instead, they exhibit potential interrelations. Hence, MTL inevitably has the problems
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12238

