The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sequential Decision Making in Stochastic Games with Incomplete Preferences
over Temporal Objectives
Abhishek Ninad Kulkarni1 , Jie Fu 2 , Ufuk Topcu 1
1

University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
2
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
abhishek.kulkarni@austin.utexas.edu, fujie@ufl.edu, utopcu@utexas.edu

Abstract

for verification (Pnueli and Zuck 1993; Baier and Katoen
2008), synthesis (Chatterjee and Henzinger 2012) and testing (Blass et al. 2006) of reactive systems.
We specify player preferences in the game as a preorder
on a set of temporal goals defined using linear temporal logic
over finite traces (LTLf ) (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). This
representation enables us to express preferences formally
using an English-like language (Finucane, Jing, and KressGazit 2010) and possibly be extracted from human language
(Liu et al. 2022; Brunello, Montanari, and Reynolds 2019).
While much of the existing literature on games with preferences has studied normal-form games (Bade 2005; Bosi
and Herden 2012; Özgür Evren and Ok 2011; Kokkala et al.
2019; Sasaki 2019), there is a growing interest in studying
sequential decision-making within these games. Recently,
games on graphs have been studied under lexicographic
preferences (Chatterjee et al. 2023). To the best of our
knowledge, the problem has not been studied for the class
of incomplete preferences, which subsumes both complete
and lexicographic preferences.
The synthesis problem presents two key challenges. First,
human preferences over temporal goals are often combinative (Hansson and Grüne-Yanoff 2022), meaning the alternatives over which the preferences are specified are not mutually exclusive. For example, a cleaning robot may have a
preference for “cleaning the living room” over “cleaning the
bedroom,” but if the battery allows, the robot could clean
both rooms, satisfying both goals. Decision-making with
combinative preferences is challenging because it requires
simultaneously evaluating the possibility of satisfying various subsets of alternatives. However, existing literature on
games on graphs with preferences (Chatterjee et al. 2023)
frequently assumes that alternatives are exclusive, leaving
the strategic planning of combinative preferences over temporal goals in stochastic games largely unexplored.
Second, human preferences over temporal goals are often
incomplete because it is difficult to specify comparisons between all possible subsets of goals (Barbera and Pattanaik
1984; Dalrymple et al. 2024). Synthesizing strategies in the
presence of such incomparability is challenging because the
utility-based approaches for rational decision-making are inapplicable (Sen 1997). Although recent research has studied sequential decision-making in Markov decision process
(MDP) with incomplete preferences (Li et al. 2020; Kulka-

Ensuring that AI systems make strategic decisions aligned
with the specified preferences in adversarial sequential interactions is a critical challenge for developing trustworthy
AI systems, especially when the environment is stochastic
and players’ incomplete preferences leave some outcomes
unranked. We study the problem of synthesizing preferencesatisfying strategies in two-player stochastic games on graphs
where players have opposite (possibly incomplete) preferences over a set of temporal goals. We represent these goals
using linear temporal logic over finite traces (LTLf), which
enables modeling the nuances of human preferences where
temporal goals need not be mutually exclusive and comparison between some goals may be unspecified. We introduce a solution concept of non-dominated almost-sure winning, which guarantees to achieve a most preferred outcome
aligned with specified preferences while maintaining robustness against the adversarial behaviors of the opponent. Our
results show that strategy profiles based on this concept are
Nash equilibria in the game where players are risk-averse,
thus providing a practical framework for evaluating and ensuring stable, preference-aligned outcomes in the game. Using a drone delivery example, we demonstrate that our contributions offer valuable insights not only for synthesizing rational behavior under incomplete preferences but also for designing games that motivate the desired behavior from the
players in adversarial conditions.

Introduction
Sequential decision-making in adversarial environments is
an important problem when designing trustworthy AI systems, especially when the environment is stochastic and
preferences are incomplete (Wing 2021; Dalrymple et al.
2024). This approach enables AI systems to make strategic
decisions over time and adapt to changing circumstances to
achieve the best possible outcome while remaining robust to
the opponent’s behavior.
We study sequential decision-making in two-player
stochastic games on graphs, with the goal of synthesizing
strategies for each player that align with their individual
preferences, where these preferences are adversarial and potentially incomplete. A game on graph (Grädel, Thomas, and
Wilke 2003) is a widely studied model in computer science
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27401

