The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Qua2 SeDiMo: Quantifiable Quantization Sensitivity of Diffusion Models
Keith G. Mills1,2 , Mohammad Salameh2 , Ruichen Chen1 , Negar Hassanpour2 , Wei Lu3 , Di Niu1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta
2
Huawei Technologies, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, Shanghai, China
{kgmills, ruichen1, dniu}@ualberta.ca
{mohammad.salameh, negar.hassanpour2}@huawei.com
robin.luwei@hisilicon.com

Abstract

Nvidia’s TensorRT framework (NVIDIA 2024). Additionally, ViDiT-Q adopt Large Language Model (LLM) quantization techniques (Xiao et al. 2023) to compress newer Diffusion Transformers (DiT) (Peebles and Xie 2023) like the
PixArt models (Chen et al. 2024, 2025). In order to preserve
generation quality, each of these techniques employs a calibration set to perform gradient-based calibration for weight
quantization. However, till now existing methods still struggle to quantize weight precision below 4-bits (W4) in diffusion models without severely degrading the image generation quality.
To achieve low-bit quantization, mixed-precision quantization has recently been explored for LLMs, although not
for DMs yet, which aims to differentiate the bit precision
applied to different weights. Talaria (Hohman et al. 2024) is
a tool developed by Apple to visualize the impact of different compression techniques applied to different model layers
on hardware metrics and latency, which however cannot assess the same impact on task performance. OWQ (Lee et al.
2024) attempts to identify weight column vectors that can
generate outlier activations in LLMs, while PB-LLM (Yuan,
Shang, and Dong 2024) measures the salience of individual
weights. Such outlier or salience information is then used
to apply different quantization configurations and bit precisions across weights in an LLM. Although these techniques
rely on the Hessian of model weights to identify sensitive
weights, the weight saliency is computed by heuristics and is
not directly derived to associate with task performance. Another limitation is that as originally designed for LLMs, the
granularity adopted is on a fine-grained weight (or weight
column) level, rather than on an operator (layer) level or
block level. However, such generalizable per-operator or
per-model insights are valuable for DMs, which involve a
diverse range of model types, e.g., various types of U-Nets
and DiTs, as well as a wider range of operation types than
in LLMs. These insights, if available, will not only help
differentiating quantization method and configuration selection per operation, but also help identify specific operation
types, e.g., time-step embeddings or skip-connections that
can greatly affect end-to-end performance when improperly
quantized.
In this paper, we propose Qua2 SeDiMo (pronounced
kwa-see-dee-mo), short for Quantifiable Quantization
Sensitivity of Diffusion Models, a framework for discover-

Diffusion Models (DM) have democratized AI image generation through an iterative denoising process. Quantization is
a major technique to alleviate the inference cost and reduce
the size of DM denoiser networks. However, as denoisers
evolve from variants of convolutional U-Nets toward newer
Transformer architectures, it is of growing importance to understand the quantization sensitivity of different weight layers, operations and architecture types to performance. In this
work, we address this challenge with Qua2 SeDiMo, a mixedprecision Post-Training Quantization framework that generates explainable insights on the cost-effectiveness of various model weight quantization methods for different denoiser
operation types and block structures. We leverage these insights to make high-quality mixed-precision quantization decisions for a myriad of diffusion models ranging from foundational U-Nets to state-of-the-art Transformers. As a result,
Qua2 SeDiMo can construct 3.4-bit, 3.9-bit, 3.65-bit and 3.7bit weight quantization on PixArt-α, PixArt-Σ, HunyuanDiT and SDXL, respectively. We further pair our weightquantization configurations with 6-bit activation quantization
and outperform existing approaches in terms of quantitative
metrics and generative image quality.

Project — https://kgmills.github.io/projects/qua2sedimo/

Introduction
Diffusion Models (DM) (Sauer et al. 2024) have become the
state of the art in image synthesis. However, at the core of
every DM is a large denoiser network, e.g., a U-Net or Diffusion Transformer. The denoiser performs multiple rounds of
inference, thus imposing a significant computational burden
on the generative process.
One effective method for reducing this burden is quantization (Du, Gong, and Chu 2024) which reduces the bit
precision of weights and activations. TFMQ-DM (Huang
et al. 2024), a state-of-the-art DM Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) approach, carefully quantizes weight layers associated with time-step inputs to ensure accurate image generation. Q-Diffusion (Li et al. 2023) split the weight layers
associated with long residual connections to compensate for
bimodal activation distributions and has been integrated into
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6153

