The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Logic Induced High-Order Reasoning Network for Event-Event Relation Extraction
Peixin Huang1 , Xiang Zhao2 , Minghao Hu3 , Zhen Tan1 * , Weidong Xiao1
1

National Key Laboratory of Information Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, China
2
Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, National University of Defense Technology, China
3
Information Research Center of Military Science, China
{huangpeixin15, xiangzhao, tanzhen08a, wdxiao}@nudt.edu.cn, huminghao16@gmail.com

Abstract
To understand a document with multiple events, event-event
relation extraction (ERE) emerges as a crucial task, aiming
to discern how natural events temporally or structurally associate with each other. To achieve this goal, our work addresses
the problems of temporal event relation extraction (TRE) and
subevent relation extraction (SRE). The latest methods for
such problems have commonly built document-level event
graphs for global reasoning across sentences. However, the
edges between events are usually derived from external tools
heuristically, which are not always reliable and may introduce
noise. Moreover, they are not capable of preserving logical
constraints among event relations, e.g., coreference constraint,
symmetry constraint and conjunction constraint. These constraints guarantee coherence between different relation types,
enabling the generation of a unified event evolution graph.
In this work, we propose a novel method named LogicERE,
which performs high-order event relation reasoning through
modeling logic constraints. Specifically, different from conventional event graphs, we design a logic constraint induced
graph (LCG) without any external tools. LCG involves event
nodes where the interactions among them can model the coreference constraint, and event pairs nodes where the interactions
among them can retain the symmetry constraint and conjunction constraint. Then we perform high-order reasoning on
LCG with relational graph transformer to obtain enhanced
event and event pair embeddings. Finally, we further incorporate logic constraint information via a joint logic learning
module. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method with state-of-the-art performance on
benchmark datasets.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14688

Introduction
Interpreting news messages involves identifying how natural
events temporally or structurally associate with each other
from news documents, i.e., extracting event temporal relations and subevent relations. Through this process, one can induce event evolution graphs that arrange multiple-granularity
events with temporal relations and subevent relations interacting among them. The event evolution graphs built through
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24141

event-event relation extraction (ERE) are important aids for
future event forecasting (Chaturvedi, Peng, and Roth 2017)
and hot event tracking (Zhuang, Fei, and Hu 2023b). As
shown in Figure 1, ERE aims to induce such an event evolution graph, in which the event mention storm involves more
fine-grained subevent mentions, i.e., killed, died and canceled. Some of those mentions follow temporal order, e.g.,
died happens BEFORE canceled. Generally, predicting the
relations between diverse events within the same document,
such that these predictions are coherent and consistent with
the document, is a challenging task (Xiang and Wang 2019).
Recently, significant research efforts have been devoted
to several ERE tasks, such as event temporal relation extraction (TRE) (Zhou et al. 2021; Wang, Li, and Xu 2022;
Tan, Pergola, and He 2023) and subevent relation extraction
(SRE) (Man et al. 2022; Hwang et al. 2022). Nonetheless,
ERE is still challenging because most event relations lack
explicit clue words such as before and contain in natural languages, especially when events scatter in a document. Accordingly, a few previous methods attempt to build a documentlevel event graph to assist in the cross-sentence inference,
where the nodes are events, and the edges are designed with
linguistic/discourse relations of event pairs (Zhuang, Hu, and
Zhao 2023; Li and Geng 2024). Despite the success, these
methods face two major issues. First, they are not capable of
preserving logic constraints among relations, such as transitivity, during training time (Roth and Yih 2004). Second, the
edges heuristically from external tools may introduce noise
and cause exhaustive extraction (Phu and Nguyen 2021).
For the first issue, Wang et al. (2020) propose a constrained
learning framework which enforces logic coherence amongst
the predicted relation types through extra differentiable objectives. However, since the coherence is enforced in a soft manner, there is still room for improving coherent predictions. In
this work, we show that it is possible to enforce coherence in
a much stronger manner by feeding logic constraints into the
event graphs. For the second issue, Chen et al. (2022) propose
an event pair centered causality identification model which
takes event pairs as nodes and relations of event relations as
edges, refraining the external tools and enabling the causal
transitivity reasoning. However, some useful prior relation
constraints such as coreference are discarded. Moreover, we
observe logical property information loss from the document
to graph, which should be complied in global inference for

