The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Reinforcement Learning with Time-Scale Invariant Memory
Md Rysul Kabir, James Mochizuki-Freeman, Zoran Tiganj
Department of Computer Science
Luddy School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering
Indiana University Bloomington
mdrkabir@iu.edu, jmochizu@iu.edu, ztiganj@iu.edu

Abstract

of variation. In other words, the relative uncertainty or error in time estimation remains constant as the duration increases. This is known as the Weber-Fechner law (Fechner
1860/1912), which states that the just noticeable difference
between two stimuli is proportional to the magnitude of the
stimuli. Hence the ratio between these two quantities is constant, implying that the perceived magnitude is on a logarithmic scale. This law is foundational for understanding
mammalian perceptions and spans virtually all perceptual
domains except angles (Gibbon 1977; Wilkes 2015). Scale
invariance in learning is demonstrated in classical conditioning where animals observe a salient stimulus followed by a
reward. When the temporal distance between stimulus and
reward is rescaled by the same factor as between two stimuli, the number of trials the animal needs to learn the value
of the stimulus remains unchanged. While previous studies
have demonstrated this effect on the order of about a minute
(Gallistel and Gibbon 2000; Balsam and Gallistel 2009), recent work has demonstrated that it holds for at least 16 minutes (Gallistel and Shahan 2024). Contrary to biological organisms, the performance of machine learning systems is
typically not scale invariant. Machine learning systems tend
to perform well only at a limited set of scales and require
adjustments of hyperparameters such as learning rate, temporal resolution and temporal discounting to learn problems
at different scales.

The ability to estimate temporal relationships is critical for
both animals and artificial agents. Cognitive science and neuroscience provide remarkable insights into behavioral and
neural aspects of temporal credit assignment. In particular,
scale invariance of learning dynamics, observed in behavior and supported by neural data, is one of the key principles that governs animal perception: proportional rescaling
of temporal relationships does not alter the overall learning
efficiency. Here we integrate a computational neuroscience
model of scale invariant memory into deep reinforcement
learning (RL) agents. We first provide a theoretical analysis
and then demonstrate through experiments that such agents
can learn robustly across a wide range of temporal scales, unlike agents built with commonly used recurrent memory architectures such as LSTM. This result illustrates that incorporating computational principles from neuroscience and cognitive science into deep neural networks can enhance adaptability to complex temporal dynamics, mirroring some of the
core properties of human learning.

Introduction
Learning temporal relationships between cause and effect is
critical for successfully obtaining rewards and avoiding punishments in a natural environment. Humans and many other
animals can estimate the temporal duration of events and use
that estimate as an integral component of decision-making.
Furthermore, the ability to do this rapidly and flexibly across
a wide range of temporal scales has been critical for survival. While machine learning systems also possess the capacity to represent the elapsed time, typically via recurrent
connections, they often struggle with learning temporal relationships, especially when those are extended over multiple
scales.
The mammalian ability to estimate time and learn exhibits
scale invariance across a wide range of temporal scales,
spanning from seconds to several minutes (Buhusi and Meck
2005; Gibbon 1977; Buhusi et al. 2009; Balci and Freestone 2020; Gallistel and Gibbon 2000; Balsam and Gallistel 2009; Gallistel and Shahan 2024). A scale invariant
system has a linear relationship between the mean estimated time and the actual time, with a constant coefficient

A number of neuroscience studies have investigated the
neural underpinning of temporal representations in tasks
such as interval timing and temporal bisection (Emmons
et al. 2017; Matell and Meck 2004; Kim et al. 2013,
2017; Parker et al. 2014; Mello, Soares, and Paton 2015;
Narayanan 2016; Gouvêa et al. 2015; Tiganj et al. 2017;
Donnelly et al. 2015). Neural activity observed in several
brain regions, including the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex and striatum, was often characterized by one of two
traits: (1) ramping/decaying activity, where neurons monotonically increase/decrease their firing rate as a function of
time following some salient stimulus (such as the onset of
the interval timing cue); and (2) sequential activity, where
neurons activate sequentially following some salient stimulus, with each neuron elevating its firing rate for a distinct
period of time. These sequentially activated neurons, also
known as time cells (as a temporal analog of place cells
(O’Keefe 1976)) have been observed in the hippocampus

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1345

