The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SYNAPSE: SYmbolic Neural-Aided Preference Synthesis Engine
Sadanand Modak* , Noah Tobias Patton, Isil Dillig, Joydeep Biswas
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
{smodak11, npatt, isil, joydeepb}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

Mao et al. 2019; Han et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021; Mei et al.
2022; Hsu, Mao, and Wu 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Hsu et al.
2023). All such prior work assumes there is a ground-truth
for the concept, i.e. the definition of the concept does not differ among people, and as a consequence, sufficiently many
examples are available and can be objectively evaluated. We
refer to such concepts as factual concepts. While most prior
work that learns visual concepts exploits the availability of
large datasets such as CLEVR (Johnson et al. 2017), those
methods cannot be applied to preference learning because
it is a data-impoverished setting by its very nature: a single
individual can only provide limited training data. Reinforcement learning-based preference learning, where human preferences are represented as neural networks or latent reward
models (Ouyang et al. 2022; Busa-Fekete et al. 2013; Wirth,
Fürnkranz, and Neumann 2016), also suffers from this limitation, and is thus applicable only to learning consistent
preferences across a large population, rather than individual preferences. Furthermore, because preferences are inherently individual, they can depend on entirely different (auxiliary lower-level) concepts, such as in the drop-off location
example above (i.e. based on proximity to door as opposed
to being in the shade). This requires learning novel visual
concepts in a hierarchical manner, i.e. first learning the auxiliary concepts and then the ego concept. Lastly, coming up
with a complete definition of a preferential concept at once
is itself a hard problem: it is much easier for someone to incrementally demonstrate examples one-at-a-time that satisfy
their intuition as humans tend to build their notion of a preferential concept over time. Thus, preference learning calls
for an approach that can handle incremental learning from
visual demonstrations, since the robot might not have access
to a large number of samples at once.

This paper addresses the problem of preference learning,
which aims to align robot behaviors through learning userspecific preferences (e.g. “good pull-over location”) from visual demonstrations. Despite its similarity to learning factual
concepts (e.g. “red door”), preference learning is a fundamentally harder problem due to its subjective nature and the
paucity of person-specific training data. We address this problem using a novel framework called SYNAPSE, which is a
neuro-symbolic approach designed to efficiently learn preferential concepts from limited data. SYNAPSE represents
preferences as neuro-symbolic programs – facilitating inspection of individual parts for alignment – in a domain-specific
language (DSL) that operates over images and leverages a
novel combination of visual parsing, large language models,
and program synthesis to learn programs representing individual preferences. We perform extensive evaluations on various preferential concepts as well as user case studies demonstrating its ability to align well with dissimilar user preferences. Our method significantly outperforms baselines, especially when it comes to out-of-distribution generalization. We
show the importance of the design choices in the framework
through multiple ablation studies.

Website — https://amrl.cs.utexas.edu/synapse

1

Introduction

Imagine trying to come up with a definition of “a good taxi
drop-off location”. One person may consider a spot to be
a good drop-off location depending on whether it is close
to the door of a building, while someone else might want
it in the shade. Such concepts vary from person to person
and inherently depend on their preferences. We call them
preferential concepts, and we are interested in the problem
of preference learning from visual input. Learning preferences is important because we want robots, and systems in
general, that are customizable and can adapt to end-users
(e.g. home robots). This problem is related to the task of
visual concept learning, which focuses on learning factual
concepts such as having the color red or being to the left
of another object (Srivastava, Labutov, and Mitchell 2017;

To address these challenges, we present SYNAPSE, a
novel framework that learns human preferences in a dataefficient manner. In contrast to prior preference learning approaches which take in weak reward signals to learn preferences, we use a more direct form of a signal, which consists of a robot-demonstration and a natural language (NL)
explanation for the preference. We use NL input to identify new concepts to be learned as well as how to compose
them, thus representing the preference qualitatively. However, in addition to learning new concepts or composing existing ones, preferences also have a quantitative aspect. For

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27529

