The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hierarchical Alignment-enhanced Adaptive Grounding Network for Generalized
Referring Expression Comprehension
Yaxian Wang1,2 , Henghui Ding3 * , Shuting He4 , Xudong Jiang5 , Bifan Wei6,7∗ , Jun Liu1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
3
Institute of Big Data, Fudan University, China
4
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China
5
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
6
School of Continuing Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
7
Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
wyx1566@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, henghui.ding@gmail.com, shuting.he@sufe.edu.cn, {weibifan,liukeen}@xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

In this work, we address the challenging task of Generalized
Referring Expression Comprehension (GREC). Compared
to the classic Referring Expression Comprehension (REC)
that focuses on single-target expressions, GREC extends the
scope to a more practical setting by further encompassing notarget and multi-target expressions. Existing REC methods
face challenges in handling the complex cases encountered in
GREC, primarily due to their fixed output and limitations in
multi-modal representations. To address these issues, we propose a Hierarchical Alignment-enhanced Adaptive Grounding Network (HieA2G) for GREC, which can flexibly deal
with various types of referring expressions. First, a Hierarchical Multi-modal Semantic Alignment (HMSA) module is
proposed to incorporate three levels of alignments, including word-object, phrase-object, and text-image alignment. It
enables hierarchical cross-modal interactions across multiple
levels to achieve comprehensive and robust multi-modal understanding, greatly enhancing grounding ability for complex
cases. Then, to address the varying number of target objects in
GREC, we introduce an Adaptive Grounding Counter (AGC)
to dynamically determine the number of output targets. Additionally, an auxiliary contrastive loss is employed in AGC
to enhance object-counting ability by pulling in multi-modal
features with the same counting and pushing away those with
different counting. Extensive experimental results show that
HieA2G achieves new state-of-the-art performance on the
challenging GREC task and also the other 4 tasks, including
REC, Phrase Grounding, Referring Expression Segmentation
(RES), and Generalized Referring Expression Segmentation
(GRES), demonstrating the remarkable superiority and generalizability of the proposed HieA2G.

Figure 1: Different visual grounding tasks. (a) Classic REC:
text expressions can only specify a single object; (b) Phrase
grounding detects all objects mentioned in expressions; (c)
GREC (He et al. 2023; Liu, Ding, and Jiang 2023) supports
the text expressions indicating an arbitrary number of target
objects from 0 to multiple, which is a more challenging task.

that only supports the single-target text expressions, GREC
narrows the gap with real-world scenarios by further encompassing no-target expressions that do not match any object
in the image, and multi-target expressions that refer to multiple target objects. This task has great potential value for
various practical applications such as visual-language navigation, embodied AI, and human-robot interaction.
Although recent methods (Zhu et al. 2022; Deng et al.
2023) have achieved remarkable performance in REC, they
are constrained to predict only one target that is most related
to the text expression, leading to the inability to deal with notarget and multi-target expressions. As shown in Figure 1,
the text expression “the player in blue top and black pants”
does not match any object within the image. In this case,
the traditional REC models (Kamath et al. 2021; Yan et al.

Introduction
Generalized Referring Expression Comprehension (GREC)
(He et al. 2023; Liu, Ding, and Jiang 2023) aims to detect an
arbitrary number of target objects based on a given free-form
text expression. In contrast to the classic Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) (Mao et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2016)
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8042

