The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Excluding the Impossible for Open Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Shiyuan Zhao1 , Baodi Liu1 * , Yu Bai1 , Weifeng Liu1 , Shuai Shao2 *
1

China University of Petroleum (East China)
2
Zhejiang Lab
zhaoshiyuan@s.upc.edu.cn, {thu.liubaodi, liuwfxy, shaoshuai0914}@gmail.com, baiyu upc@163.com

To-be-recognized

Known Data

Abstract
Open vocabulary semantic segmentation is a hot topic in research, focusing on segmenting and recognizing a diverse array of categories in varied environments, including those previously unknown, thereby holding significant practical value.
Mainstream studies utilize the CLIP model for direct semantic segmentation (denoted as “forward methods”), which often struggles to represent underrepresented categories effectively. To address this issue, this paper introduces a novel approach Excluding the ImpossibLe Semantic SEgmentation
Network (ELSE-Net) based on reverse thinking. By excluding improbable categories, ELSE-Net narrows the selection range for forward methods, significantly reducing
the risk of misclassification. In implementation, we initially
draw on leading research to design the General Processing
Block (GP-Block), which generates inclusion probabilities
(the likelihood of belonging to a category) by using the
CLIP model cooperated with a Mask Proposal Network
(MPN). We then present the EXcluding the ImPossible
Block (EXP-Block), which computes exclusion probabilities (the likelihood of not belonging to a category) through
the CLIPN model and a custom-designed Reverse Retrieval
Adapter (R2 -Adapter). These exclusion probabilities are
subsequently used to refine the inclusion probabilities, which
are ultimately employed to annotate class-agnostic masks.
Moreover, the core component of our EXP-Block is modelagnostic, enabling it to enhance the capabilities of existing frameworks. Experimental results from four benchmark
datasets validate the effectiveness of ELSE-Net and underscore the seamless model-agnostic functionality of the EXPBlock.

Hard

Forward
Cat

Thinking

The category is
sheep.

Bird

Easy

Reverse
Thinking
Dog

The category is
not cat, not dog,
not bird.

Figure 1: An intuitive example to introduce the concept of
“Excluding the Impossible”. Predicting unseen categories
based solely on data from known categories is challenging. However, it is comparatively straightforward to ascertain that certain data do not belong to any known categories.
By using this reverse thinking strategy to exclude impossible categories as prior information for forward methods, we
can effectively narrow the decision space of these methods,
thereby effectively lowering the risk of misclassification.

real-world scenarios. Consequently, it holds significant importance for tasks such as self-driving technology, city planning, and marine surveillance, where new objects of interest
continuously emerge.
The prevailing mainstream approaches leverage the exceptional zero-shot capabilities of CLIP (Radford et al.
2021) to develop “forward methods” that directly enable semantic segmentation, achieving notable progress (Xu et al.
2023; Cho et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2024; Ghiasi et al.
2022). However, as the CLIP model suffers from the classimbalance-problem (Chuang et al. 2023; Parashar et al.
2024), this issue inevitably affects CLIP-based segmentation
models as well, causing them to be biased towards recognizing seldom-seen or novel categories as common ones.
To address this issue, we introduce an innovative concept
from a reverse perspective by excluding improbable categories to narrow the selection range of forward models. This
reverse concept is straightforward: although it is challeng-

Code — https://github.com/shishiyuanzhao/ELSE-Net

Introduction
Open vocabulary semantic segmentation research has garnered considerable attention in recent years (Liang et al.
2023; Han et al. 2023a; Qin et al. 2023), aiming to perform
pixel-level labeling in diverse environments, including categories that were not encountered during training. This research extends the capabilities of segmentation models beyond known categories, enabling them to adapt to dynamic
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10457

