The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiT4Edit: Diffusion Transformer for Image Editing
Kunyu Feng1 * , Yue Ma2 * , Bingyuan Wang3 * , Chenyang Qi2 , Haozhe Chen1 ,
Qifeng Chen2† , Zeyu Wang3,2†
1
Peking University, China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
{feng ky21, chenhaozhe}@stu.pku.edu.cn, ymacn@cse.ust.hk, bwang667@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
chenyangqi67@gmail.com, {cqf, zeyuwang}@ust.hk
2

Abstract

2023) (Zhang et al. 2023) often relied on fine-tuning diffusion models to address this issue. However, these methods typically require considerable time and computational
resources, which limits their practical applicability. Recent
approaches often utilize DDIM (Song, Meng, and Ermon
2020) inversion to obtain latent maps and then control the
attention mechanism in diffusion models for real image editing (Mokady et al. 2023) (Cao et al. 2023). However, the
consistency of the edited images depends heavily on the invertibility of the DDIM inversion process. Although some
efforts have focused on optimizing this inversion (Ju et al.
2024) (Dong et al. 2023) for better results, the editing framework still relies on too many timesteps (e.g., 50 steps).

Despite recent advances in UNet-based image editing, methods for shape-aware object editing in high-resolution images
are still lacking. Compared to UNet, Diffusion Transformers (DiT) demonstrate superior capabilities to effectively capture the long-range dependencies among patches, leading to
higher-quality image generation. In this paper, we propose
DiT4Edit, the first Diffusion Transformer-based image editing framework. Specifically, DiT4Edit uses the DPM-Solver
inversion algorithm to obtain the inverted latents, reducing
the number of steps compared to the DDIM inversion algorithm commonly used in UNet-based frameworks. Additionally, we design unified attention control and patch merging,
tailored for transformer computation streams. This integration allows our framework to generate higher-quality edited
images faster. Our design leverages the advantages of DiT,
enabling it to surpass UNet structures in image editing, especially in high-resolution and arbitrary-size images. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the strong performance of DiT4Edit
in various editing scenarios, highlighting the potential of diffusion transformers for image editing.

In addition, current research on image editing tasks
mainly uses the UNet-based diffusion model structure (Rombach et al. 2022), making the final editing results heavily bounded by the generative capacity of UNet.
Although the attention mechanism in UNet is also derived
from the transformer, DiT (Peebles and Xie 2023) based on
pure transformers offers a global attention calculation between patches, allowing them to capture broader and more
detailed features compared to the UNet with convolution
blocks, leading to higher-quality images. In addition, evidence from DiT demonstrates that transformer-based diffusion models offer better scalability and outperform UNetbased models in large-scale experiments.

Code — https://github.com/fkyyyy/DiT4Edit

Introduction
Recent advances in diffusion models have witnessed impressive progress in text-driven visual generation. The development of these text-to-image (T2I) models, e.g., Stable
Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al. 2022), DALL·E 3 (Betker
et al. 2023), and PixArt (Chen et al. 2023), has led to significant impacts on numerous downstream applications (Ma
et al. 2024a,b; Wang et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2024; Wang et al.
2023), with image editing as one of the most challenging
tasks. Given a synthetic or real input image, image editing
algorithms aim to add, remove, or replace entire objects or
object attributes according to the user’s intent.
A primary challenge in text-driven image editing is maintaining the consistency between the source and target images. Earlier approaches (Choi et al. 2021) (Kawar et al.

To address these challenges, we explore image editing
tasks using the diffusion transformer architecture and provide a valuable empirical baseline for future research. First,
we aim to leverage solvers that require fewer inversion steps
to reduce our inference time while maintaining the image
quality of the results. Specifically, we employ an inversion
algorithm based on a high-order DPM-Solver (Lu et al.
2023) to obtain better latent maps with fewer timesteps. We
then implement a unified attention control scheme for textguided image editing while preserving background details.
Third, to mitigate the increased computational complexity of
transformers compared to UNet, we use patch merging to accelerate computation. By integrating these key components,
we introduce DiT4Edit, the first diffusion transformer-based
editing framework to our knowledge. Experiments demonstrate that our framework achieves superior editing results
with fewer inference steps.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2969

