The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Embedding Robust Watermarking into Pattern to Protect the Copyright of
Ceramic Artifacts
Lei Tan1 , Yuliang Xue1 , Guobiao Li1 , Zhenxing Qian1 * , Sheng Li1 , Chunlei Bao2
1

2

School of Computer Science, Fudan University
The Arts and Technology Education Centre, Fudan University
leitan23@m.fudan.edu.cn, zxqian@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Ceramic artworks with elegant patterns present enormous
collectible value and profits. To claim the copyright, the
builder usually pastes their conspicuous stamp on the bottom or side of the ceramic artworks, which inevitably affects
the external image of the artwork. In addition, the stamp is
weak in resisting forgery attacks due to its visible nature. To
address the above issues, we propose in this paper a novel
framework for embedding invisible watermarking into patterns of the ceramic artworks. In the framework, a templatebased watermarking embedding scheme is designed to map
the watermark to an invisible template, which is added to the
ceramic pattern to create its watermarked version. A distortion layer is further proposed to model the distortion of ceramic patterns in the ceramic manufacturing process, where a
color-halftoning and an adaptive brightness adjustment strategy are developed to counter the print and firing operations
that introduce the most significant distortions. Finally, a deep
decoder is learned to extract the watermarking from the distorted pattern. Various experiments have been conducted to
demonstrate the advantage of our proposed method for protecting the copyright of the ceramic artworks, which provides
reliable watermark extraction accuracy without the need for a
conspicuous stamp.

Years：Qing Dynasty
Made by Ying Tang

(a)

Years：Qing Dynasty
Made by Ying Tang

(b)

Figure 1: The traditional (a) and proposed (b) ways to protect the copyright of ceramic artworks.

work, as shown in Fig. 1(a). However, the stamp may affect
the external appearance of the artworks and the artistic conception expressed by their pattern. On the other hand, the
stamps are also prone to be forged due to their visible nature. As a result, pirated ceramic artworks with fake stamps
are rampant in the market.
Robust watermarking technology (Wang et al. 2024) provides a potential way to address the above limitations. It was
used to protect the copyright of digital media by embedding watermarks within them. Inspired by this, we consider
to embed the copyright data within the ceramic artwork’s
pattern in an imperceptible and robust way. ‘imperceptible’
refer to that the watermarked pattern looks similar with its
clean version. ‘robust’ represent that the hidden data could
be reliably extracted from the distorted pattern (i.e., the watermarked pattern suffers serious distortion during the ceramic manufacturing process). In this way, the created ceramic artworks with watermarked patterns not only retain
their elegant image but also allow for the retrieval of hidden
copyright data from their patterns when necessary, as shown
in Fig. 1(b).
Unfortunately, existing image watermarking methods
(Zhu et al. 2018; Tancik, Mildenhall, and Ng 2020) are designed either for digital or physical printed/screened and
camera-captured images, which may be inadequate to provide reliable watermark retrieval accuracy in the ceramic
artwork protection scenario. Specifically, digital image watermarking involves minor alteration to the original image
and focuses on resisting distortions caused by digital image processing, such as Gaussian noise, Gaussian blur, JPEG

Introduction
Ceramic artworks are made through a complex process using
ceramic materials, including clay, inks, coatings, etc. Due
to its elegant appearance, ceramic artwork is liked by many
people around the world and is used to decorate their homes
and cultivate their sentiments. Crafted ceramic artwork with
exquisite patterns is extremely valuable and often becomes
more precious over time. For instance, at a Christie’s auction
in London in 2005, a Chinese Yuan Dynasty blue-and-white
vase decorated with the ”Guigu’s Descent from the Mountain” motif sold for £15.688 million. Tempted by the enormous profits, many pirates forge ceramic artworks that look
like real ones. Between 2020 and 2023, over 1,500 registered
cases of ceramic art forgery were reported in Jingdezhen,
Jiangxi Province, China.
To claim the copyright, the builder usually pastes their
conspicuous stamp on the bottom or side of the ceramic art* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

791

