The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VersaGen: Unleashing Versatile Visual Control for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Zhipeng Chen1 , Lan Yang1, 2 , Yonggang Qi1, 2 ,
Honggang Zhang1 , Kaiyue Pang2 , Ke Li1, 2 * , Yi-Zhe Song2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
zhipengchen1998@bupt.edu.cn, ylan@bupt.edu.cn, qiyg@bupt.edu.cn,
zhhg@bupt.edu.cn, thatkpang@gmail.com, like1990@bupt.edu.cn, y.song@surrey.ac.uk
A bear and a deer are in the rainforest.

Abstract
Despite the rapid advancements in text-to-image (T2I) synthesis, enabling precise visual control remains a significant
challenge. Existing works attempted to incorporate multi-facet
controls (text and sketch), aiming to enhance the creative control over generated images. However, our pilot study reveals
that the expressive power of humans far surpasses the capabilities of current methods. Users desire a more versatile approach
that can accommodate their diverse creative intents, ranging
from controlling individual subjects to manipulating the entire scene composition. We present VersaGen, a generative
AI agent that enables versatile visual control in T2I synthesis.
VersaGen admits four types of visual controls: i) single visual
subject; ii) multiple visual subjects; iii) scene background; iv)
any combination of the three above or merely no control at
all. We train an adaptor upon a frozen T2I model to accommodate the visual information into the text-dominated diffusion
process. We introduce three optimization strategies during the
inference phase of VersaGen to improve generation results
and enhance user experience. Comprehensive experiments on
COCO and Sketchy validate the effectiveness and flexibility
of VersaGen, as evidenced by both qualitative and quantitative
results.

A mouse finds a mushroom in the desert.

A swan floats on the river next to a boat.
𝑠

Single Visual Subject

Subjects + Background

Figure 1: VersaGen can handle various forms of input provided by users, whether at the object-level, scene-level, or a
combination of both.

Agrawala 2023) to generate images matching a given reference. The results revealed that participants faced two main
challenges: incapability and inflexibility.
Incapability refers to the technical barriers that hinder users
from achieving their desired visual outcomes, an issue widely
acknowledged and tackled in recent works (Cao et al. 2023;
Ju et al. 2023; Ge et al. 2023; Gong et al. 2023; Wu et al.
2023; Gafni et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023; Chang et al. 2023).
These solutions introduce various multi-modal input forms
to make the process more intuitive. However, inflexibility
remains largely underappreciated. Systems like ControlNet
(Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023) and T2I-Adapter (Mou
et al. 2024) require users to control the entire scene, which
our findings suggest rarely facilitates meaningful engagement. In fact, 74.96% of the 1,250 ControlNet trials reported
that users found it exceedingly difficult to provide comprehensive visual guidance, particularly for complex scenes with
multiple subjects.
To address the challenges of incapability and inflexibility,
we propose a natural next step: allowing individuals the flexibility to decide what to control or not. Recognising that people express their creative intent differently – we re-envisage

Code —
https://github.com/FelixChan9527/VersaGen official

1

Multiple Visual Subjects

Introduction

Ask any artist, and they will likely express their discontent
with generative AI. They demand control over the creative
process, control that aligns with their creative intent, and
rightfully so! For you and me alike, beyond the initial ”wow”,
questions are also starting to form around why models do
not follow exactly what we want. There is a clear trend in
the generative AI literature towards enhancing user control,
which is encouraging. However, to fully understand the limitations of current approaches, it is essential to articulate the
gap between human artistic expressivity and the capabilities
of generative AI. To shed light on this, we first conducted a
pilot study in which participants used Stable Diffusion (SD)
(Rombach et al. 2022) and ControlNet (Zhang, Rao, and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2394

