The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Anatomical Knowledge Mining and Matching for Semi-supervised Medical
Multi-structure Detection
Bin Pu1 , Liwen Wang2 , Jiewen Yang3 , Xingbo Dong2 , Benteng Ma3 , Zhuangzhuang Chen3 ,
Lei Zhao1 , Shengli Li4 , Kenli Li1†
1

Hunan University, Changsha, China
2
Anhui University, Hefei, China
3
The Hongkong University of Science and Technology, HKSAR, China
4
Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital, Southern Medical University, Shenzhen, China
{pubin, lkl}@hnu.edu.cn, liwenwang919@gmail.com, jyangcu@connect.ust.hk, xingbo.dong@ahu.edu.cn
Abstract
In medical image analysis, detecting multiple structures is
crucial for evaluations and diagnosis but is often limited by
the lack of high-quality annotations. Semi-supervised object detection emerges as a potent methodology to enhance
model performance and generalization by leveraging a vast
pool of unlabeled data alongside a minimal set of labeled
data. A striking observation is that both unlabelled and labeled medical images contain a priori anatomical knowledge
from human screening. In this work, we introduce a novel
semi-supervised approach named Semi-akmm for mining and
matching anatomical knowledge in ultrasound images. We
develop an Adaptive Prior Knowledge Transfer (APKT) module to mine and explore the distribution and knowledge of
potential proposal boxes by proposal proportion constraint.
Furthermore, within a teacher-student learning framework,
we put forward an Anatomical Structure Matching (ASM)
module to facilitate co-learning consistent topological prior
knowledge between the student and teacher models. To our
knowledge, this marks the inception of an efficient semisupervised medical multi-structure detection model. Our experiments across five publicly available ultrasound datasets
demonstrate that Semi-akmm sets a new benchmark in performance with solid results that outperform existing methods.

Figure 1: Motivation of our Semi-akmm. Two types of priori
medical knowledge are distributional proposal knowledge,
such as proportions and areas, and topological graph knowledge between multiple structures.

2021a), which may not be available. However, unlabeled
medical data is easier to acquire.
Semi-supervised learning is a settlement route where
more robust detection performance can be obtained using
unlabeled data and a small amount of labeled data trained
together (Zhou and Zhou 2021). These approaches (Xu et al.
2021; Li et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2023b; Hua et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023) have
shown their strong robustness and effectiveness in natural image detection scenarios. For example, (Chen et al.
2022a) developed an effective label-matching framework to
solve the issue of semi-supervised object detection task that
lead to severe confirmation bias during self-training. These
methods are universal semi-supervised detection methods
for natural scenarios, and their direct application to medical semi-supervised multi-structure detection may lead to
performance degradation or be inapplicable.
In medical image analysis, although many semisupervised learning methods have been proposed for a wide
range of applications, such as abnormality classification
(Lecouat et al. 2018), 2D image segmentation (Zhang et al.
2017; Luo et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022), and 3D volume
segmentation (Yu et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2023). However,
multi-structure detection applications have not been widely

Introduction
Medical multi-structure detection plays an essential role in
assisted diagnostics, e.g., training the skills of novice inexperienced novice physicians (Yang et al. 2020), standardized screening (Loh et al. 2021; Pu et al. 2021), and diagnosis of structural-deficiency-based diseases (Elakkiya et al.
2021) (e.g., single-ventricle diseases due to the absence of
one ventricular structure). However, developing robust models that can accurately recognize and analyze multiple structures in medical images requires a large amount of boxlabeled data. The large-scale data annotation process is timeconsuming, expensive, and unaffordable in real applications,
so obtaining labels can be a bottleneck. Especially for medical image analysis, labeling these structures usually requires
trained experts with prior biomedical knowledge (Zhou et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author.

6523

