The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GlyphDraw2: Automatic Generation of Complex Glyph Posters with Diffusion
Models and Large Language Models
Jian Ma1 , Yonglin Deng2 * , Chen Chen1 † , Nanyang Du3 * , Haonan Lu1 , Zhenyu Yang1
1

OPPO AI Center
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Tsinghua University
majian2@oppo.com, yonglindeng@link.cuhk.edu.cn, chenchen4@oppo.com, dny22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{luhaonan,yangzhenyu}@oppo.com
2

Abstract

3) How to remove the need for manual user input and enable
automatic poster generation based on implicit user cues?
Current advancements in visual text rendering are primarily built upon the ControlNet framework (Yang et al. 2024;
Tuo et al. 2023; Zhao and Lian 2023), which generally employs glyph reference images and detailed textual layouts
to guide the generation process. However, as depicted in
Fig. 2, the conventional ControlNet exhibits limited control over intricate details, while the small text elements in
the posters contain a significant amount of fine-grained information. Unlike the traditional global conditional control
approach, glyph control is restricted to specific regions, typically covering only a small fraction of the overall image
pixels, indicating a more localized control. To address these
differences, we propose a triple cross-attention method. Besides the standard cross-attention computation in UNet for
interacting between image latent and semantic information,
we introduce two additional cross-attentions. The Q interaction information is sourced from the image’s latent, while
the K, V interaction information for one comes from a feature obtained from the glyph image after glyph encoding and
is inserted only into the block corresponding to the SD decoder layer. This aims to capture the detailed glyph feature
information and enhance the rendering precision of small
text. The other K,V interaction derives from ControlNet features and aims to adaptively learn conditional information,
ensuring the glyph’s coherence within the overall layout. We
introduced alignment target learning to enhance the richness
of the poster background. Despite multiple control conditions, the aim is to align with the background output of the
original semantic prompt, maintaining model integrity while
ensuring accurate rendering and richness. To automate layout creation and minimize manual input, we develop comprehensive instructional datasets and fine-tune open-source
LLMs for a seamless user experience during inference. Although current LLMs lack the ability to predict personalized
fonts and colors, our framework inherently supports these
customizations, leaving automation choices to the user.
A key requirement for poster generation is high resolution with an adjustable aspect ratio. Therefore, we use
SDXL (Podell et al. 2023), which requires high-quality data.
We collected specific poster data alongside open-source data
to enhance SDXL training. Additionally, we use a PEA strat-

Posters serve an essential function in marketing and advertising by improving visual communication and brand visibility, thus significantly contributing to industrial design. With
the latest developments in controllable T2I diffusion models,
research interest has surged in text rendering within synthesized images. Although text rendering accuracy has seen advancements, automatic poster generation remains a relatively
untapped area. This paper presents an automatic poster generation framework featuring text rendering capabilities through
the use of LLMs. Our framework employs a triple-cross attention mechanism based on alignment learning to achieve precise text placement within detailed contextual backgrounds.
Moreover, it supports adjustable fonts, varying image resolutions, and poster rendering with textual prompts in both English and Chinese. Additionally, we present a comprehensive
bilingual image-text dataset, GlyphDraw-3M, comprising 3
million image-text pairs, each with OCR annotations and resolutions exceeding 1024. Our method utilizes the SDXL architecture, and extensive experiments confirm its ability to
generate posters with intricate and context-rich backgrounds.

Introduction
Posters, as a prominent visual communication medium, have
an increasing demand for personalization and customization in various fields of industrial design, whether in advertising, propaganda, marketing, or other areas. Although
the powerful generative capacity of large-scale T2I diffusion models (Nichol et al. 2021; Ramesh et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022; Podell et al. 2023) enables the creation of images with striking realism and detail,
and much research effort has been devoted to addressing the
limitations of text rendering in images generated by diffusion models, research on automated poster generation is still
relatively limited. The goal of this paper is to endow the
diffusion system with the ability to automatically generate
posters. The key challenges we face include: 1) How to precisely generate fine details in small, paragraph-length text?
2) How to enhance the richness of the poster’s background?
* The author did his work during internship at OPPO AI Center.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5955

