The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hybrid Decentralized Optimization:
Leveraging Both First- and Zeroth-Order Optimizers for Faster Convergence
Shayan Talaei1 * , Matin Ansaripour2 * , Giorgi Nadiradze3 , Dan Alistarh3
1

Stanford University
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
3
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
stalaei@stanford.edu, matin.ansaripour@epfl.ch, {giorgi.nadiradze, dan.alistarh}@ista.ac.at
2

minimization setting, we have a set of samples S from a distribution, and wish to minimize the function f : Rd → R,
which is the average of losses over samplesP
from S. In other
words, we wish to find x? = argmin x s∈S fs (x)/|S|.
Assuming that we have n compute nodes which can process samples in parallel, data-parallel SGD consists of iterations in which each node computes gradient estimator
for a batch of samples, and then nodes then exchange this
information, either globally, via all-to-all communication,
or pair-wise. Specifically, in this paper we will focus on
the highly-popular decentralized optimization case, in which
nodes interact in randomly chosen pairs, exchanging model
information, following each local optimization step.
There is already a vast amount of literature on decentralized optimization in the case where nodes have access
to first-order, gradient-based estimators. While this setting
is prevalent, it does not cover the interesting case where,
among the set of nodes, a fraction only have access to
weaker, zeroth-order gradient estimators, corresponding to
less computationally-capable devices, but which may still
possess useful local data and computation.
In this paper, we initiate the study of hybrid decentralized optimization in the latter setting. Specifically, we aim to
answer the following key question:

Abstract
Distributed optimization is the standard way of speeding up
machine learning training, and most of the research in the
area focuses on distributed first-order, gradient-based methods. Yet, there are settings where some computationallybounded nodes may not be able to implement first-order,
gradient-based optimization, while they could still contribute
to joint optimization tasks. In this paper, we initiate the study
of hybrid decentralized optimization, studying settings where
nodes with zeroth-order and first-order optimization capabilities co-exist in a distributed system, and attempt to jointly
solve an optimization task over some data distribution. We essentially show that, under reasonable parameter settings, such
a system can not only withstand noisier zeroth-order agents
but can even benefit from integrating such agents into the optimization process, rather than ignoring their information. At
the core of our approach is a new analysis of distributed optimization with noisy and possibly-biased gradient estimators,
which may be of independent interest. Our results hold for
both convex and non-convex objectives. Experimental results
on standard optimization tasks confirm our analysis, showing
that hybrid first-zeroth order optimization can be practical,
even when training deep neural networks.

Code — https://github.com/ShayanTalaei/HDO
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07703

Can zeroth-order estimators be integrated in a
decentralized setting, and can they boost convergence?

Introduction

Roughly, we show that the answer to this question is affirmative. To arrive at it, we must overcome a number of nontrivial technical obstacles, and the answer must be qualified
by key parameters, such as the first-order/zeroth-order split
in the population, and the estimator variance and bias. More
precisely, a key difficulty we must overcome in the algorithm
and in the analysis is the fact that, under standard implementations, zeroth-order estimators are biased, breaking one of
the key analytic assumptions in existing work on decentralized optimization, e.g. (Lian et al. 2017a; Wang and Joshi
2021; Koloskova et al. 2020a,b; Nadiradze et al. 2021).
Our analysis approach overcomes this obstacle and provides the first convergence bounds for hybrid decentralized
optimization via a novel potential argument. Roughly, assuming a d-dimensional and L-smooth finite-sum objective
function f , and a population of n nodes, in which n1 have
first-order stochastic gradient estimators of variance σ1 , and

One key enabler of the extremely rapid recent progress of
machine learning has been distributed optimization: the ability to efficiently optimize over large quantities of data, and
large parameter counts, among multiple nodes or devices,
in order to share the computational load, and therefore reduce end-to-end training time. Distributed machine learning
has become commonplace, and it is not unusual to encounter
systems which distribute model training among tens or even
hundreds of nodes.
By and large, the standard distribution strategy in the context of machine learning tasks has been data-parallel (Bottou 2010), using first-order gradient estimators. We can formalize this as follows: considering a classical empirical risk
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20778

