The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Robust Visual Question Answering via Prompt-Driven
Geometric Harmonization
Yishu Liu1 * , Jiawei Zhu2 * , Congcong Wen3 , Guangming Lu1† , Hui Lin3 , Bingzhi Chen2†
1

Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
2
Beijing Institute of Technology, Zhuhai, China
3
China Academic of Electronics and Information Technology, Beijing, China
liuyishu@stu.hit.edu.cn, luguangm@hit.edu.cn, chenbingzhi@bit.edu.cn
Hypersphere Base Space

Language Prior

Abstract

Training

Distribution Shifts
Inference

Rare

Instances

Instances

Visual Question Answering (VQA) has garnered significant
attention as a crucial link between vision and language,
aimed at generating accurate responses to visual queries.
However, current VQA models still struggle with the challenges of minority class collapse and spurious semantic
correlations posed by language bias and imbalanced distributions. To address these challenges, this paper proposes
a novel Prompt-Driven Geometric Harmonization (PDGH)
paradigm, which integrates both geometric structure and information entropy principles to enhance the ability of VQA
models to generalize effectively across diverse scenarios.
Specifically, our PDGH approach is meticulously designed to
generate image-generated prompts that are guided by specific
question cues, facilitating a more accurate and context-aware
understanding of the visual content. Moreover, we project
the prompt-visual-question and visual-question joint representations into a unified hypersphere space, applying feature weight self-orthogonality and prompt-information entropy correction constraints to optimize the margin, further
alleviating minority class collapse and correcting language
bias. To maintain the geometric integrity of the representation space, we introduce multi-space geometric contrast constraints to minimize the impact of spurious priors introduced
during training. Finally, a semantic matrix is constructed for
the coordinated joint representation to ensure that the learned
instances are semantically consistent and improve reasoning
ability. Extensive experiments on various general and medical VQA datasets demonstrate the consistent superiority of
our PDGH approach over existing state-of-the-art baselines.

Frequent

Inference
Distribution

Answer Class index
Testset Distribution

Answer Class index
Trainset Distribution

Ground Truth Answer
Hypersphere Representations

Answer Representations

Kitchen

Frequent Class Expansion

Inference
Visualization

VQA Inference Process (Rare-Class Collapse)

Question:

What room is this?

Language Bias

Question-Answer

Dining

Priori Dominant Answer

Prediction：Dining

Figure 1: Illustration of the challenges of language bias
and imbalanced distributions. Due to inherent differences in
class distribution, the unevenness of the class space resulting from the frequent recurrence of common classes and the
scarcity of rare answer classes can reduce the robustness of
the learned representations in semantic reasoning.

that mimic human question-answering abilities (Han et al.
2021) and perform well on in-distribution datasets, research
has shown that their performance significantly declines on
out-of-distribution (OOD) data. In the real world, natural
data often follows an unbalanced distribution (Zhang et al.
2023). The primary challenge is to prevent VQA models
from relying on language pseudo-priors in the training data
and neglecting the association between visual cues and answers, which contradicts the fundamental purpose of visual
question answering. Therefore, the ongoing challenge in the
field is to develop VQA models that can effectively resist
the lure of these pseudo-priors, ensuring that they maintain
the integrity of the visual-language association even in the
presence of unbalanced data distributions.
To bridge the gap between human intelligence and neural networks, numerous scholars leveraged bias models during training (Han et al. 2023; Cho et al. 2023) or incorporating question branches (Cadene et al. 2019; Clark,

Introduction
Humans naturally possess the ability to learn multimodal
knowledge asymptotically and excel at using visual cues
to think and make wise decisions when confronted with
problems. Visual Question Answering (VQA) models aim
to bridge the gap between vision and natural language, emulating human reasoning to transition from understanding
the semantics of a problem to solving practical issues. Although significant progress has been made in VQA models
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†

Corresponding authors: Bingzhi Chen and Guangming Lu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5721

