The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Cross-Domain Representations for Transferable Drug Perturbations on
Single-Cell Transcriptional Responses
Hui Liu* , Shikai Jin
College of Computer and Information Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 211816, China
hliu@njtech.edu.cn

Abstract

have been conducted to measure a wealth of drug-induced
transcriptional responses in vitro (Yang et al. 2012). For example, the L1000 platform (Subramanian et al. 2017) offers
a cost-effective, high-throughput method for generating expression profiles in response to drug perturbations (Yofe,
Dahan, and Amit 2020). In particular, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is valuable for detecting subtle transcriptional changes within individual cells, allowing for the
identification of cell subpopulations that are resistant to specific drugs and facilitating phenotypic analysis at single-cell
resolution (Haque et al. 2017; Levitin, Yuan, and Sims 2018;
Ding, Chen, and Shen 2020). For instance, sci-Plex (Srivatsan et al. 2020), which integrates nuclear hashing and singlecell RNA sequencing into a single workflow for multiplex
transcriptomics, has been used to quantify global transcriptional responses to hundreds of independent perturbations
at the single-cell level. Despite the power of these highthroughput screening techniques, their capacity remains limited when compared to the space of all potential cell types
and perturbation combinations. As such, there is an urgent
need to develop computational models capable of predicting
phenotype changes induced by various perturbations.

Phenotypic drug discovery has attracted widespread attention
because of its potential to identify bioactive molecules. Transcriptomic profiling provides a comprehensive reflection of
phenotypic changes in cellular responses to external perturbations. In this paper, we propose XTransferCDR, a novel
generative framework designed for feature decoupling and
transferable representation learning across domains. Given a
pair of perturbed expression profiles, our approach decouples
the perturbation representations from basal states through domain separation encoders and then cross-transfers them in the
latent space. The transferred representations are then used to
reconstruct the corresponding perturbed expression profiles
via a shared decoder. This cross-transfer constraint effectively
promotes the learning of transferable drug perturbation representations. We conducted extensive evaluations of our model
on multiple datasets, including single-cell transcriptional responses to drugs and single- and combinatorial genetic perturbations. The experimental results show that XTransferCDR achieved better performance than current state-of-theart methods, showcasing its potential to advance phenotypic
drug discovery.

Code — https://github.com/hliulab/XTransferCDR

Several methods have been proposed for predicting cellular responses to drug treatments, including deep variational
autoencoders (Jia et al. 2021), kernelized Bayesian matrix
factorization (Madhukar et al. 2019), matrix factorization
with similarity regularization (Gao, Yang, and Wang 2021),
and convolutional neural networks (Zhang, Lu, and Zang
2022). These methods employ various techniques, such as
imputing drug responses through low embeddings of multiple genes (Roohani, Huang, and Leskovec 2022), incorporating prior knowledge of pathway-drug associations
(Chawla et al. 2022), leveraging mutational signatures (Robichaux et al. 2021; Aissa et al. 2021) and expression profiles for prediction (Sharifi-Noghabi et al. 2021; He et al.
2022). Despite these advancements, most machine learning models struggle to handle high-dimensional scRNAseq data, resulting in suboptimal performance in predicting single-cell responses. To address these limitations, deep
learning techniques have been increasingly applied in the
analysis of scRNA-seq data in recent years. CPA (Lotfollahi et al. 2021) proposes a deep encoder-decoder framework to generate interpretable drug and cell type embeddings, facilitating the cellular response prediction of novel

Introduction
In recent years, target-based drug discovery has made significant progress (Yofe, Dahan, and Amit 2020; Przybyla and
Gilbert 2022). However, the efficacy of drug molecules on
their targets is profoundly influenced by the complex cellular context, and drugs designed to bind their targets do not
always elicit the desired changes at the level of cellular phenotype (Lim 2022), partially due to off-target effects. Consequently, the success rate of target-based drug discovery remains relatively low (Herrera-Acevedo et al. 2022) . These
challenges have prompted researchers to increasingly focus
on phenotype-based drug discovery (Jones et al. 2022).
Transcriptomic profiles are widely used as molecular phenotype data to elucidate cellular responses to various perturbations (Replogle, Saunders, and et al. 2021), such as drugs
and genetic knockout/activation. Large-scale experiments
* Correspondence author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18834

