The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-Modal Stealth: A Coarse-to-Fine Attack Framework for RGB-T Tracker
Xinyu Xiang1 * , Qinglong Yan1 * , Hao Zhang1† , Jianfeng Ding2 , Han Xu3 ,
Zhongyuan Wang2 , Jiayi Ma1†
1

Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China,
3
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
xiangxinyu@whu.edu.cn, qinglong yan@whu.edu.cn, zhpersonalbox@gmail.com, jyma2010@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Current research on adversarial attacks mainly focuses on
RGB trackers, with no existing methods for attacking RGB-T
cross-modal trackers. To fill this gap and overcome its challenges, we propose a progressive adversarial patch generation
framework and achieve cross-modal stealth. On the one hand,
we design a coarse-to-fine architecture grounded in the latent space to progressively and precisely uncover the vulnerabilities of RGB-T trackers. On the other hand, we introduce
a correlation-breaking loss that disrupts the modal coupling
within trackers, spanning from the pixel to the semantic level.
These two design elements ensure that the proposed method
can overcome the obstacles posed by cross-modal information complementarity in implementing attacks. Furthermore,
to enhance the reliable application of the adversarial patches
in real world, we develop a point tracking-based reprojection
strategy that effectively mitigates performance degradation
caused by multi-angle distortion during imaging. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method.

RGB

Feature Extracting

Thermal

Feature Extracting

RGB-T Tracker
Cross-modal
Fusion
Block

Successful-attack

Modal-gap
Single modal attack

(a) Attack RGB Tracker

Predicted
Head

Unexplored

Ours: Cross modal attack

(b) Attack RGB-T Tracker

Figure 1: The superiority of our attack model: (a) Current
attack methods for RGB-T trackers remain unexplored, and
existing attack methods targeting RGB trackers achieve a
limited attack effectiveness due to modal gap. (b) We pioneer a coarse-to-fine attack framework, combined with a robust physical attack strategy, demonstrating strong and versatile capabilities in both digital and physical domains.
Attack method

Attack modal Attack domain

PAT (ICCV2019)
RGB
digital
CSA (CVPR2020)
RGB
digital
TTAttack (ECCVW2022)
RGB
digital
RGB
digital
Pluggable (TIFS2023)
Cont-Guide (TMM2024)
RGB
digital
CMS (Ours)
RGB&TIR digital&physical

Code — https://github.com/Xinyu-Xiang/CMS

Introduction
Visual Object Tracking (VOT) aims to recognize and locate a tracked object in subsequent frames, starting from
its initial appearance in the first frame of a visible video.
Due to the representation limitations of the RGB modality
in harsh conditions (Liu et al. 2024), researchers prefer to
combines complementary information from RGB and thermal modalities to achieves more accurate and environmentally robust tracking (Zhu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023). Tracking finds extensive application in critical domains including autonomous driving and intelligent surveillance (Zhang
et al. 2022, 2023), and addressing its security challenges
is paramount. Fortunately, adversarial attacks aid in exploring potential vulnerabilities comprehensively and serve as a
critical mechanism to bolster model security, which has attracted a great deal of scholarly attention.
In the past decades, numerous tracker attack techniques
have been proposed, including one-stage attack methods

Table 1: Various attack method in different settings.
and two-stage attack methods. The one-stage attack methods (Zhao et al. 2023; Lou et al. 2023; Li et al. 2021) directly
employ a network or a perturbation generation strategy to
produce adversarial examples. Although effective attack performance can be achieved, it is challenging to thoroughly
examine the model vulnerabilities. Different from one-stage
attack, two-stage attack methods (Jia et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022b) can exploit more hidden model defects through the
use of coarse attacks in the initial phase and fine-tuning in
subsequent stages. Specifically, Stage I extensively identifies
potential model vulnerabilities to attain a preliminary level
of attack. Furthermore, Stage II employs a more refined attack strategy to target the critical vulnerabilities of the model
accurately. Consequently, in comparison with one-stage attack, the two-stage methods can more meticulously uncover
the security issues within the model.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8620

