The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diffusion-based Synthetic Data Generation for Visible-Infrared Person
Re-Identification
Wenbo Dai1 , Lijing Lu2,3 * , Zhihang Li3 *
1

Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{a18151882515, lulijing1997, lizhihang.cas}@gmail.com
Abstract
The performance of models is intricately linked to the
abundance of training data. In Visible-Infrared person ReIDentification (VI-ReID) tasks, collecting and annotating
large-scale images of each individual under various cameras and modalities is tedious, time-expensive, costly and
must comply with data protection laws, posing a severe challenge in meeting dataset requirements. Current research investigates the generation of synthetic data as an efficient and
privacy-ensuring alternative to collecting real data in the field.
However, a specific data synthesis technique tailored for VIReID models has yet to be explored. In this paper, we present
a novel data generation framework, dubbed Diffusion-based
VI-ReID data Expansion (DiVE), that automatically obtain
massive RGB-IR paired images with identity preserving by
decoupling identity and modality to improve the performance
of VI-ReID models. Specifically, identity representation is acquired from a set of samples sharing the same ID, whereas the
modality of images is learned by fine-tuning the Stable Diffusion (SD) on modality-specific data. DiVE extend the textdriven image synthesis to identity-preserving RGB-IR multimodal image synthesis. This approach significantly reduces
data collection and annotation costs by directly incorporating synthetic data into ReID model training. Experiments
have demonstrated that VI-ReID models trained on synthetic
data produced by DiVE consistently exhibit notable enhancements. In particular, the state-of-the-art method, CAJ, trained
with synthetic images, achieves an improvement of about 9%
in mAP over the baseline on the LLCM dataset.

Figure 1: Performance comparison of different VI-ReID
methods on the SYSU-MM01 dataset before and after using our proposed data expansion approach.

of the single-modality ReID for practical nighttime surveillance. To address this problem, researchers have introduced
cross-modality ReID, known as Visible-Infrared Person ReIDentification (VI-ReID) (Ye et al. 2020a). The goal of VIReID is to match the night-time infrared person images captured by infrared (IR) cameras and visible person images
captured by RGB cameras (Yang et al. 2023). With modern surveillance systems being able to automatically switch
between visible and infrared modes during nighttime, VIReID has attracted more and more attention. Nevertheless,
the distinct modality of infrared images presents substantial
domain discrepancies, posing greater challenges for ReID.
Several studies (Ye et al. 2020a; Fang, Yang, and Fu
2023) have made initial attempts of VI-ReID to learn a
modality-invariant and discriminative feature space by designing more advanced neural network structures, improving objective functions, and adjusting training strategies. In
this way, samples from the same person are closer across
different modalities, while samples from different individuals are farther apart.Following above strategies, significant
progress has been made in the field of VI-ReID (Ye et al.
2023; Zhang and Wang 2023; Ye et al. 2020a; Fang, Yang,
and Fu 2023), but the performance of these methods is still
limited by the scale of the dataset, leading to suboptimal
accuracy. For example, the commonly used dataset SYSU-

Introduction
Person Re-IDentification (ReID), aiming to match and
identify individuals captured by non-overlapping cameras
(Huang et al. 2023), has been widely used in numerous computer vision applications, including intelligent monitoring,
public security, and persons analysis. Early efforts mainly
focus on single-modality ReID tasks, where all the person images are typically collected by visible cameras under well-lit environments, ignoring the fact that visible cameras often fail to capture adequate information of one person
under poor lighting conditions, restricting the applicability
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11185

