The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Video Summarization Using Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model
Zirui Shang1 , Yubo Zhu1 , Hongxi Li1 , Shuo Yang2 , Xinxiao Wu1, 2 *
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science & Technology,
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
{shangzirui, 3120211052, lihongxi, wuxinxiao}@bit.edu.cn, yangshuo@smbu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video summarization aims to eliminate visual redundancy
while retaining key parts of video to construct concise and
comprehensive synopses. Most existing methods use discriminative models to predict the importance scores of video
frames. However, these methods are susceptible to annotation
inconsistency caused by the inherent subjectivity of different annotators when annotating the same video. In this paper,
we introduce a generative framework for video summarization that learns how to generate summaries from a probability distribution perspective, effectively reducing the interference of subjective annotation noise. Specifically, we propose
a novel diffusion summarization method based on the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM), which learns
the probability distribution of training data through noise prediction, and generates summaries by iterative denoising. Our
method is more resistant to subjective annotation noise, and is
less prone to overfitting the training data than discriminative
methods, with strong generalization ability. Moreover, to facilitate training DDPM with limited data, we employ an unsupervised video summarization model to implement the earlier
denoising process. Extensive experiments on various datasets
(TVSum, SumMe, and FPVSum) demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1.0
0.8

0.6
0.4

0.2
0.0

Figure 1: An example of subjective annotation noise in the
TVSum dataset, where yellow blocks represent the annotated video frames of summaries by different annotators.
2023; Terbouche et al. 2023), etc. However, these existing
methods use discriminative models to predict the importance
scores of video frames, which are susceptible to annotation
inconsistency. The inconsistency is inevitable because of the
inherent subjectivity of different annotators when annotating
the same video. For example, as shown in Figure 1, when
facing the video of a pet store advertisement, some annotators may focus on the cute pets in the video (shown in the
red box), and others may show more interest in the products
in the store (shown in the blue box), resulting in different
annotations of importance scores.
To address this challenge, we introduce a generative
framework for video summarization that learns how to generate summaries from a probability distribution perspective,
effectively reducing the interference of subjective annotation noise. In this paper, we propose a novel diffusion summarization method based on the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM), which learns the probability distribution of training data through noise prediction, and generates summaries by iterative denoising. Specifically, we use
video frame features as guidance, and take the importance
scores after adding noise as input to train DDPM for generating clear importance scores. We directly train DDPM
using raw annotations rather than averaging them, enabling

Introduction
With the popularity of video-sharing platforms and social
media, video data is experiencing explosive growth, and increasing attentions are paid to automatically identifying and
extracting representative segments from a video. Video summarization emerges as a critical technique that condenses
video content into a concise summary while preserving essential information and key moments. These summaries enable users to quickly grasp the video content, making it more
easily accessible and manageable in various scenarios, such
as online platforms, surveillance systems, and multimedia
archives.
Considerable progress has been made in video summarization recently, and many deep models have been applied,
such as Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Zhang et al.
2016), Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) (Liang et al.
2022), Transformer (Li et al. 2023; Hsu, Liao, and Huang
* Xinxiao Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6776

