The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FigStep: Jailbreaking Large Vision-Language Models via Typographic Visual
Prompts
Yichen Gong1 * , Delong Ran2 * , Jinyuan Liu3 , Conglei Wang4 ,
Tianshuo Cong3† , Anyu Wang3,5,6† , Sisi Duan3,5,6,7 , Xiaoyun Wang3,5,6,7,8
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
2
Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua University,
3
Institute for Advanced Study, BNRist, Tsinghua University,
4
Carnegie Mellon University,
5
Zhongguancun Laboratory,
6
National Financial Cryptography Research Center,
7
Shandong Institute of Blockchain,
8
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shandong University
{gongyc18, rdl22, liujinyuan24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, congleiw@andrew.cmu.edu,
{congtianshuo, anyuwang, duansisi, xiaoyunwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Vanilla

Abstract

Textual Module

Safety Alignment

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) signify a groundbreaking paradigm shift within the Artificial Intelligence (AI)
community, extending beyond the capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) by assimilating additional modalities
(e.g., images). Despite this advancement, the safety of LVLMs
remains adequately underexplored, with a potential overreliance on the safety assurances purported by their underlying
LLMs. In this paper, we propose FigStep, a straightforward
yet effective black-box jailbreak algorithm against LVLMs. Instead of feeding textual harmful instructions directly, FigStep
converts the prohibited content into images through typography to bypass the safety alignment. The experimental results
indicate that FigStep can achieve an average attack success
rate of 82.50% on six promising open-source LVLMs. Not
merely to demonstrate the efficacy of FigStep, we conduct
comprehensive ablation studies and analyze the distribution
of the semantic embeddings to uncover that the reason behind
the success of FigStep is the deficiency of safety alignment
for visual embeddings. Moreover, we compare FigStep with
five text-only jailbreaks and four image-based jailbreaks to
demonstrate the superiority of FigStep, i.e., negligible attack
costs and better attack performance. Above all, our work reveals that current LVLMs are vulnerable to jailbreak attacks,
which highlights the necessity of novel cross-modality safety
alignment techniques.

Reject
Accept

Connector
FigStep

Visual Module

Reject
Accept

LVLMs

Figure 1: FigStep jailbreaks LVLM through transferring the
harmful information from textual domain to visual domain,
thereby bypassing the textual module’s safety alignment.

(AI) research. Unlike single-modal Large Language Models
(LLMs) like ChatGPT (OpenAI 2022), LVLMs can process
queries with both visual and textual modalities. Noteworthy LVLMs like GPT-4V (OpenAI 2023a) and LLaVA (Liu
et al. 2023b) have remarkable abilities, which could enhance
end-user-oriented scenarios like image captioning for blind
people (Xu et al. 2015) or recommendation systems for children (Deldjoo et al. 2017), where content safety is crucial.
Typically, an LVLM consists of a visual module, a connector, and a textual module (see Figure 1). To be specific,
the visual module is an image encoder (Radford et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2023) that extracts visual embeddings from imageprompts. The connector will transform these visual embeddings to the same latent space as the textual module (Liu et al.
2023b). The textual module takes the concatenation of textprompts and transforms visual embeddings to generate the
final textual responses. As the core component of LVLM, the
textual module is usually an off-the-shelf pre-trained LLM
that has undergone strict safety alignment to ensure LVLM
safety (Zheng et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Perez et al.
2022; Korbak et al. 2023; Shevlane et al. 2023).
However, most of the popular open-source LVLMs do
not undergo a rigorous safety assessment before being re-

Code, Datasets — https://github.com/ThuCCSLab/FigStep
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05608

Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) are at the forefront
of the recent transformative wave in Artificial Intelligence
* These authors contributed equally.
†

These authors are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23951

