The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-modal and Multi-scale Spatial Environment Understanding for
Immersive Visual Text-to-Speech
Rui Liu1 * , Shuwei He1 , Yifan Hu1 , Haizhou Li2, 3
1

2

Inner Mongolia University, China
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
liurui imu@163.com, shuwei he@163.com, hyfwalker@163.com, haizhouli@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

of the reference based on given textual content (He, Liu, and
Li 2024). For example, Lee et al. (2024) utilizes the pretrained CLAP model to map a textual or audio description
into an environmental feature vector that controls the reverberation aspects of the generated audio. Tan, Zhang, and
Lee (2022) design an environment embedding extractor that
learns environmental features from the reference speech. In
more recent studies, Liu et al. (2023b) propose a visual-text
encoder based on the transformer to learn global spatial visual information from the RGB image. Building on these
advancements, this paper focuses on employing visual information as the cue to generate reverberation audio for the
targeted scene.
However, previous VTTS methods have not fully understood the spatial environment, due to the neglect of local and
depth image information. For example, the local elements in
the spatial environment can directly influence the reverberation style. Specifically, the hard surfaces such as tables reflect sound waves, while softer materials like carpets absorb
them, directly affecting the audio’s authenticity and naturalness (Chen et al. 2023, 2022; Liu et al. 2023b). In addition,
the Depth space of the image contains positional relationships within the spatial environment (Majumder et al. 2022;
Chen et al. 2023), such as the arrangement of objects, the
position of the speaker and the room geometry. Therefore, it
is crucial for VTTS systems to accurately capture the local
and depth spatial environment information simultaneously.
To address the issues, we propose a novel multi-modal
and multi-scale spatial environment understanding scheme
to achieve immersive VTTS, termed M2 SE-VTTS. The
multi-modal aims to take both the RGB and Depth spaces
of the spatial image to learn more comprehensive spatial information, such as the speaker’s location and the positions
of key objects that influence sound absorption and reflection. The multi-scale seeks to model the impact of local and
global spatial knowledge on reverberation. Specifically, we
first split the RGB and Depth images into patches following the visual transformer strategy (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021).
In addition, we adopt the Gemini-generated (Team et al.
2024) environment captions to guide the local spatial understanding based on an identification mechanism. After that,
the local-aware global spatial understanding takes the multimodal and multi-scale features as input and progressively integrates spatial environment knowledge. In this way, M2 SE-

Visual Text-to-Speech (VTTS) aims to take the environmental image as the prompt to synthesize the reverberant speech
for the spoken content. The challenge of this task lies in understanding the spatial environment from the image. Many
attempts have been made to extract global spatial visual information from the RGB space of an spatial image. However,
local and depth image information are crucial for understanding the spatial environment, which previous works have ignored. To address the issues, we propose a novel multi-modal
and multi-scale spatial environment understanding scheme to
achieve immersive VTTS, termed M2 SE-VTTS. The multimodal aims to take both the RGB and Depth spaces of the
spatial image to learn more comprehensive spatial information, and the multi-scale seeks to model the local and global
spatial knowledge simultaneously. Specifically, we first split
the RGB and Depth images into patches and adopt the
Gemini-generated environment captions to guide the local
spatial understanding. After that, the multi-modal and multiscale features are integrated by the local-aware global spatial
understanding. In this way, M2 SE-VTTS effectively models
the interactions between local and global spatial contexts in
the multi-modal spatial environment. Objective and subjective evaluations suggest that our model outperforms the advanced baselines in environmental speech generation.

Code and Audio Samples —
https://github.com/AI-S2-Lab/M2SE-VTTS

Introduction
Visual Text-to-Speech (VTTS) aims to leverage the environmental image as the prompt to generate the reverberant
speech that corresponds to the spoken content. With the advancement of human-computer interaction, VTTS has become integral to intelligent systems and plays an important
role in fields such as augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) (Liu et al. 2023b).
Unlike acoustic matching tasks that transform input
speech to match the environmental conditions of a reference source (Chen et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023a; Somayazulu,
Chen, and Grauman 2024; Im and Nam 2024), VTTS seeks
to synthesize speech with the environmental characteristics
* Corrposending Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24632

