The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Skip Mamba Diffusion for Monocular 3D Semantic Scene Completion
Li Liang 1 , Naveed Akhtar 2 , Jordan Vice 1 , Xiangrui Kong 1 , Ajmal Saeed Mian 1
1

The University of Western Australia
2
The University of Melbourne
li.liang@research.uwa.edu.au, naveed.akhtar1@unimelb.edu.au, jordan.vice@uwa.edu.au,
xiangrui.kong@research.uwa.edu.au, ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au

Abstract

et al. 2023) rely on LiDAR point clouds for 3D semantic scene completion. However, LiDAR data is inherently
sparse - a property conflicting with the scene completion objective. Consequently, LiDAR-based scene completion models need to make up for this disparity with additional model
complexity. For instance, Xia et al. (2023) developed SCPNet, which enhances single-frame models through denseto-sparse knowledge distillation. However, the model computational demands become sizable. Image-based methods
(Cao and De Charette 2022; Zhang, Zhu, and Du 2023;
Yu et al. 2024; Zheng et al. 2024b) utilize color images
for the task, promising relatively simpler solutions. However, performance level of these techniques remains a bottleneck (Zhang, Zhu, and Du 2023; Yu et al. 2024). As an example, Yu et al. (2024) introduced CGFormer, which utilizes
multiple representations to encode 3D volumes from both
local and global perspectives. Their method also includes a
depth refinement module to enhance depth estimation accuracy. Nevertheless, the advancement still lacks an acceptable
performance for the critical nature of the task.
Multi-modal inputs are also being considered for 3D semantic scene completion (Li et al. 2019b, 2020; Cai et al.
2021; Dourado, Guth, and de Campos 2022; Wang et al.
2023; Cao and Behnke 2024). As a representative example,
FFNet (Wang, Lin, and Wan 2022) aims at addressing inconsistencies in RGB+D data and uncertainties in depth measurements. The technique employs a frequency fusion module and a correlation descriptor to capture the explicit correlation of RGB+D features. Whereas using multiple modalities helps in performance gain, it comes with a considerable
computational overhead and intricacies in modeling. Moreover, achieving accurate alignment between different modalities remains a significant challenge along this direction.
In this work, we focus on monocular image data to devise an effective 3D semantic scene completion method that
demonstrates a marked performance gain in this category.
Our approach leverages a unique combination of advances
in generative diffusion modeling (Rombach et al. 2022)
and state space models (Gu and Dao 2023) tailored to the
problem at hand. We propose a neural network, see Fig. 1,
that encapsulates data processing for 3D scene completion
in a conditioned latent space of a variational autoencoder
(VAE). The conditioning lifts 2D scene information to 3D
for subsequent multi-scale processing that prepares data for

3D semantic scene completion is critical for multiple downstream tasks in autonomous systems. It estimates missing geometric and semantic information in the acquired scene data.
Due to the challenging real-world conditions, this task usually demands complex models that process multi-modal data
to achieve acceptable performance. We propose a unique neural model, leveraging advances from the state space and diffusion generative modeling to achieve remarkable 3D semantic
scene completion performance with monocular image input.
Our technique processes the data in the conditioned latent
space of a variational autoencoder where diffusion modeling is carried out with an innovative state space technique. A
key component of our neural network is the proposed Skimba
(Skip Mamba) denoiser, which is adept at efficiently processing long-sequence data. The Skimba diffusion model is integral to our 3D scene completion network, incorporating a
triple Mamba structure, dimensional decomposition residuals
and varying dilations along three directions. We also adopt
a variant of this network for the subsequent semantic segmentation stage of our method. Extensive evaluation on the
standard SemanticKITTI and SSCBench-KITTI360 datasets
show that our approach not only outperforms other monocular techniques by a large margin, it also achieves competitive
performance against stereo methods.

Code — https://github.com/xrkong/skimba

Introduction
3D semantic scene completion is essential for inferring
missing geometric and semantic information in scene data
acquisition. This task finds numerous downstream applications in autonomous driving (Li et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023),
robotic navigation (Tian et al. 2024; Jin et al. 2024), and
planning (Mei et al. 2023) etc. Recent semantic scene completion techniques use different input modalities, e.g., LiDAR, images, multi-modal, to pursue an acceptable level
of performance. However, the complexity of the underlying
modeling objective still makes 3D semantic scene completion an open challenge for the research community.
Several studies (Zhang et al. 2018; Roldao et al. 2020;
Yan et al. 2021; Xiong et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023; Xia
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5155

