The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attend and Enrich: Enhanced Visual Prompt for Zero-Shot Learning
Man Liu2,4 , Huihui Bai1,2,4B , Feng Li3B , Chunjie Zhang2,4 ,
Yunchao Wei2,4 , Tat-Seng Chua5 , Yao Zhao2,4
1

Tangshan Research Institute of Beijing Jiaotong University
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
3
Hefei University of Technology
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
5
National University of Singapore
{manliu, hhbai, cjzhang, yunchao.wei, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn, fengli@hfut.edu.cn, chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) endeavors to transfer knowledge
from the seen categories to recognize unseen categories,
which mostly relies on the semantic-visual interactions between image and attribute tokens. Recently, the prompt learning has emerged in ZSL and demonstrated significant potential as it allows the zero-shot transfer of diverse visual
concepts to downstream tasks. However, current methods explore the fixed adaptation of the learnable prompt on the seen
domains, which make them over-emphasize the primary visual features observed during training, limiting their generalization capabilities to the unseen domains. In this work,
we propose AENet, which endows semantic information into
the visual prompt to distill semantic-enhanced prompt for visual representation enrichment, enabling effective knowledge
transfer for ZSL. AENet comprises two key steps: 1) exploring the concept-harmonized tokens for the visual and attribute
modalities, grounded on the modal-sharing token that represents consistent visual-semantic concepts; and 2) yielding the
semantic-enhanced prompt via the visual residual refinement
unit with attribute consistency supervision. It is further integrated with primary visual features to attend to semanticrelated information for visual enhancement, thus strengthening transferable ability. Experimental results on three benchmarks show that our AENet outperforms existing state-ofthe-art ZSL methods.

Figure 1: Motivation of AENet. (a) Embedding-based
methods align visual and semantic features for ZSL, which
suffer from vague visual representations due to cross-dataset
bias. (b) Prompt-based methods add the learnable prompt to
pre-trained vision encoders, adapting them to ZSL scenarios while over-emphasizing primary visual features. (c) Our
AENet distills the semantic-enhanced prompt that attends to
semantic-related details to enrich visual representations, ensuring more comprehensive knowledge transfer.

Code — https://github.com/ManLiuCoder/AENet.
space. Prior to such a cross-modal alignment, as depicted in
Figure 1(a), embedding-based models typically commence
with a visual encoder, such as ResNet (He et al. 2016)
or ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) pre-trained on ImageNet
(Deng et al. 2009), to initialize visual features. However,
this can introduce distribution discrepancy when applied to
downstream ZSL benchmarks as wider categories are unobserved during pre-training, thereby resulting in cross-dataset
bias that produces vague or even misleading visual representations (Torralba and Efros 2011).
To mitigate the distribution discrepancy and cross-dataset
bias issues arising from using pre-trained encoders, recent
ZSL methods have incorporated attention mechanisms (Xie
et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2019) and vision transformers (Chen
et al. 2022b,a, 2024). These approaches refine visual representations by focusing on informative image regions and

Introduction
Humans naturally interact with the world through various
channels such as vision and language, enabling them to identify unseen objects based on prior knowledge. Leveraging
this cognitive capability, zero-shot learning (ZSL) (Palatucci
et al. 2009; Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009) aims
to classify objects from the unseen domain carrying knowledge from seen categories. One of the mainstream methods
in ZSL is the embedding-based approach (Xu et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022d,b; Liu et al. 2024b), which
learns the semantic-visual alignment in a joint embedding
B

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5504

