The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MCAT: Visual Query-Based Localization of Standard Anatomical Clips in Fetal
Ultrasound Videos Using Multi-Tier Class-Aware Token Transformer
Divyanshu Mishra1 , Pramit Saha1 , He Zhao3 , Netzahualcoyotl Hernandez-Cruz1 , Olga Patey2 ,
Aris Papageorghiou2 , J. Alison Noble1
1
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
Nuffield Department of Women’s and Reproductive Health, University of Oxford
3
Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool
{divyanshu.mishra, pramit.saha, netzahualcoyotl.hernandez-cruz, alison.noble}@eng.ox.ac.uk,
{olga.patey, aris.papageorghiou}@wrh.ox.ac.uk, he.zhao@liverpool.ac.uk
2

Abstract

Cai et al. 2018; Lee, Gao, and Noble 2021; Baumgartner
et al. 2016; Schlemper et al. 2018). Other recent works have
looked into leveraging temporal information for more complex tasks, such as anomaly detection in ultrasound videos
(Zhao et al. 2022, 2023) and generative modeling of standard planes (Men et al. 2023), although these approaches do
not explicitly localize standard frames. Integrating a videoclip localization model could enhance sonographer workflow by allowing them to focus on detailed video reviews
and anomaly detection. However, automatically detecting
standard frames in video is challenging due to the high similarity of frames before and after the standard ones, making
it difficult to determine temporal anatomical boundaries, as
shown in Fig. 1. Additionally, even human experts may find
it hard to agree on standard frame selection, as evidenced
by our study showing a kappa score of only 66% between
two fetal cardiologists annotating the same fetal heart videos
(see Supp. Fig. 1), highlighting the complexity and inherent noise in annotations. Text query-based localization tasks,
such as video-temporal grounding (Yang et al. 2022; Zeng
et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2023), video moment retrieval (Liu
et al. 2022; Moon et al. 2023), and highlight detection, have
shown promising performance in natural video understanding. However, textual data often falls short of providing the
dense video understanding required for some applications.
In the medical domain, reports traditionally rely on static images and text to convey diagnostic information (Moon et al.
2022; Saha et al. 2024a,b,c). While image-based methods
are informative, video-based analysis can offer a significant
advancement in diagnostic capabilities. For instance, a dynamic ultrasound video of a beating heart provides a more
detailed and holistic assessment of cardiac function compared to a single static frame (Scott et al. 2013). Similarly,
in fetal anatomy examinations, video clips allow practitioners to measure biometry more accurately and review the entire sequence for optimal plane selection, thereby enhancing
diagnostic precision. Despite the advantages, paired videotextual data is typically scarce in the medical field. When
available, it usually includes sparse class labels or radiology reports providing a diagnosis for the entire video rather
than detailed clip-level information. This is where imagebased queries, or visual queries (VQs), are potentially valuable. VQs allow for intuitive and direct identification of ob-

Accurate standard plane acquisition in fetal ultrasound (US)
videos is crucial for fetal growth assessment, anomaly detection, and adherence to clinical guidelines. However, manually selecting standard frames is time-consuming and prone
to intra- and inter-sonographer variability. Existing methods
primarily rely on image-based approaches that capture standard frames and then classify the input frames across different anatomies. This ignores the dynamic nature of video acquisition and its interpretation. To address these challenges,
we introduce Multi-Tier Class-Aware Token Transformer
(MCAT); a visual query-based video clip localization (VQVCL) method to assist sonographers by enabling them to capture a quick US sweep. By then providing a visual query of
the anatomy they wish to analyze, MCAT returns the video
clip containing the standard frames for that anatomy, facilitating thorough screening for potential anomalies. We evaluate
MCAT on two ultrasound video datasets and a natural image
VQ-VCL dataset based on Ego4D. Our model outperforms
state-of-the-art methods by 10% and 13% mtIoU on the ultrasound datasets and by 5.35% mtIoU on the Ego4D dataset,
using 96% fewer tokens. MCAT’s efficiency and accuracy
have significant potential implications for public health, especially in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), where
it may enhance prenatal care by streamlining standard plane
acquisition, simplifying US based screening, diagnosis and
allowing sonographers to examine more patients.

Introduction
Fetal ultrasound is essential for monitoring prenatal development, detecting potential abnormalities, and ensuring
the health of both the fetus and the expectant mother. In
routine pregnancy assessments, a sonographer scans different fetal anatomies to assess fetal development and identify anomalies. Selecting standard frames (Salomon et al.
2022; Hernandez-Cruz et al. 2025; Mishra et al. 2023) that
meet clinical guidelines (e.g., ISUOG) is a time-consuming
process, and a typical fetal ultrasound scan can take up
to an hour. Multiple studies have attempted to streamline
this process by automatically identifying standard planes
in 2D fetal ultrasound using deep learning-based classification models (Rahmatullah, Papageorghiou, and Noble 2011;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28267

