The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Kernel Learning for Sample Constrained Black-Box Optimization
Rajalaxmi Rajagopalan, Yu-Lin Wei, Romit Roy Choudhury
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{rr30,yulinlw2,croy}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Black box optimization (BBO) focuses on optimizing unknown functions in high-dimensional spaces. In many applications, sampling the unknown function is expensive, imposing a tight sample budget. Ongoing work is making progress
on reducing the sample budget by learning the shape/structure
of the function, known as kernel learning. We propose a new
method to learn the kernel of a Gaussian Process. Our idea
is to create a continuous kernel space in the latent space of
a variational autoencoder, and run an auxiliary optimization
to identify the best kernel. Results show that the proposed
method, Kernel Optimized Blackbox Optimization (KOBO),
outperforms state of the art by estimating the optimal at considerably lower sample budgets. Results hold not only across
synthetic benchmark functions but also in real applications.
We show that a hearing aid may be personalized with fewer
audio queries to the user, or a generative model could converge to desirable images from limited user ratings.

1

Figure 1: KerGPR in VAE latent space gives K ∗ to f GPR

the rough shape of f (x), i.e., select a GPR kernel that models this shape. With humans, for example, f (x) may have a
staircase structure as they may not perceive differences in
certain neighborhoods of x, but their ratings may change
just outside that neighborhood. If GPR’s surrogate model
fˆ(x) captures this staircase structure in its kernel, sample
efficiency can improve. However, in the absence of domain
knowledge, can the optimal GPR kernel K∗ be learnt, using
the same sample queries used to estimate x∗ ?
A growing body of research (Grosse et al. 2012)(Kim and
Teh 2016)(Teng et al. 2020) is concentrating on kernel learning. One effective approach is Automatic Statistician (AS)
(Duvenaud et al. 2013) where authors compose complex kernels by combining simple ones through a context-free grammar and design a search method over the countably infinite
complex kernels (more in Section 5). Subsequent improvements over AS have used Hellinger distance as a measure
of kernel similarity (Malkomes, Schaff, and Garnett 2016).
This similarity metric guides an optimization-based search
over the space of composite kernels. To reduce search complexity, (Gardner et al. 2017) exploits additive structures in
the search space and employs MCMC methods to discover
kernels. All these techniques operate on discrete spaces, delivering a categorical composition of simple kernels.
A continuous space of kernels naturally lends itself to optimization methods. Our contribution is in designing such a
continuous kernel space and running an auxiliary optimization on it to discover K∗ . To this end, we first synthesize
many discrete kernels by adding or multiplying a set of simple “basis” kernels, and then use a variational autoencoder
(VAE) to learn a low-dimensional continuous manifold for
the discrete kernels. This manifold lives in the latent space
of the VAE, as shown by the orange region in Figure 1. Con-

Introduction

Many problems involve the optimization of an unknown
objective function. Examples include personalizing content
x to maximize a user’s satisfaction f (x), or training deep
learning models with hyperparameters x to maximize their
performance f (x). Function f (x) is unknown in these cases
because it is embedded inside the human brain (for the case
of personalization) or too complex to derive (for hyperparameter tuning). However, for any chosen sample xi , the
value of f (xi ) can be evaluated. For hearing-aid personalization, say, evaluating the function would entail playing audio with some hearing-compensation filter xi and obtaining
the audio clarity score f (xi ) from the user.
Bayesian methods like Gaussian Process Regression (GPR)
are de facto approaches to black-box optimization (BBO).
Using a set of function evaluations, conventional GPR (Frazier 2018) learns a probabilistic surrogate model fˆ(x) for
f (x). The optimum is estimated on this surrogate as x̂∗ =
argmin −fˆ(x). In most BBO problems, f (x) is expensive to
evaluate, hence a strict sample or query budget B is of interest. Techniques that lower this budget have garnered recent
attention. One idea is to exploit domain knowledge about
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20113

