The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bias Unveiled: Investigating Social Bias in LLM-Generated Code
Lin Ling1 , Fazle Rabbi1 , Song Wang2 , Jinqiu Yang1
1

Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada
2
Lassonde School of Engineering, York University, Toronto, Canada
lin.ling@mail.concordia.ca, fazle.rabbi@mail.concordia.ca, wangsong@yorku.ca, jinqiu.yang@concordia.ca

Abstract

HumanEval (Chen et al. 2021) and MBPP (Austin et al.
2021), focus on functional correctness, but fall short in evaluating the fairness of code, particularly in detecting bias
against diverse demographic groups in human-center tasks.
Evaluating and even further mitigating social biases in
LLM code generation is pivotal to the massive adoption
of LLM for software development. Prior studies reveal
that LLMs have social biases towards different demographics in NLP tasks (Bai et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2023;
Meade, Poole-Dayan, and Reddy 2021; Gallegos et al.
2023). Yet, these techniques are not applicable in code
generation. Recent works (Liu et al. 2023; Huang et al.
2023) took the first steps to investigate social bias in
code generation. Yet these works do not fully represent
real-world human-centered coding tasks for which developers may utilize LLM to generate code. Specifically,
Liu et al. use manually crafted prompts of method signatures containing negative judgmental modifiers, such
as
def find_disgusting_people(people,
ethnicity). Huang et al. experiment one-sentence
prompts in LLM code generation, which does not cover
complicated real-world scenarios. Moreover, the work by
Liu et al. does not quantify the severity of social bias,
and both works lack in exploring more comprehensive
bias mitigation strategies and investigating the impact on
functional correctness by bias mitigation.
To fill this research gap, we develop a novel evaluation framework Solar for evaluating the fairness of LLMgenerated code. Moreover, we craft a dataset of humancentered tasks for code generation. Figure 1-a shows an
example of human-centered tasks (i.e., a task definition),
which involves deciding a career choice based on personal characteristics. Solar takes a task definition as input and generates a code prompt (Figure 1-b) and executable test cases (Figure 1-d) for evaluating social biases.
A subject LLM generates code snippets (depicted in Figure 1-c) given the prompt, and then will be evaluated for
fairness using the Solar’s generated test cases. Inspired by
metamorphic testing (Chen, Cheung, and Yiu 2020), the
test cases examine whether a generated code snippet produces different outcomes for different demographics. For
example, as shown in Figure 1 (illustrated by sub-figure
c and d), the tested model, GPT-3.5-turbo-0125, produces
gender-biased code that excludes transgender individuals as

Large language models (LLMs) have significantly advanced
the field of automated code generation. However, a notable
research gap exists in evaluating social biases that may be
present in the code produced by LLMs. To solve this issue,
we propose a novel fairness framework, i.e., Solar, to assess
and mitigate the social biases of LLM-generated code.
Specifically, Solar can automatically generate test cases for
quantitatively uncovering social biases of the auto-generated
code by LLMs. To quantify the severity of social biases in
generated code, we develop a dataset that covers a diverse set
of social problems. We applied Solar and the crafted dataset
to four state-of-the-art LLMs for code generation. Our evaluation reveals severe bias in the LLM-generated code from all
the subject LLMs. Furthermore, we explore several prompting strategies for mitigating bias, including Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) prompting, combining positive role-playing with CoT
prompting and dialogue with Solar. Our experiments show
that dialogue with Solar can effectively reduce social bias in
LLM-generated code by up to 90%. Last, we make the code
and data publicly available is highly extensible to evaluate
new social problems.

Code — https://github.com/janeeyre912/fairness_testing_
code_generation
Datasets — https://github.com/janeeyre912/fairness_
testing_code_generation/tree/master/dataset
Extended version —
https://github.com/janeeyre912/fairness_testing_code_
generation/blob/master/Paper_extended_version.pdf 1

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) that are pre-trained and finetuned on code-specific datasets have led to recent successes
of LLM-for-code models, such as Codex (Chen et al. 2021),
CodeGen (Nijkamp et al. 2022), StarCoder (Li et al. 2023),
Code Llama (Roziere et al. 2023), and Copilot (Chen et al.
2021). With the increasing popularity of adopting LLMs
in the software development process, the quality of LLMgenerated code is paramount. Current evaluations, such as
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This work contains examples that potentially implicate stereotypes that may be offensive to certain social groups.

27491

