The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Language Prompt for Autonomous Driving
Dongming Wu1 * † , Wencheng Han2 * , Yingfei Liu3 ,
Tiancai Wang3 , Cheng-zhong Xu2 , Xiangyu Zhang3,4 , Jianbing Shen2‡
1
Beijing Institute of Technology,
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau,
3
MEGVII Technology,
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{wudongming97, wencheng256}@gmail.com, wangtiancai@megvii.com, jianbingshen@um.edu.mo
2

Abstract

Pioneering works like Talk2Car (Deruyttere et al. 2019),
Cityscapes-Ref (Vasudevan, Dai, and Van Gool 2018) have
started to incorporate natural language into object detection
tasks in driving scenes. Unfortunately, these datasets only
allow each expression to refer to a single object within an
individual image, restricting their usage in scenarios with
multiple referred objects or changing temporal states. Furthermore, Refer-KITTI (Wu et al. 2023b) addressed this issue by extending the KITTI dataset (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012) to include expressions that ground multiple video
objects. This work mainly focuses on modular images and
2D detection, thereby leaving room for improvement in 3D
driving scenes. A recent advancement, namely NuScenesQA (Qian et al. 2023), offers numerous question-answer
pairs for 3D multi-view driving scenes, making significant
strides in the use of language prompts. However, it primarily
contributes to scene-level understanding and overlooks the
direct and fine-grained semantic correspondence between
3D instances and natural language expression.
To advance the research of prompt learning in driving
scenarios, we propose a new large-scale benchmark, named
NuPrompt. The benchmark is built on the popular multiview 3D object detection dataset nuScenes (Caesar et al.
2019). We assign a language prompt to a collection of objects sharing the same characteristics for grounding them.
Essentially, this benchmark provides lots of 3D instancetext pairings with three primary attributes: ❶ Real-driving
descriptions. Different from existing benchmarks that only
represent 2D objects from modular images, the prompts of
our dataset characterize a diverse range of driving-related
objects from 3D, panoramic views, and long-temporal space.
Fig. 1 shows a typical example, i.e., a car surpasses our
car from behind towards the front across multiple views. ❷
Instance-level prompt annotations. Every prompt indicates
a fine-grained and discriminative object-centric description,
as well as enabling it to cover an arbitrary number of driving
objects. ❸ Large-scale language prompts. From a quantitative perspective, NuPrompt has 40,147 language prompts.
Along with NuPrompt, we present a new and challenging prompt-based driving perception and prediction task,
whose main idea is to track and forecast the trajectory for
3D objects based on a specified language prompt. The chal-

A new trend in the computer vision community is to capture
objects of interest following flexible human command represented by a natural language prompt. However, the progress
of using language prompts in driving scenarios is stuck in
a bottleneck due to the scarcity of paired prompt-instance
data. To address this challenge, we propose the first objectcentric language prompt set for driving scenes within 3D,
multi-view, and multi-frame space, named NuPrompt. It expands nuScenes dataset by constructing a total of 40,147 language descriptions, each referring to an average of 7.4 object
tracklets. Based on the object-text pairs from the new benchmark, we formulate a novel prompt-based driving task, i.e.,
employing a language prompt to predict the described object
trajectory across views and frames. Furthermore, we provide
a simple end-to-end baseline model based on Transformer,
named PromptTrack. Experiments show that our PromptTrack achieves impressive performance on NuPrompt. We
hope this work can provide some new insights for the selfdriving community.

1

Introduction

Leveraging natural language description in visual tasks is
one of the recent trends in the vision community (Radford
et al. 2021; Kirillov et al. 2023). It has garnered significant
interest for its potential applications in various downstream
tasks, such as embodied intelligence and human-robot interactions (Deruyttere et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2023; Gupta
and Kembhavi 2023; Hu et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023a,c; Bai
et al. 2024). Its core idea is to predict the desired answer
by shifting human instruction inputs but not updating model
weights, delivering high adaptability in response to varying human demands. A key factor for the progress in 2D
scenes is the availability of large-scale image-text pairs (Lin
et al. 2014; Changpinyo et al. 2021; Schuhmann et al. 2021).
However, this success is hard to replicate in self-driving scenarios due to the scarcity of 3D instance-text pairs.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The work is done during Dongming Wu interned at MEGVII.
Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

8359

