The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Marginal Benefit Driven RL Teacher for Unsupervised Environment Design
Dexun Li, Wenjun Li, Pradeep Varakantham
Singapore Management University
{dexunli.2019, wjli.2020, pradeepv}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Training generally capable agents in complex environments is
a challenging task that involves identifying the “right” environments at the training stage. Recent research has highlighted
the potential of the Unsupervised Environment Design framework, which generates environment instances/levels adaptively
at the frontier of the agent’s capabilities using regret measures.
While regret approaches have shown promise in generating
feasible environments, they can produce difficult environments
that are challenging for an RL agent to learn from. This is because regret represents the best-case (upper bound) learning
potential and not the actual learning potential of an environment. To address this, we propose an alternative mechanism
that employs marginal benefit, focusing on the improvement
(in terms of generalized performance) the agent policy gets for
a given environment. The advantage of this new mechanism
is that it is agent-focused (and not environment focused) and
generates the “right” environments depending on the agent’s
policy. Additionally, to improve the generalizability of the
agent, we introduce a representative state diversity metric that
aims to generate varied experiences for the agent. Finally, we
provide detailed experimental results and ablation analysis to
showcase the effectiveness of our methods. We obtain SOTA
results among RL-based environment generation methods.

1

Introduction

The advancements in Reinforcement Learning (RL) have
led to significant successes in various applications, such as
game playing (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016), robot
control (Levine et al. 2016; Akkaya et al. 2019), and many
others. However, training RL agents with general capabilities
remains a major challenge due to the millions of experiences
required to train an RL agent in each environment, which is
both time-consuming and expensive.
One promising approach to address this problem is to
"shallowly" train an agent on a sequence of tasks or environments (Dennis et al. 2020; Parker-Holder et al. 2022;
Li, Varakantham, and Li 2023). In this method, instead of
extensively training on each environment with millions of
experiences, the RL agent is exposed to a limited number of
experiences in each individual environment. This adaptive
curriculum of environments, tailored to the agent’s policy, has
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18253

been demonstrated to produce more robust agents in fewer
training steps (Portelas et al. 2020a; Jiang, Grefenstette, and
Rocktäschel 2021). This methodology is referred to as Unsupervised Environment Design (UED).
Protagonist Antagonist Induced Regret Environment Design (PAIRED) (Dennis et al. 2020) introduced a selfsupervised RL paradigm in which the RL teacher employs
regret, obtained from the student agent’s performance to generate new environments. This approach leverages regret as
a measure of learning potential to create environments that
are at the edge of the capabilities of the student. However,
computing the regret value, which is approximated by the
difference between the expected payoffs of the student (protagonist) and the expert (antagonist), is computationally expensive owing to costly interactions between the three agents
and the environment. Furthermore, PAIRED suffers from
catastrophic forgetting of past environments due to learning
on new environments. To address these concerns, subsequent
works such as PLR (Jiang, Grefenstette, and Rocktäschel
2021) and ACCEL (Parker-Holder et al. 2022) introduced
multiple changes: (1) They eliminated RL-based generation
and instead employed a random generation of environments;
(2) They used an approximate version of regret, namely Generalized Advantage Estimate (GAE); (3) They employed the
replay of past environments to prevent catastrophic forgetting;
and (4) They Edited the generated environments to ensure
thorough training on a challenging sequence of environments.
While there has been significant progress in UED on account of above-mentioned algorithms, there exist some significant issues. The random environment generation-based
training has been shown to provide good zero-shot generalization performance (in ACCEL and PLR), however, there
exists a significant variance in performance across different
runs. As indicated earlier, regret represents the upper bound
on the learning potential of an environment and not the real
learning potential. Furthermore, it is unclear if that potential
can really be achieved. As shown in Figure 2, there is a positive correlation between what the agent can learn from the
environment and the learning potential of the environment,
but the significant variance suggests that high potential does
not necessarily lead to substantial performance gains.
Therefore, we propose to employ RL-based training but
with an alternative measure for environment generation called
marginal benefit. Marginal benefit quantifies the actual im-

