The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Representation Learning for Forecasting Recursive and Multi-Relational
Events in Temporal Networks
Tony Gracious, Ambedkar Dukkipati
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore - 560012, INDIA
{tonygracious, ambedkar}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

and Shin 2023). With the availability of richer datasets that
show more complex interaction events, learning problems
must consider scenarios beyond hypergraphs by incorporating a wide variety of information associated with these interactions. These ideas have been explored in recent works of
topology-aware deep learning, where higher-order network
structures such as simplicial complexes, cell complexes, and
multi-scale topological information are used for improving
graph neural networks (Hajij et al. 2023; Horn et al. 2022).
Recent works have shown that n-ary facts or multi-relational
hyperedges are the natural data representations for Knowledge graphs, and models based on those perform better than
that use pairwise multi-relation models (Wen et al. 2016;
Fatemi et al. 2020).
Most of these works ignore the temporal aspects of the
network, where entities interact and evolve (S. Gupta and
Dukkipati 2019). This has been addressed using dynamic
network models based on temporal point processes (TPP)
and link prediction. The recent works model interactions as
instantaneous edges (Kumar, Zhang, and Leskovec 2019;
Dai et al. 2016; Trivedi et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2021)/hyperedges (Gracious and Dukkipati 2023) forming between
a pair of nodes or a group of nodes, and a generative model
is parameterized to model the formation of edges given the
history.
However, real-world interactions can be much more complex than just a group of entities interacting. These interactions can exhibit group structure within themselves. For
example, a directed hyperedge involves interaction between
two groups of entities in the source and destination. Here,
one can represent the source and destination as hyperedges,
which act as nodes to the interaction hyperedge. In our
work, we generalize this recursive group structure property
of real-world interactions to incorporate a variable number
of groupings. Examples of these types of interactions can be
seen in political events, where source and target hyperedges
function as nodes within larger hyperedges. Figure 1 illustrates a real-world event where Putin delivers a speech at
the EU. In this context, each source and target hyperedge
consists of nodes that are themselves hyperedges, representing the actor, sector, and country. The source and target hyperedges are connected by the relation SpokedIn, indicating the action of the source hyperedge when giving a speech,
while the relation InvSpokedIn represents the inverse re-

Understanding relations arising out of interactions among entities can be very difficult, and predicting them is even more
challenging. This problem has many applications in various
fields, such as financial networks and e-commerce. These relations can involve much more complexities than just involving more than two entities. One such scenario is evolving recursive relations between multiple entities, and so far, this is
still an open problem. This work addresses the problem of
forecasting higher-order interaction events that can be multirelational and recursive. We pose the problem in the framework of representation learning of temporal hypergraphs that
can capture complex relationships involving multiple entities. The proposed model, Relational Recursive Hyperedge
Temporal Point Process (RRHyperTPP) uses an encoder that
learns a dynamic node representation based on the historical interaction patterns and then a hyperedge link predictionbased decoder to model the occurrence of interaction events.
These learned representations are then used for downstream
tasks involving forecasting the type and time of interactions.
The main challenge in learning from hyperedge events is
that the number of possible hyperedges grows exponentially
with the number of nodes in the network. This will make the
computation of negative log-likelihood of the temporal point
process expensive, as the calculation of survival function requires a summation over all possible hyperedges. In our work,
we develop a noise contrastive estimation method to learn the
parameters of our model, and we have experimentally shown
that our models perform better than previous state-of-the-art
methods for interaction forecasting.

Code & Datasets — https://tinyurl.com/RRHyperTPP
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2404.17943

1

Introduction

With the advancement of the field of geometric deep learning and the availability of more and more datasets that capture complex interactions among entities, there is a new interest in learning representations from higher-order relations
in networks (Bronstein et al. 2017, 2021). Until now the focus had been only on hypergraphs, where relations are represented as hyperedges that represent interactions of groups of
entities/nodes (Ghoshdastidar and Dukkipati 2017a,b; Lee
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16897

