The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AdaO2B: Adaptive Online to Batch Conversion for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Xiao Zhang,1 Sunhao Dai,1 Jun Xu,1, * Yong Liu,1 Zhenhua Dong2
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shenzhen, China
{zhangx89,sunhaodai,junxu,liuyonggsai}@ruc.edu.cn
dongzhenhua@huawei.com

Abstract
Online to batch conversion involves constructing a new batch
learner by utilizing a series of models generated by an existing
online learning algorithm, for achieving generalization guarantees under i.i.d assumption. However, when applied to realworld streaming applications such as streaming recommender
systems, the data stream may be sampled from time-varying
distributions instead of persistently being i.i.d. This poses a
challenge in terms of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization.
Existing approaches employ fixed conversion mechanisms that
are unable to adapt to novel testing distributions, hindering the
testing accuracy of the batch learner. To address these issues,
we propose AdaO2B, an adaptive online to batch conversion
approach under the bandit setting. AdaO2B is designed to be
aware of the distribution shifts in the testing data and achieves
OOD generalization guarantees. Specifically, AdaO2B can
dynamically combine the sequence of models learned by a
contextual bandit algorithm and determine appropriate combination weights using a context-aware weighting function. This
innovative approach allows for the conversion of a sequence of
models into a batch learner that facilitates OOD generalization.
Theoretical analysis provides justification for why and how the
learned adaptive batch learner can achieve OOD generalization
error guarantees. Experimental results have demonstrated that
AdaO2B significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines
on both synthetic and real-world recommendation datasets.

Introduction
Online learning aims at conducting sequential decisionmaking by capturing the dynamic nature of data stream,
which generates an updated model at each round and uses
it for the next decision-making round (Cesa-Bianchi and
Lugosi 2006; Shalev-Shwartz 2011; Zhang and Liao 2019).
To achieve regret guarantees of the decision process, online
learning algorithms need to update the model incrementally
upon receiving the new instances. Due to its high computational cost and decision instability, updating the model
* Corresponding author: Jun Xu (junxu@ruc.edu.cn).
Work partially done at Engineering Research Center of NextGeneration Intelligent Search and Recommendation, Ministry of
Education.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22596

fully online is rather unrealistic for many real-world applications (e.g., streaming recommender systems). An effective
approach is online to batch conversion (Littlestone 1989;
Cesa-Bianchi, Conconi, and Gentile 2004), which constructs
a batch learner based on the model sequence generated by an
existing online learning algorithm. The batch learner is fixed
during the testing process, which aims to benefit from the
sequence of existing models for good generalization abilities.
Classic online to batch (O2B) conversion approaches typically assume that the instances in data streaming are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) according to
a fixed but unknown distribution. Under the i.i.d. assumption, O2B conversion becomes a process of selecting a representative model or averaging multiple models (Dekel and
Singer 2005; Dekel 2008; Cutkosky 2019). But in real-world
applications, distribution shifts between training and testing data are ubiquitous, posing new challenges of achieving
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization guarantees through
O2B conversions. For example, in streaming recommender
systems, users often change their preference dynamically
(Hamidzadeh and Moradi 2021; Zhang et al. 2021a; Dai et al.
2023), e.g., a user may prefer different categories of videos
due to changes in weather or mood, and the features of a
video may change on different timestamp.
Existing O2B conversion technologies are not suitable for
the OOD scenarios due to their fixed conversion mechanisms,
which can not adjust strategies of combining or selecting
models for adaptation to novel (or similar) testing distributions. Figure 1 shows an empirical study on the real-world
video recommendation data, where the user preferences in
testing data may differ due to the different data-collection
time that could incur OOD problem in the testing phase. We
can observe that, compared with the fully online learning
algorithm, the recommendation performances of classic O2B
conversions significantly decreased during the testing phase.
The results clearly indicate that the out-of-distribution data
could be damaging for O2B conversion in terms of hurting
the testing accuracy of a batch learner.
Analysis shows that, in online learning, the received instances in the data stream may be sampled from multiple distributions that violate the i.i.d. assumption. Thus, the models
generated by an online learning algorithm have already been
trained on data from these distributions, raising the possibility

