The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training Verification-Friendly Neural Networks via Neuron Behavior Consistency
Zongxin Liu1,2 , Zhe Zhao3 , Fu Song1,4 , Jun Sun5 , Pengfei Yang6 , Xiaowei Huang7 , Lijun Zhang1,2 *
1

Key Laboratory of System Software (Chinese Academy of Sciences) and State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
RealAI, Beijing, China
4
Nanjing Institute of Software Technology, Nanjing, China
5
Singapore Management University, Singapore
6
College of Computer and Information Science, Software College, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
7
The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
liuzx@ios.ac.cn, zhe.zhao@realai.ai, songfu@ios.ac.cn, junsun@smu.edu.sg, ypfbest001@swu.edu.cn,
xiaowei.huang@liverpool.ac.uk, zhanglj@ios.ac.cn
Abstract

samples without affirming their absence. In contrast, formal
verification ensures the correctness of neural networks using logical and mathematical methods, allowing us to verify
their robustness formally. This rigorous verification is essential for safety-critical systems.
Advanced formal verification tools (Wang et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2022a; Bak 2021; Katz et al. 2017), typically
employ branch-and-bound algorithms for neural network
verification. At the start of the verification process, abstract
interpretation (Gehr et al. 2018; Mirman, Gehr, and Vechev
2018; Zhang et al. 2021, 2023; Guo et al. 2021) is usually
used to abstract neurons. If the properties of the network remain undetermined after using symbolic propagation (Singh
et al. 2019) to calculate neuron boundaries and applying
MILP (Tjeng, Xiao, and Tedrake 2019; Tran et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2022b; Zhang, Song, and Sun 2023; Zhang et al.
2024) or SMT methods (Ehlers 2017; Huang et al. 2017;
Katz et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2024a) for constraint solving, further branching is required. The branching
process involves enumerating the activation states of unstable neurons, whose activation status cannot be determined
through bound calculations. This introduces additional constraints, thereby refining the abstraction. Typically, neural
networks contain numerous unstable neurons, and exploring
the combinations of these activation states requires exponential time, which limits the widespread application of formal
verification techniques in practice.
In addition to developing ever-more sophisticated methods for post-training verification, researchers have investigated the idea of training neural networks that are easier to
verify, known as verification-friendly neural networks. Ideally, a training method for verification-friendly neural networks must satisfy the following requirements. First, (accuracy) the resultant neural network must have an accuracy
comparable to that of neural networks trained conventionally. Second, (robustness) the resultant neural network must
have improved robustness, which could be measured using
existing adversarial attacks. Third, (verifiability) it must be
easier to verify using existing or dedicated neural network
verification techniques, which can be measured using the ef-

Formal verification provides critical security assurances for
neural networks, yet its practical application suffers from
the long verification time. This work introduces a novel
method for training verification-friendly neural networks,
which are robust, easy to verify, and relatively accurate. Our
method integrates neuron behavior consistency into the training process, making neuron activation states remain consistent across different inputs within a local neighborhood. This
reduces the number of unstable neurons and tightens the
bounds of neurons thereby enhancing the network’s verifiability. We evaluated our method using the MNIST, FashionMNIST, and CIFAR-10 datasets with various network architectures. The experimental results demonstrate that networks
trained using our method are verification-friendly across different radii and architectures, whereas other tools fail to
maintain verifiability as the radius increases. Additionally,
we show that our method can be combined with existing approaches to further improve the verifiability of networks.

Introduction
Neural networks are increasingly being applied in safetycritical domains such as autonomous driving (Urmson and
Whittaker 2008) and flight control (Julian, Kochenderfer,
and Owen 2019). However, they often struggle with a lack
of robustness, as even minor perturbations to their inputs
can lead to incorrect predictions (Bu et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2021; Song et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023, 2022b; Zhao et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2022a). This is unacceptable in safetycritical applications, where consistent performance is imperative. Thus, it is desirable to develop methods to systematically advance the robustness verification of neural networks.
Existing methods for analyzing robustness can be broadly
classified into two categories: empirical analysis through adversarial attacks and mathematical proof via formal verification. While adversarial attacks generate misleading examples, they merely demonstrate the presence of adversarial
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5757

