The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Synergy of GFlowNet and Protein Language Model Makes
a Diverse Antibody Designer
Mingze Yin1,2 * , Hanjing Zhou1 * , Yiheng Zhu1 * , Jialu Wu3 , Wei Wu4 , Mingyang Li5 , Kun Fu5 ,
Zheng Wang5 , Chang-Yu Hsieh3† , Tingjun Hou3† , Jian Wu1,2,6†
2

1
College of Computer Science & Technology and Liangzhu Laboratory, Zhejiang University
State Key Laboratory of Transvascular Implantation Devices of The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University
3
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
5
Alibaba Cloud Computing
6
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Medical Imaging Artificial Intelligence
{mzyin256, zhj85393}@gmail.com, {zhuyiheng2020, jialuwu, kimhsieh, tingjunhou, wujian2000}@zju.edu.cn
{sangheng.lmy, fukun.fu, wz388779}@alibaba-inc.com, urara@mail.ustc.edu.cn

antigen

Abstract

VL, variable region of light chain

Antibodies defend our health by binding to antigens with
high specificity, primarily relying on the ComplementarityDetermining Region (CDR). Yet, current experimental methods of discovering new antibody CDRs are heavily timeconsuming. Computational design could alleviate this burden, with protein language models demonstrating remarkable
utility in many recent studies. However, most existing models solely focus on antibody developability and struggle to
encapsulate the diverse range of plausible CDR candidates,
limiting their effectiveness in real-world scenarios as binding
is only one factor in the multitude of drug-forming criteria. In
this paper, we introduce PG-AbD, a framework uniting Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) and pretrained Protein
Language Models (PLMs) to successfully generate highly
potent, diverse and novel antibody candidates. We innovatively construct a Products of Experts (PoE) composed by the
global-distribution-modeling PLM and the local-distributionmodeling Potts Model to serve as the reward function of
GFlowNet. The joint training paradigm is introduced, where
PoE is trained by contrastive divergence with the negative
samples generated by GFlowNet, and then guides GFlowNet
to sample diverse antibody candidates. We evaluate PGAbD on extensive antibody design benchmarks. It significantly outperforms existing methods in diversity (13.5% on
RabDab, 31.1% on SabDab) while maintaining optimal developability and novelty. Generated antibodies are also found
to form stable and regular 3D structures with their corresponding antigens, demonstrating the great potential of PGAbD to accelerate real-world antibody discovery.

1

VH, variable region of heavy chain
CL, conserved region of light chain

CH, conserved region of heavy chain

complementarity-determining region

VH

antibody

VL

CDR-H1

CDR-H1

CDR-H2

CDR-H2

CDR-H3

CDR-H3

Figure 1: Overview of antibody Y-shape structure.
is a Y-shaped molecule composed of two identical heavy
chains and two identical light chains linked by disulfide
bonds. On each chain, the Complementarity-Determining
Region (CDR), also known as the hypervariable region, primarily determines the antibody’s affinity and specificity for
its target. Given the crucial role of CDRs in antigen binding, computational antibody design primarily focuses on designing these regions. However, this presents a significant
challenge due to the enormous combinatorial search space of
over O(2060 ) possible CDRs and the limited solution space
satisfying the desired constraints of binding affinity, stability, and synthesizability (Raybould et al. 2019).
Current antibody discovery procedures still heavily rely
on a laborious combination of high-throughput screening
and experimental heuristics. The impressive progress of
deep learning methods has recently enabled computational
predictions (Jin et al. 2021; Fu and Sun 2022) that could
potentially improve wet-lab antibody discovery. Despite the
versatility and claimed high prediction accuracy (often defined as “reconstructing the ground truth in training or test
datasets”) of contemporary deep learning models, there remains room for improvement. Rather than solely focusing

Introduction

Antibodies, also known as immunoglobulins, are specialized
proteins produced by the immune system to safeguard and
combat a variety of diseases by specifically binding to antigens (Zhu et al. 2022). As shown in Figure 1, an antibody
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22164

