The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Empowering Self-Learning of LLMs: Inner Knowledge Explicitation as a Catalyst
Shijue Huang1,4 * , Wanjun Zhong2 * , Deng Cai2 , Fanqi Wan3 , Chengyi Wang2 ,
Mingxuan Wang2 , Mu Qiao2 , Ruifeng Xu1,4,5†
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Bytedance Seed, China
3
Sun Yat-sen University, China
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
joehsj310@gmail.com, wanjun@bytedance.com, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

Query

Self-learning of Large Language Models (LLMs) facilitates their advancement towards super-intelligence by training with self-synthesized experiences. However, a critical
challenge is the amplification of hallucinations in generated
data during iterative self-learning, underscoring the need for
reliable data selection. To address this, we investigate the
mechanism of Inner Knowledge Explicitation, which involves
explicitly extracting the inner knowledge from memory of
LLMs, to concurrently improves reasoning, and enables reliable self-learning data selection. This paper introduces a
Self Knowledge Explicitation Learning (SKE-Learn) framework, which equips the LLMs with meta-skills to explicitly extract, verify and utilize inner knowledge for reasoning. By leveraging these meta-skills, SKE-Learn establishes a
self-learning approach that ensures reliable selection of selfsynthetic data. This approach enhances performance through
iterative self-learning while mitigating the problem of hallucinations. Empirical results from six benchmarks demonstrate that Inner Knowledge Explicitation improves reasoning
by serving as a more effective prompting method. Additionally, SKE-Learn, based on the verifiability of explicit knowledge, shows consistent performance improvements over multiple self-training iterations, with an average performance increase from 52.79% to 56.54% across all benchmarks. Furthermore, Inner Knowledge Explicitation provides explanation and intervention space during LLM’s generation process.

Inner
Knowledge

Real-World
Knowledge
Verifiable

E=MC !

Reasoning

(a) Direct Reasoning v.s. Inner Knowledge Explicitation.
E=MC !
Question

Inner Knowledge

Reasoning

Verify
Self-learning

Filtered Data
(Knowledge-Reasoning)

Real-World
Knowledge

(b) Self-learning with Verifiable Inner Knowledge.

Figure 1: Illustration of (a) Direct Reasoning v.s. Inner
Knowledge Explicitation; and (b) Self-learning with Verifiable Inner Knowledge.

This paradigm paves the way for automatic advancement of
LLMs towards super-intelligence. Nonetheless, synthesized
data often has the issue of hallucinations (Ji et al. 2023),
which will be amplified during iterative self-training and
leads to model collapse (Shumailov et al. 2024). Hence, reliable selection of self-learning data is of substantial significance to ensure learning robustness. However, previous
methods (Huang et al. 2023; Lu et al. 2024) directly synthesize reasoning process, which is question-specific and challenging to verify without human annotations or more advanced models’ judgments. In contrast, as knowledge has
authorized resource for verification and is general for different questions, its correctness is more easily to be verified as
shown in Figure 1 (a).
Inspired by human problem-solving, where relevant
knowledge is recalled from memory before reasoning,
equipping models with meta-skills to acquire, validate, and
utilize their inner knowledge could enhance reasoning and
ensure more reliable automatic data selection.

Code — https://github.com/JoeYing1019/SKE-Learn

1

Hard
to Verify

Reasoning

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI et al. 2024; Dubey
et al. 2024) have significantly advanced the field of natural language processing (NLP). However, as LLMs evolve
rapidly, the traditional approach of collecting high-quality
human annotations for model training struggles to meet
the increasing scalability demands. Therefore, self-learning
methods for LLMs (Wang et al. 2023b; Tu et al. 2024; Tao
et al. 2024) have been proposed, allowing LLMs to learn autonomously from self-synthesized, large-scale training data.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24150

