The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CLIMB-ReID: A Hybrid CLIP-Mamba Framework for Person Re-identification
Chenyang Yu1 , Xuehu Liu2 , Jiawen Zhu1 , Yuhao Wang3 , Pingping Zhang3 * , Huchuan Lu1,3
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China
3
School of Future Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
{yuchenyang, jiawen, 924973292}@mail.dlut.edu.cn;liuxuehu@whut.edu.cn;{zhpp, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn
2

(a) Text-prompt Learning

Abstract

Align

A text description
of a person.

Person Re-IDentification (ReID) aims to identify specific persons from non-overlapping cameras. Recently, some works
have suggested using large-scale pre-trained vision-language
models like CLIP to boost ReID performance. Unfortunately,
existing methods still struggle to address two key issues simultaneously: efficiently transferring the knowledge learned
from CLIP and comprehensively extracting the context information from images or videos. To address these issues, we
introduce CLIMB-ReID, a pioneering hybrid framework that
synergizes the impressive power of CLIP with the remarkable computational efficiency of Mamba. Specifically, we
first propose a novel Multi-Memory Collaboration (MMC)
strategy to transfer CLIP’s knowledge in a parameter-free and
prompt-free form. Then, we design a Multi-Temporal Mamba
(MTM) to capture multi-granular spatiotemporal information
in videos. Finally, with Importance-aware Reorder Mamba
(IRM), information from various scales is combined to produce robust sequence features. Extensive experiments show
that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods
on both image and video person ReID benchmarks.

Visual Encoder

Fixed

Text Encoder
(b) Text-free Learning
A set of training samples.

Prompt
Learning

Update

Visual Encoder

Align

Visual Encoder
(c) Ours Prompt-free Learning

Momentum Update

Update

Align
Align

Figure 1: Comparison of typical CLIP-based ReID methods
and our prompt-free framework. (a) Text-prompt learning.
(b) Text-free learning. (c) Our prompt-free learning.

Code — https://github.com/AsuradaYuci/CLIMB-ReID
struggle to tackle two main challenges: efficiently transferring knowledge from CLIP and sufficiently extracting contextual information from images or videos.
In fact, when applying CLIP to ReID, the first challenge
is that person samples are typically annotated with one-hot
labels, which lack semantic information. As shown in Fig. 1
(a), Li et al. (Li, Sun, and Li 2023) propose CLIP-ReID to
address this issue by generating label-specific text features
with prompt learning. Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2024a) further propose SVLL-ReID for generating diverse texts to enhance CLIP’s performance in ReID. Given that CLIP’s text
and visual encoders are aligned in the feature space, Yu et
al. (Yu et al. 2024) propose an one-stage text-free framework. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), it leverages the visual encoder
to generate an identity-specific CLIP Memory to replace text
descriptions. Although the above methods achieve significant performance improvements, the use of prompt learning
inevitably introduces additional training parameters.
On the other hand, leveraging spatiotemporal information is crucial for video-based person ReID. Existing methods (Liu et al. 2024a; Wang et al. 2024d; Wu et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2024c; Yan et al. 2023) rely on the self-attention

Introduction
Person Re-IDentification (ReID) (Gao et al. 2023; Zhang
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021b; Zhang et al. 2024) aims to
identify an individual from images or videos captured by
non-overlapping camera systems. Various approaches have
been developed over the past decade, including methods
based on CNNs (Dai et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2024; Chen
et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2024a; Zou et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2022) and Transformers (Zhang et al. 2021a; Chen et al.
2024; Diao et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2023; Diao et al. 2025).
While these methods demonstrate promising performance,
they still encounter challenges in achieving robust feature
representations. Recently, some works (Li et al. 2024; Li and
Gong 2023; Diao et al. 2025) have utilized large-scale pretrained vision language models like Contrastive LanguageImage Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021), to enhance
the ReID performance. Unfortunately, current methods still
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9589

