The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Vox-UDA: Voxel-wise Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Cryo-Electron
Subtomogram Segmentation with Denoised Pseudo-Labeling
Haoran Li1, 2 , Xingjian Li3 , Jiahua Shi4 , Huaming Chen5 , Bo Du6 , Daisuke Kihara7 , Johan
Barthelemy8 , Jun Shen1 * , Min Xu3 *
2

1
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Australia
ARC Training Centre for Innovative Composites for the Future of Sustainable Mining, University of Wollongong, Australia
3
Ray and Stephanie Lane Computational Biology Department, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
4
Centre for Nutrition and Food Sciences, University of Queensland, Australia
5
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Sydney, Australia
6
Department of Business Strategy and Innovation, Griffith University, Australia
7
Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, USA
8
NVIDIA, USA
hl644@uowmail.edu.au, lixj04@gmail.com, jiahua.shi@uq.edu.au, huaming.chen@sydney.edu.au, bo.du@griffith.edu.au,
dkihara@purdue.edu, jbarthelemy@nvidia.com, jshen@uow.edu.au, mxu1@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Introduction

Cryo-Electron Tomography (cryo-ET) is a 3D imaging technology that facilitates the study of macromolecular structures at near-atomic resolution. Recent volumetric segmentation approaches on cryo-ET images have drawn widespread
interest in the biological sector. However, existing methods
heavily rely on manually labeled data, which requires highly
professional skills, thereby hindering the adoption of fullysupervised approaches for cryo-ET images. Some unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) approaches have been designed to enhance the segmentation network performance
using unlabeled data. However, applying these methods directly to cryo-ET image segmentation tasks remains challenging due to two main issues: 1) the source dataset, usually obtained through simulation, contains a fixed level of
noise, while the target dataset, directly collected from rawdata from the real-world scenario, have unpredictable noise
levels. 2) the source data used for training typically consists of known macromoleculars. In contrast, the target domain data are often unknown, causing the model to be biased towards those known macromolecules, leading to a domain shift problem. To address such challenges, in this work,
we introduce a voxel-wise unsupervised domain adaptation
approach, termed Vox-UDA, specifically for cryo-ET subtomogram segmentation. Vox-UDA incorporates a noise generation module to simulate target-like noises in the source
dataset for cross-noise level adaptation. Additionally, we propose a denoised pseudo-labeling strategy based on the improved Bilateral Filter to alleviate the domain shift problem. More importantly, we construct the first UDA cryoET subtomogram segmentation benchmark on three experimental datasets. Extensive experimental results on multiple
benchmarks and newly curated real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed approach compared to
state-of-the-art UDA methods.

Cryo-Electron Tomography (cryo-ET) is one cuttingedge imaging technique which enables three-dimensional
views of biological samples in a native frozen-hydrated
state (Oikonomou and Jensen 2017). This automatic electron
tomography technique allows biologists to capture highresolution structures of macromolecular complexes (Wan
and Briggs 2016), which plays an important role in the field
of drug discovery and disease treatment. Inspired by the development of deep learning research in recent years, some
efforts have been made in cryo-ET image analysis, especially for the subtomogram segmentation task (Zhu et al.
2021; Zhou et al. 2021). Subtomogram segmentation is a
3D segmentation task that aims to mine the meaningful information of the target macromolecular on the voxel-level.
However, existing methods heavily rely on manual annotations which are highly subjective and resource-intensive.
To tackle the challenges for data annotation, the classical unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods involve
transferring the knowledge from labeled source domains to
unlabelled target domains (Liu et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2023a). Most existing approaches are designed
for 2D images, making them less effective for 3D tasks.
While some recent works explore UDA on 3D images (Shin
et al. 2023; Xian et al. 2023), they typically convert 3D input
into 2D slices for network processing, resulting in a loss of
spatial information. MAPSeg (Zhang et al. 2024) proposes
a voxel-level pseudo-labeling method based on MAE. However, label distortion remains a main challenge for UDA.
In this paper, we introduce a novel UDA approach using large simulated macromolecular data (Eisenstein, Danev,
and Pilhofer 2019; Hagen, Wan, and Briggs 2017) as the
source domain dataset and experimental dataset as the
target domain dataset. Advances in data simulation techniques have made it possible to generate cryo-ET subtomogram data beyond traditional biological methods. Given
the structure of macromolecules, existing generative methods (Martinez-Sanchez et al. 2024; Harar et al. 2023) can

Code — https://github.com/xulabs/aitom.
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

406

