The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Conversational Adaptability: Assessing the Proficiency of Large
Language Models in Dynamic Alignment with Updated User Intent
Yu-Chuan Chen, Hen-Hsen Huang
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
cychen@iis.sinica.edu.tw, hhhuang@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper presents a practical problem in dialogue systems:
the capability to adapt to changing user intentions and resolve inconsistencies in conversation histories. It is crucial
in scenarios like train ticket booking, where travel plans often change dynamically. Notwithstanding the advancements
in NLP and large language models (LLMs), these systems
struggle with real-time information updates during conversations. We introduce a specialized dataset to evaluate LLMbased chatbots on such conversational adaptability by asking
a broad range of open-domain questions, focusing on scenarios where users modify their requests mid-conversation. Additionally, as LLMs are susceptible to generating superfluous
sentences, we propose a novel, Chain-of-Thought-free evaluation framework to distill the user intention from their responses. Through extensive investigations on four LLMs, we
observe that these contemporary LLMs are not well-aligned
with the latest user intent in long-term conversations; they often fail to capture the nuances of natural conversations in a
zero-shot setting. Interestingly, the results demonstrate that
GPT-4, widely recognized as having the most advanced reasoning capabilities to date, is bested by GPT-3.5 in this task.
This work aims to improve the practicality of LLM-based
chatbots, bridging the gap between the current capabilities of
dialogue systems and the fluidity of human interactions.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: An example of our dataset: The customer made a
wrong request in u8 but corrected the attraction to “park” in
u9 . Bold texts are the user intents labeled in MultiWOZ 2.2.
Our dataset contains only one valid (defined in §3) intent in
the update turn (u9 and b9 ; see §3), as the phrase “In fact”
in u9 should implicitly nullify the previous intent in u8 (the
explicit case is in §6.1). Note that the utterance u9 is only
for exposition, as we also test natural ones like “In fact,
park.” and “Oh, I’m sorry. Should have been park, not college.” in this paper (see §6.1). Hence, LLMs should catch
the update and reply only “park” rather than “college and
park” in b13 . Our updated intent does not have “museum and
park” (multi-intent) or “others except college” (obscure).

In the dynamic flow of a conversation, it is common for
speakers to shift their intentions and revise their previously
spoken words. Take, for instance, the scenario of customers
booking train tickets for travel. Naturally, their initial travel
plans are often subject to change during the booking process, influenced by factors like ticket availability or weather
conditions. In response to these changes, the booking agent,
responsible for understanding and processing the flux of user
intent, must promptly update its knowledge and adapt its responses to align with their latest requirements.
As dialogue systems continue to evolve, the number of
online customer service interactions handled by NLP models
has proliferated. Yet, the ability of these models, including
state-of-the-art large language models (LLMs), to accurately
and efficiently update information during a conversation remains a significant challenge. The difficulty stems from the

need for an LLM to understand the nuances of human communication and dynamically adjust its understanding as the
conversation progresses along with the emergence of new
information (see Figure 1).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23642

