The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Verifiable Text Generation with Generative Agent
Bin Ji1 * , Huijun Liu1 * , Mingzhe Du2 , Shasha Li1† , Xiaodong Liu1† , Jun Ma1† , Jie Yu1† , See-Kiong
Ng3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
2
Nanyang Technological University
3
National University of Singapore
{jibin, liuhuijun, shashali, liuxiaodong, majun, yj}@nudt.edu.cn, {mingzhe, seekiong}@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Question

Text generation with citations makes it easy to verify the factuality of Large Language Models’ (LLMs) generations. Existing one-step generation studies expose distinct shortages
in answer refinement and in-context demonstration matching. In light of these challenges, we propose R2 -MGA, a Retrieval and Reflection Memory-augmented Generative Agent.
Specifically, it first retrieves the memory bank to obtain
the best-matched memory snippet, then reflects the retrieved
snippet as a reasoning rationale, next combines the snippet
and the rationale as the best-matched in-context demonstration. Additionally, it is capable of in-depth answer refinement with two specifically designed modules. We evaluate
R2 -MGA across five LLMs on the ALCE benchmark. The
results reveal R2 -MGA’ exceptional capabilities in text generation with citations. In particular, compared to the selected
baselines, it delivers up to +58.8% and +154.7% relative performance gains on answer correctness and citation quality,
respectively. Extensive analyses strongly support the motivations of R2 -MGA.

Which is the most rainy place on earth?
[1] ... Cherrapunji has often
been credited as being the
wettest place on Earth ...

Retrieved
documents

[2] Based on the "Guinness
Book of World Records",
Mawsynram received of ...

[3] ... Cherrapunji has often been credited as being the
wettest place on Earth, but for now nearby Mawsynram
currently holds that distinction..

(a) Question and retrieved documents
Cherrapunji is the most rainy place on
earth [1].

LLM
(b) One-step generation

Agent

The official record is held by
Mawsynram [2][3], although
nearby Cherrapunji holds
the record for most rain in a
calendar month for July 1861
and most rain in a year from
August 1860 to July 1861 [1].

(c) Agent generation

Introduction

Figure 1: Illustrations of different types of text generation
with citations. ✓ and ✗ denote correct and wrong generation
cases, respectively.

With the advent of Large Language Models (LLMs), they
have shown exceptional capabilities in completing various
complex tasks like text generation (Wang et al. 2023b). Although these generations are usually coherent, they may be
unfaithful because of LLMs’ tendency to hallucinate. To authenticate the factuality, a novel research topic of text generation with citations is brought to the public (Gao et al. 2023;
Funkquist et al. 2023), which focuses on instructing LLMs
to provide citations to support their generations.
Research on text generation with citations begins with
commercial search engines such as Bing Chat1 , which integrate with LLMs like GPT models (OpenAI 2023). In particular, LLMs generate answers to given questions by synthesizing and citing searched results. However, these scenarios
fall short of automatically evaluating the generation quality,
which call for high-cost and low-efficiency human evaluations instead (Liu, Zhang, and Liang 2023). In light of this

challenge, Gao et al. (2023) propose ALCE, an automatic
evaluation benchmark for text generation with citations. Extensive efforts have been taken centering around ALCE. The
one-step generation study is a representative line of work,
which directly prompts LLMs to generate answers to questions by synthesizing retrieved documents, as the example
in Figure 1(b) shows. Gao et al. (2023) explore a series of
LLMs in the one-step generation study and propose several off-the-shelf document retrieval settings. Ji et al. (2024)
incorporate Chain-of-Thought into the one-step generation
study. Li et al. (2023) and Li et al. (2024) investigate advanced techniques to improve document retrieval accuracy
in the one-step generation study.
Despite the great success achieved by existing one-step
generation studies, they expose two distinct shortages: (1)
They fail to provide matched in-context demonstrations. To
be more precise, they typically use the same demonstrations
across all cases. However, the question type in the demon-

* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.bing.com/new

24230

