The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

WaveLoss: An Adaptive Dynamic Loss for Deep Gait Recognition
Zicheng Wang, Qiuxia Wu*
South China University of Technology
smallsquirrel007@gmail.com, qxwu@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

across various datasets, but there has been a notable lack
of research on loss functions. They simply combine triplet
loss and softmax loss to pull intra-class samples and push
inter-class samples. However, triplet loss and softmax loss
suffer from some drawbacks. For instance, Arcface (Deng
et al. 2019) highlighted the issue of combinatorial explosion
with triplet loss, leading to slow convergence, while softmax
loss is not only challenging to open-set recognition but also
leads to weak feature discriminability. Simply adding them
together may not necessarily be complementary. Therefore,
we aim to propose a more suitable loss function for deep gait
recognition.
Directly transferring the loss functions from face recognition may be a feasible solution. Through this approach,
sample-level losses can be integrated. However, the horizontal pooling (Chao et al. 2019) before the loss function in gait
recognition results in calculating intra-class and inter-class
similarities for each different part of different samples separately. Therefore, we also need to integrate the losses of
different parts in part-level.
The traditional part fusion approach(Chao et al. 2019; Lin
et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2023a) adopts an ostrich strategy,
wherein after obtaining losses from different parts, they are
directly averaged through pooling, referred to as post-fusion.
Figure1 illustrates the gradients of each part. As shown in
Figure1 (c)(d), in the later stages of training, most parts reside in regions of zero gradients, while a few challenging
parts are located in gradient regions. Despite the model’s efforts to learn from difficult parts, noisy parts make it hard to
learn useful features. Typically, the solution to distinguishing between low-quality samples and difficult samples involves image quality assessment. However, defining image
quality for binary gait images is difficult compared to RGB
images, and introducing complex image quality assessment
makes the loss function more complex.
Another intuitive and straightforward method is to perform fusion pooling on the parts obtained from horizontal
pooling before calculating the loss. This helps remove additional part dimensions generated by horizontal pooling. Subsequently, the loss is directly obtained through the loss function, referred to as pre-fusion. As shown in Figure 1 (a)(b),
pre-fusion aggregates all parts before computing the loss, so
the gradient of all parts is the gradient of the centroid. The
advantage of pre-fusion is that it enhances robustness against

Designing an appropriate loss function can enhance the discriminative power on gait recognition. However, previous research focuses on improving network structure and enriching
input modalities but overlooks the loss functions. Although
transferring loss functions from face recognition can address
sample-level loss, additional design is needed for part-level
loss. Therefore, we have designed a new loss function called
Waveloss, aimed at adaptively and dynamically changing the
preference for parts of different difficulties. First, the previous method treats the loss of different parts equally, which
brings the problems of difficult convergence or susceptibility to noise interference, so we propose norm-fusion to adaptively learn samples of different difficulties. Additionally,
since we find the exponential value represents preference for
learning different samples, we introduce the Dynamic Learning Process, which dynamically adjusts the exponential value
during iteration to focus on samples of varying difficulties at
different training stages. Finally, as the changes of the exponential value leads to significant fluctuations in the gradient, we introduce the gradient truncation and normalization
to avoid getting trapped in local optima and gradient vanishing or exploding by adaptively adjusting the gradient. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed Waveloss
achieves state-of-the-art performance on various gait recognition datasets and can improve the performance of different
backbones as well.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been rapid development in deep
gait recognition, with numerous methods (Chao et al. 2019;
Hou et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2021; Dou et al. 2022; Fan et al.
2023a) being proposed. Some (Lin et al. 2021; Fan et al.
2023a; Dou et al. 2023a; Ma et al. 2023) focus on improving
network structures, while others (Meng et al. 2020; Zheng
et al. 2022a, 2023; Shen et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2023; Fan
et al. 2024) concentrate on enriching input modalities. These
approaches enable deep learning models to extract discriminative gait features better, thereby increasing intra-class similarity and reducing inter-class similarity.
As mentioned above, the recent deep gait recognition methods have demonstrated commendable performance
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8259

