The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimal Control Operator Perspective and a Neural Adaptive Spectral Method
Mingquan Feng1 , Zhijie Chen2 , Yixin Huang1 , Yizhou Liu1 , Junchi Yan1,3
1
2

School of Electronic Information & Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
3
School of Artificial Intelligence & MoE Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{fengmingquan, cindyh1103, yizhou0409, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, lucmon@illinois.edu

Abstract

2004; Lewis, Vrabie, and Syrmos 2012):
Z tf
min f (x, u) =
p(x(t), u(t)) dt + h(x(tf )) (1a)

Optimal control problems (OCPs) involve finding a control
function for a dynamical system such that a cost functional is
optimized. It is central to physical systems in both academia
and industry. In this paper, we propose a novel instancesolution control operator perspective, which solves OCPs in
a one-shot manner without direct dependence on the explicit
expression of dynamics or iterative optimization processes.
The control operator is implemented by a new neural operator architecture named Neural Adaptive Spectral Method
(NASM), a generalization of classical spectral methods. We
theoretically validate the perspective and architecture by presenting the approximation error bounds of NASM for the control operator. Experiments on synthetic environments and a
real-world dataset verify the effectiveness and efficiency of
our approach, including substantial speedup in running time,
and high-quality in- and out-of-distribution generalization.

t0

s.t.

ẋ(t) = d(x(t), u(t)),
x(t0 ) = x0 ,

(1b)
(1c)

where d is the dynamics of differential equations; p evaluates the cost alongside the dynamics and h evaluates the
cost at the termination state x(tf ); and x0 is the initial state.
We restrict our discussion to differential equation-governed
optimal control problems, leaving the control problems in
stochastic networks (Dai and Gluzman 2022), inventory
management (Abdolazimi et al. 2021), etc. out of the scope
of this paper. The analytic solution of Eq. 1 is usually unavailable, especially for complex dynamical systems. Thus,
there has been a wealth of research towards accurate, efficient, and scalable numerical OCP solvers (Rao 2009) and
neural network-based solvers (Kiumarsi et al. 2017). However, both classic and modern OCP solvers are facing challenges, especially in the big data era, as briefly discussed
below.
1) Opacity of Dynamical Systems. Existing
works (Böhme and Frank 2017a; Effati and Pakdaman
2013; Jin et al. 2020) assume the dynamical systems a priori
and exploit their explicit forms to ease the optimization.
However, real-world dynamical systems can be unknown
and hard to model. It raises serious challenges in data
collection and system identification (Ghosh, Birrell, and
De Angelis 2021), where special care is required for error
reduction.
2) Model Reusability. Model reusability is conceptually
measured by the capability of utilizing historical data when
facing an unprecedented problem instance. Since solving an
individual instance of Eq. 1 from scratch is expensive, a
reusable model that can be well adapted to new problems
is welcomed for practical usage.
3) Running Paradigm. Numerical optimal control
solvers traditionally use iterative methods before picking the
control solution, thus introducing a multiplicative term regarding the iteration in the running time complexity. This
sheds light on the high cost of solving a single OC problem.
4) Control Solution Continuity. Control functions are
defined on a continuous domain (typically time) despite be-

Code — https://github.com/FengMingquan-sjtu/NASM
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12469

1

u∈U

Introduction

Although control theory has been rooted in a modelbased design and solving paradigm, the demands of model
reusability and the opacity of complex dynamical systems
call for a rapprochement of modern control theory, machine
learning, and optimization. Recent years have witnessed the
emerging trends of control theories with successful applications to engineering and scientific research, such as robotics
(Krimsky and Collins 2020), aerospace technology (He et al.
2019), and economics and management (Lapin, Zhang, and
Lapin 2019) etc.
We consider the well-established formulation of optimal
control (Kirk 2004) in finite time horizon T = [t0 , tf ]. Denote X and U as two vector-valued function sets, representing state functions and control functions respectively. Functions in X (resp. U ) are defined over T and have their outputs in Rdx (resp. Rdu ). State functions x ∈ X and control
functions u ∈ U are governed by a differential equation.
The optimal control problem (OCP) is targeted at finding a
control function that minimizes the cost functional f (Kirk
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14567

