The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PATENT LMM: Large Multimodal Model for
Generating Descriptions for Patent Figures
Shreya Shukla1 * , Nakul Sharma1 * , Manish Gupta2 , Anand Mishra1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India
2
Microsoft, India
{shukla.12,sharma.86}@iitj.ac.in, gmanish@microsoft.com, mishra@iitj.ac.in

Abstract

tential infringements by others. However, manually crafting
such descriptions is time-consuming and laborious, hindering the efficiency of patent processing and analysis.
One of the major challenges for generating patent figure
descriptions in an automated way is the lack of large-scale
labeled datasets. Existing datasets, while invaluable for advancing research in natural and scientific figure captioning,
do not adequately capture the nuances and complexities inherent to patent illustrations. To address this gap, we curate
PATENT D ESC -355K, a novel large-scale dataset containing
∼355K patent figures and their brief and detailed textual
descriptions extracted from 60K+ patent documents. This
dataset offers a rich and diverse collection of patent figures
that span various technical domains, along with their corresponding descriptions, enabling the development and evaluation of models specifically tailored for this task.
Typically, patent figures are associated with brief and detailed descriptions. In our proposed PATENT D ESC -355K
dataset, we found that they span an average of ∼34 and
∼1680 tokens, respectively. Thus, unlike existing image
captioning benchmarks, for example COCO (Lin et al.
2014), TextCaps (Sidorov et al. 2020) and NoCaps (Agrawal
et al. 2019) where captions span an average of ∼12 tokens,
the descriptive captioning of patent figures in our dataset is
much more challenging. Moreover, unlike the natural scene
images of the existing captioning datasets, patent figures are
structured technical illustrations that adhere to a more standardized visual style for technical and legal documentation.
The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) and
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) has revolutionized almost every vision and language task. These models exhibit
a remarkable ability to understand and generate coherent
language across diverse domains. However, applying these
models to the generation of patent descriptions presents
unique challenges. The length of descriptions and the complexity inherent to patent diagrams underscore the need to
focus on various elements of the figure, such as arrows,
nodes, and text annotations. Further, contrary to dense document images, patent figures are sparse and comprise several
elements like text, nodes, node labels (a number associated
with nodes in the patent figure), figure numbers, and arrows
in different styles, i.e., uni-direction and bidirectional, solid,
and dotted, among others. Please refer to Fig. 3 in the Appendix for an overview of these elements.

Writing comprehensive and accurate descriptions of technical drawings in patent documents is crucial to effective
knowledge sharing and enabling the replication and protection of intellectual property. However, automation of this
task has been largely overlooked by the research community. To this end, we introduce PATENT D ESC -355K, a novel
large-scale dataset containing ∼355K patent figures along
with their brief and detailed textual descriptions extracted
from more than 60K US patent documents. In addition, we
propose PATENT LMM – a novel large multimodal model
specifically tailored to generate high-quality descriptions of
patent figures. Our proposed PATENT LMM comprises two
key components: (i) PATENT MME, a specialized multimodal
vision encoder that captures the unique structural elements of
patent figures, and (ii) PATENT LL A MA, a domain-adapted
version of LLaMA fine-tuned on a large collection of patents.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate that training a vision encoder specifically designed for patent figures significantly boosts the performance, generating coherent descriptions compared to fine-tuning similar-sized off-the-shelf
multimodal models. PATENT D ESC -355K and PATENT LMM
pave the way for automating the understanding of patent figures, enabling efficient knowledge sharing and faster drafting
of patent documents.

Project Page —
https://vl2g.github.io/projects/PatentLMM/

1

Introduction

Patents are a cornerstone of intellectual property protection,
granting inventors exclusive rights to their creations. Effective communication of these inventions is crucial for patent
examiners, courts, and the technical community to appreciate the inventiveness of these inventions and assess their
novelty. Patent documents rely heavily on figures and their
corresponding textual descriptions to present technical details. Writing accurate descriptions of these figures is essential for an unambiguous understanding of the invention and
its components and facilitates knowledge sharing within the
technical community. Comprehensive descriptions also ensure that the invention is adequately protected against po* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20488

