The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Audio-Visual Adaptive Fusion Network for Question Answering Based on
Contrastive Learning
Xujian Zhao1 * † , Yixin Wang1† , Peiquan Jin2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Southwest University of Science and Technology
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
jasonzhaoxj@swust.edu.cn, yixin1202@mails.swust.edu.cn, jpq@ustc.edu.cn

2

Abstract
The Audio-Visual Question Answering (AVQA) task involves extracting question-related audio-visual clues from
both temporal and spatial perspectives to answer questions
accurately. Despite the promising performance of existing
multi-modal AVQA models, thanks to large-scale pre-trained
models, challenges remain in the field. Firstly, aligning audiovisual information across temporal and spatial dimensions is
difficult. Secondly, the fusion of audio-visual information is
often weighted inadequately, limiting model performance. To
address the above issues, we design the Audio-Visual Adaptive Fusion Network (AVAF-Net), which uses contrastive
learning to align audio-visual information temporally and
spatially and adaptively adjusts fusion weights based on the
question. Specifically, we initially align visual and audio
information temporally through a temporal-alignment contrastive loss. This is followed by an audio-visual clue-mining
module that highlights question-related cues, aligning them
with the vocal region spatially using spatial alignment contrastive loss. Additionally, a question-oriented adaptive fusion module assigns different weights to audio and visual
modalities based on the question content and then fuses them.
The fused audio-visual cues are finally used to predict the answer. Extensive experiments on the MUSIC-AVQA dataset
show that AVAF-Net surpasses all baseline models, with a
maximum improvement of 15.90% in average accuracy and
an average improvement of 9.80%.

Figure 1: Illustration of the AVQA task and our audio-visual
adaptive fusion method. (A) The AVQA task requires mining audio-visual clues related to the question. (B) Different
questions require different modalities to be focused on. For
question 1, the audio modality needs to be given higher attention, while for question 2, the visual modality needs to be
focused on.

Introduction

(Zhou et al. 2022b, 2024c; Liu et al. 2024), and question answering (Li et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2022; Li, Hou, and Hu
2023). Different from other audio-visual tasks, the audiovisual question answering (AVQA) task not only requires
exploring the temporal and spatial relations in audio-visual
scenes, but also requires comprehensive spatio-temporal reasoning based on the question content (Li et al. 2024). As
shown in Fig.1, to obtain the correct answer, the AVQA
model should identify the “cello” and “violin” in both temporal and spatial dimensions. For question one, “Is the cello
in the video always playing?”, the AVQA model should pay
high attention to the audio modality. And for question two,
“Are there violin and cello instruments in the video?”, the
visual modality should be given high attention.
To explore the AVQA task under long-term videos, Li
et al. (2022) constructed a large-scale dynamic audio-visual

Audio and visual clues greatly help us perceive the world
and transmit information daily. By combining the two, our
ability to perceive and understand dynamic audio-visual
scenes is greatly improved (Wei et al. 2022). In recent years,
the research on audio-visual scene understanding has received widespread attention and made significant progress,
such as sound source localization (Hu et al. 2023; Senocak
et al. 2018) and separation (Zhou et al. 2022a; Gan et al.
2020), event localization (Zhou et al. 2021, 2024a; Zhou,
Guo, and Wang 2023; Zhou et al. 2024b), video parsing
(Tian, Li, and Xu 2020; Mo and Tian 2022), segmentation
* Corresponding authors.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10483

