The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiverSAT: A Novel and Effective Local Search Algorithm for Diverse SAT Problem
Jiaxin Liang1 , Junping Zhou1 * , Minghao Yin1, 2 *
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, China
{liangjx348,zhoujp877,ymh}@nenu.edu.cn

2

Abstract

It contributes to many valuable applications in many fields.
For example, in intelligent planning, the agents benefit from
multiple diverse solutions because changes are pervasive in
our dynamic and uncertain world (Ghasemi et al. 2021). In
software testing, automated software testing requires diverse
solutions for maximizing fault detection rate or structural
coverage criteria to ensure the reliability of a software product line (Devroey et al. 2016). In semiformal verification,
verification engineers attempt to generate different witnesses
(solutions) with the aim of achieving sufficient coverage and
detecting corner-case bugs (Agbaria et al. 2010).
In recent years, diversity of the solutions has been discussed and explored in various fields, particularly in combinatiorial optimization problems (Hanaka et al. 2023; Petit
and Trapp 2015). In SAT and constraint satisfaction problems, there are several studies on diversity between two
solutions. For example, Distance-SAT problem determines
whether there exists a solution that differs from a given configuration by at most d variable assignments (Bailleux and
Marquis 1999), while Max Differ SAT problem focuses on
finding two solutions with a minimum distance threshold
of d (Misra, Mittal, and Rai 2024). Some researchers have
also studied algorithms for a series of problems from the
perspective of complexity, aiming at finding a pair of maximally far-apart solutions, known as Max Hamming Distance
(Crescenzi and Rossi 2002), such as Max Hamming XSAT
(Dahllöf 2005; Hoi and Stephan 2019). Additionally, a similar paradigm in the SAT literature is uniform solution sampling, where the objective is to find multiple solutions without directly considering diversity (Chakraborty et al. 2015;
Dutra et al. 2018). However, research on algorithms specifically designed for Diverse SAT is limited. To the best of
our knowledge, the currently available algorithms for Diverse SAT (referred to as DiversekSet in the literature) are
proposed by Nadel (Nadel 2011). These algorithms enumerate k diverse solutions by adjusting the variable ordering in
the CDCL-based solver. There remain many aspects for improvement, such as the solution quality.
In this work, we develop an efficient local search algorithm for the Diverse SAT problem, called DiverSAT. DiverSAT performs local search in the space of models by starting
with a solution S containing k diverse models and then repeatedly replacing a model in S with a new one to increase
the diversity quality. In order to generate diverse models, we

For many real-world problems, users are often interested not
only in finding a single solution but in obtaining a sufficiently
diverse collection of solutions. In this work, we consider the
Diverse SAT problem, aiming to find a set of diverse satisfying assignments for a given propositional formula. We propose a novel and effective local search algorithm, DiverSAT,
to solve the problem. To cope with diversity, we introduce
three heuristics and a perturbation strategy based on some
relevant information. We conduct extensive experiments on a
large number of public benchmarks, collected from semiformal hardware verification, logistics planning, and other domains. The results show that DiverSAT outperforms the existing algorithms on most of these benchmarks.

Datasets — https://github.com/LyreRabbit/DiverseSAT

Introduction
The Boolean Satisfiability Problem, often abbreviated as
SAT, is a fundamental problem in computer science (Biere
et al. 2021). SAT has broad applications across various
fields, such as intelligent planning, software testing, formal verification, and electronic design automation. It focuses on determining a solution (also known as a model) to
a given logical propositional formula. However, many logical propositional formulae only approximate complex realworld problems and cannot capture all details and uncertainties in these problems. Moreover, in numerous real-world
application scenarios, relying solely on a single solution to
the original problems falls short of meeting their coverage
demands. One potential approach to addressing this issue
involves finding diverse solutions to the logical formula and
allowing users to choose their preferences. Unfortunately,
although researchers have developed various techniques to
design advanced SAT solvers, the current solvers still return the same or similar solutions when running repeatedly,
which motivates the research on the Diverse SAT problem,
first introduced by Nadel (Nadel 2011).
The Diverse SAT is a problem of computing a set of k
diverse solutions of a given logical propositional formula,
such that the sum of the pairwise distances is maximized.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11290

