The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalizable Sensor-Based Activity Recognition via Categorical Concept
Invariant Learning
Di Xiong1 * , Shuoyuan Wang2 * , Lei Zhang1† , Wenbo Huang3 , Chaolei Han3
1

Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, Jiangsu, China
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China
3
Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, Jiangsu, China
{221812013, leizhang}@njnu.edu.cn, claytonwang0205@gmail.com, {wenbohuang1002, chaoleihan}@seu.edu.cn
2

Data from subject A
Data from subject B

Abstract
Human Activity Recognition (HAR) aims to recognize activities by training models on massive sensor data. In real-world
deployment, a crucial aspect of HAR that has been largely
overlooked is that the test sets may have different distributions from training sets due to inter-subject variability including age, gender, behavioral habits, etc., which leads to
poor generalization performance. One promising solution is
to learn domain-invariant representations to enable a model to
generalize on an unseen distribution. However, most existing
methods only consider the feature-invariance of the penultimate layer for domain-invariant learning, which leads to suboptimal results. In this paper, we propose a Categorical Concept Invariant Learning (CCIL) framework for generalizable
activity recognition, which introduces a concept matrix to
regularize the model in the training stage by simultaneously
concentrating on feature-invariance and logit-invariance. Our
key idea is that the concept matrix for samples belonging
to the same activity category should be similar. Extensive
experiments on four public HAR benchmarks demonstrate
that our CCIL substantially outperforms the state-of-the-art
approaches under cross-person, cross-dataset, cross-position,
and one-person-to-another settings.

A

B
Data from position 1
Data from position 2

2
1

Figure 1: Domain shift: sensor readings collected from different subjects or different locations of the same subject.

verse. Therefore, simply generalizing a model trained on existing data to new unseen data may not work due to such distribution shift problem in sensor signals.
In practice, the real-world sensor samples are typically
restricted to access during training. Taking elderly fall detection as an example, it is rather unrealistic to aggregate
training data from the elderly people based on safety concerns. However, it is feasible to collect training data from
young subjects while ensuring enough safe conditions. We
have to expect a model trained on the data collected from
young subjects to be readily extensible to elderly users with
no need of training data collected from them. To mitigate
this issue, DG has been a popular technique to reduce the
distribution discrepancy between the source and target domains with no need of direct access to never-seen-before
target data during training. Though many research efforts
have been devoted to computer vision applications, they may
be incompatible with time series data. Until now, there has
been limited research attention targeted at wearable sensor
data including feature disentanglement (Qian, Pan, and Miao
2021), data augmentation (Zhang et al. 2018), gradient operation (Huang et al. 2020), and domain-invariant representation learning (Lu et al. 2024; Du et al. 2021), which focus on explicitly or implicitly regularizing the models based
on the analysis of features. Despite notable achievements in
DG, it still remains a major challenge that is far from being
solved on sensor data. A recent study (Gulrajani and LopezPaz 2021) have empirically shown that most current state-ofthe-art approaches are even inferior to the baseline empirical
risk minimization (ERM) algorithm. These findings clearly

Introduction
Sensor-based human activity recognition (HAR) aims to
train models using massive data collected from wearable
sensors such as accelerometers and magnetometers. HAR
has wide applications in many areas, including personal fitness, elderly-care, human-machine interaction, sports tracking, etc (Huang et al. 2022). Despite significant progress,
current HAR study still faces critical challenges that prevent practical deployment while rendering the performance
suboptimal on never-seen-before data (Qian, Pan, and Miao
2021). As shown in Figure 1, the distribution of sensor signals is typically influenced by various factors such as age,
gender, and deployment locations. For instance, due to intersubject variability, a model that recognizes the activities of
an adult does not generalize well on new unseen data from
an elderly person, because they may have different behavioral patterns that make their data distributions highly di* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

923

