The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Text and Image Are Mutually Beneficial:
Enhancing Training-Free Few-Shot Classification with CLIP
Yayuan Li1 , Jintao Guo1 , Lei Qi2 , Wenbin Li1 , Yinghuan Shi1 *
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
{liyayuan, guojintao}@smail.nju.edu.cn, qilei@seu.edu.cn, {liwenbin, syh}@smail.nju.edu.cn

Issue 1: Anomalous match in image modality

Abstract

Bengal

Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) has been
widely used in vision tasks. Notably, CLIP has demonstrated
promising performance in few-shot learning (FSL). However,
existing CLIP-based methods in training-free FSL (i.e., without the requirement of additional training) mainly learn different modalities independently, leading to two essential issues: 1) severe anomalous match in image modality; 2) varying quality of generated text prompts. To address these issues, we build a mutual guidance mechanism, that introduces
an Image-Guided-Text (IGT) component to rectify varying
quality of text prompts through image representations, and a
Text-Guided-Image (TGI) component to mitigate the anomalous match of image modality through text representations.
By integrating IGT and TGI, we adopt a perspective of TextImage Mutual guidance Optimization, proposing TIMO. Extensive experiments show that TIMO significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) training-free method. Additionally, by exploring the extent of mutual guidance, we propose an enhanced variant, TIMO-S, which even surpasses the
best training-required methods by 0.33% with approximately
×100 less time cost.

Text guided
transfer

Support
Bengal

British
shorthair
Support

Anomalous
match

Query

Severe

Issue 2: Varying quality of generated text prompts
“A photo of a Bengal, a type of pet.” (best prompt)
“The image of a Bengal from the Caltech101 dataset looks
like a tiger.” (second-worst prompt)
“See the image below:.” (worst prompt)
Bad prompts
hinder the
performance

Code — https://github.com/lyymuwu/TIMO
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11375

Figure 1: Defects of independent modelling. The top of the
figure illustrates how the anomalous match left from the
CLIP pretraining stage results in high similarity between images from distinct categories; The bottom shows the varying
quality of the automatically generated prompts, where poor
prompts can negatively impact the final performance.

Introduction
Given its strong zero-shot capability, Contrastive LanguageImage Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) has recently
been adopted for various downstream tasks (Shao et al.
2024; Tang et al. 2024; Martin et al. 2024; Zhou et al. 2023).
Among these, CLIP-based few-shot learning (FSL) has garnered significant attention due to its ability to quickly adapt
to downstream tasks with few training samples (Wang et al.
2020; Sanghi et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2024; Mu et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2024a). However, as models and datasets grow,
traditional training-required FSL methods face significant
time costs due to backpropagation and are prone to overfitting, diminishing the rapid adaptability of FSL. Consequently, training-free FSL methods (Zhang et al. 2022; Zhu

et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024b) have emerged, aiming to improve model performance while avoiding iterative optimization methods like gradient descent to enhance efficiency.
Despite the promising performance of previous state-ofthe-art (SOTA) training-free FSL methods, they generally
model different modalities separately, ignoring the importance of effective cross-modal interaction (e.g., modality
alignment). This is particularly challenging to achieve in
training-free settings, as we cannot update model parameters
as in conventional methods. Consequently, previous related
works either only focus on designing sophisticated architectures (Wang et al. 2024b; Zhang et al. 2022; Udandarao,
Gupta, and Albanie 2023; Zhang et al. 2023), or only con-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5039

