The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Till the Layers Collapse: Compressing a Deep Neural Network Through the
Lenses of Batch Normalization Layers
Zhu Liao, Nour Hezbri, Victor Quétu, Van-Tam Nguyen, Enzo Tartaglione
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
{zhu.liao, victor.quetu, van-tam.nguyen, enzo.tartaglione}@telecom-paris.fr
{nour.hezbri}@ensae.fr
Abstract

must align with environmental friendliness. This has led to
the rise of model compression techniques. They reduce network size and complexity without impacting performance
significantly. Techniques such as pruning (Lee, Ajanthan,
and Torr 2019; Tartaglione et al. 2022), which eliminates
less critical neurons or weights, and quantization (Han, Mao,
and Dally 2015), which reduces the precision of weights and
activations, have been instrumental in this regard. Furthermore, Knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015) enables transferring knowledge from large, complex
models to smaller, efficient ones.
However, most compression techniques focus on reducing parameters and filters. Few address reducing the model’s
depth. Eliminating parameters or filters has relatively little
impact on modern computational resources such as GPUs.
Indeed, due to the parallel nature of the computation, the
size of layers is mainly limited by memory cache and core
availability. The main computational bottleneck is the critical path that the forward propagation must pass through (Ali
Mehmeti-Göpel and Disselhoff 2023). We would like to
specifically minimize this.
This paper addresses this challenge by introducing a
novel method, Till the Layers Collapse (TLC), which compresses DNNs looking through the lenses of batch normalization layers. By leveraging batch normalization parameters, TLC identifies and removes less important layers, thereby decreasing computational demands and latency
without significantly compromising model performance. Indeed, in rectifier-activated networks, if the standardized signal is mainly positive, we will know that a linear activation
would introduce a minimal error during the forward pass.
Conversely, a mainly negative signal leads to outputs close
to zero. Leveraging this, we can linearize (or remove) layers in the target model that will minimally alter the model’s
output. We empirically validate our approach across image
classification and natural language processing (NLP) tasks.
It maintains accuracy while improving efficiency.
We summarize, here below, our key messages and contributions.
• We propose a method for evaluating the importance of
layers (Sec. 3.3) based on the value of the batch normalization parameters (Sec. 3.2).
• We propose TLC, a method that identifies and removes
redundant layers by leveraging batch normalization pa-

Today, deep neural networks are widely used since they can
handle a variety of complex tasks. Their generality makes
them very powerful tools in modern technology. However,
deep neural networks are often overparameterized. The usage of these large models consumes a lot of computation resources. In this paper, we introduce a method called Till the
Layers Collapse (TLC), which compresses deep neural networks through the lenses of batch normalization layers. By
reducing the depth of these networks, our method decreases
deep neural networks’ computational requirements and overall latency. We validate our method on popular models such
as Swin-T, MobileNet-V2, and RoBERTa, across both image
classification and natural language processing (NLP) tasks.

Code — https://github.com/ZhuLIAO001/TLC
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15077

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have grown considerably in
recent decades, with applications in many different tasks.
DNNs capture subtle patterns effectively, enabling a wide
range of applications. This also allows them to achieve high
accuracy. Their applications cross various domains, including image classification (Barbano et al. 2022), semantic segmentation (Chaudhry et al. 2022), object detection (Carion
et al. 2020), natural language processing (Touvron et al.
2023), and the multi-modal tasks (Sun, Wang, and Li 2019).
The ability of DNNs to scale with the size of models and
datasets has been well-demonstrated (Hestness et al. 2017).
However, while DNNs have shown their scalability, modern DNNs can consist of millions to billions of parameters,
which means that the number of floating point operations
(FLOPs) required for a single inference is enormous. Not
only does this require a lot of computing power, but it also
creates huge energy consumption and environmental problems. For instance, models like GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020),
which contains 175 billion parameters, have a huge carbon
footprint during training, that emphasizes the need for more
sustainable AI.
With growing awareness of AI’s environmental impact,
there are increasing calls for balance. High performance
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18702

