The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Branch Self-Drafting for LLM Inference Acceleration
Zipeng Gao1 , Qingrong Xia2 , Tong Xu1* , Xinyu Duan2 ,
Zhi Zheng1* , Zhefeng Wang2* , Enhong Chen1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Huawei Cloud
gaozp619@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xiaqingrong@huawei.com, tongxu@ustc.edu.cn, duanxinyu@huawei.com,
zhengzhi97@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangzhefeng@huawei.com, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

techniques like model distillation (Liang et al. 2021; Wu,
Wu, and Huang 2021), pruning (Wang, Wohlwend, and Lei
2020; Ma, Fang, and Wang 2023), and quantization (Xiao
et al. 2023; Bai et al. 2022) aim to reduce the number of parameters loaded at each model forward step. Additionally,
optimizing resource management and utilization through
model and data parallelization (Cai et al. 2024; Chen et al.
2024b; Ghazvininejad et al. 2019), caching mechanisms (He
et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2024b), and prefetching strategies
seeks to maximize the potential of different hardware resources while minimizing redundant resource consumption.
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in the draft-andverify paradigm among researchers (He et al. 2023; Zhao
et al. 2024b; Zhang et al. 2023; Cai et al. 2024; Leviathan,
Kalman, and Matias 2023a; Chen et al. 2023; Sato et al.
2021). This paradigm typically consists of two components:
draft and verification modules. The draft module generates
draft sequences, and then LLMs verify them in parallel. This
pipeline allows LLMs to decode several tokens in a single
forward step, enhancing decoding speed while maintaining
the output quality.
Typically, draft sequences are produced using smaller,
more efficient LLMs as draft models to expedite the drafting process (Sato et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2024a; Zhang et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2023). However, despite LLMs being able
to verify and accept more tokens in one forward step, the
substantial computational and serial communication overhead incurred by the draft model results in only a marginal
improvement in end-to-end decoding speed. Besides, the
alignment between the draft model and the LLM also requires additional training. Certain studies have modified the
architecture of LLMs to enable the generation of multiple tokens in a single forward pass (Cai et al. 2024; Monea, Joulin,
and Grave 2023; Stern, Shazeer, and Uszkoreit 2018). However, these methods typically require additional fine-tuning
to mitigate the impact of such modifications on the quality
of the generated output.
In an effort to mitigate the computational demands at the
draft stage, some efforts have tried to extract candidate sequences from some pre-built caches, followed by verification through larger models (He et al. 2023; Zhao et al.
2024b). This strategy is more cost-effective for acquiring
candidate sequences, and there is almost no additional computational overhead in the reasoning process. Nevertheless,

The autoregressive decoding paradigm endows large language models (LLMs) with superior language generation capabilities; however, its step-by-step decoding process inherently limits decoding speed. To mitigate these constraints, the
prevalent “draft and validation” strategy enables parallel validation of candidate drafts, allowing LLMs to decode multiple tokens simultaneously during one model forward propagation. However, existing methodologies for obtaining drafts
often incur additional overhead in communication or training
process, or statistical biases from the corpus. To this end, we
propose an innovative draft generation and maintenance approach that leverages the capabilities of LLM itself. Specifically, we extend the autoregressive decoding paradigm to a
multi-branch drafting procedure, which can efficiently generate draft sequences without any additional models or training
process, while preserving the quality of the generated content
by maintaining LLM parameters. Experiments across various
open-source benchmarks show that our method generates 2.0
to 3.2 tokens per forward step and achieves around 2 times
improvement of end-to-end throughput compared to the autoregressive decoding strategy.

Code — https://github.com/ZipECHO/Self-Draft

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated their
outstanding capabilities in natural language understanding and generation, rendering them indispensable tools
across a broad spectrum of disciplines, including linguistics (Jipeng et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024a), cognitive psychology (Hagendorff 2023), social science (Lei et al. 2024),
and recommendation system (Zheng et al. 2024; Zhao et al.
2024c; Wu et al. 2024). Nonetheless, it is essential to note
that their auto-regressive decoding process, loading billionparameters of LLM from the memory to the on-chip cache
to merely generate one token, leading to a notable constraint
on decoding speed and a subsequent increase in the computational cost of inference in practice.
Many efforts are focusing on enhancing the efficiency
of LLM inference from various angles. Model compression
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23942

