The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Every Opinion Matters: Evaluating and Building Models with Pluralistic Views
Xiang Li
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
xianglli@pitt.edu

Abstract

found that multiple-choice tests enable models to memorize answer choices from training data instead of reasoning
with new contexts. My work (Boratko* et al. 2020) ProtoQA
proposes a generative evaluation to evaluate all possible answers for a given question by comparing a ranked answer
list. The work is still framed as a question-answering task.
However, we explicitly take into account that multiple answers could be correct with varying likelihood. Later, we
proposed to broaden the scope of ProtoQA with greater applicability to downstream tasks (Cheng et al. 2024). We consider a short context sentence and aim to fill in the implicit
information by framing it as a question. We also proposed an
automatic evaluation to compare diverse answer sets, defining a novel approach that directly measures the KL divergence between distributions. We justify the automatic evaluation with rigorous theoretical motivation and empirical
results by demonstrating a high correlation (0.73) with human scoring. Few-shot GPT4 only achieved a 0.68 KL score
compared to 0.06 in terms of human performance.

The development of large language models has demonstrated
robust performance on English-centric benchmarks, which
predominantly reflect majority opinions and dominant cultural norms. However, successful deployment in real-world
applications requires the ability to handle context-specific and
diverse knowledge, which is often underrepresented in training data. Addressing a plurality of perspectives is therefore
essential. My research focuses on developing pluralistic evaluation methods to assess the diversity of LLM outputs, with
a particular focus on culturally rich common-sense reasoning. Additionally, I work on advancing models that integrate
diverse knowledge into LLMs, aiming to bridge the gap between human and AI understanding through the incorporation
of varied perspectives using innovative probabilistic frameworks. In this talk, I will emphasize two key directions of my
previous work: the probabilistic box model for representing
diverse knowledge and probabilistic evaluation for assessing
diversity in LLMs, with a focus on distributional aspects. Additionally, I will discuss my efforts to understand model behavior in long-tail scenarios.

Ethical Considerations We acknowledge that the answers may be biased towards certain populations. To reflect
global perspectives, we are actively working on expanding
the dataset’s scope.

Probabilistic Box Model for Knowledge Building probabilistic models for diverse knowledge is challenging due to
the vast amount of information, making explicit categorization difficult. Traditional models like probabilistic graphical models struggle with large-scale distributions involving
thousands or millions of events. While LLMs can generalize across large datasets, their inner workings are opaque,
and suffer from producing inconsistent probabilities under different contexts. My previous work bridges these approaches by using probabilistic box embeddings, which represent joint probability distributions in a latent geometric
space (Vilnis* et al. 2018). This method excels in modeling
transitive relational data, such as word and sentence-level
entailment (Li* et al. 2019), and is also effective for representing diverse knowledge.

References
Boratko*, M.; Li*, X. L.; O’Gorman*, T.; Das*, R.; Le, D.;
and McCallum, A. 2020. ProtoQA: A Question Answering Dataset for Prototypical Common-Sense Reasoning. In
EMNLP. * Equal contribution.
Cheng, Q.; Boratko, M.; Yelugam, P. K.; O’Gorman, T.;
Singh, N.; McCallum, A.; and Li, X. 2024. Every Answer
Matters: Evaluating Commonsense with Probabilistic Measures. In ACL.
Li, X. L.; Kuncoro, A.; d’Autume, C. d. M.; Blunsom, P.;
and Nematzadeh, A. 2022. A Systematic Investigation of
Commonsense Understanding in Large Language Models.
In EMNLP.
Li*, X. L.; Vilnis*, L.; Zhang, D.; Boratko, M.; and McCallum, A. 2019. Smoothing The Geometry of Probabilistic
Box Embeddings. In ICLR. * Equal contribution.
Vilnis*, L.; Li*, X. L.; Murty, S.; and McCallum, A. 2018.
Probabilistic Embedding of Knowledge Graphs with Box
Lattice Measures. In ACL. * Equal contribution.

LLM Evaluation with Pluralistic Views Most LLM
evaluations are based on multiple-choice tasks, which, while
reliable, lack the pluralistic complexity of real-world scenarios. In my previous work (Li et al. 2022), I systematically
evaluated these benchmarks with large language models. I
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28716

