The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Federated Graph Anomaly Detection Through Contrastive Learning
with Global Negative Pairs
Nannan Wu, Yazheng Zhao, Hongdou Dong, Keao Xi, Wei Yu, Wenjun Wang
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{nannan.wu, yazhengzhao, hongdong dou, xikeao 99, wjwang}@tju.edu.cn, weiyu@zyufl.edu.cn

Abstract

Conventional centralized methods for anomaly detection
often require direct access to sensitive user information,
which raises substantial privacy concerns(Pazho et al. 2023).
In scenarios with limited information resources, federated
learning has become a robust solution, leveraging its ability to facilitate distributed collaborative training(Wang et al.
2024a). Recent years have witnessed a surge of work focused on detecting anomalies in attribute graphs within distributed environments. Nevertheless, performing anomaly
detection tasks directly in distributed settings can lead to
performance degradation in federated graph learning, which
primarily dues to restricted data access during the training
process(Wang et al. 2024c).
In this paper, we propose FedCLGN, a framework dedicated to federated graph anomaly detection. In the face of
the primary challenge of data privacy protection, FedCLGN
strictly follows the principles of federated learning by not
directly accessing client data but instead performing parameter aggregation on the server side. Addressing the challenge of scarce anomaly information in a federated environment, we propose a groundbreaking innovation. FedCLGN
shares structural information of the global graph (excluding node features) on the server and uploads the embedding
representations of negative pairs corresponding to anomalous nodes. By leveraging graph diffusion techniques, it facilitates the exchange of negative pair information among
clients, thereby maintaining a global negative pair pool. Using negative pairs sampled from the global negative pair pool
in subsequent contrastive learning on clients makes the difference between positive and negative sample pairs in the
contrastive learning more pronounced, thereby improving
the accuracy of anomaly detection. It is noteworthy that FedCLGN does not directly share node features, but instead
shares the embedding representations of the negative pairs
corresponding to the nodes. More crucially, FedCLGN only
uploads the embedding representations of negative pairs corresponding to anomalous nodes to the server. These two key
designs jointly ensure data privacy and security.
In this paper, we propose FedCLGN.The primary contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:

Anomaly detection on attributed graphs has applications in
various domains such as finance and email spam detection,
thus gaining substantial attention. Distributed scenarios can
also involve issues related to anomaly detection in attribute
graphs, such as in medical scenarios. However, most of the
existing anomaly detection methods are designed for centralized scenarios, and directly applying them to distributed settings may lead to reduced performance. One possible reason
for this issue is that, when graph data are distributed across
multiple clients, federated graph learning may struggle to
fully exploit the potential of the dispersed data, leading to
suboptimal performance. Building on this insight, we propose
FedCLGN, a federated graph anomaly detection framework
that leverages contrastive self-supervised learning. First, we
put forward an augmentation method to maintain global negative pairs on the server. This involves identifying anomalous
nodes using pseudo-labels, extracting embedding representations of the negative pairs corresponding to these anomalous
nodes from clients, and uploading them to the server. Then,
we adopt graph diffusion to enhance the feature representation of nodes, capturing the global structure and local connection patterns. This strategy can strengthen the differentiation
between positive and negative instance pairs. Finally, the effectiveness of our approach is verified by experimental results
on four real graph datasets.

Introduction
The main objective of anomaly detection on attribute
graphs is to identify nodes that deviate from normal patterns.(Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009). Traditional
anomaly detection methods primarily focus on simple data
that lack complex linkage relationships, such as a set of discrete data points. However, as intricate networks such as social and biological networks continue to emerge, the detection of anomalies in attribute graphs has gained significant
importance(Ma et al. 2021). In contrast to structured data, attribute graphs contain more intricate information, including
topological structures and node-specific attributes. Therefore, identifying anomalous nodes within such a complex
environment poses considerable challenges for anomaly detection in attribute graphs.

• We propose FedCLGN, a novel framework for federated
graph anomaly detection that addresses the challenge of
detecting anomalies in attribute graphs within a federated
environment lacking critical information. With distinc-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21554

