The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HDT: Hierarchical Discrete Transformer for Multivariate Time Series Forecasting
Shibo Feng1, 2 , Peilin Zhao3 * , Liu Liu3 , Pengcheng Wu2 , Zhiqi Shen1 *
1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
2
Webank-NTU Joint Research Institute on Fintech, NTU, Singapore
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{shibo001, pengcheng.wu, zqshen}@ntu.edu.sg, {leonliuliu, masonzhao}@tencent.com

Abstract

and non-autoregressive ways. To our knowledge, most of the
work in the context of high-dimensional MTS has focused
on short-term forecasting (predicted length: 24, 48) (Rasul
et al. 2020, 2024; Fan et al. 2024).To improve long-term
forecasting, various Transformer architectures (Nie et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2023) have been proposed, but most are
focused on low-dimensional scenarios. Effectively modeling high-dimensional distributions with longer forecasting
lengths remains a challenge. A key issue is integrating deep
generative models with sequence modeling frameworks to
handle both high-dimensional data and long-term forecasting tasks.
Existing works (Salinas et al. 2020; Rasul et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2022; Feng et al. 2023) have several attempts to utilize
various forms of deep generative models, such as Normalizing flows (Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2016), Variational Auto-Encoder (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013),
Diffusion models (Li et al. 2024; Fan et al. 2024) to model
high-dimensional MTS. They apply deep generative models to the high-dimensional distributions over time, learning the patterns of distribution changes along the temporal
dimension for precise prediction. Due to complex patterns
and long temporal dependencies of MTS, directly modeling high-dimensional MTS distributions in the time domain
can lead to issues of distribution drift (Kim et al. 2021) and
overlook the correlations between variables, limited to shortterm forecasting settings.
Recently, several attention-variant Transformer frameworks (Liu et al. 2023; Rao, Li, and Miao 2022) and LLMbased structures (Zhou et al. 2023; Bian et al. 2024) have
been applied to long-term forecasting of MTS, showing excellent performance on MTS datasets. Building on the success of these methods, we identified two key modules: the
series decomposition block (Wu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022),
which uses moving averages to smooth periodic fluctuations
and highlight long-term trends, and the discrete Transformer
for MTS modeling. Inspired by these approaches, we first
learn the discrete representations of the MTS and then incorporate the long-term trends of the forecasting target into
our model. This allows us to enhance forecasting length capability with high accuracy.
As a discrete framework, Vector Quantized (Gray 1984)
techniques have shown strong competitiveness in highdimensional image fields (Rao et al. 2021; Zheng et al.

Generative models have gained significant attention in multivariate time series forecasting (MTS), particularly due to
their ability to generate high-fidelity samples. Forecasting the
probability distribution of multivariate time series is a challenging yet practical task. Although some recent attempts
have been made to handle this task, two major challenges
persist: 1) some existing generative methods underperform in
high-dimensional multivariate time series forecasting, which
is hard to scale to higher dimensions; 2) the inherent highdimensional multivariate attributes constrain the forecasting lengths of existing generative models. In this paper, we
point out that discrete token representations can model highdimensional MTS with faster inference time, and forecasting the target with long-term trends of itself can extend the
forecasting length with high accuracy. Motivated by this, we
propose a vector quantized framework called Hierarchical
Discrete Transformer (HDT) that models time series into discrete token representations with ℓ2 normalization enhanced
vector quantized strategy, in which we transform the MTS
forecasting into discrete tokens generation. To address the
limitations of generative models in long-term forecasting, we
propose a hierarchical discrete Transformer. This model captures the discrete long-term trend of the target at the low level
and leverages this trend as a condition to generate the discrete representation of the target at the high level that introduces the features of the target itself to extend the forecasting
length in high-dimensional MTS. Extensive experiments on
five popular MTS datasets verify the effectiveness of our proposed method. The source code will be released.

Introduction
Multivariate time series forecasting task has been applied
to many real-world applications, such as economics (Sezer,
Gudelek, and Ozbayoglu 2020; Feng et al. 2022), traffic (Wu
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2016), energy (Zhicheng et al. 2024)
and weather (Qiu et al. 2017; Jin et al. 2023). As a generative task, MTS forecasting presents challenges in two key
aspects: the inherent high-dimensionality of the data distribution, and the long-term forecasting. To model the complex
distributions of high-dimensional data, previous studies have
established deep generative models in both autoregressive
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

746

