The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Testing Causal Models with Hidden Variables in Polynomial Delay
via Conditional Independencies
Hyunchai Jeong* 1 , Adiba Ejaz* 2 , Jin Tian3 , Elias Bareinboim2
1

Purdue University
Columbia University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
jeong3@purdue.edu, adiba.ejaz@cs.columbia.edu, jin.tian@mbzuai.ac.ae, eb@cs.columbia.edu
2

Abstract
Testing a hypothesized causal model against observational data
is a key prerequisite for many causal inference tasks. A natural approach is to test whether the conditional independence
relations (CIs) assumed in the model hold in the data. While a
model can assume exponentially many CIs (with respect to the
number of variables), testing all of them is both impractical
and unnecessary. Causal graphs, which encode these CIs in
polynomial space, give rise to local Markov properties that
enable model testing with a significantly smaller subset of
CIs. Model testing based on local properties requires an algorithm to list the relevant CIs. However, existing algorithms
for realistic settings with hidden variables and non-parametric
distributions can take exponential time to produce even a single CI constraint. In this paper, we introduce the c-component
local Markov property (C-LMP) for causal graphs with hidden variables. Since C-LMP can still invoke an exponential
number of CIs, we develop a polynomial delay algorithm to
list these CIs in poly-time intervals. To our knowledge, this
is the first algorithm that enables poly-delay testing of CIs
in causal graphs with hidden variables against arbitrary data
distributions. Experiments on real-world and synthetic data
demonstrate the practicality of our algorithm.

Code — https://github.com/CausalAILab/
ListConditionalIndependencies

1

Introduction

Causal models are the daily bread of many fields of research
(Pearl 2000; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2001), but tools
for testing them are lacking. In various studies, researchers
posit a causal model and use it to compute causal effects from
data (Tennant et al. 2020; Hoover 1990; King et al. 2004;
Sverchkov and Craven 2017; Robins, Hernan, and Brumback
2000; Rotmensch et al. 2017). The model imposes testable
constraints on the statistics of the data collected. Before using
the model for causal inference, it’s crucial to test if these
constraints are met, and adjust the model as needed (Pearl
1995, 2000; Bareinboim and Pearl 2016; Malinsky 2024;
Ankan and Textor 2022).
Causal directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are one popular
model for causal assumptions (Pearl 2000; Spirtes, Glymour,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26813

and Scheines 2001). Conditional independencies (CIs) are
the most basic constraint that a causal DAG imposes on observational data. The study of CIs in the context of graphical
models dates back to at least the 1980’s (Pearl 1988; Dawid
1979; Spirtes et al. 1998; Pearl 1998; Pearl and Meshkat
1999; Pearl 2000). A classic problem in this line of research
is: given observational data and a hypothesized causal graph,
do all the CIs implied by this graph hold in the data? If the
answer is no, the DAG may be revised.
A key idea in the early literature of graphical models was
to use a DAG to represent the constraints of probability distributions. A multivariate probability distribution may encode
exponentially many CIs with respect to the number of variables. A DAG can encode these CIs in polynomial space. The
d-separation criterion allows us to derive the CIs encoded in
a DAG (Pearl 1988). The global Markov property of a DAG
is the set of all CIs encoded in it (Pearl 1988). There is also
a well-known local Markov property for DAGs (Pearl 1988;
Lauritzen et al. 1990), which states that each variable must
be conditionally independent of its non-descendants given its
parents. Since the CI relation is a semi-graphoid, the linearly
many CIs of the local Markov property together imply the
exponentially many CIs of the global Markov property. This
means that to test a DAG against observational data, it suffices
to perform a linear number of CI tests as given by the local
Markov property. For concreteness, consider the DAG G 1 in
Fig. 1a and assume all variables {A, B, . . . , H, U1 , U2 , U3 }
are observed. Though G 1 encodes 35787 CIs, only 11 need
testing by the local Markov property. For example, if we
test that F ⊥
⊥ {A, B} | {C}, we do not need to test that
F⊥
⊥ {A} | {B, C}, since the former implies the latter by the
weak union axiom.
Unobserved confounding is a widespread phenomenon in
real-world settings (Fisher 1936). It occurs when a hidden
variable causally affects two or more observed variables. The
local Markov property can be used to test Markovian causal
DAGs, which represent models without unobserved confounding. However, it cannot be used to test non-Markovian
DAGs, which represent models with unobserved confounding. This is because if the parents of a variable are partially
unobserved, we cannot test CIs that require conditioning on
these parents (Fig. 1a). Since the assumption of no unobserved confounding rarely holds in practice, alternative ways
to test non-Markovian DAGs have been developed (Tian and

