The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Personalized Federated Learning for Spatio-Temporal Forecasting: A Dual
Semantic Alignment-Based Contrastive Approach
Qingxiang Liu1, 2 , Sheng Sun1 , Yuxuan Liang3 , Min Liu1, 4 * , Jingjing Xue1, 2
1

Institute of Computing Technology Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory
Abstract
The existing federated learning (FL) methods for spatiotemporal forecasting fail to capture the inherent spatiotemporal heterogeneity, which calls for personalized FL (PFL)
methods to model the spatio-temporally variant representations. While contrastive learning is promising in tackling
spatio-temporal heterogeneity, the existing methods are noneffective in distinguishing positive and negative pairs and can
hardly apply to PFL paradigm. To tackle this limitation, we
propose a novel PFL method, named Federated dUal sEmantic
aLignment-based contraStive learning (FUELS), which can
adaptively align positive and negative pairs based on semantic similarity, thereby injecting precise spatio-temporal heterogeneity into the latent representation space by auxiliary
contrastive tasks. From temporal perspective, a hard negative
filtering module is introduced to dynamically align heterogeneous temporal representations for the supplemented intraclient contrastive task. From spatial perspective, we design
lightweight-but-efficient prototypes as client-level semantic
representations, based on which the server evaluates spatial
similarity and yields client-customized global prototypes for
the supplemented inter-client contrastive task. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FUELS outperforms state-of-the-art
methods, with impressive communication cost reduction.

1

Figure 1: Spatio-temporal heterogeneity inside traffic flows.

Introduction

Spatio-temporal forecasting aims to predict the future trends
with historical records from distributed devices. Given the
masses of generated data, a better way is decentralized processing, thus significantly decreasing transmission latency
(Meng, Rambhatla, and Liu 2021). Federated Learning (FL)
enables distributed devices (termed clients) to collaboratively
optimize a shared model without the disclosure of local data,
which can release the concerns on privacy leakage and simultaneously achieve comparable performance with centralized
learning methods (McMahan et al. 2017). Therefore, FL generates great promise for spatio-temporal forecasting tasks
and a multitude of relevant methods have been proposed (Li,
Li, and Wang 2021; Li and Wang 2022). Since the server
can only have access to local model parameters, these FL
methods cannot exploit a joint spatio-temporal correlationcapturing module like centralized methods (Li et al. 2018; Li
* Min Liu is the corresponding author. E-mail: liumin@ict.ac.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12192

and Zhu 2021). Generally, most of them decouple the spatiotemporal correlation, and evaluate spatial correlation in the
server by Graph Neural Networks (Zhao et al. 2020; Lin et al.
2021) and temporal correlation at clients by Recurrent Neural
Networks (Zhu and Wang 2021; Mahdy et al. 2020).
Nevertheless, these FL forecasting methods cannot capture the inherent spatio-temporal heterogeneity by adopting
shared model parameters across clients. As shown in Fig.
1, in wireless traffic prediction (Zhang et al. 2021), traffic
patterns of two base stations (BSs) are spatio-variant (traffic
distribution of two clients varies) and time-variant (traffic
patterns in the morning and evening are diverse). The spatiotemporal heterogeneous traffic patterns call for personalized
federated learning (PFL) methods to tackle with differentiated representations in the latent space from spatio-temporal
level. However, the existing PFL methods mainly focus on increasing the generalization ability of local models by sharing
diverse knowledge across clients (Karimireddy et al. 2020;
Tan et al. 2022a; Chen et al. 2023), which can hardly work
on coupled spatio-temporal heterogeneity.
Contrastive learning has emerged as an effective technique
which shows great promise in improving PFL paradigm
to address spatio-temporal heterogeneity. Generally, con-

