The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MaintaAvatar: A Maintainable Avatar Based on Neural Radiance Fields by
Continual Learning
Shengbo Gu1,3 , Yu-Kun Qiu1,3 , Yu-Ming Tang1,3 , Ancong Wu1,3 * , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{gushb3,qiuyk,tangym9}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wuanc@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org
Abstract

time

The generation of a virtual digital avatar is a crucial research
topic in the field of computer vision. Many existing works utilize Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) to address this issue and
have achieved impressive results. However, previous works
assume the images of the training person are available and
fixed while the appearances and poses of a subject could
constantly change and increase in real-world scenarios. How
to update the human avatar but also maintain the ability to
render the old appearance of the person is a practical challenge. One trivial solution is to combine the existing virtual
avatar models based on NeRF with continual learning methods. However, there are some critical issues in this approach:
learning new appearances and poses can cause the model to
forget past information, which in turn leads to a degradation in the rendering quality of past appearances, especially
color bleeding issues, and incorrect human body poses. In
this work, we propose a maintainable avatar (MaintaAvatar)
based on neural radiance fields by continual learning, which
resolves the issues by utilizing a Global-Local Joint Storage
Module and a Pose Distillation Module. Overall, our model
requires only limited data collection to quickly fine-tune the
model while avoiding catastrophic forgetting, thus achieving
a maintainable virtual avatar. The experimental results validate the effectiveness of our MaintaAvatar model.

1

Task0

training

Task1

rendering

Task2

Figure 1: In reality, a person’s pose and appearance constantly update. Our maintainable avatar is designed to continuously learn from sequential data, enabling it to render
any previously encountered viewpoint, pose, or appearance.

In this paper, we focus on creating a maintainable avatar
that models a certain character with ever-changing poses
and appearances (see Figure 1). In the real world, the poses
and appearances of a person could be updated frequently,
and consequently, the corresponding human avatar should
also be updatable. Employing conventional static humannerf methods to track real-world trends will lead to a high
demand for computation, training time, and extra storage
room, let alone the need for abundant training samples from
new styles and poses. We raise such a question: Is it possible
to maintain a dynamic human avatar using only a few shots
from the updated character, with the ability to trace back to
any point of time?
The main challenge of such a task lies in the old avatar rerendering with old poses and appearances, which is related
to the well-known catastrophic forgetting (French 1999;
Yang et al. 2023) of deep neural networks. Specifically, if
the model directly learns from new data, it tends to forget
the information about past poses and appearances, resulting
in poor rendering outcomes. Further, we identify two major
issues that employ the popular ‘replay’ strategy that stores
or generates (fake) old inputs for future task training (Chung
et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2024; Cai and Müller 2023; Shin et al.
2017) into a human avatar: (1) The appearances between different tasks can interfere with each other, resulting in color
bleeding and affecting the geometric rendering quality of
each task. (2) During the process of continual learning of
novel appearances and poses, the model may render incor-

Introduction

Free-viewpoint rendering of 3D scenes has attracted significant academic and industrial attention, with effective solutions such as neural radiance fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) demonstrating impressive performance in
this field. (Mildenhall et al. 2021; Barron et al. 2021; MartinBrualla et al. 2018, 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2020; Kerbl et al. 2023; Qian et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024;
Zhou et al. 2024; Sun, Wu, and Gao 2024). Among them,
human-specific methods (Peng et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2020;
Weng et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2022; Hu, Hu, and Liu 2024;
Pan et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024) model dynamic human bodies by establishing a deformable radiance
field, achieving the driving and free-viewpoint rendering of
dynamic human bodies.
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3176

