The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PDDM: Pseudo Depth Diffusion Model for RGB-PD Semantic Segmentation
Based in Complex Indoor Scenes
Xinhua Xu, Hong Liu* , Jianbing Wu, Jinfu Liu
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
{xuxinhua, kimbing.ng, liujinfu}@stu.pku.edu.cn, hongliu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

RGB

The integration of RGB and depth modalities significantly enhances the accuracy of segmenting complex indoor scenes,
with depth data from RGB-D cameras playing a crucial role
in this improvement. However, collecting an RGB-D dataset
is more expensive than an RGB dataset due to the need for
specialized depth sensors. Aligning depth and RGB images
also poses challenges due to sensor positioning and issues like
missing data and noise. In contrast, Pseudo Depth (PD) from
high-precision depth estimation algorithms can eliminate the
dependence on RGB-D sensors and alignment processes, as
well as provide effective depth information and show significant potential in semantic segmentation. Therefore, to explore the practicality of utilizing pseudo depth instead of real
depth for semantic segmentation, we design an RGB-PD segmentation pipeline to integrate RGB and pseudo depth and
propose a Pseudo Depth Aggregation Module (PDAM) for
fully exploiting the informative clues provided by the diverse
pseudo depth maps. The PDAM aggregates multiple pseudo
depth maps into a single modality, making it easily adaptable to other RGB-D segmentation methods. In addition, the
pre-trained diffusion model serves as a strong feature extractor for RGB segmentation tasks, but multi-modal diffusionbased segmentation methods remain unexplored. Therefore,
we present a Pseudo Depth Diffusion Model (PDDM) that
adopts a large-scale text-image diffusion model as a feature
extractor and a simple yet effective fusion strategy to integrate pseudo depth. To verify the applicability of pseudo
depth and our PDDM, we perform extensive experiments on
the NYUv2 and SUNRGB-D datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that pseudo depth can effectively enhance
segmentation performance, and our PDDM achieves state-ofthe-art performance, outperforming other methods by +6.98
mIoU on NYUv2 and +2.11 mIoU on SUNRGB-D.

RGB-D
Camera

SegModel

Depth
Alignment

Rough

(a) Previous RGB-D Segmentation pipeline

RGB
Camera

Meta Depth
Estimation

RGB

SegModel
Pseudo Depth

Smooth

PDAM

(b) Our RGB-PD Segmentation pipeline

Figure 1: (a) Previous RGB-D segmentation methods utilize RGB and depth images from RGB-D cameras. (b) Our
RGB-PD segmentation adopts pseudo depth images from
RGB images by meta depth estimation methods and integrates them into a single modality by pseudo depth aggregation module (PDAM). It can be observed that the real
depth image exhibits some noise, resulting in rougher edges,
whereas the edges in pseudo depth images are comparatively
smoother.

Gao et al. 2023), such as autonomous driving, SLAM, and
scene understanding, which has made significant strides
(e.g., (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Xie et al. 2021))
in recent years. Nonetheless, in complex and dense indoor
scenes, relying solely on the RGB modality is insufficient for
accurate segmentation. To address this challenge, the depth
modality, which provides valuable information on object positions, edges, and geometric information, is utilized to enhance segmentation accuracy, known as RGB-D semantic
segmentation.
Figure 1 (a) shows the workflow of previous RGB-D
methods. As can be observed, mainstream RGB-D semantic segmentation works (Zhang et al. 2023a,b; Wang et al.
2022a) use both depth and RGB modalities from RGB-D
cameras and emphasize the development of superior network architectures or fusion mechanisms. Although these

Code — https://github.com/Oleki-xxh/PDDM

Introduction
Semantic segmentation constitutes a significant task in computer vision, aiming to categorize each pixel into predefined
categories. This technique is essential for various applications (Muhammad et al. 2022; Liu, Jin, and Zhao 2017;
* Corresponding author: hongliu@pku.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8969

