The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Elite-guided Weighted Simulated Annealing Algorithm for the Clique
Partitioning Problem
Baiyu Chen, Junwen Ding, Canhui Luo, Qingyun Zhang* , Zhouxing Su, Zhipeng Lü
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
qingyun_zhang@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

branch-and-price (Mehrotra and Trick 1998), and branchand-price-and-cut (Ji and Mitchell 2007), etc. In addition,
Jaehn and Pesch (2013) proposed new methods for constraining the upper bound of the CPP, while Sukegawa, Yamamoto, and Zhang (2013) reduced the problem size by
Lagrange relaxation. Although exact algorithms are able to
guarantee the optimality, they fail to solve large-scale instances in a reasonable time (Sørensen and Letchford 2024).
Therefore, metaheuristics have become the popular methods
for the CPP.
Various metaheuristic algorithms have been proposed for
the CPP. Local search is the earliest metaheuristic algorithm
applied to the CPP (Marcotorchino and Michaud 1981; Regnier 1983), which used the basic neighborhood move by reassigning a vertex to a subgraph, and iterates until reaching the local optima. With the development of metaheuristic algorithms, various advanced diversification strategies
have been proposed to enhance the search capability of local search. Among them, tabu search (Glover 1989, 1990)
and simulated annealing (Kirkpatrick, Jr., and Vecchi 1983;
Skiscim and Golden 1983) are the most popular algorithms.
Amorim, Barthélemy, and Ribeiro (1992) applied them to
solve the CPP. More powerful algorithms were subsequently
proposed for the CPP, such as noising methods (Charon and
Hudry 2001, 2006), variable neighborhood search with embedded tabu search (Brusco and Koehn 2009) and others.
Apart from the above works, impressive results were obtained by several recent metaheuristic algorithms. In particular, Palubeckis, Ostreika, and Tomkevičius (2014) proposed
an iterated tabu search algorithm (ITS) by combining the traditional tabu search with a perturbation procedure and introducing a neighborhood move which relocates two vertices
in the same subgraph in the perturbation phase. Based on
ITS, Zhou, Hao, and Goëffon (2016) developed an effective
three-phase local search algorithm (CPP-P3 ) which consists
of three stages: descending search, tabu search, and directional perturbation. Hu et al. (2021) proposed a two-model
local search algorithm with a self-adaptive parameter mechanism (TMLS-SA), which combines local search with simulated annealing and controls the perturbation intensity by
means of an adaptive parameter during the search process.
More recently, Lu, Zhou, and Hao (2022) applied a mergedivide memetic clique partitioning algorithm (MDMCP) to
the CPP and produced very competitive results on instances

The clique partitioning problem (CPP) aims to find a partition
of vertices of a complete graph in order to maximize the sum
of edge weights within each partition (clique), which has been
proven to be NP-hard and has wide real-world applications.
In this paper, we propose an elite-guided weighted simulated
annealing algorithm called EWSA to solve the CPP. First,
EWSA employs two specific configurations and alternates
between them via an oscillation strategy, which balances the
exploitation and exploration of the search. Second, a weighting strategy is introduced to improve the scoring function in
traditional simulated annealing, which is able to guide the
search to explore diverse solutions. Finally, a partition restriction strategy is adopted to reduce search space and increase
the search efficiency. Experiments on 255 instances demonstrate the competitiveness of EWSA. For 130 open instances,
EWSA discovers new upper bounds in 32 cases and matches
the best known results for the others. For the remaining 125
closed instances, EWSA achieves the best known objective
values within a short computational time.

Introduction
Given a complete edge-weighted undirected graph, the
clique partition problem (CPP) aims to find a partition of
vertices of the graph such that the sum of edge weights
that belong to each subset (clique) is maximized. The CPP
has been proven to be NP-hard (Grötschel and Wakabayashi
1990) and was widely used in various applications, such as
image processing (Ion, Carreira, and Sminchisescu 2011),
social network analysis (Alduaiji, Datta, and Li 2018; Fox
et al. 2020; Ouyang, Dey, and Zhang 2020), data mining (Miyauchi, Sonobe, and Sukegawa 2018), biological
computing (Grötschel and Wakabayashi 1989; Strickland,
Barnes, and Sokol 2005), and logistics (Dorndorf, Jaehn,
and Pesch 2008; Wang et al. 2006).
Since the CPP was first introduced by Grötschel and
Wakabayashi (1989), many methods have been proposed
which can be classified into two main categories: exact and metaheuristic methods. The well-known exact approaches include: cutting plane (Grötschel and Wakabayashi
1989, 1990), branch-and-bound (Dorndorf and Pesch 1994),
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26904

