The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Agent Motion Planning For Differential Drive Robots Through Stationary
State Search
Jingtian Yan, Jiaoyang Li
Carnegie Mellon University
jingtianyan@cmu.edu, jiaoyangli@cmu.edu

Abstract
Multi-Agent Motion Planning (MAMP) finds various applications in fields such as traffic management, airport operations, and warehouse automation. In many of these environments, differential drive robots are commonly used.
These robots have a kinodynamic model that allows only
in-place rotation and movement along their current orientation, subject to speed and acceleration limits. However, existing Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF)-based methods often use simplified models for robot kinodynamics, which limits their practicality and realism. In this paper, we introduce
a three-level framework called MASS to address these challenges. MASS combines MAPF-based methods with our proposed stationary state search planner to generate high-quality
kinodynamically-feasible plans. We further extend MASS using an adaptive window mechanism to address the lifelong
MAMP problem. Empirically, we tested our methods on the
single-shot grid map domain and the lifelong warehouse domain. Our method shows up to 400% improvements in terms
of throughput compared to existing methods.

ACT3
MAPF+ADG (b)
ACT2 ACT3

Speed

ACT1

ACT2

ACT3

SIPP-IP (c)

PSB (d)

ACT2

ACT1

ACT2

B

ACT3

ACT1

ACT1

ACT2 ACT3

ACT1
A

ACT3
MASS (e)

Time (s)

Figure 1: Speed profile of agent A (blue line: linear velocity, red line: angular velocity) generated by (a) MAPF, (b)
MAPF+ADG, (c) SIPP-IP, (d) PSB, and (e) MASS. Agent
A first moves upward (ACT1) while adjusting its speed to
avoid collisions with agent B, performs an in-place rotation
(ACT2), and then moves to the right (ACT3).

Extended version —
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.13359

1

MAPF (a)

ACT2
ACT1

agents. However, they assume instantaneous movement and
infinite acceleration capabilities, resulting in plans that are
unrealistic for real-world execution (see Fig. 1 (a) for an example). To apply MAPF methods to MAMP, ADG (Hönig
et al. 2019) post-processes the speed profiles of the MAPF
plan to meet kinodynamic constraints while maintaining the
passing orders of agents at each location. However, as shown
in Fig. 1 (b), such methods can lead to long execution time
as the initial MAPF plan (Fig. 1 (a)) overlooks kinodynamic constraints. SIPP-IP (Ali and Yakovlev 2023) extends
MAPF methods to MAMP by searching with a fixed number
of predefined actions with discretized speeds and accelerations. However, as shown in Fig. 1 (c), due to its discretized
nature, the limited action choices can lead to long execution
time or even failures in solving certain cases. Moreover, to
account for the different choices of speeds and accelerations,
SIPP-IP explores a high-dimensional state space which compromises its efficiency. The recent work PSB (Yan and Li
2024) avoids such discretization by combining search-based
and optimization-based methods, but it does not consider the
orientations of agents, making it hard to apply to differential
drive robots, as shown in Fig. 1 (d).
In this work, we introduce MAPF-SSIPP-SPS (MASS),

Introduction

We study the Multi-Agent Motion Planning (MAMP) problem which aims to find collision-free kinodynamically feasible paths for a team of agents in a fully observable environment while minimizing their arrival time. This problem finds various real-world applications, including traffic
management (Ho et al. 2019), airport operations (Li et al.
2019), and warehouse automation (Kou et al. 2019). Differential drive robots are widely used in many of these environments. These robots, often navigating on a grid map,
can move forward along their orientation with bounded velocity and acceleration. They can only change their orientation through in-place rotation when at zero speed. Although
much work has been done to address the MAMP problem,
existing methods often either fail to account for the orientations of robots or overlook continuous dynamic constraints.
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) (Stern et al. 2019)
methods are a promising solution that scales to hundreds of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23360

