The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spatial-Temporal Heterogenous Graph Contrastive Learning for Microservice
Workload Prediction
Mohan Gao1 , Kexin Xu1 , Xiaofeng Gao1 * , Tengwei Cai2 , Haoyuan Ge2
1

MoEKey Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai, China
2
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
gao mohan@sjtu.edu.cn, irene233@sjtu.edu.cn, gao-xf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, tengwei.ctw@antgroup.com,
gehaoyuan.ghy@antgroup.com
Abstract

with specific responsibilities that do not rely on other components. In such architecture, the main challenge is to improve resource utilization. Previous research has shown that
resource waste is mainly caused by the mismatch between
resource allocation and actual demand (Wang et al. 2023).
Indeed, as a distributed system, the microservices architecture allocates resources in advance based on estimation of
future workloads (the workload refers to CPU resources in
most scenarios). Therefore, forecasting the workload of microservices has become the key to the efficient resource allocation (Krieger et al. 2017; Abdullah et al. 2022).

With the widely adoption of microservice architecture in the
cloud computing industry, accurate prediction of workloads,
especially CPU cores, can support reasonable resource allocation, thereby optimizing the resource utilization of the system. However, workload prediction is challenging in two dimensions. In the temporal dimension, workload series 1) has
non-stationary characteristics, leading to poor predictability;
2) has a multi-periodic nature with entangled temporal patterns; 3) may be influenced by dynamic system states like
response time and number of requests. In the spatial dimension, when regarding microservices as nodes in a distributed
system, there is no topology caused by physical connections,
but exists complex similarity dependencies. Extracting robust
spatial features from these dependencies presents difficulties.
To address these, we propose STEAM, a Spatio Temporal
Heterogenous Graph Contrastive Learning for Microservice
Workload Prediction. STEAM leverages non-stationary decomposition self-attention to extract temporal features from
non-stationary and multi-periodic workload series, while the
decoupled embedding is used to capture system state information of microservices. By treating microservices as nodes
and constructing a similarity graph, STEAM effectively models the similarity relationships between microservices. To reduce the prior interference caused by the similarity threshold
and improve the robustness, STEAM constructs two heterogeneous augmentation views and uses contrastive learning to
extract the shared consistent spatial features. The multi-scale
learning is adopted to model the long- and short-term temporal features, forming a spatio-temporal stacking structure.
Experiments on two datasets, including MS dataset obtained
from Ant Group, which is one of the world’s largest cloud
service providers, demonstrate the superiority of STEAM.

① Non-stationary

Rank
0.72
0.59
0.61

② Multi-periodicity

0.70

Inference
0.71
0.62
0.54

0.79

0.55

0.45

Search

0.83
0.59

③ Dynamic effect of system
states

0.92

Microservice
Similarity Relationship

Spatial Dependencies

Introduction

Workload Analysis

Figure 1: An Instance of Microservice Architecture.

Cloud computing has become widespread across various industries to improve resource flexibility, cost efficiency, and
fast deployment of applications (Gan et al. 2021).
Currently, cloud service providers widely adopt microservices architecture (Google 2021; Luo et al. 2022), consisting
of many fine-grained, loosely coupled microservices, each

Predicting the future workloads faces challenges. As
shown in the right part of Fig. 1, microservice workloads
are normally non-stationary with various period patterns.
The latest time series forecasting methods leverage the nonstationarity characteristics of the time series (Liu et al.
2022c) or adopt series decomposition (Wu et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2022) and multi-scale learning (Chen et al. 2024; Liu
et al. 2022b) methods to enhance performance. However,

* Xiaofeng Gao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11681

