The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spectra of Cardinality Queries over Description Logic Knowledge Bases
Quentin Manière1,2 , Marcin Przybyłko1,3
2

1
Department of Computer Science, Leipzig University, Germany
Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (ScaDS.AI), Dresden/Leipzig, Germany
3
Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
quentin.maniere@uni-leipzig.de, m.przybylko@uw.edu.pl

Abstract

to a query, while in (Calvanese et al. 2008) an epistemic semantics was adopted – enforcing the counting operator to
only involve known data values and making it possible to
use the usual notion of certain answers.
In this paper we adopt the semantic of (Kostylev and
Reutter 2015; Bienvenu, Manière, and Thomazo 2020) that
defines a counting query as a CQ in which some variables
have been designated as counting variables. The answer to
a counting query in a model of the KB is then obtained as
the number of different assignments for the counting variables when considering every possible homomorphism of
the CQ into the model. Finding uniform bounds on those answers, i.e. model-independent bounds, has been viewed as a
notion of certain answers and is now well-understood for a
variety of DLs (Calvanese et al. 2020; Bienvenu, Manière,
and Thomazo 2022; Manière 2022). The following example highlights that even the tightest uniform bounds give, in
general, a poor over-approximation of the set of answers.
Example 1. Consider an empty KB K and a counting query
q asking for the number of pairs (z1 , z2 ) such that z1 and z2
are friends of alice, that is q = ∃z1 ∃z2 friendOf(z1 , alice) ∧
friendOf(z2 , alice). Clearly, the set of possible answers to q
across models of K is {n2 | n ∈ N} ∪ {∞}. The tightest
uniform bounds on this set are given by the interval J0, ∞K.
Rather than aiming for an over-approximation of the set
of possible answers, we intent to give a comprehensive description of this subset of N∞ = {0, 1, 2, . . . , ∞} that we
call the spectrum of the counting query, inspired by the notion of spectrum of a formula that refers to the possible
cardinalities of its models (Fagin 1974; Durand, Fagin, and
Loescher 1997). We investigate the possible shapes of these
spectra for counting conjunctive queries (CCQs) mentioned
above and for ontologies expressed in the ALCIF DL. This
expressive DL is contained in SHIQ, in which traditional
CQ answering is well-understood (Glimm et al. 2008; Lutz
2008), and supports functionality constraints whose interactions with counting queries have never been studied to the
best of our knowledge (those proposed in (Calvanese et al.
2020) and denoted N − being much more restricted).
One of the challenges encountered in our work is to clarify how to represent spectra. Indeed, the set of possible answers of a CCQ across models of a KB might, a priori, be
an arbitrary set of natural numbers, and thus hard to describe
by means other than providing the CCQ-KB couple. We aim

Recent works have explored the use of counting queries coupled with Description Logic ontologies. The answer to such
a query in a model of a knowledge base is either an integer or
∞, and its spectrum is the set of its answers over all models.
While it is unclear how to compute and manipulate such a
set in general, we identify a class of counting queries whose
spectra can be effectively represented. Focusing on atomic
counting queries, we pinpoint the possible shapes of a spectrum over ALCIF ontologies: they are essentially the subsets of N ∪ {∞} closed under addition. For most sublogics of
ALCIF , we show that possible spectra enjoy simpler shapes,
being Jm, ∞K or variations thereof. To obtain our results, we
refine constructions used for finite model reasoning and notably rely on a cycle-reversion technique for the Horn fragment of ALCIF . We also study the data complexity of computing the proposed effective representation and establish the
FPNP[log] -completeness of this task under several settings.

1

Introduction

Ontology-mediated query answering (OMQA) uses ontologies to offer a user-friendly vocabulary for formulating
queries or to encapsulate domain knowledge that can be utilized to retrieve more comprehensive answers (Poggi et al.
2008; Xiao et al. 2018). Ontologies expressed in Description Logics (DLs), a family of knowledge representation
languages underpinning the OWL Web Ontology Language,
have received special attention (Artale et al. 2009; Baader
et al. 2017), and the core reasoning task of OMQA, the query
answering task, has been extensively studied for conjunctive
queries (CQs) and unions thereof. Under the OMQA framework, answering CQs is addressed by considering every possible model of the knowledge base (KB), that is every extension of the data that satisfies the ontology, and returning
so-called certain answers, i.e. answers true in every model.
A recent line of research has explored ways of leveraging
OMQA to support counting queries, a well-known class of
aggregate queries that allows to perform analytics on data.
Several semantics for such queries have been investigated,
differing on how the possibility of multiple models is taken
into account. In (Feier, Lutz, and Przybylko 2021), this has
been addressed by returning the number of certain answers
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15067

