The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Online and Streaming Algorithms for Constrained k-Submodular Maximization
Fabian Christian Spaeh,1 Alina Ene,1 Huy Nguyen2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Boston University
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University
fspaeh@bu.edu, aene@bu.edu, hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu

Abstract

Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi (2016) show how to model a
recommender system through cut functions in dissimilarity
graphs, which are general k-submodular. Related tasks such
as document or image summarization (Lin and Bilmes 2011;
Gomes and Krause 2010) can be modeled through similar
objectives. Additional motivation on influence maximization, sensor placement, and video summarization is given
in the works of Ohsaka and Yoshida (2015a) and Feldman,
Karbasi, and Kazemi (2018). These further applications also
motivate the study of more general packing constrains such
as knapsack, where items take up non-uniform space in the
budget constraints.
The datasets used in all of these applications are typically
large and even offline greedy algorithms are often impractical. This necessitates streaming algorithms which only make
one or multiple passes over the data and require little space.
Furthermore, applications such ad allocation require us to
make decisions online: Upon arrival, we need to immediately allocate a user to an advertiser without the chance of
re-allocating later. Algorithms that work simultaneously in
the online and streaming setting are therefore desirable and
well-studied (Ene and Nguyen 2022; Feldman et al. 2021).
We contribute to this line of work by designing algorithms
with improved approximation guarantees. We make further
progress with novel algorithms for more general settings.
Our Contributions and Techniques: Our key contributions for the online and streaming setting are:
1. We introduce a novel, general algorithm and analysis
framework. Algorithms in our framework are combinatorial
and very efficient, have optimal space and attain the best
known running time for our setting. Our framework does
not only allow us to improve upon prior results in a unified
way, but also handles much more general non-monotone objectives and budget constraints.
2. Our framework allows us to address settings that
were previously out of reach. For general (possibly nonmonotone) k-submodular maximization, we are the first to
obtain a constant-factor approximation, which was previously not even known in the offline setting (Xiao et al.
2022). We are also first to provide an algorithm for ksubmodular maximization subject to individual knapsack
constraints (here, items do not have uniform size in the budget constraints), where prior work is restricted to a common
constraint (Pham et al. 2022; Ha, Pham, and Tran 2024).

Constrained k-submodular maximization is a general framework that captures many discrete optimization problems such
as ad allocation, influence maximization, personalized recommendation, and many others. In many of these applications, datasets are large or decisions need to be made in
an online manner, which motivates the development of efficient streaming and online algorithms. In this work, we develop single-pass streaming and online algorithms for constrained k-submodular maximization with both monotone
and general (possibly non-monotone) objectives subject to
cardinality and knapsack constraints. Our algorithms achieve
provable constant-factor approximation guarantees which improve upon the state of the art in almost all settings. Moreover,
they achieve the fastest known running times and have optimal space usage. We experimentally evaluate our algorithms
on instances for ad allocation and other applications, where
we observe that our algorithms are practical and scalable, and
construct solutions that are comparable in value even to offline greedy algorithms.

1

Introduction

We develop algorithms for maximizing a k-submodular
function f subject to cardinality or knapsack constraints. kSubmodular functions capture the property of diminishing
returns under an allocation of elements from a ground set
V to k parts. Specifically, we are trying to find k disjoint
subsets (S1 , . . . , Sk ) of V such that f (S1 , . . . , Sk ) is maximized. We consider constrained k-submodular maximization where we enforce individual constraints for each part:
Each part a ∈ {1, . . . , k} has a specified budget na and we
are only allowed to allocate at most |Sa | ≤ na items.
k-Submodular functions model several important applications such as ad allocation. In this problem, ad impressions arrive online and we have to allocate them immediately to one of k advertisers. At the same time, each advertiser a ∈ {1, . . . , k} is willing to pay for at most na ad impressions (Feldman et al. 2009). The advertising platform
makes an allocation to maximize advertiser satisfaction, for
which natural objectives such as user exposure show diminishing returns. Another important application is in personalized recommendation, which motivates the study of general (possibly non-monotone) objectives. Mirzasoleiman,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20567

