The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MRR-FV: Unlocking Complex Fact Verification with
Multi-Hop Retrieval and Reasoning
Liwen Zheng1 , Chaozhuo Li1 * , Litian Zhang2 , Haoran Jia1 ,
Senzhang Wang3 , Zheng Liu4 , Xi Zhang1
1

Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (MoE),
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing 100191, China
3
Central South University, China
4
BAAI, China
{zhenglw, lichaozhuo}@bupt.edu.cn, litianzhang@buaa.edu.cn, jiahaoran@bupt.edu.cn, szwang@csu.edu.cn,
zhengliu1026@gmail.com, zhangx@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract
The pervasive spread of misinformation on social networks
highlights the critical necessity for effective fact verification
systems. Traditional approaches primarily focus on pairwise
correlations between claims and evidence, often neglecting
comprehensive multi-hop retrieval and reasoning, which results in suboptimal performance when dealing with complex claims. In this paper, we propose MRR-FV, a generative retrieval-enhanced model designed to address the novel
challenge of Multi-hop Retrieval and Reasoning for Fact
Verification, which integrates two core modules: Generative
Multi-hop Retriever and the Hierarchical Interaction Reasoner. MRR-FV utilizes an autoregressive model for iterative
multi-hop evidence retrieval, complemented by a pre-trained
compressor to address the challenge of intention shift across
retrieval hops. For claim verification, we propose a hierarchical interaction reasoner that conducts intra-sentence reasoning to capture long-term semantic dependencies and intersentence reasoning across multi-hop evidence subgraphs to
reveal complex evidence interactions. Experimental evaluations on the FEVER and HOVER datasets demonstrate the
superior performance of our model in both claim verification
and evidence retrieval tasks.

Figure 1: The evidence retrieved by the one-hop retriever
leads to an incorrect verification label of “Not Enough Information,” indicated as “N” in the figure above. However,
the evidence retrieved by the multi-hop retriever can result in
the correct verification label of “Supports,” denoted as “S”.

Introduction
Fact verification (FV) aims to leverage credible evidence
to autonomously assess the veracity of textual statements,
which helps combat the proliferation of misinformation and
enhance the reliability and credibility of social media (Guo,
Schlichtkrull, and Vlachos 2022; Zhang et al. 2025). Existing FV models usually follow a two-phase paradigm consisting of evidence retrieval and claim verification (Hu et al.
2023). Evidence retrieval focuses on precisely identifying
critical evidential sentences within a vast corpus (Chen et al.
2022a). In the claim verification phase, the semantic interactions between the claim and the retrieved evidence are organized into sequences or graphs, which are then jointly analyzed to assess their authenticity (Zeng, Abumansour, and
Zubiaga 2021).

Evidence retrieval serves as the cornerstone of FV systems, offering a robust and essential foundation for the
subsequent claim verification (Samarinas, Hsu, and Lee
2021). Most retrieval modules adhere to a one-hop retrieval
paradigm, where the semantic similarity between each candidate evidence and the claim is assessed independently.
This approach focuses solely on the semantic relationship
within individual claim-evidence pairs, overlooking the potential interactions between the claim and a wider set of evidence (Li et al. 2021). Consequently, this limitation may result in sub-optimal performance when addressing complex

* Corresponding author: Chaozhuo Li.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26066

