The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AI-generated Image Quality Assessment in Visual Communication
Yu Tian1 , Yixuan Li1 , Baoliang Chen2 , Hanwei Zhu1 , Shiqi Wang∗1 , Sam Kwong* 3
1

City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
3
Lingnan University, Hong Kong SAR, China
{ytian73-c, hanwei.zhu}@my.cityu.edu.hk, yixuanli423@gmail.com, blchen@scnu.edu.cn, shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk,
samkwong@ln.edu.hk
AIGI-VC

Abstract
The image shows a thrilling downhill

ride on a mountain bike through a
forest trail. This
image is designed
Assessing the quality of artificial
intelligence-generated
im- to
excite
viewers
to
embrace
ages (AIGIs) plays a crucial role
in their
application
in real-this
adventurous and liberating lifestyle
world scenarios. However, traditional
image quality assessby purchasing this mountain bike.

Information Clarity Emotional Interaction
Preference
Description
[14 ad topic!8 emotion categories]
[2.5K images!500 prompts!5 generative models]

ment (IQA) algorithms primarily focus on low-level visual
perception, while existing IQA works on AIGIs overemphasize the generated content itself, neglecting its effectiveness
showsTo
a bridge
chimpanzee
in real-worldThe image
applications.
thisin a
gap, we propose
costume,
sitting alone
in a dark
AIGI-VC, a clown
quality
assessment
database
for AI-Generated
corner of a circus tent. This image is
Images in Visual
Communication, which studies the commudesigned to sadness viewers to making
nicability of them
AIGIs
in the
advertising
from the perspecaware
of the
animals' field
suffering
tives of
information
clarity
emotional
interaction. The
in
circuses
and and
reject
attending
animal
dataset consists
ofperformances
2,500 images spanning 14 advertisement
topics and 8 emotion types. It provides coarse-grained human
preference annotations and fine-grained preference descriptions, benchmarking the abilities of IQA methods in preference prediction, interpretation, and reasoning. We conduct an
empirical study of existing representative IQA methods and
large multi-modal models on the AIGI-VC dataset, uncovering their strengths and weaknesses.

Ad
Topics

Environment Proctection
Animal Rights
Social Welfare
Bullying&violence
Safety
Emotion
Healthcare
Categories
Self-esteem
Creative Products
Food
Drink
Baby Products
Electronics
Cosmetic
Home Essentials

Contentment
Awe
Amuesment
Excitement
Sadness
Fear
Disgust
Anger

Figure 1: Outline of the AIGI-VC dataset.
reflect (Holbrook and O’Shaughnessy 1984; Hussain et al.
2017; Yang et al. 2023). However, due to hardware limitations and technical proficiency, the quality of AI-generated
images (AIGIs) varies widely, necessitating refinement and
filtering before distributing them to practical applications.
There have been substantial efforts in establishing
benchmarks to facilitate research on AIGI quality assessment. (Lee et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024c; Duan et al. 2024;
Tian et al. 2024). However, these benchmarks emphasize the
quality of generated content for general purposes, overlooking the effectiveness of AIGIs in real-world applications. For
practical applications in visual communication, the primary
challenges in evaluating the quality of AIGIs arise from two
aspects: 1) information clarity: each element in the text message must be present and clearly depicted in the image; 2)
emotional interaction: the image must powerfully evoke the
intended emotion in the viewers. It is crucial to develop an
IQA benchmark that is closely aligned with practical use
cases. In this work, we contribute a dataset called AIGIVC, the first-of-its-kind database to study the communicability of AI-Generated Images in Visual Communication.
The overview of the AIGI-VC dataset is shown in Fig. 1. The
AIGI-VC dataset comprises a diverse collection of 2,500 images, encompassing 14 distinct ad topics and representing 8
different types of emotions. We conduct subjective experiments via pairwise comparisons on two evaluation dimen-

Code — https://github.com/ytian73/AIGI-VC.

Introduction
Image generation has undergone significant advancements
with the help of artificial intelligence (AI) technology (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Rombach et al. 2022; Bao et al.
2024; Chen et al. 2024b; Zhu et al. 2024b). Recent research has demonstrated the potential benefits of AI in various visual communication fields, particularly in advertising (Campbell et al. 2022; Quan et al. 2023; Ford et al.
2023; Akhtar and Ramkumar 2023). For example, CocaCola used an AI platform to create a series of advertisements
(ads) for its brand, creating deeper engagement than existing ones. Some large e-commerce platforms, such as Amazon and Alibaba, utilize AI technology to generate personalized ad content, enhancing the efficiency of ad development and increasing the impact of the ads. For applications
that require visual communication, high-quality images not
only fully and clearly convey a certain message, but also
evoke the inner emotion that the visual designer wants to
* Corresponding authors: Shiqi Wang, Sam Kwong.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7392

