The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Certified Causal Defense with Generalizable Robustness
Yiran Qiao1 , Yu Yin1 , Chen Chen2 , Jing Ma1 *
1

Case Wester Reserve University
2
University of Virginia
yxq350@case.edu, yxy1421@case.edu, zrh6du@virginia.edu, jing.ma5@case.edu

Abstract
While machine learning models have proven effective across
various scenarios, it is widely acknowledged that many models
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Recently, numerous efforts have emerged in adversarial defense. Among them, certified defense is well known for its theoretical guarantees against
arbitrary adversarial perturbations on input within a certain
range. However, most existing works in this line struggle to
generalize their certified robustness in other data domains
with distribution shifts. This issue is rooted in the difficulty
of eliminating the negative impact of spurious correlations on
robustness in different domains. To address this problem, in
this work, we propose a novel certified defense framework
GLEAN, which incorporates a causal perspective into the generalization problem in certified defense. More specifically, our
framework integrates a certifiable causal factor learning component to disentangle the causal relations and spurious correlations between input and label, thereby excluding the negative
effect of spurious correlations on defense. On top of that, we
design a causally certified defense strategy to handle adversarial attacks on latent causal factors. In this way, our framework
is not only robust against malicious noises on data in the training distribution but also can generalize its robustness across
domains with distribution shifts. Extensive experiments on
benchmark datasets validate the superiority of our framework
in certified robustness generalization in different data domains.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.15451

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models, particularly deep neural networks (DNN), have demonstrated remarkable success across
a diverse range of areas (Devlin et al. 2018; Silver et al. 2017;
He et al. 2016). Despite their success, these models still exhibit significant vulnerabilities to adversarial perturbations on
input (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Biggio et al. 2013). A typical example in image classification is that a trained classifier that correctly classifies an image x can be easily fooled by a perturbed image x+δ, where δ
represents adversarial perturbations that are imperceptible to
human perception. This weakness impedes the deployment of
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20024

ML models in critical applications where security and reliability are priorities, such as autonomous driving and healthcare.
In the past few decades, researchers have developed numerous defense methods to enhance the adversarial robustness of
ML models. Many of these methods are based on adversarial
training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2019; Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018),
which incorporates adversarial samples into model training.
Despite its impressive performance, adversarial training is
an empirical approach that lacks theoretical guarantees. That
is, although it can enhance robustness against certain types
of attacks, it may still be vulnerable to other unknown, or
more potent adversarial perturbations. Differently, another
line of work develops certified robustness. A certified robust
classifier can theoretically guarantee that its prediction for
a point x remains constant within a certain specified range
(a.k.a. radius) of perturbations on x, regardless of the type
of attack. Randomized smoothing-based certified defense
(Lecuyer et al. 2019; Li et al. 2018; Cohen, Rosenfeld, and
Kolter 2019) is one of the most representative methods in
this area. Specifically, given an arbitrary base classifier f ,
this method can convert it to a certifiably robust classifier g,
which is created by randomly sampling multiple noised versions of a given input and using the aggregated output from
these variations to make final predictions. Inspired by this
approach, many subsequent studies (Li et al. 2019; Jeong and
Shin 2020; Jeong et al. 2021; Salman et al. 2019; Zhai et al.
2020) have expanded upon the basis of random smoothing.
Currently, most existing certified defense works focus on
data in the same domain yet overlook other domains with
distribution shifts. This limitation can result in a markedly degraded certified robustness performance when these methods
are applied to the test domain (Sun et al. 2021). As discussed
in previous work (Ilyas et al. 2019; Beery, Van Horn, and
Perona 2018), such degradation of robustness lies in the fact
that ML models tend to overfit spurious correlations between
features and labels. As these spurious correlations often vary
across different domains (Ye et al. 2022), fitting spurious
correlations can easily lead g to make incorrect predictions
or correct predictions but with lower confidence levels. The
former results in the certified radius being assigned zero,
while the latter also leads to a reduced certified radius.
Therefore, domain shifts can lead to weak generalization w.r.t.
not only prediction performance but also certified robustness.

