The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoDe: Communication Delay-Tolerant Multi-Agent Collaboration via Dual
Alignment of Intent and Timeliness
Shoucheng Song1,2 , Youfang Lin1,2 , Sheng Han1,2 , Chang Yao1,2 , Hao Wu1,2 ,
Shuo Wang1,2 , Kai Lv1,2 *
2

1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Trafﬁc Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, Beijing, China
{insis_songsc, yﬂin, shhan, 22120453, 21241019, 19112029, lvkai}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Communication has been widely employed to enhance multiagent collaboration. Previous research has typically assumed
delay-free communication, a strong assumption that is challenging to meet in practice. However, real-world agents suffer from channel delays, receiving messages sent at different time points, termed Asynchronous Communication, leading to cognitive biases and breakdowns in collaboration.
This paper ﬁrst deﬁnes two communication delay settings
in MARL and emphasizes their harm to collaboration. To
handle the above delays, this paper proposes a novel framework Communication Delay-tolerant Multi-Agent Collaboration (CoDe). At ﬁrst, CoDe learns an intent representation as
messages through future action inference, reﬂecting the stable future behavioral trends of the agents. Then, CoDe devises a dual alignment mechanism of intent and timeliness
to strengthen the fusion process of asynchronous messages.
In this way, agents can extract the long-term intent of others, even from delayed messages, and selectively utilize the
most recent messages that are relevant to their intent. Experimental results demonstrate that CoDe outperforms baseline
algorithms in three MARL benchmarks without delay and exhibits robustness under ﬁxed and time-varying delays.

Figure 1: Performance of Communication-Enabled MARL
Algorithm in Delayed Environments. Channel delays are
conﬁgured as four types: 0, 5, inﬁnity, and values sampled
from a Gaussian distribution N ∼ (5, 2). Notably, the unit
of delay is the decision time interval.
(Zhang, Zhang, and Lin 2019, 2020; Sheng et al. 2022;
Yuan et al. 2022). Moreover, several studies (Mitchell, Blumenkamp, and Prorok 2020; Xue et al. 2021; Yuan et al.
2024; Ding et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024) also consider the impact of channel noise and malicious attacks and make further
enhancements.
Nevertheless, only a few researchers have concentrated
on the delay issue in MARL. DAMARL (Chen et al. 2020)
addresses interaction delays between agents and the environment, assuming agents receive observations after a ﬁxed
time interval, without involving inter-agent communication.
DACOM (Yuan et al. 2023) centers on communication delays among agents, integrating waiting time into the decision
process. It assumes the delay is shorter than a single decision
interval, thus ignoring message asynchronicity issues. Actually, channel delays often extend across decision intervals
in more general scenarios, meaning that agents receive and
utilize delayed messages from varying time points.
We deﬁne the above issue of delays across decision intervals as Asynchronous Communication. With delays, message transmission among agents lags, forcing them to rely on
outdated messages to understand the environment and team-

Introduction
Communication is crucial for enhancing the collaborative
capability of multi-agents, especially within distributed systems. Through internal communication, agents restricted
by local observations can strengthen their understanding of
teammates and the environment, leading to more cooperative behaviors (Foerster et al. 2016; Das et al. 2019; Ding,
Huang, and Lu 2020; Yuan et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2024).
However, previous works frequently rely on ideal communication conditions, such as unlimited bandwidth, noisefree channels, and delay-free transmissions. These strong assumptions are typically hard to achieve in the real world.
Prior efforts have primarily focused on communication architectures to achieve sparse communication under
bandwidth constraints, which involves gating mechanisms
(Jiang and Lu 2018; Han, Dastani, and Wang 2023), eventtriggered mechanisms (Hu et al. 2020), and predeﬁned rules
* Corresponding Author: Kai Lv (lvkai@bjtu.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23304

