The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On Oversquashing in Graph Neural Networks
Through the Lens of Dynamical Systems
Alessio Gravina* 1 , Moshe Eliasof* 2 , Claudio Gallicchio1 , Davide Bacciu1 , Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
alessio.gravina@di.unipi.it, me532@cam.ac.uk, {claudio.gallicchio, davide.bacciu}@unipi.it, cbs31@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
A common problem in Message-Passing Neural Networks
is oversquashing – the limited ability to facilitate effective
information flow between distant nodes. Oversquashing is
attributed to the exponential decay in information transmission as node distances increase. This paper introduces a novel
perspective to address oversquashing, leveraging dynamical
systems properties of global and local non-dissipativity, that
enable the maintenance of a constant information flow rate.
We present SWAN, a uniquely parameterized GNN model
with antisymmetry both in space and weight domains, as a
means to obtain non-dissipativity. Our theoretical analysis
asserts that by implementing these properties, SWAN offers
an enhanced ability to transmit information over extended
distances. Empirical evaluations on synthetic and real-world
benchmarks that emphasize long-range interactions validate
the theoretical understanding of SWAN, and its ability to mitigate oversquashing.

1

Introduction

A critical issue that limits Message-Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs) (Gilmer et al. 2017), a class of GNNs, is the oversquashing problem (Alon and Yahav 2021; Di Giovanni
et al. 2023). In the oversquashing scenario, the capacity of
MPNNs to transmit information between nodes exponentially
decreases as their distance increases, which imposes challenges on modeling long-range interactions, which are often
necessary for real-world tasks (Dwivedi et al. 2022). At the
same time, it has been shown in (Haber et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2018) that neural networks can be interpreted as the discretization of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). Building on these observations and understandings, similar concepts were utilized to forge the field of differential-equations
inspired GNNs (DE-GNNs), as shown in (Poli et al. 2019;
Chamberlain et al. 2021b) and subsequent works. Through
this view, it is possible to design GNNs with strong inductive
biases, such as smoothness (Chamberlain et al. 2021b), energy preservation (Eliasof, Haber, and Treister 2021; Rusch
et al. 2022), node-wise non-dissipativity (Gravina, Bacciu,
and Gallicchio 2023), and more.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16906

In this paper, we are interested in addressing the oversquashing problem in a principled manner, accompanied by
theoretical understanding through the prism of DE-GNNs.
Current literature offers several approaches to mitigate oversquashing, such as adding a virtual global node (Gilmer et al.
2017; Cai et al. 2023), graph rewiring (Gasteiger, Weißenberger, and Günnemann 2019; Topping et al. 2022; Karhadkar, Banerjee, and Montufar 2023), as well as using graph
transformers (Dwivedi and Bresson 2021; Rampášek et al.
2022). Some of the methods above focus on providing ad-hoc
mechanisms for the network to reduce oversquashing. Instead,
in this paper, we are interested in theoretically understanding
and improving the information propagation capacity of the
network, thereby mitigating oversquashing. Specifically, we
will show that it is possible to design GNNs with a constant
flow of information, unlike typical diffusion-based methods. To this end, we take inspiration from the recent ADGN
(Gravina, Bacciu, and Gallicchio 2023), a non-dissipative
GNN. In ADGN, it was shown that by incorporating an antisymmetric transformation to the learned channel-mixing
weights, it is possible to obtain a locally, i.e., node-wise,
non-dissipative behavior. Here, we propose SWAN (SpaceWeight ANtisymmetry), a novel GNN model that is both
globally (i.e., graph-wise) and locally (i.e., node-wise) nondissipative, achieved by space and weight antisymmetric parameterization. To understand the behavior of SWAN and
its effectiveness in mitigating oversquashing, we propose a
global, i.e., graph-wise, analysis, and show that compared to
ADGN (Gravina, Bacciu, and Gallicchio 2023), our SWAN
is both globally and locally non-dissipative. The immediate
implication of this property is that SWAN is guaranteed to
have a constant information flow rate, thereby mitigating
oversquashing. Such a property is visualized in Figure 1,
where SWAN shows improved capacities of propagating information across the graph, with respect to diffusion and local
non-dissipative approaches. To complement our theoretical
analysis, we experiment with several synthetic and real-world
long-range benchmarks.
Main Contributions. We present the following contributions. (i) A novel graph perspective theoretical analysis of the
stability and non-dissipativity of antisymmetric DE-GNNs,
providing a general design principle for introducing nondissipativity as an inductive bias in any DE-GNN model. (ii)
We propose SWAN, a space and weight antisymmetric DE-

