The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tradutor: Building a Variety Specific Translation Model
Hugo Sousa1,2 * , Satya Almasian3 * , Ricardo Campos2,4,5 , Alı́pio Jorge1,2
1

Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
2
INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal
3
Institute of Computer Science, Heidelberg University, Germany
4
Department of Informatics, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal
5
Ci2 - Smart Cities Research Center, Tomar, Portugal
hugo.o.sousa@inesctec.pt, almasian@informatik.uni-heidelberg.de
Abstract

tuguese, could find themselves at a disadvantage, particularly in deploying LM-based systems in critical areas such
as healthcare and judiciary, where the grammar and lexicons
of the language are of great importance (Scherre and Duarte
2016; Kato and Martins 2016; Brito and Lopes 2016).
One solution would be to create LMs specific to a certain
language variety. However, this presents its own set of challenges for training and evaluation (Armengol-Estapé et al.
2021; Rodrigues et al. 2023). Training a LM, be it from
scratch or fine-tuning, requires a large, carefully curated corpus for training and several benchmarks for evaluation (Albalak et al. 2024), which are either nonexistent or contaminated by the dominant language varieties. Another way to
overcome these challenges is to create machine translation
(MT) models dedicated to a specific language variety (Zbib
et al. 2012; Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016; Riley et al.
2023). With a sufficiently powerful MT model for the lowresource variety, we can take the first step toward resource
creation and inclusion of these languages. Such models can
be used to translate training and evaluation benchmarks,
which are predominantly in English, to the low-resource
variety. Additionally, they can serve as an off-the-shelf intermediary between widely-used LMs and systems in lowresource settings or even be used to artificially generate data
in the desired language variety.
In this paper, we present a novel methodology for developing a neural machine translation (NMT) model tailored
to low-resource language varieties, where manually annotated data is scarce or unavailable. Our approach leverages a
retro-translation technique: we first gather texts in the lowresource language variety and translate them into a resourcerich language. This newly created parallel corpus is then
used to fine-tune a pre-trained language model. We validate
our methodology using European Portuguese as a case study,
though the same steps can be applied to other languages with
similar challenges. As part of this work, we have created and
publicly released a meticulously curated parallel corpus for
European Portuguese, comprising 1,719,002 documents –
the largest of its kind to date. We evaluate our model against
existing open and close source translation systems for Portuguese, as well as zero-shot language models, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. Finally, to ensure our
translations remain true to the intended language variety, we
use a language variety classification model to quantify if the

Language models have become foundational to many widely
used systems. However, these seemingly advantageous models are double-edged swords. While they excel in tasks related
to resource-rich languages like English, they often lose the
fine nuances of language forms, dialects, and varieties that are
inherent to languages spoken in multiple regions of the world.
Languages like European Portuguese are neglected in favor of
their more popular counterpart, Brazilian Portuguese, leading
to suboptimal performance in various linguistic tasks. To address this gap, we introduce the first open-source translation
model specifically tailored for European Portuguese, along
with a novel dataset specifically designed for this task. Results from automatic evaluations on two benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our best model surpasses existing opensource translation systems for Portuguese and approaches the
performance of industry-leading closed-source systems for
European Portuguese. By making our dataset, models, and
code publicly available, we aim to support and encourage further research, fostering advancements in the representation of
underrepresented language varieties.

1

Introduction

In an era, where Language Models (LMs) form the foundation of numerous tools and systems, a significant concern
arises: how can we ensure these tools are equally beneficial
to all communities? One major hurdle in this direction is inclusiveness, particularly when it comes to scarce language
varieties and the lack of models that take into account the
diversity of dialects and culturally significant nuances of a
given language (Team 2022). For example, while Portuguese
is not considered a low-resource language, most of the content available is in Brazilian Portuguese. This is due to the
Brazilian population representing more than 70% of all native Portuguese speakers1 . Consequently, a LM or a translation system trained on a Portuguese corpus is inclined to
produce text containing phrases and grammatical structures
of Brazilian Portuguese. As a result, countries like Portugal and Mozambique, which use different varieties of Por* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Statistic derived from Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Portuguese language#Lusophone countries

25183

