The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Similar Modality Enhancement and Action Consistency Learning for Weakly
Supervised Temporal Action Localization
Maodong Li1 , Chao Zheng1 , Jian Wang1 * , Bing Li1,2
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan
{limaodong2023, chaozheng, jianwang, bingli}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL)
aims to identify and localize action instances in untrimmed
videos using only video-level labels. Existing methods typically rely on original features from frozen pre-trained encoders designed for trimmed action classification (TAC)
tasks, which inevitably introduces task discrepancy. Additionally, these methods often overlook the importance of
considering action consistency from multiple perspectives,
specifically the consistency in action processes and action
semantics, both of which are crucial for the model’s understanding of actions. To address these issues, we propose a
novel WTAL method based on similar modality enhancement
and action consistency learning (SEAL). First, we construct global descriptors for each action category, and use
the pseudo-labels generated based on these descriptors to
guide the model in learning more consistent representations,
thereby mitigating task discrepancy. Second, we design two
types of losses to achieve action consistency learning: process consistency loss, which penalizes candidate proposals
that deviate from the action center to ensure the completeness
of the action process, and semantic consistency loss, which
employs local descriptors to help proposals of the same action
category (especially those with apparent semantic confusion)
learn similar feature distributions. Extensive experiments on
the THUMOS14 and ActivityNet datasets demonstrate the
superior performance of the proposed method compared to
state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of consistency in learning. At a global level, enforcing cross-modal consistency—aligning RGB and flow representations toward
shared target categories—reduces task discrepancies and
mitigates the impact of noisy or modality-specific artifacts.
At a local level, promoting semantic similarity among proposals from the same action class fosters more coherent feature distributions, thereby enhancing the model’s discriminative capability and improving localization accuracy.

Code — https://github.com/Lkydong2020/SEAL WTAL

which are costly and time-consuming in real-world applications (Li et al. 2023). In contrast, Weakly Supervised Temporal Action Localization (WTAL) (Li et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2017) only requires video-level labels, which has therefore attracted increasing attention from researchers.
Recent WTAL methods predominantly adopt a segmentlevel multiple instance learning framework (S-MIL) (Wang
et al. 2017; Huang, Wang, and Li 2021; Luo et al. 2020a)
within the pre-classification pipeline. Based on a finely designed two-branch architecture, S-MIL is able to parallelize the processing of original RGB features and optical
flow features extracted from frozen pre-trained encoders and
transform the localization task into a classification task. In
this framework, the class-aware branch is used to generate
segment-level class activation sequences (CAS), which pro-

Introduction
Temporal Action Localization (TAL) aims to accurately locate action instances in untrimmed videos (Wang et al.
2023), enabling broad applications in video editing (Tejerode Pablos et al. 2018), industrial video analysis (Li and Zhao
2021), intelligent surveillance (Yun et al. 2019), humancomputer interaction (Vignolo et al. 2017), and more.
To date, most research efforts in TAL have been based on
fully supervised methods (Lin et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2022;
Zhang, Wu, and Li 2022). However, fully supervised TAL
(FTAL) relies on meticulously annotated frame-level labels,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4842

