The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MUN: Image Forgery Localization Based on M3 Encoder and UN Decoder
Yaqi Liu1 * , Shuhuan Chen2,3 * , Haichao Shi2 , Xiao-Yu Zhang2† , Song Xiao1 , Qiang Cai4
1
Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Technology for Food Safety, Beijing Technology and Business University
liuyaqi@besti.edu.cn, {chenshuhuan, shihaichao, zhangxiaoyu}@iie.ac.cn, xiaosong@mail.xidian.edu.cn,
caiq@th.btbu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

in the constrained image splicing detection and localization
task (Liu et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2023). For removal forgeries, inpainting detection has been widely explored especially with the emergence of the deep learning based inpainting techniques (Li et al. 2024; Wu and Zhou 2022).
However, with a suspected forged image at hands, we do not
know it is tampered by which kinds of forgeries, and abovementioned methods are only effective under specific circumstances. In recent years, the image forgery localization task
which aims to detect multi-type forgeries attracts more and
more attention (Liu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024).
In order to improve the discrimination and generalization
abilities of detecting multi-type forgeries, numerous feature
extractors and architectures have been explored. Some researches focus on locating forged regions with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Zhuo et al. 2022; Niloy,
Kumar Bhaumik, and Woo 2023). Recently, Transformer
(Vaswani et al. 2017) has shown promising performance in
down-stream computer vision tasks (Jain et al. 2023; Li et al.
2023). Researchers also applied Transformer or its variants
to detect forgeries (Shi, Chen, and Zhang 2023; Wang et al.
2022). It is still an ambiguous question which kind of architecture is more suitable for image forgery localization in
consideration of the performance and complexity.
Besides, researchers attempt to investigate multiple clues,
e.g., DCT (Bianchi, De Rosa, and Piva 2011), SRM (Zhou
et al. 2018) and Laplacian of Gaussian (Guo et al. 2023),
to provide additional information and assist the RGB features. In (Cozzolino and Verdoliva 2020), a different perspective is considered, and the extraction of low-level artifacts is carried out by learning a sort of “camera model
fingerprint” named as Noiseprint which bears traces of incamera processing steps and is obtained by means of a
siamese network. In (Guillaro et al. 2023), Noiseprint++ is
proposed to overcome Noiseprint’s limitations of poor robustness to image impairments induced by out-camera processes. Noiseprint++ is an improved version of Noiseprint,
and it can work in more challenging scenarios. While it
is still an open question how Noiseprint++ is deployed in
the image forgery localization task when processing images
with different resolutions.
In this paper, we propose a novel image forgery localization network, i.e., MUN, which consists of an M3 encoder

Image forgeries can entirely change the semantic information of an image, and can be used for unscrupulous purposes.
In this paper, we propose a novel image forgery localization
network named as MUN, which consists of an M3 encoder
and a UN decoder. Firstly, the M3 encoder is constructed
based on a Multi-scale Max-pooling query module to extract Multi-clue forged features. Noiseprint++ is adopted to
assist the RGB clue, and its deployment methodology is discussed. A Multi-scale Max-pooling Query (MMQ) module
is proposed to integrate RGB and noise features. Secondly, a
novel UN decoder is proposed to extract hierarchical features
from both top-down and bottom-up directions, reconstructing both high-level and low-level features at the same time.
Thirdly, we formulate an IoU-recalibrated Dynamic CrossEntropy (IoUDCE) loss to dynamically adjust the weights on
forged regions according to IoU which can adaptively balance
the influence of authentic and forged regions. Last but not
least, we propose a data augmentation method, i.e., Deviation
Noise Augmentation (DNA), which acquires accessible prior
knowledge of RGB distribution to improve the generalization
ability. Extensive experiments on publicly available datasets
show that MUN outperforms the state-of-the-art works.

Code — https://github.com/MrHuan3/MUN

Introduction
With ubiquitous digital cameras and highly developed image
editing tools, non-expert users can fabricate realistic forged
images which may be used for vicious purposes, interfering with public security. For different types of image forgeries, e.g., splicing, copy-move, removal, there are different
forensics solutions. For splicing detection, statistical inconsistencies left by tampering operations in RGB or spectral
domains are researched (Yang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2023).
In copy-move forgery detection, visual similar features are
extracted and matched in a hand-crafted manner (Wang et al.
2023; Li and Zhou 2019) or an end-to-end deep learning
style (Liu et al. 2022b; Weng et al. 2024). Some works even
attempt to detect splicing traces using visual similar features
* These authors contributed equally.
†

indicates the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5685

