The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoRe: Context-Regularized Text Embedding Learning for
Text-to-Image Personalization
Feize Wu1 * , Yun Pang1 * , Junyi Zhang1 * , Lianyu Pang1 * , Jian Yin1 ,
Baoquan Zhao1 , Qing Li2 , Xudong Mao1†
2

1
Sun Yat-sen University
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Input

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image personalization have enabled high-quality and controllable image synthesis for userprovided concepts. However, existing methods still struggle
to balance identity preservation with text alignment. Our approach is based on the fact that generating prompt-aligned images requires a precise semantic understanding of the prompt,
which involves accurately processing the interactions between the new concept and its surrounding context tokens
within the CLIP text encoder. To address this, we aim to embed the new concept properly into the input embedding space
of the text encoder, allowing for seamless integration with existing tokens. We introduce Context Regularization (CoRe),
which enhances the learning of the new concept’s text embedding by regularizing its context tokens in the prompt. This
is based on the insight that appropriate output vectors of the
text encoder for the context tokens can only be achieved if the
new concept’s text embedding is correctly learned. CoRe can
be applied to arbitrary prompts without requiring the generation of corresponding images, thus improving the generalization of the learned text embedding. Additionally, CoRe can
serve as a test-time optimization technique to further enhance
the generations for specific prompts. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms several baseline methods in both identity preservation and text alignment.

Input

A S* wearing a Santa hat, with a
white beard, dressed as Santa
Claus, is standing in front of a
burning fireplace

A S* was planted with
sunflowers ona wooden shelf,
on a sunny day

A S* dressed as Loki, with a tiny
horned helmet and a green and
gold outfit, standing on a throne
in a grand Asgardian hall

A S* as Star-Lord, featuring a
red leather jacket and a
miniature blaster, standing on a
distant alien planet with a
colorful nebula sky

A S* dressed as a Jedi, holding
a glowing lightsaber, standing
on a desert planet under the sun

A S* dressed as a wizard,
holding a glowing staff, standing
in a mystical forest filled with
ancient ruins

Input

Figure 1: CoRe enables text-aligned personalized generations, allowing for high visual variability of the userprovided concept.

Code — https://github.com/pangy9/CoRe
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.15914

Introduction

the fact that a precise semantic understanding of the prompts
is the premise for aligning the generated images with the
prompts. The semantic understanding of the prompts is managed by the CLIP text encoder, which involves processing the text embeddings of all tokens and their interactions.
Therefore, we aim to learn a proper text embedding for the
new concept, which not only accurately represents the concept but also seamlessly integrates with existing tokens.
Instead of investigating the text embedding of the new
concept itself (Gal et al. 2022), we shift our focus to the context tokens surrounding the new concept in prompts. Here,
the term text embedding refers to the input to the CLIP text
encoder. Moreover, for clarity and following the terminology used in (Lu et al. 2022), we refer to the embeddings
before and after the CLIP text encoder also as the input embedding and output embedding, respectively. As illustrated

Text-to-image personalization involves adapting a pretrained diffusion model to generate novel images based on
user-provided concepts and text prompts. The goal of personalization techniques is to produce high-quality images
that not only accurately preserve the concept’s identity but
also align well with the text prompt. However, balancing
the trade-off between identity preservation and text alignment remains a core challenge in personalization of diffusion models.
In this work, we focus on improving text alignment for
text-to-image personalization. Our investigation is based on
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8377

