The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attention Bootstrapping for Multi-Modal Test-Time Adaptation
Yusheng Zhao1 , Junyu Luo1 , Xiao Luo2,* , Jinsheng Huang1 ,
Jingyang Yuan1 , Zhiping Xiao3,* , Ming Zhang1, *
1
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, PKU-Anker LLM Lab, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
3
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
{yusheng.zhao, luojunyu, hjs}@stu.pku.edu.cn, xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu,
{yuanjy, mzhang cs}@pku.edu.cn, patxiao@uw.edu

Abstract
Test-time adaptation aims to adapt a well-trained model to
potential distribution shifts at test time using only unlabeled test data, without access to the original training data.
While previous efforts mainly focus on a single modality,
test-time distribution shift in the multi-modal setting is more
complex and calls for new solutions. This paper tackles the
problem of multi-modal test-time adaptation by proposing a
novel method named Attention Bootstrapping with Principal Entropy Minimization (ABPEM). We observe that testtime distribution shift causes misalignment across modalities,
leading to a large gap between intra-modality discrepancies
(measured by self-attention) and inter-modality discrepancies
(measured by cross-attention). We name this the attention
gap. This attention gap widens with more severe distribution
shifts, hindering effective modality fusion. To mitigate this
attention gap and encourage better modality fusion, we propose attention bootstrapping that promotes cross-attention
with the guidance of self-attention. Moreover, to reduce the
gradient noise in the commonly-used entropy minimization,
we adopt principal entropy minimization, a refinement of entropy minimization that reduces gradient noise by focusing on
the principal parts of entropy, excluding less reliable gradient
information. Extensive experiments on the benchmarks validate the effectiveness of the proposed ABPEM in comparison
with competing baselines.

Figure 1: During test time, the distribution shift typically has
a larger impact on the inter-modality discrepancy than intramodality discrepancy, leading to an increasing attention gap.
To tackle the challenge of test-time distribution shift, testtime adaptation has emerged as a promising solution as it
assumes neither the labels of test data (which is more practical) nor the access of training data (which protects privacy). Recently, many test-time adaptation methods have
been proposed (Wang et al. 2021; Boudiaf et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2022; Nguyen et al. 2023; Karmanov et al. 2024).
However, most existing test-time adaptation methods focus
on the uni-modal setting. In practice, multi-modal test-time
adaptation is more challenging. As is shown in Figure 1,
the test-time distribution shift causes not only intra-modality
changes (blue arrows) but also inter-modality changes (red
arrows), and the latter can potentially undermine the model’s
ability to effectively align and fuse different modalities as
the cross-attention tends to decrease under distribution shift.
Towards this end, we propose a novel method named Attention Bootstrapping with Principal Entropy Minimization
(ABPEM). 1 As illustrated in Figure 1, when the attention-

Introduction
Multi-modal learning (Blikstein 2013; Xu, Zhu, and Clifton
2023) has recently attracted increasing attention, with a wide
range of applications in many fields, including autonomous
driving (Zheng et al. 2023), video understanding (Lee et al.
2023a), sentiment analysis (Yu et al. 2021), and robotics
(Krauhausen et al. 2024). Recent advances in this field often encode each modality into tokens and utilize transformers to learn the embedding (Yao and Wan 2020; Zhang et al.
2022). Then, the modalities are often fused with the attention
mechanism. Although this paradigm has achieved promising
results, it assumes that the test data have the same distribution as the training data, which may fail to hold in the wild
(Niu et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2023; Liang, He, and Tan 2024).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this paper, the term bootstrap is used in its idiomatic sense
rather than the statistical sense.

22849

