The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ASP-Driven Emergency Planning for Norm Violations in Reinforcement Learning
Sebastian Adam, Thomas Eiter
Institute of Logic and Computation, Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstraße 9-11, A-1040 Vienna, Austria
{sebastian.adam, thomas.eiter}@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a widely used approach for
training an agent to maximize rewards in a given environment. Action policies learned with this technique see a broad
range of applications in practical areas like games, healthcare,
robotics, or autonomous driving. However, enforcing ethical
behavior or norms based on deontic constraints that the agent
should adhere to during policy execution remains a complex
challenge. Especially constraints that emerge after the training
can necessitate to redo policy learning, which can be costly
and, more critically, time consuming. To mitigate this problem,
we present a framework for policy fixing in case of a norm
violation, which allows the agent to stay operational. Based on
answer set programming (ASP), emergency plans are generated that exclude or minimize cost of norm violations by future
actions in a horizon of interest. By combining and developing
optimization techniques, efficient policy fixing under real-time
constraints can be achieved.

Git — https://github.com/S3basuchian/emergency-planning

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a well-known approach to
train an agent for making decisions on actions in order to
maximize cumulative rewards. Action policies obtained by
RL proved to be effective in many areas, such as games
(Silver et al. 2018), robotics (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters
2013), healthcare (Yu et al. 2023), or autonomous driving
(Kiran et al. 2022), to name a few.
However, enforcing ethical behavior or norms based on
deontic constraints that a trained agent should adhere to in
operation is a complex challenge. It has garnered significant
research attention in research related to RL (Thananjeyan
et al. 2021; Noothigattu et al. 2018), deontic logic (Neufeld
et al. 2022; Giordano, Martelli, and Dupré 2013) and planning (Kasenberg and Scheutz 2018; Aminof et al. 2019).
Especially norms and constraints that emerge only after the
training phase are difficult to factor into the agent’s behavior.
For example, consider an RL agent in a high-stake area like
autonomous driving. Even if the agent is trained to follow
all road traffic rules, it could still overtake cyclists at an
unsettling velocity. While not against the traffic rules per se,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14772

enforcing a norm that obliges the agent to overtake cyclists
only if doable safely and at a reasonable velocity is desirable.
In traditional RL, incorporating such an additional norm
into the agent’s behavior is inevitably tied to redo training.
However, training for a comprehensive policy can be expensive and, more critically, time-consuming, making it infeasible during operation. Some approaches (Thananjeyan
et al. 2021; Noothigattu et al. 2018) thus outsource norm
compliance to a secondary policy, while Neufeld et al. (2022)
conceived a logic component that checks any candidate action
against a set of norms and hinders the agent from execution
in case of a norm violation. However, it lacks to account
for norm violations by future actions. A hybrid approach by
Kasenberg and Scheutz (2018) combines norms expressed in
Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) with stochastic domains modeled by Markov decision processes (MDPs), but is geared to
generate a norm-compliant policy from scratch rather than
integrating it with an existing RL policy.
For handling norm violations, we propose to use emergency action plans that are generated based on a domain
model. They ensure that no further norm violations happen
and at the same time should closely follow the learned policy.
In this way, the agent stays operational and intuitively still
may achieve high reward while behaving norm compliant.
More specifically, we make the following contributions:
• We introduce the notion of a policy fix, which consists in
an alteration of the RL policy such that subsequent actions
do not violate deontic constraints. To this end, we present
a framework for policy fixing within an action horizon into
the future that is gradually extended. Informally, a fix alters decisions to suboptimal choices while respecting action
preferences by the RL policy.
• We express policy fixing as a planning problem in Answer
Set Programming (ASP), which allows to compute optimal
policy fixes using an ASP solver by respecting RL preferences. Norm compliance is thus entirely outsourced to an
ASP program. If full norm compliance is impossible, ASP
allows to assign penalties to norm violations using weak
(soft) constraints. This facilitates sophisticated policy fixes,
optimized based on expected rewards and penalties.
• The framework caters for both deterministic and nondeterministic environments, which are complex to handle. To do
so, we introduce a blueprint for the ASP program that can be
adapted to various complex domains, following a modular

