The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving the Lower Bound in Branch-and-Bound Algorithms for MaxSAT
Shuolin Li1 , Chu-Min Li1,2, * , Jordi Coll3 , Djamal Habet1 , Felip Manyà4
1

Aix Marseille Université, Université de Toulon, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France
2
Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France
3
Universitat de Girona, Girona, Spain
4
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, CSIC, Bellaterra, Spain
shuolin.li@lis-lab.fr, chu-min.li@u-picardie.fr, jordicoll@udg.edu, Djamal.Habet@univ-amu.fr, felip@iiia.csic.es
Abstract

As with other NP-hard problems, algorithms for MaxSAT
can be divided into two categories: heuristic and exact algorithms. The former quickly find good solutions without
guaranteeing optimality, see, e.g., (Lei and Cai 2018; Chu,
Cai, and Luo 2023b; Zheng et al. 2022). The latter return
a proven optimal solution. There are also hybrid algorithms
that combine heuristic and exact algorithms, see e.g., (Chu,
Cai, and Luo 2023a; Nadel 2023; Zheng et al. 2023; Lei et al.
2021). In this paper, we focus on exact algorithms.
Exact algorithms for MaxSAT can be broadly categorized into two groups. The first group refers to SAT-based
MaxSAT solvers (Bacchus, Järvisalo, and Ruben 2021).
They transform MaxSAT into a series of SAT problems,
which are then solved using a SAT solver. Representative solvers in this category include WPM1-3 (Ansótegui,
Bonet, and Levy 2009; Ansótegui, Bonet, and Levy 2010;
Ansótegui and Gabàs 2017), QMaxSAT (Koshimura et al.
2012), Open-WBO (Martins, Manquinho, and Lynce 2014;
Martins et al. 2014), CGSS (Berg et al. 2023), Pacose
(Paxian and Becker 2020), MaxHS (Bacchus 2020; Narodytska and Bacchus 2014), and EvalMaxSAT (Avellaneda
2020). The second group refers to branch-and-bound (BnB)
MaxSAT solvers (Li and Manyà 2021). They find an optimal assignment by constructing a binary search tree in
which each node corresponds to a partial assignment. A
BnB solver calculates a lower bound (LB) on the number
of falsified soft clauses at each node and compares it with
the current upper bound (UB) calculated from the best solution found so far. If LB ≥ UB, the current branch cannot
yield a better solution, leading the solver to prune and backtrack; otherwise, the search continues. Consequently, having a tight LB is crucial for solving MaxSAT efficiently.
State-of-the-art BnB solvers include MaxSatz (Li, Manyà,
and Planes 2007), MiniMaxSat (Heras, Larrosa, and Oliveras 2008), Ahmaxsat (Abramé and Habet 2014; Cherif,
Habet, and Abramé 2020), Akmaxsat (Kuegel 2010), and
(W)MaxCDCL (Li et al. 2021a,b).
BnB MaxSAT solvers usually compute an LB by detecting disjoint local cores using unit propagation. A local core
is a subset of soft clauses that cannot all be satisfied without falsifying a hard clause at the current search tree node.
A significant limitation of current BnB MaxSAT solvers is
their inability to reuse soft clauses from previously identified cores when detecting new cores. This constraint is im-

The MaxSAT problem is an optimization version of the satisfiability problem (SAT). A tight lower bound (LB) on the
number of falsified soft clauses in a MaxSAT solution is crucial for the efficiency of Branch-and-Bound (BnB) MaxSAT
solvers. To compute an LB, modern BnB solvers detect disjoint inconsistent subsets of soft clauses, called cores, using
unit propagation. A notable feature of these solvers is that
soft clauses belonging to already detected cores cannot be
reused to detect additional cores, limiting the number of cores
that can be detected. In this paper, we propose an unlocking
mechanism that allows the reuse of soft clauses in already detected cores while ensuring the soundness of LB. Experimental results show that this unlocking mechanism consistently
improves the performance of a state-of-the-art BnB solver. In
addition, it allowed us to win the first two places in the exact
unweighted category of the MaxSAT Evaluation 2024.

Introduction
The MaxSAT problem is an optimization version of the
satisfiability problem (SAT), which is known to be NPhard (Papadimitriou 1994). Given a Conjunctive Normal
Form (CNF) formula, generally represented as a set of
clauses, solving MaxSAT involves finding an assignment
to all Boolean variables that maximizes (minimizes) the
number of satisfied (falsified) clauses. MaxSAT has three
variants: partial MaxSAT, in which some clauses, called
hard clauses, cannot be falsified, and the others, called soft
clauses, can be falsified; weighted MaxSAT, in which each
clause can be falsified and has a positive integer weight representing the penalty of its violation; and weighted partial
MaxSAT, which has hard clauses and weighted soft clauses.
In weighted partial MaxSAT, an optimal solution satisfies
all the hard clauses and minimizes the sum of weights of the
falsified soft clauses. Thanks to the efforts of the scientific
community, MaxSAT has become a competitive generic approach to solve combinatorial optimization problems such
as scheduling (Demirović, Musliu, and Winter 2019), maximum clique (Li and Quan 2010), FPGA routing (Fu and
Malik 2006), and protein design (Allouche et al. 2014).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11272

