The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Infinite-Canvas: Higher-Resolution Video Outpainting with Extensive Content
Generation
Qihua Chen1,3 * , Yue Ma1,2 * , Hongfa Wang1,4 * , Junkun Yuan1 * † ,
Wenzhe Zhao1 , Qi Tian1 , Hongmei Wang1 , Shaobo Min1 , Qifeng Chen2† , Wei Liu1
1
Tencent, Shenzhen, China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, HongKong
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
4
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
cqh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, ymacn@cse.ust.hk, {hongfawang, junkunyuan, carsonzhao, noaltian, mayhmwang,
bobmin}@tencent.com, cqf@ust.hk, wliu@ee.columbia.edu
2

Abstract

et al. 2024a), have been proposed. They utilize the source
video as a condition and generate the canvas region through
step-by-step denoising, showing great performance. However, their results are limited in terms of resolution, such
as 256 × 256 (Fan et al. 2023) and 512 × 1024 (Wang
et al. 2024a), or content expansion ratio, for example, from
256 × 85 to 256 × 256 (3×) (Fan et al. 2023) and from
512 × 512 to 512 × 1024 (2×) (Wang et al. 2024a). This
raises an intriguing question: “Is it possible to outpaint a
video to higher resolution with a higher content expansion
ratio?”

This paper explores higher-resolution video outpainting with
extensive content generation. We point out common issues
faced by existing methods when attempting to largely outpaint videos: the generation of low-quality content and limitations imposed by GPU memory. To address these challenges,
we propose a diffusion-based method called Infinite-Canvas.
It builds upon two core designs. First, instead of employing
the common practice of “single-shot” outpainting, we distribute the task across spatial windows and seamlessly merge
them. It allows us to outpaint videos of any size and resolution without being constrained by GPU memory. Second,
the source video and its relative positional relation are injected into the generation process of each window. It makes
the generated spatial layout within each window harmonize
with the source video. Coupling with these two designs enables us to generate higher-resolution outpainting videos with
rich content while keeping spatial and temporal consistency.
Infinite-Canvas excels in large-scale video outpainting, e.g.,
from 512 × 512 to 1152 × 2048 (9×), while producing highquality and aesthetically pleasing results. It achieves the best
quantitative results across various resolution and scale setups.

This question drives us to evaluate the capability of existing methods in tackling this difficult task. However, we
find that they fall short due to limitations in GPU memory. To further explore their potential, we reduce the resolution of the source video through resizing and then resizing it
back after outpainting (see details in Section 4). The results
are depicted in Fig 1. We observe that both M3DDM (Fan
et al. 2023) and MOTIA (Wang et al. 2024a) produce lowquality results, e.g., blurry content and temporal inconsistencies. This motivates us to delve deeper into understanding the reasons behind this. We speculate that there are two
possible factors contributing to this: (i) the reduced resolution after resizing negatively affects the performance, and
(ii) the content expansion ratio is too high to achieve satisfactory results. We conduct experiments with respect to the
variations of these factors, see Fig 3. The results demonstrate that both low resolution and a high content expansion
ratio significantly reduce generation quality. In other words,
achieving high-quality results requires performing outpainting in the original/high resolution with a low content expansion ratio. Based on the analysis above, we propose a
diffusion-based method called Infinite-Canvas for higherresolution video outpainting with extensive content generation. We identify that the GPU memory limitations arises
from the “single-shot” outpainting practice (Fan et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2024a): directly taking the entire video as the input. In contrast, our Infinite-Canvas is designed to distribute
the task across spatial windows. It kills two birds with one
stone. First, it enables us to outpaint any videos to higher
resolution with a high content expansion ratio, without be-

Code — https://github.com/mayuelala/FollowYourCanvas

1

Introduction

Video outpainting aims to expand spatial contents of a video
beyond its original boundaries to fill a designated canvas region. This task has numerous applications, such as enhancing viewing experience by adjusting aspect ratio of videos
to match different users’ smartphones (Wang et al. 2024a).
Recently, diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)
have emerged as the dominant approach for visual generation, demonstrating exceptional visual synthesis ability by
producing appealing results (Rombach et al. 2022). Meanwhile, several diffusion-based video outpainting methods,
such as M3DDM (Fan et al. 2023) and MOTIA (Wang
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2150

