The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cycle3D: High-quality and Consistent Image-to-3D Generation via
Generation-Reconstruction Cycle
Zhenyu Tang1 * , Junwu Zhang 1 * , Xinhua Cheng 1 , Wangbo Yu 1 , Chaoran Feng 1
Yatian Pang1, 2 , Bin Lin 1 , Li Yuan 1 †
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
National University of Singapore
{zhenyutang, junwuzhang, chengxinhua, wangboyu, chaoran.feng, linbin.ece}@stu.pku.edu.cn
yatian pang@u.nus.edu, yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Generation Model ×T

Recent 3D large reconstruction models typically employ a
two-stage process: first generate multi-view images by a
multi-view diffusion model, and then utilize a feed-forward
model to reconstruct images to 3D content. However, multiview diffusion models often produce low-quality and inconsistent images, adversely affecting the quality of the final
3D reconstruction. To address this issue, we propose a unified 3D generation framework called Cycle3D, which cyclically utilizes a 2D diffusion-based generation module and a
feed-forward 3D reconstruction module during the multi-step
diffusion process. Concretely, 2D diffusion model is applied
for generating high-quality texture, and the 3D reconstruction model produces refined results with guaranteed multiview consistency. Moreover, 2D diffusion model can further
control the generated content and inject reference-view information for unseen views, thereby enhancing the diversity
and texture consistency of 3D generation during the denoising process. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior
ability of our method to create 3D content with high-quality
and consistency compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

Generation Model

Cycle
×T
Low-quality & Inconsistency

Higher-quality

Reconstruction Model

Reconstruction Model

More
Consistent

Figure 1: Motivation of our pipeline. Current large-scale
reconstruction models often produce geometric artifacts and
blurry textures due to the limited quality and consistency of
the received images generated by multi-view diffusion models. Our Cycle3D cyclically uses a 2D diffusion-based generation model and reconstruction model during the multistep diffusion process. During denoising, 2D generation
model gradually improves image quality, while the reconstruction model progressively enhances 3D consistency.

Introduction
The presence of high-quality and diverse 3D assets is essential across various fields, such as robotics, gaming, and
architecture. Traditionally, the creation of these assets has
been a labor-intensive manual process, necessitating proficiency with complex computer graphics software. Consequently, the automatic generation of diverse and high-quality
3D content from single-view images has emerged as a crucial objective in 3D computer vision.
With the emergence of large-scale 3D datasets (Deitke
et al. 2023, 2024; Yu et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023), recent
research (Xu et al. 2024a; Wei et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024b; Tang et al. 2024) has focused on large 3D reconstruction models. These models typically combine multi-view diffusion models and sparse-view
reconstruction models to directly predict 3D representations
(Triplane-NeRF (Shue et al. 2023; Chan et al. 2022), and 3D

Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023)), enabling efficient 3D
generation in a feed-forward manner.
However, we have observed that existing methods often
encounter following two issues as shown in Figure 1: (1)
Low quality: Multi-view diffusion models and reconstruction models are trained on limited synthetic 3D datasets, resulting in low-quality generation and poor generalization to
real-world scenarios. (2) Multi-view inconsistency: Multiview diffusion models struggle to generate pixel-level consistent multi-view images, while reconstruction models are
typically trained on 3D consistent ground truth multi-view
images. Consequently, inconsistent multi-view images usually significantly affect reconstruction results, leading to geometric artifacts and blurry textures.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7320

