The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RoDA: Robust Domain Alignment for Cross-domain Retrieval Against Label
Noise
Ziniu Yin 1 , Yanglin Feng 1 , Ming Yan 3 , Xiaomin Song 4 , Dezhong Peng 1,4 , Xu Wang 1,2 *
1

The College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
Tianfu Engineering-oriented Numerical Simulation & Software Innovation Center, Chengdu, China
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
4
Sichuan National Innovation New Vision UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu, China
yinzn1014@163.com, fcyzfyl@163.com, yanmingtop@gmail.com, songxiaomin@uptcsc.com , pengdz@scu.edu.cn,
wangxu.scu@gmail.com
2

Abstract
This paper studies the complex challenge of cross-domain
image retrieval under the condition of noisy labels (NCIR),
a scenario that not only includes the inherent obstacles of
traditional cross-domain image retrieval (CIR) but also requires alleviating the adverse effects of label noise. To address this challenge, this paper introduces a novel Robust Domain Alignment framework (RoDA), specifically designed
for the NCIR task. At the heart of RoDA is the Selective
Division and Adaptive Learning mechanism (SDAL), a key
component crafted to shield the model from overfitting the
noisy labels. SDAL effectively learns discriminative knowledge by dividing the dataset into clean and noisy parts, subsequently rectifying the labels for the latter based on information drawn from the clean one. This process involves
adaptively weighting the relabeled samples and leveraging
both the clean and relabeled data to bootstrap model training. Moreover, to bridge the domain gap further, we introduce
the Accumulative Class Center Alignment (ACCA), a novel
approach that fosters domain alignment through an accumulative domain loss mechanism. Thanks to SDAL and ACCA,
our RoDA demonstrates its superiority in overcoming label
noise and domain discrepancies within the NCIR paradigm.
The effectiveness and robustness of our RoDA framework
are comprehensively validated through extensive experiments
across three multi-domain benchmarks.

Figure 1: Visualization of cross-domain image retrieval with
noisy labels (NCIR), the upper part depicts that the clean
and the noisy knowledge are both transferred between the
query and gallery domain, and the lower part presents some
specific image samples from both domains corresponding
to the upper part. Distinct colors represent various domains,
while unique shapes denote different classes. Besides, dotted
shapes represent samples with noisy labels within each class.

Code — https://github.com/yznovo/RoDA

Introduction

task involves tackling two main challenges: learning feature
representations that are both compact and discriminative
within domains, and achieving alignment across domains
with distinct characteristics and distributions. A considerable volume of research, represented by (Taylor and Stone
2007; Xie et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020a;
Hu, Zhang, and Lee 2023; Yin et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024;
Wang, Du, and Zhu 2024; Iijima and Stathaki 2024) has been
dedicated to solving these challenges. During these research
endeavors, supervised approaches (Taylor and Stone 2007;
Xie et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2024) have
emerged as the prevalent choice due to their superior performance. Nevertheless, it should be noted that supervised
CIR approaches assume the correctness of label annotations,

Given a query image from one domain, cross-domain image retrieval (CIR) is designed to search relevant images
across different domains by leveraging the similarities of visual features. Based on the iterative advancements of image
retrieval techniques and accumulation of massive volume
data from different domains, CIR gradually serves as a fundamental task across a variety of applications, including ecommerce (Huang et al. 2015), social media (Yang, Zhang,
and Xu 2014), medical image analytics (Zheng, Li, and Liu
2023), and beyond (Li et al. 2022b). Accomplishing the CIR
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9535

