The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GNN-Transformer Cooperative Architecture for
Trustworthy Graph Contrastive Learning
Jianqing Liang, Xinkai Wei, Min Chen, Zhiqiang Wang, Jiye Liang*
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of
Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, China
liangjq@sxu.edu.cn, {202322407046,202222409003}@email.sxu.edu.cn, {wangzq,ljy}@sxu.edu.cn

(a) Image

Abstract
Random Cropping

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has become a hot topic
in the field of graph representation learning. In contrast to
traditional supervised learning relying on a large number
of labels, GCL exploits augmentation strategies to generate multiple views and positive/negative pairs, both of which
greatly influence the performance. Unfortunately, commonly
used random augmentations may disturb the underlying semantics of graphs. Moreover, traditional GNNs, a type of
widely employed encoders in GCL, are inevitably confronted
with over-smoothing and over-squashing problems. To address these issues, we propose GNN-Transformer Cooperative Architecture for Trustworthy Graph Contrastive Learning (GTCA), which inherits the advantages of both GNN and
Transformer, incorporating graph topology to obtain comprehensive graph representations. Theoretical analysis verifies
the trustworthiness of the proposed method. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art
empirical performance.

Color Loss

(b) Molecular Graph
Drop Node

Salicylic Acid

3-Hydroxybutyric Acid

Drop Edge

9-Nitroanthracene

Anthracene

Figure 1: Augmentations on image (a) keep the semantic
information, while augmentations on graphs (b) change the
underlying semantic information.
remains the same, which we can still easily recognize. Figure 1 (b) presents that removal of an atom or edge from the
molecules may change their structures, resulting in different
compounds. In order to address this issue, a number of augmentation strategies on graphs spring up. GCA (Zhu et al.
2021) introduces learnable adaptive augmentation strategies
with the structural and attribute characteristics of graphs for
GCL. GCS (Wei et al. 2023) employs gradient-based strategies to differentiate between semantics and environment
within graphs. It perturbs the environment while maintaining the semantics to obtain positive pairs, and perturbs the
semantics while preserving the environment to obtain negative pairs. However, effective augmentation strategies must
achieve a balance between the preservation of graph structural information and the generation of meaningful views
(Suresh et al. 2021). Poorly designed augmentations may result in redundant or irrelevant information generation, leading to inferior performance.
Most of the existing GCL methods exploit GNNs as graph
encoders (Veličković et al. 2019; Hassani and Khasahmadi
2020; Mo et al. 2022; Lee, Lee, and Park 2022; Shen et al.
2023). GNNs iteratively propagate, transform, and aggregate representations from topological neighbors to progressively update node features (Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Zhang et al. 2022a). With
multi-layer stacking, these local features are progressively
integrated to form a comprehensive perception of the en-

Code — https://github.com/a-hou/GTCA

Introduction
Compared with traditional supervised learning, selfsupervised learning eliminates the dependence on labels. As
one of the most representative methods of self-supervised
learning, contrastive learning has been widely applied in the
graph domain, i.e., Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL). GCL
utilizes multiple views and positive/negative pairs for node/graph representations (Zhu et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2020;
Zhu, Sun, and Koniusz 2021; Yin et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2023), the performance of which are influenced by augmentation strategies, graph encoders and loss functions.
Different from computer vision domain where augmented
images obtained with cropping, rotation, and other strategies usually retain the same semantic as the original images
(Shorten and Khoshgoftaar 2019), graph augmentation will
disturb the underlying semantics of graphs, which may affect the performance on downstream tasks (Li et al. 2022).
Figure 1 (a) shows that even after randomly cropping or
changing the color of an image, the underlying semantic still
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18667

