The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explicit and Implicit Examinee-Question Relation Exploiting for Efficient
Computerized Adaptive Testing
Changqian Wang1 , Shangshang Yang2 , Siyu Song1 , Ziwen Wang3 ,
Haiping Ma1,4 * , Xingyi Zhang3 , Bo Jin5,6
1

Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, China
4
Department of Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, China
5
School of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
6
Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang, China
{changqian.wang.dl, yangshang0308, siyusong00, wzw12sir, xyzhanghust}@gmail.com, hpma@ahu.edu.cn,
jinbo@dlut.edu.cn

Introduction

Abstract

Amid the rapid advancement of computer-aided education,
computerized adaptive testing (CAT) has been widely applied in real-world scenarios, such as educational measurement, psychological assessment, and talent recruitment (Wainer et al. 2000; Qin et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024b;
Yu et al. 2024a). CAT typically consists of two components:
the Cognitive Diagnosis Model (CDM) (Ma et al. 2024c,a)
and the question selection algorithm, which alternates until
a termination condition is met. As illustrated in Figure 1,
at time step t, the CDM estimates the examinee’s ability
based on his/her responses on the previous t − 1 steps. Subsequently, the question selection algorithm, guided by the
diagnostic results, selects a suitable question for the examinee at step t (Ma et al. 2024b; Liu et al. 2024).
Question selection approaches, a core component of the
CAT system, have been extensively studied due to their
adaptive and personalized nature. Much research delved into
understanding the examinees-questions (E-Q relation) (Lord
2012; Chang and Ying 1996). By analyzing the response label of a selected question, the diagnostic value contributed
by such a question to the examinee’s ability can be assessed.
Some studies leverage this explicit E-Q relation to establish
prior selection criteria, which are referred to as policy-based.
For instance, MAAT (Bi et al. 2020) and BECAT (Zhuang
et al. 2023) translate the impact of a question on examinee
into model expectation and seek a subset that approximates
the gradient of the complete question bank, respectively.
Such policy-based approaches possess a theoretical foundation and interpretability, which also demonstrate good adaptability to the continuously modified question bank, wherein
new questions are added.
Simultaneously, some studies (Li et al. 2023a; Gilavert
and Freire 2022; Li et al. 2023b) have explored implicit EQ relation embedded in previous examinee-question interactions and utilized these information to train selector for
adaptive question selection and are referred to as learningbased. The representatives of this category involve transforming the CAT problem into a bilevel optimization problem (Ghosh and Lan 2021; Zhuang et al. 2022). In such a

Computerized adaptive testing (CAT) is a crucial task in
computer-aided education, which aims to adaptively select
suitable questions to diagnose examinees’ ability status. Existing CAT approaches enhance selection performance by exploring examinee-question (E-Q) relation. These approaches
either exclusively utilize explicit E-Q relation. For instance,
policy-based approaches determine question selection based
on predefined criteria. While effective in adapting to changes
in question banks, these methods often entail significant computational costs in searching for suitable questions. Conversely, some studies focus solely on implicit E-Q relation.
For example, learning-based approaches train agents to efficiently select questions by learning from large-scale datasets.
However, they may struggle with newly introduced questions. Additionally, most of these existing question selectors
are based on greedy strategies, which potentially overlooks
promising questions. To bridge the above two types of approaches, we propose a novel framework named Relation
Exploiting-based CAT (RECAT) by exploring and exploiting
the implicit and explicit examinee-question relation. Specifically, we first define an examinee true ability-oriented selection objective to select more suitable questions. Then, to
learn the implicit E-Q relation, we design a question selector,
which explores the examinee ability and generates best-fitting
questions for specific examinee ability from two aspects, including generation consistency and knowledge matching. The
former aims to maximize the likelihood estimation of the implicit E-Q relation learning process, while the latter is employed to fit the distribution of real questions. To fully exploit
explicit E-Q relation, we generate a high-quality candidate set
for the given examinee’s ability using implicit E-Q relation,
which streamlines the search process, minimizing selection
latency. We demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
our framework through comprehensive experiments on realworld datasets.

* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12685

