The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HLMEA: Unsupervised Entity Alignment Based on Hybrid Language Models
Xiongnan Jin1 , Zhilin Wang2 , Jinpeng Chen3,4 , Liu Yang5 , Byungkook Oh6 , Seung-won Hwang7 ,
Jianqiang Li1 *
1

National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
2
Alibaba Group
3
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4
Xiangjiang Laboratory
5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
6
Computer Science & Engineering, Konkuk University
7
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
xiongnanjin@szu.edu.cn, wzl446229@alibaba-inc.com, jpchen@bupt.edu.cn, yangliu@csu.edu.cn, bkoh@konkuk.ac.kr,
seungwonh@snu.ac.kr, lijq@szu.edu.cn
Abstract

in various KGs, Apple’s co-founder Steve Jobs might be
identified by diverse relations and names, such as S. Jobs,
Steve Jobs, Jobs, or even appear in multiple languages.
Entity alignment (EA) aims to establish connections between KGs by identifying semantically equivalent entities.
EA has attracted remarkable attention from researchers for
enabling inter-communication and cooperation, i.e., KG fusion. Conventional EA work embeds symbolic KGs into
vector spaces and then measures the similarities via entity
embedding distances under the supervision of human labels (Yang et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022).
Semi-supervised EA methods are designed to reduce the dependency on high-cost human labels based on techniques
like bootstrapping and iterative training (Sun et al. 2018; Xie
et al. 2021). However, the above techniques still suffer from
high-cost human annotation. Unsupervised EA has been
studied to eliminate human intervention. Unimodal unsupervised approaches perform EA based on KG self-contained
information by carefully designed mechanisms such as nonsampling calibration and relative similarity metric (Li and
Song 2022; Liu et al. 2022). Some researchers incorporate
auxiliary data and utilize multimodal pre-trained models to
facilitate the EA accuracy (Liu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2023).
With the emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs)
such as GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023), traditional information technologies face revolutionary change. LLM-based EA is a
promising direction to leverage the power of LLMs to improve EA performance further. However, LLM-based EA
faces two challenges. The first challenge is how to formulate the EA problem to fit LLMs. A straightforward way is
to compose a prompt containing a source entity and all target entities and feed it into an LLM to identify an aligned
target entity. However, an entity typically has hundreds or
thousands of triples, and a KG can have millions of entities. Simply injecting all entity information will result in an
extremely long prompt that may exceed the context length
limit or require an unacceptable long inference time.
LLMs are pre-trained on extensive and varied text data,
which enables them to acquire a broad range of human
knowledge and even surpass human performance in specific NLP tasks, such as summarization. However, when it

Entity alignment (EA) is crucial for integrating knowledge
graphs (KGs) constructed from diverse sources. Conventional
unsupervised EA approaches attempt to eliminate human intervention but often suffer from accuracy limitations. With
the rise of large language models (LLMs), leveraging their
capabilities for EA presents a promising direction. However,
it introduces new challenges: formulating the LLM-based EA
problem and extracting the background knowledge in LLMs
to realize EA without human intervention. This paper proposes HLMEA, a novel hybrid language model-based unsupervised EA method. HLMEA formulates the EA task into
a filtering and single-choice problem and synergistically integrates small language models (SLMs) and LLMs. Specifically, SLMs filter candidate entities based on textual representations generated from KG triples. Then, LLMs refine
this selection to identify the most semantically aligned entities. An iterative self-training mechanism allows SLMs to
distill knowledge from LLM outputs, enhancing the EA ability of hybrid language models in subsequent rounds cooperatively. We also conducted extensive experiments on benchmark datasets to evaluate HLMEA’s performance. The results
demonstrate that HLMEA significantly outperforms unsupervised and even supervised EA baselines, proving its potential
for scalable and effective EA across large KGs. The code and
data are available at https://github.com/xnjin-ai/HLMEA.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) formulate human knowledge using a symbolic graph structure to enable machines to understand the semantics and logic. With the development
of KG modeling and construction technologies, more and
more KGs have been built in various domains to support
KG-based applications such as question answering, reasoning, retrieval, and estimation (Wang et al. 2024b; Li et al.
2024; Agrawal et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024; Liang et al.
2024; Liu, Wu, and Zhang 2024). However, the difficulty of
inter-operation between KGs is ubiquitous due to the heterogeneous nature and incomplete data source. For instance,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11888

