The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning to Prompt with Text Only Supervision for Vision-Language Models
Muhammad Uzair Khattak1 , Muhammad Ferjad Naeem5 ,
Muzammal Naseer2 , Luc Van Gool3 , Federico Tombari4,5
1

2

MBZ University of AI
Computer Science Department and Center of Secure Cyber-Physical Security Systems, Khalifa University
3
INSAIT
4
TU Munich
5
Google
Abstract

Method

Foundational vision-language models like CLIP are emerging
as a promising paradigm in vision due to their excellent generalization. However, adapting these models for downstream
tasks while maintaining their generalization remains challenging. In literature, one branch of methods adapts CLIP by
learning prompts using images. While effective, these methods often rely on image-label data, which is not always practical, and struggle to generalize to new datasets due to overfitting on few-shot source data. Another approach explores
training-free methods by generating class captions from large
language models (LLMs) and performing prompt ensembling, but these methods often produce static, class-specific
prompts that cannot be transferred to new classes and incur additional costs by generating LLM descriptions for each
class separately. In this work, we aim to combine the strengths
of both approaches by learning prompts using only text data
derived from LLMs. As supervised training of prompts in the
image-free setup is non-trivial, we develop a language-only
efficient training approach that enables prompts to distill rich
contextual knowledge from LLM data. Furthermore, by mapping the LLM contextual text data within the learned prompts,
our approach enables zero-shot transfer of prompts to new
classes and datasets, potentially reducing the LLM prompt
engineering cost. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work that learns generalized and transferable prompts for image tasks using only text data. We perform evaluations on 4
benchmarks, where ProText improves over ensembling methods while being competitive with those using labeled images.

Prompt learning
methods

Prompt ensembling
methods (LLM)

Do not require Transfer to
images unseen datasets

CoOp
CoCoOp
MaPLe
ProGrad
TCP

✘
✘
✘
✘
✘

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

DCLIP
WaffleCLIP-Concept
CuPL

✓
✓
✓

✘
✘
✘

ProText (Ours)

✓

✓

Table 1: Existing methods improve CLIP’s generalization
by learning prompts with image supervision or using nontransferable prompt ensembling with LLM knowledge. In
contrast, our approach aims to learn prompts with text-only
data which are transferable to new datasets and classes.
allows CLIP to encode open-vocabulary concepts and generalize to zero-shot tasks such as image recognition (Kim
et al. 2022), object detection (Feng et al. 2022), and image
segmentation (Lüddecke and Ecker 2022).
CLIP consists of two encoders to encode image and
text inputs respectively. For zero-shot classification, a handcrafted prompt such as ‘a photo of a CLS’ is used as the
text input. Text features of classes are compared with visual
feature and class with highest similarity is assigned as predicted label. Improving the quality of text templates such
as adding attributes (An et al. 2023), or class-specific details (Pratt et al. 2023; Jin et al. 2021) has shown to improve CLIP performance. However, designing high-quality
prompts (also known as textual-prompt enhancement) that
can best describe test image remains a key challenge, as image content is not known in advance.
In literature, numerous techniques have been proposed to
adapt CLIP for recognition tasks. One branch of methods
(Zhou et al. 2022a,b; Chen et al. 2022; Huang, Chu, and Wei
2022; Shu et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2022) treat text prompts as
learnable vectors and optimize them using task-specific objectives such as cross-entropy. As prompts are learned in the
embedding space, this allows them to be used with classes
and datasets beyond those on which they were trained on.
While effective over the baseline CLIP, most of these methods require annotated image labels to optimize the prompts
which is often impractical, especially in real-world scenarios
such as medical imaging, remote sensing, security, surveil-

Code — https://github.com/muzairkhattak/ProText

Introduction
Foundational Vision-Language models (Radford et al. 2021;
Jia et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022; Lai et al. 2023), which are
large DNNs pre-trained on web-scale data have started to
become increasingly popular in the vision community due
to their wide scale applicability and generalization abilities.
Among these, Vision-Language models (VLMs) such as
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) stand out as the latest highlights
which leverage contrastive pre-training on massive imagetext pairs from the internet. During pre-training, CLIP learns
to align image-text samples in a shared feature space. This
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4230

