The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Counterfactual Online Learning for Open-Loop Monte-Carlo Planning
Thomy Phan1 , Shao-Hung Chan1 , Sven Koenig2
1

University of Southern California
2
University of California, Irvine
{thomy.phan,shaohung}@usc.edu, sven.koenig@uci.edu

Abstract
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a popular approach to
online planning under uncertainty. While MCTS uses statistical sampling via multi-armed bandits to avoid exhaustive search in complex domains, common closed-loop approaches typically construct enormous search trees to consider a large number of potential observations and actions.
On the other hand, open-loop approaches offer better memory efficiency by ignoring observations but are generally not
competitive with closed-loop MCTS in terms of performance
– even with commonly integrated human knowledge. In this
paper, we propose Counterfactual Open-loop Reasoning with
Ad hoc Learning (CORAL) for open-loop MCTS, using a
causal multi-armed bandit approach with unobserved confounders (MABUC). CORAL consists of two online learning
phases that are conducted during the open-loop search. In the
first phase, observational values are learned based on preferred actions. In the second phase, counterfactual values are
learned with MABUCs to make a decision via an intent policy
obtained from the observational values. We evaluate CORAL
in four POMDP benchmark scenarios and compare it with
closed-loop and open-loop alternatives. In contrast to standard open-loop MCTS, CORAL achieves competitive performance compared with closed-loop algorithms while constructing significantly smaller search trees.

(a) Observational

(c) Counterfactual

Figure 1: Different decision-making models and expected
returns with unobserved confounder U , decision A (i.e., an
action), and payoff G (i.e., the return) based on (Pearl 2010).
In each model, blue nodes denote observable variables.
Dashed lines illustrate the influence of unobserved variables,
and solid lines the influence of the agent. (a) Natural or observational decision-making through an intent a, solely influenced by U . (b) Classic or interventional decision-making
via policy π that ignores the existence of U . (c) Counterfactual decision-making that conditions on the intent of (a).
constructs sparse trees over actions and observations and
represents the state-of-the-art for efficient planning in large
POMDPs (Silver and Veness 2010; Somani et al. 2013; Bai
et al. 2014). However, the constructed closed-loop trees can
still become arbitrarily large for highly complex domains,
therefore requiring considerable memory resources (Phan
et al. 2019a; Powley, Cowling, and Whitehouse 2017).
Open-loop MCTS offers better memory efficiency by ignoring observations, resulting in significantly smaller search
trees (Lecarpentier et al. 2018; Perez Liebana et al. 2015;
Phan et al. 2019a). However, open-loop MCTS is typically
not competitive with closed-loop MCTS in terms of performance – even with commonly integrated human knowledge
(Silver and Veness 2010). Due to the lack of context information, open-loop MCTS only converges to decisions that
are suitable “on average” for unobserved situations (Weinstein and Littman 2012). Considering the existence of unknown structural properties of the underlying problem, i.e.,
unobserved confounders, may be helpful to improve the performance of memory-efficient open-loop planning, though
(Bareinboim, Forney, and Pearl 2015).
In this paper, we propose Counterfactual Open-loop

Code — github.com/thomyphan/counterfactual-planning

1

(b) Interventional

Introduction

Many real-world problems can be modeled as Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP), where the
true state is unknown to the agent due to limited and noisy
sensors, to model planning and reinforcement learning problems (Ross et al. 2008). However, solving POMDPs exactly
is intractable for domains with enormous state spaces and
long planning horizons due to the curse of dimensionality
(Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998) and the curse of
history, respectively (Pineau, Gordon, and Thrun 2006).
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a popular approach
to online planning in POMDPs (Świechowski et al. 2023).
MCTS breaks both curses with statistical sampling via
multi-armed bandits and simulation. Closed-loop MCTS
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26651

