The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

V2Xum-LLM: Cross-Modal Video Summarization with Temporal Prompt
Instruction Tuning
Hang Hua* , Yunlong Tang* , Chenliang Xu, Jiebo Luo
University of Rochester
{hhua2, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, {yunlong.tang, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

Abstract
Video summarization aims to create short, accurate, and cohesive summaries of longer videos. Despite the existence of various video summarization datasets, a notable limitation is their
limited amount of source videos, which hampers the effective
training of advanced large vision-language models (VLMs).
Additionally, most existing datasets are created for video-tovideo summarization, overlooking the contemporary need for
multimodal video content summarization. Recent efforts have
been made to expand from unimodal to multimodal video summarization, categorizing the task into three sub-tasks based on
the summary’s modality: video-to-video (V2V), video-to-text
(V2T), and a combination of video and text summarization
(V2VT). However, the textual summaries in previous multimodal datasets are inadequate. To address these issues, we
introduce Instruct-V2Xum, a cross-modal video summarization dataset featuring 30,000 diverse videos sourced from
YouTube, with lengths ranging from 40 to 940 seconds and an
average summarization ratio of 16.39%. Each video summary
in Instruct-V2Xum is paired with a textual summary that references specific frame indexes, facilitating the generation of
aligned video and textual summaries. In addition, we propose
a new video summarization framework named V2Xum-LLM.
V2Xum-LLM, specifically V2Xum-LLaMA in this study, is
the first framework that unifies different video summarization
tasks into one large language model’s (LLM) text decoder and
achieves task-controllable video summarization with temporal
prompts and task instructions. Experiments show that V2XumLLaMA outperforms strong baseline models on multiple video
summarization tasks. Furthermore, we propose an enhanced
evaluation metric for V2V and V2VT summarization tasks.

Figure 1: Illustration of cross-modal video summarization.

long video. This process entails selecting the most significant
information from a video and condensing it into a shorter
form, while maintaining the essence of the original content.
Beyond extensive research in V2V summarization, there are
a few recent explorations of V2T and V2VT summarization.
Most notably, VideoXum (Lin et al. 2023a) seeks to broaden
the modality of video summaries to include text summaries.
It utilizes the dense captions from ActivityNetCap (Krishna
et al. 2017) videos as text summaries and annotates the corresponding video segments as summaries. Other datasets
for video summarization include TVSum (Song et al. 2015),
SumMe (Gygli et al. 2014), QFVS (Sharghi et al. 2017),
MED Summaries (Potapov et al. 2014), and so on. While
it is expected that powerful LLMs can help improve video
summarization, the insufficient number of source videos may
not be able to support the robust fine-tuning of LLMs to perform this task since finetuning a large model with a limited
number of training examples is prone to overfitting (Hua et al.
2021, 2023). In addition, VideoXum data cannot be considered true summaries due to redundant information in ActivityNetCap’s dense captions. More recently, Shot2Story20K
(Han et al. 2023) collects 20k video-text data that enables

Introduction
The interest in sharing life experiences has surged in recent
years, making video the most informative and diverse visual
medium on social media platforms. This trend has led to
significant demands for a variety of video and language understanding tasks, such as video captioning, video question
answering (Yu et al. 2019; Xiao et al. 2021), moment retrieval
(Lei et al. 2021), and video summarization (Gygli et al. 2014;
Song et al. 2015). Video summarization (V2V) provides an
efficient way for humans to obtain key information from a
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3599

