The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rectified Lagrangian for Out-of-Distribution Detection
in Modern Hopfield Networks
Ryo Moriai* 1 , Nakamasa Inoue* 1 , Masayuki Tanaka1 , Rei Kawakami1 ,
Satoshi Ikehata1, 3 , Ikuro Sato1,2
1

Institute of Science Tokyo, Japan
Denso IT Laboratory, Inc. Japan
3
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
moriai.ryo@d-itlab.titech.ac.jp, inoue@comp.isct.ac.jp
2

Abstract
Modern Hopfield networks (MHNs) have recently gained
significant attention in the field of artificial intelligence because they can store and retrieve a large set of patterns with
an exponentially large memory capacity. A MHN is generally a dynamical system defined with Lagrangians of memory and feature neurons, where memories associated with indistribution (ID) samples are represented by attractors in the
feature space. One major problem in existing MHNs lies in
managing out-of-distribution (OOD) samples because it was
originally assumed that all samples are ID samples. To address this, we propose the rectified Lagrangian (RegLag), a
new Lagrangian for memory neurons that explicitly incorporates an attractor for OOD samples in the dynamical system
of MHNs. RecLag creates a trivial point attractor for any interaction matrix, enabling OOD detection by identifying samples that fall into this attractor as OOD. The interaction matrix is optimized so that the probability densities can be estimated to identify ID/OOD. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of RecLag-based MHNs compared to energy-based OOD detection methods, including those using state-of-the-art Hopfield energies, across nine image datasets.

1

Introduction

Associative memory models have been proposed to model
memory retrieval in the brain through fixed-point search
in an artificial neural network. Hopfield networks (Hopfield 1982, 1984) are classic examples, based on the idea
of using recurrently connected neurons to store and retrieve memory patterns. Although these models are theoretically sound, they suffer limited memory capacity, as the
number of distinct memory patterns is at most proportional
to the dimension of the feature space. Recently, numerous
studies have explored models with significantly increased
memory capacity, the so-called modern Hopfield networks
(MHNs) (Krotov and Hopfield 2016; Demircigil et al. 2017;
Krotov and Hopfield 2018; Barra, Beccaria, and Fachechi
2018; Agliari and De Marzo 2020). Some of them are known
to have an exponentially large memory capacity with respect
to the feature dimension (Demircigil et al. 2017).
From a theoretical perspective, Krotov and Hopfield
(2021) introduced a dynamical system that represents asso-

Figure 1: Visualization of energy landscapes. Existing methods identify samples with high Hopfield energy as OOD,
though such samples fall into the attractors associated with
ID samples. In contrast, our RecLag-based MHNs possess a
dedicated attractor that specifically captures OOD samples.
ciative memory in a continuous time space based on twobody interactions between neurons. In their system, two Lagrangian functions, one for memory neurons and one for feature neurons, determine the model dynamics. When certain
pairs of Lagrangian functions are chosen, the system is reduced to classical Hopfield networks (Hopfield 1982), dense
associative memory (Krotov and Hopfield 2016; Demircigil
et al. 2017), or the MHNs described in Ramsauer et al.
(2021), indicating that new Lagrangian function designs
could lead to new MHNs.
While these studies have expanded the potential of MHNs

* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19554

