The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Active Symbolic Discovery of Ordinary Differential Equations
via Phase Portrait Sketching
Nan Jiang1 , Md Nasim2 , Yexiang Xue1
1
2

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, USA
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, USA
{jiang631, yexiang}@purdue.edu, md.nasim@cornell.edu

Abstract

performance is often heavily influenced by the quality of the
collected data. As illustrated in Figure 1, we find that the
best-discovered ODEs from the most recent baseline, that is
ODEFormer (d’Ascoli et al. 2024), may fit some test trajectories well, but fit other test trajectories poorly. This observation highlights the need for new methods that actively query
informative trajectory data to improve ODE discovery.
Suppose trajectory data can be obtained from a data oracle by specifying the initial conditions. To minimize excessively querying the oracle, a key challenge emerges: given a
set of candidate ODEs predicted by a learning method, how
can initial conditions within the variable intervals be strategically selected to obtain informative data?
Previous work in the active learning literature typically
maintains a large set of data, evaluates their informativeness,
and then queries the most informative data points (Golovin,
Krause, and Ray 2010; Medina and White 2023). However, the chaotic nature of dynamical systems complicates
the direct application of such methods. The Butterfly effect
states that small variations in initial conditions can lead to
vastly different outcomes. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 2(c), selecting initial conditions near (3, 0) for ϕ1 can
result in trajectories that diverge in opposite directions. Effectively addressing this variability requires densely sampling initial conditions to thoroughly explore the space. Existing active learning-based approaches will be computationally prohibitive and demand significant memory resources,
particularly in high-dimensional dynamical systems.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach
to data querying. We consider selecting a batch of closeneighbor initial conditions instead of individual initial conditions. This process begins by sketching the dynamics in
smaller regions, identifying an informative region in the
phase space, and then sampling a batch of initial conditions
from this region. Figure 2(c) illustrates this idea using phase
portraits for three candidate ODEs. Region u2 is chosen because the trajectories generated by the candidate ODEs exhibit greater divergence in this region than region u1 . Section 3 provides detailed region selection criteria.
Thus, we introduce Active Symbolic Discovery of Ordinary Differential Equations via Phase Portrait Sketching
(A PPS), which consists of two key components: (1) a deep
sequential decoder, which guides the search for candidate
ODEs by sampling from the defined grammar rules. (2) a

The symbolic discovery of Ordinary Differential Equations
(ODEs) from trajectory data plays a pivotal role in AI-driven
scientific discovery. Existing symbolic methods predominantly rely on fixed, pre-collected training datasets, which
often result in suboptimal performance, as demonstrated in
our case study in Figure 1. Drawing inspiration from active learning, we investigate strategies to query informative
trajectory data that can enhance the evaluation of predicted
ODEs. However, the butterfly effect in dynamical systems reveals that small variations in initial conditions can lead to
drastically different trajectories, necessitating the storage of
vast quantities of trajectory data using conventional active
learning. To address this, we introduce Active Symbolic Discovery of Ordinary Differential Equations via Phase Portrait
Sketching (A PPS). Instead of directly selecting individual initial conditions, our A PPS first identifies an informative region
within the phase space and then samples a batch of initial
conditions from this region. Compared to traditional active
learning methods, A PPS mitigates the gap of maintaining a
large amount of data. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
A PPS consistently discovers more accurate ODE expressions
than baseline methods using passively collected datasets.

Code — https://github.com/jiangnanhugo/APPS-ODE
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.01416

1

Introduction

Uncovering the governing principles of physical systems
from experimental data is a crucial task in AI-driven scientific discovery (Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Zhang and Lin
2018; Wu and Tegmark 2019). Recent advancements have
introduced various methods for uncovering knowledge of
dynamical systems in symbolic Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) form, leveraging techniques such as genetic
programming (He et al. 2022), sparse regression (Brunton,
Proctor, and Kutz 2016; Fasel et al. 2022), Monte Carlo
tree search (Sun et al. 2023), pretrained Transformers (Qian,
Kacprzyk, and van der Schaar 2022), and deep reinforcement learning (Jiang, Nasim, and Xue 2024).
State-of-the-art approaches discover the symbolic ODEs
using a fixed, pre-collected training dataset. However, their
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17626

