The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Local Causal Discovery Without Causal Sufficiency
Zhaolong Ling1 , Jiale Yu1 , Yiwen Zhang1 * , Debo Cheng2 , Peng Zhou1 ,
Xingyu Wu3 , Bingbing Jiang4 , Kui Yu5
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University
2
UniSA STEM, University of South Australia
3
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Hangzhou Normal University
5
School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Hefei University of Technology
zlling@ahu.edu.cn, e23201057@stu.ahu.edu.cn, zhangyiwen@ahu.edu.cn, xingy.wu@polyu.edu.hk,
debo.cheng@unisa.edu.au, jiangbb@hznu.edu.cn, yukui@hfut.edu.cn
Abstract

we are focused only on the local causal relationships of a
specific variable, it is unnecessary to spend extensive time
and resources learning a global causal relationships (Statnikov et al. 2015), as learning a global causal relationships
is a NP-complete problem (Chickering 1996).

Local causal discovery is crucial for revealing the causal relationships between specific variables from data. Traditional
local causal discovery algorithms are designed under the assumption of causal sufficiency, which states that there are no
latent common causes for two or more of the observed variables in data. However, the assumption of causal sufficiency
is often violated in practice. To address this issue, we first propose the local Maximal Ancestral Graph (MAG), referred to
as LocalMAG, to describe the local causal relationships of the
target variable in the MAG. Then, we propose a local causal
discovery algorithm without the assumption of causal sufficiency, called LatentLCD, to learn the LocalMAG. Specifically, LatentLCD first uses the traditional parents and children discovery algorithm to identify the local causal skeleton that includes latent variables and verifies it theoretically.
It then identifies bidirectional edges by determining whether
both the target variable and its adjacent variables are colliders, thereby identifying latent variables in the local structure of the target variable. Extensive experiments on synthetic
datasets validate that the proposed LatentLCD algorithm significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

The traditional local causal discovery algorithms first
discover the edges connected to target, then identify Vstructures and apply Meek rules (Meek 1995) to find the
parents and children (PC) of target (Gao and Ji 2015). For
example, the PCD-by-PCD algorithm (PCD means parents,
children, and descendants) (Yin et al. 2008) to identify
V-structures in the PC set and orients edges using Meek
rules. MB-by-MB (Wang et al. 2014), which sequentially
identifies the Markov Blanket (MB) of adjacent variables
of the target, then orienting the connected edges. Causal
Markov Blanket (CMB) (Gao and Ji 2015) learns the local causal relationships of the target variable based on MB
discovery. The Partial BN Structure Learning (PSL) algorithm (Ling et al. 2022) recursively finds Type-C and TypeNC V-structures until the local structure is determined. However, these local causal discovery algorithms are based on
the assumption of causal sufficiency and do not consider
learning the local causal relationships when the causal sufficiency is violated. MMB-by-MMB (MMB means MAG
MB) (Xie et al. 2024) finds the PC of target even when
the causal sufficiency is not satisfy. Sometimes, it discovers
larger local structures, which leads to higher time costs.

Introduction
Causal discovery plays an irreplaceable role across various fields, including biology, epidemiology, medicine, economics, and computer science (Pearl 2018; Schölkopf et al.
2021; Kuang et al. 2017). Thus, recovering causal relationships from data is one of the ultimate goals in the empirical sciences (Cai, Zhang, and Hao 2013). Learning a causal
model that describes the causal relationships among variables is represented by a directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Yu,
Liu, and Li 2019). The existing causal discovery algorithms learn the causal relationships of a DAG from datasets
and can be divided into two methods: the global discovery
method, which aims to learn the entire causal relationships
of the DAG (Gao, Fadnis, and Campbell 2017), and the local discovery method, which aims to uncover the causal relationships around a specific variable (Wang et al. 2023). If

The assumption of causal sufficiency implies that there
are no unobserved common causes in the data generation
process (Margaritis and Thrun 1999). A common cause is
defined as a direct cause that influences two or more observed variables (Cheng et al. 2022a). If this common cause
is not present in the observed dataset, it is referred to as
a latent common cause or latent variable (Yu et al. 2018).
When the data relaxes the assumption of causal sufficiency,
i.e., the existence of latent variables, the traditional local
causal discovery algorithms mistakenly identify the direct
effects of the latent variables as direct effects or direct causes
of the specific variable. For example, in Figure 1, when
“Genotype” is not observed, this unobserved variable represents the latent common cause of “Attention Disorder” and

* Corresponding author: Yiwen Zhang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18737

