The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Synthetic Tabular Data Generation for Imbalanced Classification: The Surprising
Effectiveness of an Overlap Class
Annie D’souza* , Swetha M* , Sunita Sarawagi
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
20d070028@iitb.ac.in, 23m0756@iitb.ac.in, sunita@iitb.ac.in

Abstract

many different techniques have been proposed ranging from
cost-sensitive loss functions (Zhou and Liu 2005), oversampling minority instances and/or under-sampling majority instances (Li et al. 2021), and augmentation with synthetic instances (Johnson and Khoshgoftaar 2019). In this paper, we
focus on data augmentation-based techniques since these are
particularly effective (Chawla et al. 2002). One popular classical data augmentation method, SMOTE, generates new minority instances using a convex combination of existing minority instances. However, recent deep data generators yield
even higher accuracy due to the enhanced quality of generated examples.
Our focus in this paper is tabular data, and recently
many high-quality generators have been proposed for generating tabular data ranging from GAN-based models like
CTabGAN (Zhao et al. 2021) to diffusion-based models
like TabSyn (Zhang et al. 2024) and ForestFlow (JolicoeurMartineau, Fatras, and Kachman 2024) Most of these have
been evaluated after training on balanced datasets, where
their generated data have been shown to be highly effective
in training classifiers that match the accuracy of real data.
We are not aware of any study that evaluates them in highly
imbalanced input data.
In this paper, we show that default training of generative
models yields significantly worse quality minority instances
than majority instances as measured by the label provided
by an Oracle Bayesian model. Simple fixes to the problem
by over and under-sampling initial real data distributions are
not effective.
We present a method called ORD1 that employs three
key ideas to improve the training of imbalanced classifiers
on tabular data using synthetic data generators: (1) We preprocess the available real data by identifying a small subset of the majority instances called the overlap set that lies
on the boundary of majority and minority examples. (2) We
modify the generator to be class conditional and generate
three-way labeled instances corresponding to minority, overlapping majority, and clear majority. (3) We train the final
classifier with a careful mix of real and synthetically generated instances comprising of balanced sample of synthetic
data generated consisting of only the minority and clear majority classes, and real minority.

Handling imbalance in class distribution when building a
classifier over tabular data has been a problem of longstanding interest. One popular approach is augmenting the
training dataset with synthetically generated data. While classical augmentation techniques were limited to linear interpolation of existing minority class examples, recently higher capacity deep generative models are providing greater promise.
However, handling of imbalance in class distribution when
building a deep generative model is also a challenging problem, that has not been studied as extensively as imbalanced
classifier model training. We show that state-of-the-art deep
generative models yield significantly lower-quality minority
examples than majority examples. We propose a novel technique of converting the binary class labels to ternary class
labels by introducing a class for the region where minority and majority distributions overlap. We show that just this
pre-processing of the training set, significantly improves the
quality of data generated spanning several state-of-the-art diffusion and GAN-based models. While training the classifier
using synthetic data, we remove the overlap class from the
training data and justify the reasons behind the enhanced accuracy. We perform extensive experiments on four real-life
datasets, five different classifiers, and five generative models
demonstrating that our method enhances not only the synthesizer performance of state-of-the-art models but also the
classifier performance.

Code — https://github.com/Annie2603/ORD

1

Introduction

The problem of imbalance in class distributions is encountered in several fields, including fraud detection in the banking sector, disease diagnosis in the medical sector, and
anomaly detection in finance, cybersecurity, and manufacturing industries. Imbalanced data refers to the distribution
of classes or categories being highly skewed or disproportionate in a dataset, i.e., one class or category is significantly
more prevalent than the others. The presence of imbalance
introduces several challenges in training classification models as they are unable to learn the distribution of the rare
class. This has been a problem of long-standing interest and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

16127

for Overlapped Region Detection

