The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scalable Federated One-Step Multi-View Clustering with Tensorized
Regularization
Wei Feng1 , Danting Liu1 , Qianqian Wang2 * , Wenqi Liang3 , Zheng Yan4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University
3
University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University
weifeng.ft@xjtu.edu.cn, 2196123604@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,liangwenqi0123@gmail.com,
qqwang@xidian.edu.cn,zyan@xidian.edu.cn
Abstract

Likas 2012), and non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)
based techniques (Liu et al. 2013), still receives considerable attention due to their simplicity and interoperability.
In real-world applications, multi-view data may originate from various entities that prefer data confidentiality
due to privacy concerns (Chen et al. 2023). This data isolation and privacy requirement present challenges for collaborative training of MVC models in distributed environments. Federated learning, encompassing horizontal federated learning (Hammoud et al. 2022) and vertical federated
learning (Liu et al. 2024), becomes an effective solution as
a distributed learning paradigm. However, neither approach
is directly applicable to multi-view data, because they generally neglect the requirement in MVC to utilize the consistent
and complementary information of multiple views. In particular, vertical federated learning methods (Zhu et al. 2023;
Huang et al. 2022a) tend to focus more on dataset construction and communication efficiency, while giving insufficient
attention to the extraction of complementary features.
The potential of federated learning in distributed environments has inspired the development of federated multi-view
clustering (FMVC)(Huang et al. 2022b). In contrast to traditional federated learning, FMVC places greater emphasis on the extraction and fusion of consistent and complementary features. Huang et al.(2022b) introduced an efficient FMVC framework based on non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), which directly applies NMF to raw data
and hence may encounter efficiency issues when processing high-dimensional data; Hu et al.(2023) proposed a federated multi-view fuzzy K-means method; Feng et al. developed a centerless NMF-based FMVC approach(Feng et al.
2024b). Nonetheless, these methods typically conduct feature extraction and clustering as separate processes and necessitate post-processing techniques like K-means to obtain
clustering labels. This separation may produce redundancy
in features and negatively impact clustering performance.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel framework termed Scalable Federated One-Step Multi-View
Clustering with Tensor Regularization (SFOMVC-TR). Our
method leverages anchor graphs instead of raw data for federated multi-view clustering (FMVC), significantly reducing
computational complexity and enhancing model scalability.
SFOMVC-TR enables each client to perform one-step clus-

Multi-view clustering (MVC) methods have garnered considerable attention within centralized data frameworks. However, real-world multi-view data are often collected and stored
by different organizations, complicating the practical deployment of MVC and motivating the emergence of federated
multi-view clustering (FMVC). Existing FMVC approaches
typically necessitate post-processing to derive clustering labels and confront challenges in effectively exploring the complementary and consistent information across multi-view data
residing in different entities. To address these limitations, we
propose a novel framework termed Scalable Federated OneStep Multi-View Clustering with Tensorized Regularization
(SFOMVC-TR). This framework facilitates one-step clustering at each client and employs tensor learning to capture
consistent and complementary information through a centralized server. Additionally, it adopts anchor graphs to enhance
clustering efficiency and scalability in high-dimensional data.
By incorporating a Lp,q sparse regularization on the projection matrix, SFOMVC-TR enables the direct projection of
anchors into clustering assignments to mitigate redundancy.
A federated optimization framework is developed to support
collaborative and privacy-preserving training under the coordination of the server. Extensive experiments on multiple
datasets validate the privacy and effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
Multi-view data offers a comprehensive description by providing insights from various perspectives. For instance, multiple cameras capturing the same scene from different angles can generate diverse viewpoints, thereby enhancing the
overall monitoring and analysis of events. Considering the
substantial costs of complex multi-view data label acquisition, multi-view clustering (MVC) has emerged as a popular approach for multi-view data processing. Current MVC
methods can be categorized into traditional MVC and deep
MVC approaches (Xu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2023), both
of which have demonstrated impressive performance. Notably, traditional MVC methods, including multi-view subspace clustering (Cai et al. 2023), multi-view graph clustering (Yu et al. 2024), multi-kernel learning (Tzortzis and
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16586

