The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

C2P-CLIP: Injecting Category Common Prompt in CLIP to Enhance
Generalization in Deepfake Detection
Chuangchuang Tan* 1,2 , Renshuai Tao* 1,2 , Huan Liu1,2 , Guanghua Gu4,5 , Baoyuan Wu6 ,
Yao Zhao1,2,3† , Yunchao Wei1,2,3
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Visual Intellgence +X International Cooperation Joint Laboratory of MOE
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yanshan University
5
Hebei Key Laboratory of Information Transmission and Signal Processing
6
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
tanchuangchuang@bjtu.edu.cn, yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
image
encoder
Image

text
decoder

Detection
Caption word freq.

concepts
of real
concepts
of fake

(a) Analyzing CLIP features in deepfake detection

Real Common Prompt
Fake Common Prompt

+

Text
AAAA
AAAA

Text Encoder

Real
Image
Image
Real
Image

Image Encoder

Categories Concept
(b) Common Prompt CLIP

Contrastive
Learning

This work focuses on AIGC detection to develop universal
detectors capable of identifying various types of forgery images. Recent studies have found large pre-trained models,
such as CLIP, are effective for generalizable deepfake detection along with linear classifiers. However, two critical issues
remain unresolved: 1) understanding why CLIP features are
effective on deepfake detection through a linear classifier; and
2) exploring the detection potential of CLIP. In this study, we
delve into the underlying mechanisms of CLIP’s detection
capabilities by decoding its detection features into text and
performing word frequency analysis. Our finding indicates
that CLIP detects deepfakes by recognizing similar concepts.
Building on this insight, we introduce Category Common
Prompt CLIP, called C2P-CLIP, which integrates the category common prompt into the text encoder to inject categoryrelated concepts into the image encoder, thereby enhancing
detection performance. Our method achieves a 12.4% improvement in detection accuracy compared to the original
CLIP.

map

Lora

Figure 1: Category Common Prompt CLIP. (a) To investigate the mechanism by which CLIP detects deepfakes, we
decode the detection feature into text. Here, the detection
features refer to the image features transformed by the linear
classifier parameters. Our analysis of these texts reveals that
the detection capability arises from the matching of similar
concepts. (b) Building on this insight, we propose a method
to enhance the generalization capability of image encoders
by introducing a category common prompt. This approach
injects manually specified category concepts into the image
encoder, aiming to improve its detection performance.

Introduction
With the development of various image generation techniques, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Karras et al. 2018, 2019), diffusion
models (Ho et al. 2020; Rombach et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2023; Yin et al. 2023), etc., distinguishing fake images from
real ones has become increasingly challenging for the human eye. As the threshold for image forgery decreases, its
misuse will have negative impacts on aspects like the economy and politics. The development of universal systems for
detecting deepfake has become imperative.
Recently, several forgery detection methods (Li et al.
2021; Tao et al. 2024) have been developed to identify
deepfake images, with a particular focus on detecting face
forgery (Yan et al. 2023, 2024). Despite these advancements, existing methods often struggle with unseen deepfake

sources, leading to inadequate generalization performance.
To address this issue, various approaches (Tan et al. 2023;
Ojha et al. 2023; Tan et al. 2024c) have been proposed to enhance generalization ability. Some studies (Tan et al. 2023,
2024c) focus on developing artifact representations that capture low-level forged traces, such as frequency information,
gradients, and neighborhood pixel relationships. Other approaches (Qian et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2024; Tan et al. 2024b)
aim to design more effective detectors to improve overall
detection performance.
Recently, large pre-trained models like CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) have been widely used in various computer vision tasks (Huang et al. 2023; Jiao et al. 2023; Hui et al.
2024). Several studies have extended CLIP’s capabilities to-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7184

