The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Rank-One Tensor Functional Factorization for
Multi-Dimensional Data Recovery
Yanyi Li1 * , Xi Zhang1 * , Yisi Luo1† , Deyu Meng1,2,3
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macao, China
yyl0605@foxmail.com, xi.zhang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yisiluo1221@foxmail.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Many real-world data are inherently multi-dimensional, e.g.,
color images, videos, and hyperspectral images. How to effectively and compactly represent these multi-dimensional
data within a unified framework is an important pursuit. Previous methods focus on tensor factorizations, convolutional
networks, or diffusion models for multi-dimensional data representation, which may not fully utilize inherent data structures and may lead to redundant parameters. In this work, we
propose a Deep Rank-One Tensor Functional Factorization
(DRO-TFF), which internally utilizes more comprehensive
data priors facilitated by much fewer parameters. Concretely,
our DRO-TFF consists of three organically integrated blocks:
compact rank-one factorizations in the spatial domain, a deep
transform to capture underlying low-dimensional structures,
and smooth factors parameterized by implicit neural representations. Through a series of theoretical analysis, we show
the rich data priors encoded in the DRO-TFF structure, e.g.,
Lipschitz smoothness and low-rankness. Extensive experiments on multi-dimensional data recovery problems, such as
image and video inpainting, image denoising, and hyperspectral mixed noise removal, showcase the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

1

Figure 1: The average PSNR and number of parameters for
hyperspectral image denoising across nine tests (see Table 2
for detailed results). The proposed DRO-TFF achieves better
PSNR with fewer parameters.

(Wang et al. 2024b), and diffusion model-based methods
(Özdenizci and Legenstein 2023), as introduced next.
For tensor decomposition-based methods, the most classical techniques are the CP decomposition and Tucker decomposition, which provide foundational approaches for representing multi-dimensional data (Kolda and Bader 2009). Another classical method is the tensor singular value decomposition (T-SVD) (Kilmer and Martin 2011), which emerges as
a significant advancement that offers more flexible topologies for decomposing tensors. Some current methods have
attempted to facilitate classical tensor decompositions with
more advanced hierarchical and multi-scale structures. For
example, the tensor network decompositions such as tensor
train (TT) (Oseledets 2011), tensor ring (TR) (Yuan et al.
2019a), and fully connected tensor network (FCTN) (Zheng
et al. 2021) decompositions are shown to be feasible in this
field of multi-dimensional data representation. Deep neural networks have also been widely considered to improve
tensor decompositions. For instance, Wang et al. (Wang
et al. 2021, 2024a) utilize coupled transforms and convolutional neural networks to improve the performance of TSVD. Luo et al. (Luo et al. 2024) introduce coordinate-based
neural network in the Tucker decomposition to improve the
flexibility of classical tensor decompositions. These tensor

Introduction

How to efficiently represent real-world multi-dimensional
data, e.g., color images (Bengua et al. 2017; Liu et al.
2023), hyperspectral images (HSIs) (Hong et al. 2021),
and videos (Hu et al. 2017), is receiving much attention
in the AI community due to the wealthy information contained in multi-dimensional data structures and the promising applicability of these representation methods in lowlevel and high-level downstream tasks, e.g., inpainting (Liu
et al. 2013), denoising (Xie et al. 2016), super-resolution
(Kawulok et al. 2020), classification (Cheng et al. 2024), and
detection (Guo et al. 2023). Within the fast developments
of multi-dimensional data representation methods, current
methodologies can be rationally categorized into three types:
tensor decomposition-based methods (Vervliet, Debals, and
De Lathauwer 2019), convolutional network-based methods
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18539

