The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging Constraint Violation Signals For Action-Constrained
Reinforcement Learning
Janaka Chathuranga Brahmanage, Jiajing Ling, Akshat Kumar
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University.
{janakat.2022, jjling.2018}@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, akshatkumar@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
In many RL applications, ensuring an agent’s actions adhere
to constraints is crucial for safety. Most previous methods in
Action-Constrained Reinforcement Learning (ACRL) employ
a projection layer after the policy network to correct the action.
However projection-based methods suffer from issues like the
zero gradient problem and higher runtime due to the usage of
optimization solvers. Recently methods were proposed to train
generative models to learn a differentiable mapping between
latent variables and feasible actions to address this issue. However, generative models require training using samples from
the constrained action space, which itself is challenging. To
address such limitations, first, we define a target distribution
for feasible actions based on constraint violation signals, and
train normalizing flows by minimizing the KL divergence between an approximated distribution over feasible actions and
the target. This eliminates the need to generate feasible action
samples, greatly simplifying the flow model learning. Second,
we integrate the learned flow model with existing deep RL
methods, which restrict it to exploring only the feasible action
space. Third, we extend our approach beyond ACRL to handle state-wise constraints by learning the constraint violation
signal from the environment. Empirically, our approach has
significantly fewer constraint violations while achieving similar or better quality in several control tasks than previous best
methods.

Code — https://github.com/rlr-smu/cv-flow

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has been successfully applied to
solve a variety of problems, ranging from mastering Atari
games (Mnih et al. 2015; Van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016)
to controlling robotics (Pham, De Magistris, and Tachibana
2018; Thananjeyan et al. 2021) and fortifying system security (Adawadkar and Kulkarni 2022; Khoury and Nassar 2020), among others. In many real-world applications,
agents have to take actions within a feasible action space
defined by some constraints at every RL step. This scenario falls under the domain of action-constrained reinforcement learning (ACRL) (Brahmanage, Ling, and Kumar 2023;
Kasaura et al. 2023). In ACRL, action constraints typically
take an analytical form based on state and action features
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15614

P2
(e.g., i=1 |si ai | <= 1 with si , ai as features) rather than
being expressed using a predefined cost function.
Representative applications of ACRL include robotic control (Kasaura et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2021; Pham, De Magistris, and Tachibana 2018) and resource allocation in supplydemand matching (Bhatia, Varakantham, and Kumar 2019),
where kinematic limitations and resource restrictions are effectively modeled using action constraints derived from system specifications. When action constraints are not directly
available, they can be approximated using state-based cost
functions or offline datasets of valid and invalid trajectories.
In such cases, action constraints can be inferred from environmental data (Dalal et al. 2018) or via inverse constraint
RL (Malik et al. 2021).
Since action constraints with a closed form can be relatively easy to evaluate for each action, one natural approach is
to use a projection to generate feasible actions that satisfy the
constraints, which involves solving a math program (Amos
and Kolter 2017; Bhatia, Varakantham, and Kumar 2019;
Dalal et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2021; Pham, De Magistris, and
Tachibana 2018). The projection-based approach can either
result in a zero gradient problem (Lin et al. 2021) or an expensive overhead due to solving an optimization program (Brahmanage, Ling, and Kumar 2023) or both. When dealing with
non-convex action constraints or large action spaces, there
is a significant reduction in training speed, which we also
validate empirically.
Recently, (Brahmanage, Ling, and Kumar 2023) learn
a smooth and invertible mapping between a simple latent
space and the feasible action space given states using conditional normalizing flows (Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio
2016) and integrate it with Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al. 2016). This approach effectively avoids the zero gradient problem common in standard
projection-based methods as there is no coupling between the
policy network and projection layer anymore. However, a key
drawback is the necessity to generate feasible actions in advance for training the flow, which is challenging for complex
constraints since specialized methods such as Hamiltonian
Monte-Carlo (HMC), decision diagrams are required to sample from the feasible action space (Brahmanage, Ling, and
Kumar 2023).
In addition to ACRL, generative models are also used
for improving exploration and utilizing off-policy data in

