The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GBRIP: Granular Ball Representation for Imbalanced Partial Label Learning
Jintao Huang1 , Yiu-ming Cheung1, * , Chi-man Vong2 , Wenbin Qian3
2

1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China
3
School of Software, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China
{csjthuang,ymc}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk; cmvong@um.edu.mo; wenbinqian1027@126.com

Abstract

hand, IDM treats the true label as a latent variable and employs iterative methods like Maximum Likelihood Estimation (Liu and Dietterich (2012); Lv et al. (2020)). Nonetheless, it runs the risk of misidentifying false positives as
true labels. Recent advancements in Graph-based manifold
learning (Wang, Li, and Zhang (2019); Lyu, Wu, and Feng
(2022); Zhang et al. (2020); Qian et al. (2024a)) have enhanced PLL by capitalizing on data relationships and intrinsic geometries, improving accuracy and robustness.
Numerous PLL methods are designed to assume balanced
class distributions, which do not always align with realworld data that often exhibit an imbalanced distribution Lu
et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024). This imbalance can lead to
suboptimal performance in less classes and cause predictions to be biased toward dominant categories. While addressing class imbalance in multi-class classification is wellresearched, it presents unique challenges in PLL inexact labeling (Zhang et al. (2023)). Due to label ambiguity, traditional methods such as under- or over-sampling could not
be effective in PLL. Imbalanced PLL (IPLL) (Wang and
Zhang (2018)) and Long-tailed PLL (LT-PLL) are more viable (Wang et al. (2022a)), but existing PLL methods struggle in labels disambiguating in imbalanced settings. Innovative approaches are necessary to tackle class imbalance
and label ambiguity in PLL. Nowadays, there are some
researches have been conducted on LT-PLL. Wang et al.
(Wang and Zhang (2018)) and Liu et al. (Liu et al. (2021))
addressed LT-PLL by employing oversampling and regularization techniques. Solar (Wang et al. (2022a)) utilized optimal transport to mitigate pseudo-label bias by enforcing
class distribution priors. Additionally, RECORDS (Hong
et al. (2023)) introduced a dynamic rebalancing strategy that
adjusts logits based on recovered class distributions. Furthermore, PLRIPL (Xu et al. (2024)) presented a pseudolabel regularization technique by focusing on penalizing
pseudo labels of head classes. Meanwhile, HTC (Jia et al.
(2024)) employed a dual-classifier model to handle samples
from both head and tail classes, leading to improved predictions across all class distributions.
However, our study observed that existing IPLL and LTPLL methods rely on prior label confidence matrices (i.e.,
pseudo labels) derived from inter-class features (i.e., interclass differences). However, these methods significantly ignore the impact of intra-class sample imbalance (Tang et al.

Partial label learning (PLL) is a complicated weakly supervised multi-classification task compounded by class imbalance. Currently, existing methods only rely on inter-class
pseudo-labeling from inter-class features, often overlooking the significant impact of the intra-class imbalanced features combined with the inter-class. To address these limitations, we introduce Granular Ball Representation for Imbalanced PLL (GBRIP), a novel framework for imbalanced
PLL. GBRIP utilizes coarse-grained granular ball representation and multi-center loss to construct a granular ball-based
feature space through unsupervised learning, effectively capturing the feature distribution within each class. GBRIP mitigates the impact of confusing features by systematically refining label disambiguation and estimating imbalance distributions. The novel multi-center loss function enhances learning
by emphasizing the relationships between samples and their
respective centers within the granular balls. Extensive experiments on standard benchmarks demonstrate that GBRIP outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods, offering a robust
solution to the challenges of imbalanced PLL.

Introduction
Partial Label Learning (PLL) (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar
(2011); Tian, Yu, and Fu (2023); Qian et al. (2024b); Xu
et al. (2025)) has emerged as a crucial area in weakly supervised learning, addressing challenges in image annotation,
natural language processing, and web mining. PLL scenarios involve instances associated with multiple candidate labels, with only one correct label mirroring real-world labeling complexities (Hüllermeier and Beringer (2006); Cour,
Sapp, and Taskar (2011); Chen, Patel, and Chellappa (2017);
Tian, Yu, and Fu (2023)). Recent research has progressed
from fundamental techniques to more advanced methods,
which can be categorized into two approaches: Average
Disambiguation Method (ADM) and Identification Disambiguation Method (IDM) (Tian, Yu, and Fu (2023)). ADM,
utilized in models such as Partial Label k-Nearest Neighbors (PL-kNN) (Hüllermeier and Beringer (2006)) and Partial Label Support Vector Machine (PL-SVM) (Nguyen and
Caruana (2008)), averages scores across all candidate labels, potentially influenced by incorrect labels. On the other
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17431

