The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evolutionary Large Language Model for Automated Feature Transformation
Nanxu Gong1 , Chandan K Reddy2 , Wangyang Ying1 , Haifeng Chen3 , Yanjie Fu1 *
1

Arizona State University, Tempe, USA
2
Virginia Tech, Arlington, USA
3
NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, USA
nanxugong@outlook.com, reddy@cs.vt.edu, wangyang.ying@asu.edu, haifeng@nec-labs.com, yanjie.fu@asu.edu

Abstract

et al. 2024, 2022; Kanter and Veeramachaneni 2015) that
aims to reconstruct a discriminative feature space through
an automatic model.
There are two main challenges in solving AFT: 1) efficient search in massive discrete space; and 2) teaming between general feature knowledge and task-specific feature
knowledge. First, a feature space comprises exponentially
growing possibilities of combinations of features and operations as candidate feature transformations, resulting in
an immensely large search space. Efficient search in massive discrete space aims to answer: How can we improve
the efficiency of identifying the optimal search path given a
large feature combination space? Second, we need knowledge to steer the optimal search path. A widely used idea
is to exploit task-specific feature knowledge, defined as predictive accuracy feedback of a transformed feature set on a
downstream ML model. This strategy ignores general feature knowledge from Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)
like ChatGPT and other LLMs. Teaming between general
feature knowledge and task-specific knowledge aims to answer: How can we steer the optimal search path by leveraging both task-specific feature knowledge and LLM-like AGI?
Prior literature can partially address the challenges. These
methods can be divided into three categories: (1) expansionreduction methods (Kanter and Veeramachaneni 2015; Khurana et al. 2016). These methods employ operators and randomly combine features to generate new feature samples,
expanding the feature space. Subsequently, useful features
are further filtered through feature selection. However, such
methods rely on stochasticity, and lack optimization trajectories. (2) evolution-evaluation methods (Wang et al. 2022;
Khurana, Samulowitz, and Turaga 2018). These methods,
rooted in reinforcement learning or evolutionary algorithms,
amalgamate features and operator sets within a unified learning framework. They iteratively generate improved individuals until the model reaches the maximum iteration threshold.
Such methods generally harbor explicit objectives. However,
achieving maximal rewards over the long term is challenging. In open environments, they tend to fall into local optima.
(3) Neural Architecture Search (NAS)-based methods (Chen
et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2022). These methods are constructed
upon NAS, which was proposed to search the optimal network architectures. Given that the objectives of AFT align
closely with those of NAS, related methods have also been

Feature transformation aims to reconstruct the feature space
of raw features to enhance the performance of downstream
models. However, the exponential growth in the combinations of features and operations poses a challenge, making
it difficult for existing methods to efficiently explore a wide
space. Additionally, their optimization is solely driven by the
accuracy of downstream models in specific domains, neglecting the acquisition of general feature knowledge. To fill this
research gap, we propose an evolutionary LLM framework
for automated feature transformation. This framework consists of two parts: 1) constructing a multi-population database
through an RL data collector while utilizing evolutionary algorithm strategies for database maintenance, and 2) utilizing the ability of Large Language Model (LLM) in sequence
understanding, we employ few-shot prompts to guide LLM
in generating superior samples based on feature transformation sequence distinction. Leveraging the multi-population
database initially provides a wide search scope to discover
excellent populations. Through culling and evolution, highquality populations are given greater opportunities, thereby
furthering the pursuit of optimal individuals. By integrating
LLMs with evolutionary algorithms, we achieve efficient exploration within a vast space, while harnessing feature knowledge to propel optimization, thus realizing a more adaptable
search paradigm. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of our proposed method.

Code — https://github.com/NanxuGong/ELLM-FT

Introduction
In many real-world applications, ML models struggle to
fight complex and imperfect data (e.g., bias, outliers,
noises). The quality of data, as a fundamental element in
machine learning (ML), plays a significant role in the predictive performance of ML. To alleviate this issue, feature
transformation is proposed to reconstruct an optimized feature space based on original features and mathematical operations (e.g., +, -, *, /, sqrt). In industrial practices, traditional feature transformations are typically labor intensive,
time costly, and lack generalization. Therefore, we focus on
the task of Automated Feature Transformation (AFT) (Wang
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16844

