The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adapting to Non-Stationary Environments: Multi-Armed Bandit Enhanced
Retrieval-Augmented Generation on Knowledge Graphs
Xiaqiang Tang1,2 , Jian Li2 * , Nan Du2 , Sihong Xie1*
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Tencent Hunyuan

Abstract

provided to the LLM to generate the final response.Recent
advancements (He et al. 2024; Luo et al. 2023c; Sun et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2024) in RAG systems have increasingly incorporated Knowledge graphs (KGs) (Baek, Aji, and Saffari 2023; Luo et al. 2023b) as the underlying knowledge
base. KGs store vast amounts of factual data in a structured
format, which enables more dependable and systematic reasoning by LLMs.
Unlike unstructured text databases (e.g. Wikipedia), the
organized nature of KGs provides diverse retrieval methods, with significantly different capabilities and costs. For
example, dense retrieval methods (Zhang et al. 2023; Yu
et al. 2022) are typically fast but offer limited reasoning capabilities. In contrast, using LLMs to generate KG query
languages (e.g., SPARQL) as in ChatKBQA (Luo et al.
2023a) provides high coverage and is suitable for multientity retrieval. Methods like RoG (Luo et al. 2023c), where
LLMs function as search agents excel in complex reasoning.
However, both methods require interactions with LLMs like
ChatGPT (OpenAI 2024), leading to longer execution times.
However, current KG-based RAG systems often rely solely
on a single retrieval method or use static neural network
routers (Reis et al. 2019; lla 2024), which require complete
labeled data for supervision and periodic fine-tuning. Moreover, while RAG systems are often deployed in scenarios
where users can provide feedback on generated responses
(Gamage et al. 2024; Alan, Aydın, and Karaarslan 2024),
current systems generally neglect this feedback. Relying on
a single retrieval method, or computationally intensive ensemble all retrieval results can not ensure responses that are
both timely and informative. On the other hand, static neural
network routers cannot effectively leverage real-time feedback to continually adapt to changing user needs and system
variability.
Therefore, deploying RAG systems in real-world scenarios faces the following challenges as described in Fig. 1:
(C1): Non-stationary environments require RAG systems to
adapt to two sides continuously: on the user side, the evolving nature of queries driven by trending topics, and on the
server side, the backend retrieval model upgrading. (C2): In
practical applications RAG systems, such as personal home
assistants and customer support chatbots, balancing multiobjective, such as efficiency, coverage, and reasoning power,
is crucial to providing informative and satisfying user expe-

Despite the superior performance of Large language models on many NLP tasks, they still face significant limitations
in memorizing extensive world knowledge. Recent studies
have demonstrated that leveraging the Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) framework, combined with Knowledge
Graphs that encapsulate extensive factual data in a structured format, robustly enhances the reasoning capabilities of
LLMs. However, deploying such systems in real-world scenarios presents challenges: the continuous evolution of nonstationary environments may lead to performance degradation and user satisfaction requires a careful balance of performance and responsiveness. To address these challenges, we
introduce a Multi-objective Multi-Armed Bandit enhanced
RAG framework, supported by multiple retrieval methods
with diverse capabilities under rich and evolving retrieval
contexts in practice. Within this framework, each retrieval
method is treated as a distinct “arm”. The system utilizes
real-time user feedback to adapt to dynamic environments,
by selecting the appropriate retrieval method based on input queries and the historical multi-objective performance of
each arm. Extensive experiments conducted on two benchmark KGQA datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms baseline methods in non-stationary settings while achieving state-of-the-art performance in stationary environments.

Code —
https://github.com/FUTUREEEEEE/Dynamic-RAG

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) (Chowdhery et al. 2023;
Achiam et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023) excel in natural language processing tasks (Bang et al. 2023; Brown et al. 2020)
but struggle with knowledge-intensive challenges, often
producing unfaithful or hallucinated information (Petroni
et al. 2020; Ji et al. 2023). Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) (Lewis et al. 2020) has been developed to enhance
LLM reasoning, effectively reducing hallucinations and providing reliable, up-to-date information. In this approach,
when presented with a user query, a retriever first extracts
relevant information from a knowledge base, which is then
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12658

