The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adversarial-Inspired Backdoor Defense via Bridging Backdoor and Adversarial
Attacks
Jia-Li Yin1, 2 , Weijian Wang1, 2 , Lyhwa2 * , Wei Lin3, 4 * , Ximeng Liu2, 5
1

Fujian Province Key Laboratory of Information Security and Network Systems, Fuzhou 350108, China
2
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350118, China
3
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Applications, Fuzhou 350118, China
4
College of Computer Science and Mathematics, Fujian University of Technology, Fuzhou 350118, China
5
Lion Rock Labs of Cyberspace Security, CTIHE, Hong Kong, China
{jlyin, 221027096}@fzu.edu.cn, wlin@fjut.edu.cn, lyhwa@fzu.edu.cn, snbnix@gmail.com
Backdoor attack

Abstract

Trigger

Backdoor attacks and adversarial attacks are two major security threats to deep neural networks (DNNs), with the former
one is a training-time data poisoning attack that aims to implant backdoor triggers into models by injecting trigger patterns into training samples, and the latter one is a testing-time
attack trying to generate adversarial examples (AEs) from benign images to mislead a well-trained model. While previous
works generally treat these two attacks separately, the inherent connection between these two attacks is rarely explored.
In this paper, we focus on bridging backdoor and adversarial attacks and observe two intriguing phenomena when applying adversarial attacks on an infected model implanted
with backdoors: 1) the sample is harder to be turned into
an AE when the trigger is presented; 2) the AEs generated
from backdoor samples are highly likely to be predicted as
its true labels. Inspired by these observations, we proposed a
novel backdoor defense method, dubbed Adversarial-Inspired
Backdoor Defense (AIBD), to isolate the backdoor samples
by leveraging a progressive top-q scheme and break the correlation between backdoor samples and their target labels using adversarial labels. Through extensive experiments on various datasets against six state-of-the-art backdoor attacks, the
AIBD-trained models on poisoned data demonstrate superior
performance over the existing defense methods.

Clean data

Adversarial attack

Training

Poisoned data

Infected model

Testing

Poisoned data

Adversarial data

Infected model

0.6
Data proportion

0.5

Clean sample
Backdoor sample

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 1517 19 21 23
Number of iterations

True label

Iterative perturbation
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1.0
0.8
0.6

0.4
0.2
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Adversial label

0.0

Figure 1: Illustration of our observations when applying
adversarial attack on an infected model implanted with
backdoors. Top: Backdoor attack in training time. Middle:
Adversarial attack in inference time. During the adversarial example generation, we can observe that the backdoor
samples take more iterations to be transformed into AEs
(Bottom left), and the adversarial labels of backdoor samples are highly likely to be their true labels (Bottom right).
The statistics are obtained by applying PGD attacks on a
ResNet-18 model injected with WaNet backdoor on CIFAR10 dataset with a 10% poisoning rate.

Introduction
Ever since deep neural networks (DNNs) have become the
de facto tools for various applications, the security of DNNs
has attracted rapidly growing attention, especially in the
safety-critical scenarios, e.g., autonomous driving (Dai et al.
2024), and object tracking (Huang et al. 2023). It has been
widely demonstrated that DNNs are vulnerable to malicious
attacks that can compromise their safety and reliability. One
of the emerging threats is the backdoor attack (Gu, DolanGavitt, and Garg 2017; Li et al. 2023; Bai et al. 2024), where
an attacker aims to implant backdoor into a DNN model by
injecting the trigger patterns into a small proportion of the
training samples. The infected model would perform normally on clean test data but alters to the target label when
the trigger pattern is presented. Such an attack allows the attacker to obtain unauthorized access to a model and cause

potential accidents, posing a severe risk for real-world applications. Developing backdoor defense methods that can
achieve clean models on poisoned datasets is critical.
Besides the backdoor attack, another well-known threat
to DNNs is the adversarial attack (Madry et al. 2018; Andriushchenko et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2023), which is an
inference-time attack that tries to generate AEs that are
similar-looking to benign images but can cause dramatic
changes in DNN predictions. Since the backdoor attack and
adversarial attack belongs to the training-time and inferencetime attacks respectively, existing works generally treat

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9508

