The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Better Understandings and Configurations in MaxSAT Stochastic Local Search
Solvers via Anytime Performance Analysis
Furong Ye1,2 , Chuan Luo3 * , Shaowei Cai1
1

Key Laboratory of System Software (Chinese Academy of Sciences) and State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science (LIACS), Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
3
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
f.ye@ios.ac.cn, chuanluo@buaa.edu.cn, caisw@ios.ac.cn
Abstract

have been continuously proposed, the corresponding comparison results are presented in numerous documents. The
famous MaxSAT Evaluations (Berg et al. 2023a) provide a
platform for practitioners to understand the performance of
state-of-the-art solvers, and the existing comparisons among
MaxSAT solvers mainly concern the quality, i.e., fitness, of
best solutions obtained within a given time budget, namely,
cutoff time (Luo et al. 2014; Cai et al. 2014; Cai, Luo, and
Zhang 2017; Luo et al. 2017; AlKasem and Menai 2021;
Chu, Cai, and Luo 2023; Liu et al. 2025), which is a reasonable option when we require a concrete judgment in competitions. However, the assessments concerning best-found
solutions may produce bias in the cutoff time and hinder us
from understanding the behavior of solvers during the iterative optimization process. Though some work (Zheng et al.
2022) investigated the convergence process when analyzing
SLS solvers’ behavior, the current mechanism usually plots
individual convergence lines for particular instances. Hickey
and Beacchus’s work (Hickey and Bacchus 2022) addressed
anytime performances of MaxSAT solvers. Still, their work
focused on proposing a solution that would obtain good solutions on multiple cutoff times without addressing the issue of measuring anytime performance. Meanwhile, recent
work (Hansen et al. 2022) has discussed that anytime performance assessment is vital for benchmarking algorithms.

Though numerous solvers have been proposed for the
MaxSAT problem, and the benchmark environment such as
MaxSAT Evaluations provides a platform for the comparison
of the state-of-the-art solvers, existing assessments were usually evaluated based on the quality, e.g., fitness, of the bestfound solutions obtained within a given running time budget.
However, concerning solely the final obtained solutions regarding specific time budgets may restrict us from comprehending the behavior of the solvers along the convergence
process. This paper demonstrates that Empirical Cumulative Distribution Functions can be used to compare MaxSAT
stochastic local search solvers’ anytime performance across
multiple problem instances and various time budgets. The
assessment reveals distinctions in solvers’ performance and
displays that the (dis)advantages of solvers adjust along different running times. This work also exhibits that the quantitative and high variance assessment of anytime performance
can guide machines, i.e., automatic configurators, to search
for better parameter settings. Our experimental results show
that the hyperparameter optimization tool, i.e., SMAC, can
achieve better parameter settings of solvers when using the
anytime performance as the cost function, compared to using
the metrics based on the fitness of the best-found solutions.

Code and Datasets —
https://github.com/FurongYe/AAAI25-MaxSAT/

Two perspectives, i.e., fixed-budget and fixed-target, are
commonly considered when measuring iterative algorithms’
performance. The fixed-budget approach is usually applied
to problems in which prior knowledge about the performance, e.g., the fitness scale, is unavailable, and it can assess the order of the obtained solutions. The fixed-target
approach is commonly applied in well-understood practical
scenarios or benchmarking environments, and it uses quantitative indicators to explain how fast an algorithm obtains a
solution meeting specific requirements. However, we usually need to consider both perspectives when developing
an algorithm for practical problems. Therefore, addressing
the concerns of both approaches, an anytime performance
metric, which examines algorithms’ performance based on
empirical cumulative distribution functions (ECDF) of a
set of cutoff times, has recently presented its superiority
in black-box optimization benchmarking scenarios (Doerr
et al. 2020; Hansen et al. 2016, 2022). The ECDF value at a
given time is computed based on the fraction of solved prob-

Introduction
The Maximum Satisfiability (MaxSAT) problem is the optimization version of the influential Boolean Satisfiability
(SAT) problem that aims at finding the maximum number
of satisfied clauses (Biere, Heule, and van Maaren 2009).
(Weighted) partial MaxSAT, which is an important generalization of MaxSAT, divides the clauses into hard and soft
ones, and a feasible solution requires all hard clauses to be
satisfied (Li and Manya 2021). Among various complete and
incomplete solvers developed for solving MaxSAT, stochastic local search (SLS) (Cai et al. 2016; Lei and Cai 2018),
which commonly follows an iterative framework, is a significant category of incomplete solvers. While new methods
* Chuan Luo is the corresponding author of this work.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27153

