The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

State-Based Disassembly Planning
Chao Lei, Nir Lipovetzky, Krista A. Ehinger
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
clei1@student.unimelb.edu.au, {nir.lipovetzky, kris.ehinger}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

has been widely implemented in different assembly tasks,
including mechanical product assembly (Homem de Mello
and Sanderson 1991; Wang, Rong, and Xiang 2014) and kit
assembly (Zakka et al. 2020).
With the development of general-purpose assembly planning algorithms, Tian et al. (2022) proposed a physicsbased assembly-by-disassembly planning method, referred
as PDP, for sequential assembly tasks where operations involve inserting an individual part into the sub-assembly. This
approach employs a physics-based simulation, built upon the
rigid body simulator developed by Xu et al. (2021) to generate the disassembly trajectories while using a sequential
planner to determine the disassembly sequence. The disassembly trajectories and sequence are reversed to construct
the assembly plan. Compared to sampling-based approaches
such as RRT (LaValle 1998) and its variants (Aguinaga,
Borro, and Matey 2008; Ebinger et al. 2018), as well as
the classic physics-based method (Zickler and Veloso 2009),
PDP demonstrates state-of-the-art performance in terms of
success rate and computational efficiency.
The exhaustive search in disassembly sequence planning
and path planning results in redundant and unnecessary simulations in PDP. Regenerating already simulated trajectories
instead of reusing them also weakens the efficiency of PDP.
In addition, users must specify if a task requires translational
or rotational operations, as considering both at the same time
hinders the advantages of using one operation at a time,
where translational motion offers computational efficiency,
while rotational motion provides better coverage. Requiring
user input reduces the autonomy of the deployed solutions
in PDP. To address these issues, we prioritize translational
motion over rotational motion in a State-Based Disassembly Planning search algorithm. We use the physical simulation as a transition function and record the trajectories in
the state representation, avoiding computationally intensive
simulations of states that need to be revisited. We integrate
and propose novel Directional Blocking Graphs with state
information to derive new evaluation functions that allow
disassembly planning to accurately select components and
actions for disassembly.

It has been shown recently that physics-based simulation significantly enhances the disassembly capabilities of real-world
assemblies with diverse 3D shapes and stringent motion constraints. However, the efficiency suffers when tackling intricate disassembly tasks that require numerous simulations
and increased simulation time. In this work, we propose a
State-Based Disassembly Planning (SBDP) approach, prioritizing physics-based simulation with translational motion
over rotational motion to facilitate autonomy, reducing dependency on human input, while storing intermediate motion
states to improve search scalability. We introduce two novel
evaluation functions derived from new Directional Blocking
Graphs (DBGs) enriched with state information to scale up
the search. Our experiments show that SBDP with new evaluation functions and DBGs constraints outperforms the stateof-the-art in disassembly planning in terms of success rate
and computational efficiency over benchmark datasets consisting of thousands of physically valid industrial assemblies.

Introduction
Assembly planning is crucial for optimizing manufacturing efficiency and minimizing maintenance and repair costs
(Ghandi and Masehian 2015). Numerous methods for automated assembly have been proposed (Perrard et al. 2023;
Bedeoui et al. 2018; Tian et al. 2022) through various
methodologies, such as heuristic search (Wang et al. 2013),
evolutionary algorithms (Zeng et al. 2011) and neural networks (Chen et al. 2008). Despite these efforts, automatically generating an efficient, precise and generalizable assembly plan remains an open challenge. An assembly planning task often contains two steps: assembly sequence planning, which computes the sequential order to assemble all
components; and assembly path planning, which searches
for penetration-free trajectories to add new components into
a sub-assembly. The bijection between assembly and disassembly sequences, when all parts are rigid, raises the
idea of assembly-by-disassembly, introduced by Homem de
Mello and Sanderson (1991). The assembly-by-disassembly
method, understood as regression, minimizes the required
search space in assembly tasks by leveraging the defined
precedence and motion constraints in assembled parts. It

Background
A common strategy for solving planning problems is to
create a state model for the target domain (Bonet and

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14602

