The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ALTBI: Constructing Improved Outlier Detection Models via Optimization of
Inlier-Memorization Effect
Seoyoung Cho1 , Jaesung Hwang2 , Kwan-Young Bak13 , Dongha Kim13 *
1

Department of Statistics, Sungshin Women’s University
2
SK Telecom
3
Data Science Center, Sungshin Women’s University
{katesycho, postechiminuru}@gmail.com, {kybak, dongha0718}@sungshin.ac.kr
Abstract
Outlier detection (OD) is the task of identifying unusual observations (or outliers) from a given or upcoming data by
learning unique patterns of normal observations (or inliers).
Recently, a study introduced a powerful unsupervised OD
(UOD) solver based on a new observation of deep generative models, called inlier-memorization (IM) effect, which
suggests that generative models memorize inliers before outliers in early learning stages. In this study, we aim to develop
a theoretically principled method to address UOD tasks by
maximally utilizing the IM effect. We begin by observing that
the IM effect is observed more clearly when the given training
data contain fewer outliers. This finding indicates a potential
for enhancing the IM effect in UOD regimes if we can effectively exclude outliers from mini-batches when designing
the loss function. To this end, we introduce two main techniques: 1) increasing the mini-batch size as the model training proceeds and 2) using an adaptive threshold to calculate
the truncated loss function. We theoretically show that these
two techniques effectively filter out outliers from the truncated loss function, allowing us to utilize the IM effect to
the fullest. Coupled with an additional ensemble technique,
we propose our method and term it Adaptive Loss Truncation
with Batch Increment (ALTBI). We provide extensive experimental results to demonstrate that ALTBI achieves state-ofthe-art performance in identifying outliers compared to other
recent methods, even with lower computation costs. Additionally, we show that our method yields robust performances
when combined with privacy-preserving algorithms.

Figure 1: An illustration of ALTBI.

sify each sample as either outlier or not. Semi-supervised
OD (SSOD), also known as out-of-distribution detection, assumes that all training data are normal and builds models
based only on these inliers. Unsupervised OD (UOD) works
with data that may contain outliers but has no labels to identify them. In UOD tasks, the primary goal is to accurately
identify outliers in a given training dataset. In general, many
real-world anomaly detection tasks belong to UOD because
outliers in large datasets are usually unknown beforehand.
Hence, we focus on addressing UOD problems in this study.
Recent advancements in machine learning domains have
introduced powerful UOD methods. In particular, many
studies have leveraged deep generative models (DGM) to
develop unique scores to identify outliers. Surprisingly, conventional likelihood was not utilized, as it has been widely
recognized that it often confuses outliers with inliers when
the models are fully trained (Nalisnick et al. 2019b,a; Lan
and Dinh 2021).
Recently, a notable study has highlighted the potential
of the likelihood values of DGMs in UOD tasks, based on
the observation of the inlier-memorization (IM) effect (Kim
et al. 2024). This effect suggests that when a DGM is trained,
the loss values, i.e., the negative log-likelihoods, of inliers
decrease before those of outliers in early training stages.
This implies that the likelihood value itself can be a favorable measure to identify outliers with under-fitted DGMs.
Leveraging this phenomenon, Kim et al. (2024) developed a
UOD solver called ODIM, which has demonstrated powerful yet computationally efficient performance in identifying

Introduction
Outlier detection: Outlier detection (OD) is an important
task in various fields, aiming to identify unusual observations, or outliers. This process involves learning the distinct
patterns of normal observations, known as inliers, and developing efficient scores to distinguish between inliers and
outliers. The ability to accurately detect outliers is essential
for ensuring data quality and reliability in applications such
as fraud detection, network security, and fault diagnosis.
OD tasks can be divided into three cases depending on
availability of anomalousness information of given training data. Supervised OD (SOD) uses labeled data to clas* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11544

