The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LVPTrack: High Performance Domain Adaptive UAV Tracking with Label
Aligned Visual Prompt Tuning
Hongjing Wu1 , Siyuan Yao2 * , Feng Huang3 , Shu Wang3 ,
Linchao Zhang4 , Zhuoran Zheng1 , Wenqi Ren1 *
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
3
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
4
Artificial Intelligence Institute of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation, Beijing, China
wuhj28@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yaosiyuan04@gmail.com, huangf@fzu.edu.cn,
shu@fzu.edu.cn, hune213@163.com, renwq3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Visual object tracking is essentially crucial for unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs). Despite the substantial progress,
most of the existing UAV trackers are designed for wellconditioned daytime data, while for the scenarios in challenging weather condition, e.g. foggy or nighttime environment, the tremendous domain gap leads to significant performance degradation. To address this issue, in this paper, we
propose a novel robust UAV tracker termed LVPTrack, which
conducts high quality label-aligned visual prompt tuning to
adapt to various challenging weather conditions. Specifically, we first synthesize the sequential foggy and nighttime
video frames to assist the model training. A domain adaptive teacher-student network is utilized to distill the hierarchical visual semantic of the target objects in cross-domain
scenarios. Then we propose a target-aware pseudo-label voting (PLV) strategy to alleviate the target-level misalignment
in the dual domains. Furthermore, we propose a dynamic aggregated prompt (DAP) module to facilitate the appearance
variation adaptation of the target object in challenging scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our tracker
achieves superior performance over existing state-of-the-art
UAV trackers.

LVPTrack (Ours)

LiteTrack

TCTrack

LVPTrack (Ours)

LiteTrack

UDAT-BAN

HiFT

Ground Truth

SiamFC++

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Visualization of tracking results in representative
extreme scenarios. The foggy images belong to our synthesized DTB70-Haze dataset. The dark images belong to the
NAT2021-test dataset.

Introduction
Visual object tracking is an essential task in various applications of UAVs such as remote sensing, aerial cinematography and GIS. Given the initial annotation of the target template in the first frame, the goal of UAV tracking is to precisely predict the object’s location across the entire video
frames. Though many trackers have been proposed in recent
years, it’s still challenging to design a robust UAV tracking
system in the real world as the tracking performance is always influenced by the complex environmental factors, e.g.
weather condition and background surrounding, etc.
Recently, the template matching based UAV trackers
(Bertinetto et al. 2016; Li et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2022; Yao
et al. 2021; Tang and Ling 2022) have become the dominant
solution due to their well-balanced accuracy and efficiency.
These methods generally learn an target-specific matching

network on large-scale video dataset, e.g. LaSOT (Fan et al.
2019) or TrackingNet (Müller et al. 2018) to learn the appearance similarity between the paired template-search images. The computed features are then sent into bounding box
prediction head to generate response heatmap for target object localization, the maximum peak axis in the heatmap indicates the correct inferred position.
Despite the significant advance, the advanced UAV trackers still suffers from the following limitations. Firstly, existing UAV trackers typically utilize well-conditioned daytime datasets as supervision for model training, while they
can hardly adapt to the challenging weather condition, e.g.
foggy or nighttime environment, which limits the their deployment in real-world systems. Although some efforts (Ye
et al. 2022b,c) have been made to the nighttime environment,
their effectiveness has not been well investigated in other
weather conditions. Secondly, most of the domain adaptive

* Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8395

