The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spike2Former: Efficient Spiking Transformer for High-performance Image
Segmentation
Zhenxin Lei1, 2∗ , Man Yao2† , Jiakui Hu3, 4∗ , Xinhao Luo2 , Yanye Lu3, 4 , Bo Xu2 , Guoqi Li2†
1

2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Automation, Key Laboratory of Brain Cognition and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University Health Science Center, Peking University
4
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University
For instance, in image segmentation, an additional segmentation head is required alongside the backbone used for
image classification, resulting in a network structure that is
significantly more complex than that for classification. Simply converting complex Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)
into spiking versions or directly applying residual designs
from classification tasks often leads to a notable drop in performance. Consequently, the few existing SNN models (Kim,
Chough, and Panda 2022; Zhang, Fan, and Zhang 2023; Yao
et al. 2024a; Su et al. 2024; Patel et al. 2021) that tackle
image segmentation tasks tend to perform poorly.
This work explores the application of SNNs with more
complex architectures to image segmentation tasks. Specifically, Mask2Former (Cheng et al. 2022) is a classic
Transformer-based per-mask classification architecture consisting of three parts: a backbone network; a Feature Pyramid
Network (FPN) pixel decoder with a multi-scale deformable
transformer encoder block; and a transformer decoder block.
Directly converting the Mask2Former architecture into a
spiking version results in obvious performance degradation
and non-convergence. To address this, we investigated which
modules in the spiking Mask2Former contribute to the significant loss of information, where the spiking neurons in
these modules nearly cease to fire.
The first module with severe spike degradation is the deformable attention transformer encoder block in the FPN
decoder. In the vanilla Mask2Former, the query operation
in the deformable attention block is inherently sparse; if the
queried information consists of sparse spikes, this could result in significant information loss. To address this, we incorporate convolution blocks in encoder blocks and redesign
the deformable attention blocks to preserve more effective
information and energy efficiency. The second key module
that leads to information loss is the final mask embedding
layer. This layer is crucial as it outputs the final segmentation
results; however, being at the deepest part of the network, the
semantic information that reaches this point is already greatly
diminished. To end this, we build an auxiliary information
branch to enhance the representation of mask embedding.
Another challenge is that, beyond architectural design,
spiking neurons inherently introduce information loss by
converting continuous values into binary spikes. This issue
has long plagued the SNN field, leading to the development

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have a low-power advantage
but perform poorly in image segmentation tasks. The reason is
that directly converting neural networks with complex architectural designs for segmentation tasks into spiking versions
leads to performance degradation and non-convergence. To
address this challenge, we first identify the modules in the architecture design that lead to the severe reduction in spike firing, make targeted improvements, and propose Spike2Former
architecture. Second, we propose normalized integer spiking
neurons to solve the training stability problem of SNNs with
complex architectures. We set a new state-of-the-art for SNNs
in various semantic segmentation datasets, with a significant improvement of +12.7% mIoU and 5.0× efficiency on
ADE20K, +14.3% mIoU and 5.2× efficiency on VOC2012,
and +9.1% mIoU and 6.6× efficiency on CityScapes.

Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) emulate the spatiotemporal dynamics and spike-based communication of biological
neurons. The former ensures the network’s representation
(Maass 1997), while the spike-driven paradigm introduced
by the latter allows SNNs to perform sparse computing when
deployed on neuromorphic chips (Merolla et al. 2014; Davies
et al. 2018), thereby benefiting from low power consumption
(Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019; Schuman et al. 2022). A notable example is the sensing-computing neuromorphic chip
Speck, which operates at a power level as low as 0.7mW in
typical visual scenes (Yao et al. 2024d).
The complex neuronal dynamics and binary activations
make it challenging to train large-scale SNNs. It took a long
time for the SNN field to effectively address this issue through
surrogate gradient training (Wu et al. 2018; Neftci, Mostafa,
and Zenke 2019a) and residual learning design (Fang et al.
2021; Hu et al. 2024b). Currently, SNNs have achieved commendable performance on simple image classification tasks
(Yao et al. 2024b,a). Unfortunately, when it comes to complex visual tasks that require the use of sophisticated neural
network architectures, SNNs fall short.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1364

