The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Text2Relight: Creative Portrait Relighting with Text Guidance
Junuk Cha1,2 * , Mengwei Ren2 , Krishna Kumar Singh2 , He Zhang2 , Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 ,
Seunghyun Yoon2 , HyunJoon Jung2 , Jae Shin Yoon2† , Seungryul Baek1†
2

1
UNIST
Adobe Research

Abstract

as possible from real-world observations using a number of
parameters such as color, intensity, and direction. The advent of powerful generative AI technologies such as a denoising diffusion model (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) and
large language models (Radford et al. 2019) have shifted the
research paradigm from how accurately to how creatively
one can model such a physical phenomenon. Is it possible to
model the lighting behavior as a function of our emotions?
For example, how does a joyful lighting look like? In this
paper, we break the boundary between the physical and creative space by introducing Text2Relight, a lighting-specific
foundational model that can perform relighting (i.e., remove
the original lighting and apply a novel one) of a single portrait image driven by a text prompt as shown in Figure 1. Our
main assumption is that there exists unbounded creativeness
in language, and correlating this with lighting enables the
mapping from a physical space to a creative one.
One simple way to achieve Text2Relight is to utilize existing foundational models for text-guided image editing
such as InstructPix2pix (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023).
However, such a general foundational model which never
learns from lighting-specific data, e.g., identical scenes captured under different lighting, encodes a weak correlation
of the text with lighting, producing a large distortion of the
original contents as shown in Figure 2. This necessitates a
new foundational model that can control the image from the
lighting space that is completely decomposed from the contents space (e.g., shape and intrinsic appearance).
However, developing such a lighting-specific model is
challenging due to the lack of data pairs for relighting, i.e.,
the images of identical scene and main subject captured under different lighting conditions, associated by a text description. While existing methods (Pandey et al. 2021; Saito
et al. 2023) have captured the relighting data using expensive
infrastructure such as lightstage system, such lab-controlled
data are often not scalable (particularly for the axis of human identities) and the rendering of image relighting is often applicable to only foreground human region where the
background scene is simply composed with a part of preset panorama images. Those limited imaging data, in turn,
restricts the diversity of the labeled text prompts as well.
To address this data challenge, we propose a scalable data
simulation pipeline that can synthesize the relighting data
of a portrait scene for both foreground and background, and

We present a lighting-aware image editing pipeline that, given
a portrait image and a text prompt, performs single image relighting. Our model modifies the lighting and color of both
the foreground and background to align with the provided
text description. The unbounded nature in creativeness of a
text allows us to describe the lighting of a scene with any
sensory features including temperature, emotion, smell, time,
and so on. However, the modeling of such mapping between
the unbounded text and lighting is extremely challenging due
to the lack of dataset where there exists no scalable data that
provides large pairs of text and relighting, and therefore, current text-driven image editing models does not generalize to
lighting-specific use cases. We overcome this problem by introducing a novel data synthesis pipeline: First, diverse and
creative text prompts that describe the scenes with various
lighting are automatically generated under a crafted hierarchy using a large language model (e.g., ChatGPT). A textguided image generation model creates a lighting image that
best matches the text. As a condition of the lighting images,
we perform image-based relighting for both foreground and
background using a single portrait image or a set of OLAT
(One-Light-at-A-Time) images captured from lightstage system. Particularly for the background relighting, we represent
the lighting image as a set of point lights and transfer them
to other background images. A generative diffusion model
learns the synthesized large-scale data with auxiliary task
augmentation (e.g., portrait delighting and light positioning)
to correlate the latent text and lighting distribution for textguided portrait relighting. In our experiment, we demonstrate
that our model outperforms existing text-guided image generation models, showing high-quality portrait relighting results
with a strong generalization to unconstrained scenes.

Project page —
https://junukcha.github.io/project/text2relight/

Introduction
Light, as a physical phenomenon, has been extensively studied in computer graphics to model its behavior as accurately
* This research was conducted when Junuk Cha was an intern at

Adobe Research.
†
These authors are co-last authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1980

