The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SEAL: Systematic Error Analysis for Value ALignment
Manon Revel* 1† , Matteo Cargnelutti* 2 , Tyna Eloundou3 , Greg Leppert2
1

Harvard University, Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society
2
Harvard Law School Library, Library Innovation Lab
3
OpenAI

Abstract

generalize desired behavior across unseen scenarios. Practitioners test this generalization using benchmarking, which
compares LM responses to established ground truths, as well
as red-teaming, where users deliberately provoke the model
to find edge cases. However, these methods can be ad hoc
and often uncover failures through indirect evaluations.

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
aims to align language models (LMs) with human values by
training reward models (RMs) on binary preferences and using these RMs to fine-tune the base LMs. Despite its importance, the internal mechanisms of RLHF remain poorly understood. This paper introduces new metrics to evaluate the
effectiveness of modeling and aligning human values, namely
feature imprint, alignment resistance and alignment robustness. We categorize alignment datasets into target features
(desired values) and spoiler features (undesired concepts). By
regressing RM scores against these features, we quantify the
extent to which RMs reward them – a metric we term feature
imprint. We define alignment resistance as the proportion
of the preference dataset where RMs fail to match human
preferences, and we assess alignment robustness by analyzing RM responses to perturbed inputs. Our experiments,
utilizing open-source components like the Anthropic/hh-rlhf
preference dataset and OpenAssistant RMs, reveal significant
imprints of target features and a notable sensitivity to spoiler
features. We observed a 26% incidence of alignment resistance in portions of the dataset where LM-labelers disagreed
with human preferences. Furthermore, we find that misalignment often arises from ambiguous entries within the alignment dataset. These findings underscore the importance of
scrutinizing both RMs and alignment datasets for a deeper
understanding of value alignment.

1.1

Project Repo — github.com/harvard-lil/SEAL

1

Main Contributions

This paper examines the training dynamics of RMs and the
composition of alignment datasets in the RLHF pipeline ([1]
in Figure 1). By treating the preferences in the alignment
dataset D as ground truth, we analyze how well an RM
trained on D aligns with human preferences. We introduce
simple yet effective heuristics to evaluate the impact of value
alignment on RMs ([2, 3] in Figure 1) and test these on an
open-source alignment pipeline ([4] in Figure 1) aimed at
aligning models with helpfulness and harmlessness.
First, we use a state-of-the-art LM to featurize an alignment dataset D into target features (values explicitly intended to be learned) and spoiler features (unintended values
learned during training). This taxonomy, combined with the
RM’s reward scores on the entries of D, enables us to quantify feature imprint, a metric indicating how well specific
values are rewarded by the RM. Our findings reveal significant imprints of target features such as harmlessness and
helpfulness, with the RM favoring these desired behaviors.
Next, we explore alignment resistance, defined as instances where the RM disfavors entries favored by humans.
We compare the behavior of the post-D RM (trained on the
alignment dataset and other datasets) with a pre-D RM (an
earlier model trained solely on other datasets), using the earlier model as a baseline1 . Our analysis uncovers systematic
post-training failures, with the post-D RM remaining misaligned with human preferences in over a quarter of the
cases. Notably, in approximately one-twelfth of the cases,
the post-D RM is less aligned than its predecessor.
Finally, we assess alignment robustness, which measures the RM’s sensitivity to spoiler features by analyzing

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is
used to fine-tune language models (LMs) to better align with
human preferences. These preferences, collected through
comparisons of LM responses, are compiled into an alignment dataset that is then used to train a reward model (RM),
which is essentially a language model with a linear head.
RMs predict scalar rewards consistent with human preferences and are used to update an LM’s policy. The trained RM
emulates human-defined desirability, enabling the LM to

1
We distinguish between semantic fine-tuning and value finetuning. The pre-D RM was trained on semantic datasets to enhance
semantic capabilities, while the later RM was additionally trained
on the alignment dataset encoding safety-related values. Although
our focus is on value fine-tuning (central to AI safety), we touch on
alignment dynamics with semantic tasks in Section 3.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author: mrevel@cyber.harvard.edu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27599

