The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zeroth-Order Methods for Nonconvex Stochastic Problems
with Decision-Dependent Distributions
Yuya Hikima,1 Akiko Takeda1, 2
1

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8654, Japan
2
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN,
1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan
yuya-hikima@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, takeda@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract

a wide range of applications such as performative prediction (Perdomo et al. 2020) and price optimization (Ray et al.
2022; Hikima and Takeda 2024). Because of its importance
for applications, various studies have addressed this problem
(Perdomo et al. 2020; Mendler-Dünner et al. 2020; Ray et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2023).
In general, problem (P) is a non-convex problem: even
if f (x, ξ) is convex with respect to x, it is generally nonconvex since the probability distribution D(x) depends on
x. Moreover, there exists a difficulty: we cannot access the
gradient of the objective function because the probability
distribution D(x) is unknown in practical applications.
Recently, several studies (Ray et al. 2022; Liu, Li, and Wai
2024; Chen et al. 2023) have proposed zeroth-order methods
for (P). Concretely, (Ray et al. 2022) proposed a condition
under which the objective function of (P) is strongly convex,
and employed a zeroth-order method based on the following
one-point gradient estimator:
d
gk := f (xk + µvk , ξk )vk ,
µ
where vk is a unit vector sampled uniformly from the unit
sphere in dimension d, ξk ∼ D(xk + µvk ), and µ ∈ R≥0 .
(Liu, Li, and Wai 2024) considered non-convex problem (P)
with a state-dependent setting where the distribution evolves
according to an underlying controlled Markov chain. They
proposed a zeroth-order method based on the above onepoint gradient estimator and showed its convergence to a
stationary point. (Chen et al. 2023) supposed that their optimization problem can be reduced to convex ones, and they
employed a zeroth-order method based on the following gradient estimator:

d
gk :=
f (xk + µvk , ξk1 ) − f (xk − µvk , ξk2 ) vk ,
2µ
where vk is a unit vector sampled uniformly from the unit
sphere in dimension d, ξk1 ∼ D(xk + µvk ), ξk2 ∼ D(xk −
µvk ), and µ ∈ R≥0 .
Although these existing studies have successfully proposed zeroth-order methods with theoretical convergence
for problem (P), there exist limitations. First, zeroth-order
methods with one-point gradient estimators (Ray et al. 2022;
Liu, Li, and Wai 2024) exhibit large variances of their gradient estimators, which may increase the number of iterations and sampling. Specifically, although the variances

In this study, we consider an optimization problem with uncertainty dependent on decision variables, which has recently
attracted attention due to its importance in machine learning and pricing applications. In this problem, the gradient of
the objective function cannot be obtained explicitly because
the decision-dependent distribution is unknown. Therefore,
several zeroth-order methods have been proposed, which obtain noisy objective values by sampling and update the iterates. Although these existing methods have theoretical convergence for optimization problems with decision-dependent
uncertainty, they require strong assumptions about the function and distribution or exhibit large variances in their gradient estimators. To overcome these issues, we propose two
zeroth-order methods under mild assumptions. First, we develop a zeroth-order method with a new one-point gradient
estimator including a variance reduction parameter. The proposed method updates the decision variables while adjusting the variance reduction parameter. Second, we develop
a zeroth-order method with a two-point gradient estimator.
There are situations where only one-point estimators can be
used, but if both one-point and two-point estimators are available, it is more practical to use the two-point estimator. As
theoretical results, we show the convergence of our methods
to stationary points and provide the worst-case iteration and
sample complexity analysis. Our simulation experiments with
real data on a retail service application show that our methods
output solutions with lower objective values than the conventional zeroth-order methods.

Code — https://github.com/Yuya-Hikima/AAAI25-ZerothOrder-Methods-for-Nonconvex-Stochastic-Problemswith-Decision-Dependent-Distributions
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.20330

Introduction
In this study, we consider the following problem:
(P)

min

x∈Rd

F (x) := Eξ∼D(x) [f (x, ξ)],

where F : Rd → R is generally non-convex. The main feature of this problem is that the probability distribution D(x)
depends on the decision variable x. This feature appears in
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17195

