The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Integrating Personalized Spatio-Temporal Clustering for Next POI
Recommendation
Chao Song, Zheng Ren, Li Lu
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
chaosong@uestc.edu.cn, renzheng@std.uestc.edu.cn, luli2009@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Location-Based Social Networks (LBSNs) offer a rich dataset
of user activity at Points-of-Interest (POIs), making next POI
recommendation a key task. Traditional algorithms face challenges due to broad searching scopes, affecting recommendation accuracy. Users tend to visit nearby POIs and show
temporal concentration in their activities, reflecting personalized spatio-temporal clustering. However, individual user
data may be insufficient to capture these clustering effects
for personalized recommendations. In this paper, we propose an integrated Personalized Spatio-Temporal Clustering
Model (iPCM) for next POI recommendation. The model
learns this kind of personalized spatio-temporal clustering effect by using global historical trajectory data in conjunction
with user feature embeddings. It integrates the features of
personalized spatio-temporal clustering with the user’s trajectory, and completes the user’s POI recommendation through
a Transformer encoding and MLP decoding. To enhance the
accuracy of predictions, we add a module of probability adjustment. The experimental results on multiple datasets show
that with the help of personalized spatio-temporal clustering,
the proposed iPCM is superior to existing methods in various
evaluation metrics.

Figure 1: Personalized spatio-temporal clustering

decisions, which has potential commercial value. Therefore,
recommending the next POI for users based on historical
check-in data is one of the most important tasks in the research of location-based social networks (Huang et al. 2022;
Yin et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a; Ou et al. 2023).
Next POI recommendation is a critical task in locationbased services, aiming to predict users’ future visits based
on their historical data. Traditional algorithms struggle with
vast searching scopes, encompassing whole cities and all
times, leading to decreased accuracy due to increased computational load and noise. Limiting the spatio-temporal
searching range is essential to improve recommendation
quality. As shown in Fig. 1, the occurrence of POIs exhibits
spatial and temporal clustering effects. In terms of time, user
behavior tends to be concentrated within specific time periods, while in terms of space, the clustering effect of geographical locations is reflected in the tendency of users to
visit nearby places. Combined with personal habits and preferences, each user has their own unique lifestyle and preferences, which leads to clustering behavior in specific times
and places. We term the combination of temporal and spatial clustering effects and personalized recommendation as
personalized spatio-temporal clustering. For each user, such
personalized spatio-temporal clustering also exhibits a distribution of their individual characteristics, hence we need to
learn this for personalized POI recommendations. However,
learning such effect from an individual’s historical trajectory data can be challenging due to insufficient data volume.

Introduction
With the rapid development and application of mobile devices and network applications, Location-Based Social Networks (LBSNs) such as Foursquare, Gowalla, and Yelp are
capable of recording a large amount of rich activity trajectories of users at different Points-of-Interest (POIs), such
as shopping centers, restaurants, or gyms. The vast historical check-in data provides valuable information for service
providers to understand users’ preferences for the next visit
behavior, as historical trajectories reveal the behavioral patterns of users when making every decision (Luo, Liu, and
Liu 2021; Long et al. 2023; Dai et al. 2022; Song, Wen,
and Li 2019; Gutowski et al. 2019; Cranshaw et al. 2012).
Based on this information, service providers can make more
accurate recommendations for users and provide more personalized services, thereby improving user satisfaction with
the service; this information can also serve as an auxiliary
factor to help businesses or service providers make wiser
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12550

