The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Deformable Convolutional Prompt for Continual Test-Time Adaptation
in Medical Image Segmentation
Shiyu Liu1 , Daoqiang Zhang2 , Xiaoke Hao1
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, 300401, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, 211106, China
202222802030@stu.hebut.edu.cn, dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn, haoxiaoke@scse.hebut.edu.cn

Abstract
The domain gap resulting from mismatches in acquisition
details like protocol and scanner between training and test
data hinders the deployment of the trained model in clinical practice. To address this issue, Continual test-time adaptation (CTTA) has been proposed to adapt the source model
to continually changing unlabeled domains without accessing
the source data. Existing methods learn an image-level visual
prompt for target domains and inject the trainable prompt into
the input space. However, they either combine the input with
a prompt of equal scale or determine the prompt injection position through complex strategies such as uncertainty estimation or Fourier Transform. These approaches substantially increase the number of trainable parameters and computational
burden, especially in high-dimensional medical imaging data.
To overcome these challenges, we propose the Efficient Deformable Convolutional Prompt (EDCP), which leverages the
inductive bias of convolution to reduce trainable parameters
compared to standard prompts. We further enhance convolution by making it deformable, addressing fine-grained domain shifts at the pixel level through an offset branch. To
improve training efficiency and balance parameters between
the convolution and offset branches, we decompose the offset
transformation into two parts, storing one in an offset bank
that also serves as a domain indicator. This bank accelerates training by skipping test images similar to those already
stored. Prompt updates are guided by layer-wise alignment of
source-target statistics without unfreezing batch normalization layers. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method in 2D and 3D medical image segmentation
tasks.

Figure 1: (a) Illustrations of three different domain shifts in
medical images. (b) Our goal is to adapt the source model
to continually changing domains in the input space by injecting visual prompts. Existing prompt-based methods either inject the prompt at the same scale as the input or use
complex strategies to select the injection position, padding
the rest with constant values (white square). In contrast, we
leverage the inherent advantages of convolutional inductive
bias and extend it to be deformable, significantly reducing
the trainable parameters in the prompt.

Introduction
foggy, but it is more severe in medical imaging. For example, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the same tissue (i.e., fundus ) is
acquired with different imaging scanners and setups across
the medical centers. Besides, magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is a widely adopted radiation-free imaging technique
and also bears heterogeneity in cross-sequence (e.g., the
contrast varies for the same brain tumor in T1, T1ce, T2, and
FLAIR sequence). Moreover, computed tomography (CT)
and MRI provide significantly different signals for the same
region (i.e., heart) due to their different imaging principles.
To address this issue, a line of work focuses on unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), which typically requires

Semantic segmentation is the fundamental step toward
anatomical structure recognition in medical image analysis. The segmentation model can achieve remarkable performance when the model is trained with a supervised signal
and tested with data of consistent distribution. However, the
model suffers from performance degradation when there exists a domain gap between the source and target data distribution. Unfortunately, this domain gap commonly exists in
real scenarios, as the weather changes from sunny to rainy to
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5550

