The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HSRDiff: A Hierarchical Self-Regulation Diffusion Model for Stochastic Semantic
Segmentation
Han Yang1,2 , Chuanguang Yang1 * , Zhulin An1 * , Libo Huang1 , Yongjun Xu1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yanghan22s, yangchuanguang, anzhulin, huanglibo, xyj}@ict.ac.cn

Predictive preference analysis

Abstract

Scenario Analysis

In safety-critical domains such as medical diagnostics and autonomous driving, single-image evidence is sometimes insufficient to reflect the inherent ambiguity of vision problems.
Therefore, multiple plausible assumptions that match the image semantics may be needed to reflect the actual distribution
of targets and support downstream tasks. However, balancing and improving the diversity and consistency of segmentation predictions under the high-dimensional output spaces
and potential multimodal distributions is still challenging.
This paper presents Hierarchical Self-Regulation Diffusion
(HSRDiff), a unified framework that simulates joint probability distribution over entire labels. Our model self-regulates
the balance between the two modes of predicting the label
and noise in a novel “differentiation to unification” pipeline
and dynamically fits the optimal path to model the aleatoric
uncertainty rooted in observations. In addition, we preserve
the high-fidelity reconstruction of the delicate structure in images by leveraging the hierarchical multi-scale condition priors. We validate HSRDiff in three different semantic scenarios. Experimental results show that HSRDiff is superior to the
comparison method with a considerable performance gap.

different data distribution

(a)

Mode
(DataSet)

LIDC-IDRI

MS-Lesion

Cityscapes
(256×512)

𝜖

0.763

0.700

0.603

0.717

0.724

0.641

𝑥!

CIMD

HSRDiff (Ours)

Segmentation results
(b)

Segmentation results

different modes of labels

Input

Condition prior analysis

Figure 1: The motivation of HSRDiff. (a) mIoU of different
datasets under different DDPM modes with global condition
guidance; (b) Generated samples of CIMD (with the global
condition) and HSRDiff (with the multi-scale condition).

objects by human eyes. Therefore, the goal of stochastic semantic segmentation is to model the aleatoric uncertainty of
the label and condition to a given image, thereby providing
multiple reasonable and effective segmentation assumptions
to improve the decision confidence of downstream tasks.
Many VAE-based methods have been proposed to complete the stochastic semantic segmentation tasks (Kohl et al.
2018, 2019; Bian et al. 2020). Still, the diversity of their prediction results is limited because they rely on a strict condition of the axis-aligned Gaussian latent posterior distribution. In recent years, due to the powerful generative ability
of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020), some stochastic segmentation works
based on DDPM have been proposed successively (Rahman
et al. 2023; Zbinden et al. 2023; Wolleb et al. 2022). They
predict the application noise or label map at each timestep
and let the network model the underlying structure of the
dataset in the reverse diffusion process with global guidance of condition information. However, there are still two
problems: (1) Global condition information is insufficient
to guide the network to model the rich probability distribution of targets (Kohl et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2024):
High-resolution features contain more fine-structure information, which is conducive to predicting small targets. Low-

Code — https://github.com/yanghan-yh/HSRDiff.git

Introduction
Due to the powerful representation ability (Yang et al.
2024a, 2023a) of deep neural networks, image semantic segmentation has made significant progress (Chen et al. 2017,
2018; Yang et al. 2022b; Zhao et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2020;
Yang et al. 2022a). At present, most of the methods are deterministic models (Isensee et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023b; Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015), that is, only one segmentation prediction with the highest probability and the best
match is generated for a given image, which is practical in
many scenarios. However, for some safety-critical domains,
a single segmentation prediction is insufficient to reflect the
inherent ambiguity of the natural visual world. For example,
in medical diagnosis, different radiologists often make different diagnoses due to the ambiguity of lesions and organ
margins (Yang et al. 2022b). Also, in road driving, different observation conditions may cause foreign judgments of
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1701

