The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LogicAD: Explainable Anomaly Detection via VLM-based Text Feature
Extraction
Er Jin1, * , Qihui Feng2, * , Yongli Mou2 , Gerhard Lakemeyer2 , Stefan Decker2,3 ,
Oliver Simons4,† , Johannes Stegmaier1,†
1

Institute of Imaging and Computer Vision, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
2
Department of Computer Science, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
3
Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology FIT, Sankt Augustin, Germany
4
Independent Researcher
{er.jin, johannes.stegmaier}@lfb.rwth-aachen.de, {feng, gerhard}@kbsg.rwth-aachen.de,
{mou, decker}@dbis.rwth-aachen.de, science.osimons@posteo.de
(A)

Abstract
Logical image understanding involves interpreting and reasoning about the relationships and consistency within an image’s visual content. This capability is essential in applications such as industrial inspection, where logical anomaly detection (AD) is critical for maintaining high-quality standards
and minimizing costly recalls. Previous research in AD has
relied on prior knowledge for designing algorithms, which
often requires extensive manual annotation effort, significant
computing power, and large amounts of data for training. Autoregressive, multimodal Vision Language Models (AVLMs)
offer a promising alternative due to their exceptional performance in visual reasoning across various domains. Despite
this, their application in logical AD remains unexplored. In
this work, we investigate using AVLMs for logical AD and
demonstrate that they are well-suited to the task. Combining AVLMs with format embedding and a logic reasoner, we
achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) AD performance on public
benchmarks, MVTec LOCO AD, with an AUROC of 86.0%
and an F1 -max of 83.7% along with explanations of the
anomalies. This significantly outperforms the existing SOTA
method by 18.1% in AUROC and 4.6% in F1 -max score.

…

Enc.

Dec.

local

Enc.

Dec.

global

(B)

Vision
Model

Anomaly
Map

Local

Global

Regional

Others
Others
Others

Vision Memory Banks

(C)

AVLM
Text Prompt

Text
Feature
Text Memory Bank

✔
score
reason
few-shot
annot.-free ✔
✔
score
reason
few-shot ✔
annot.-free ❓
✔
score
reason ✔
few-shot ✔
annot.-free ✔

Figure 1: Overview of Anomaly Detection Approaches: (A)
AD models trained from scratch require large-scale datasets
and are capable of AD but lack reasoning capabilities. (B)
Memory-based AD methods leverage a pre-trained vision
model to extract features from normal images, enabling fewshot AD. However, they often require additional visual annotations and lack reasoning. (C) Our method uses pretrained AVLMs as a text feature extractors and uses it for
logical anomaly (LA) detection and reasoning with only text
prompts, eliminating the need for visual annotations.

The dataset, code and supplementary materials —
https://jasonjin34.github.io/logicad.github.io/

comprehensive, abstract understanding of the normal and
abnormal states. Moreover, some LA features even appear
in both abnormal and normal objects (Bergmann et al. 2019;
Zou et al. 2022). Current methods face challenges in effectively detecting LA. The full-shot method, which is trained
on a full dataset in the AD domain, captures all the error-free
localized features as a memory bank and uses them to detect anomalies, which can be very effective at SA detection
while facing difficulties in detecting LAs (Roth et al. 2022;
Kim et al. 2024). As shown in Figure 1(A), some approaches
attempt to solve this issue by training multiple global and
local autoencoder (AE) networks to capture both LA and
SA related features (Bergmann et al. 2022). Others rely
on additional manual visual annotations and multiple memory banks to achieve remarkable LA detection (Kim et al.
2024; Zhang et al. 2024). However, the inability to perform

Introduction
Anomalies in industrial image data can be broadly classified into two distinct categories: structural anomalys (SAs)
and LAs (Bergmann et al. 2022). The structures of SA observed in industrial images are often referred to as localized regional features, such as broken parts, color contamination, and minor deformations. These anomalies are typically observable only in the abnormal object. In contrast,
logical anomalies, such as missing objects, misplacements,
and incorrect object color combinations, are not confined to
a specific area. Generally, detecting them requires a more
* Corresponding authors with equal contributions.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4129

