The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Causal-Inspired Multitask Learning for Video-Based Human Pose Estimation
Haipeng Chen1,2 , Sifan Wu1,2 * , Zhigang Wang3 * ,
Yifang Yin4 , Yingying Jiao1,2 * , Yingda Lyu1,5 * , Zhenguang Liu6,7
2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University,
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University,
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University,
4
Institute for Infocomm Research (I 2 R), A*STAR,
5
Public Computer Education and Research Center, Jilin University,
6
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University,
7
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security,
chenhp@jlu.edu.cn, wusifan2021@gmail.com, wangzhigang2024@gmail.com,
yin yifang@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, jiaoyy21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, ydlv@jlu.edu.cn, liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com

Abstract

this task has garnered an increasing interest from researchers
and industry, accelerating advances in human-centric applications in diverse scenes such as action recognition (Yang
et al. 2023), motion prediction (Su et al. 2021) and motion
transfer (Liu et al. 2022b; Wu et al. 2024b).

Video-based human pose estimation has long been a fundamental yet challenging problem in computer vision. Previous studies focus on spatio-temporal modeling through the
enhancement of architecture design and optimization strategies. However, they overlook the causal relationships in the
joints, leading to models that may be overly tailored and
thus estimate poorly to challenging scenes. Therefore, adequate causal reasoning capability, coupled with good interpretability of model, are both indispensable and prerequisite for achieving reliable results. In this paper, we pioneer a causal perspective on pose estimation and introduce
a causal-inspired multitask learning framework, consisting of
two stages. In the first stage, we try to endow the model with
causal spatio-temporal modeling ability by introducing two
self-supervision auxiliary tasks. Specifically, these auxiliary
tasks enable the network to infer challenging keypoints based
on observed keypoint information, thereby imbuing causal
reasoning capabilities into the model and making it robust to
challenging scenes. In the second stage, we argue that not all
feature tokens contribute equally to pose estimation. Prioritizing causal (keypoint-relevant) tokens is crucial to achieve
reliable results, which could improve the interpretability of
the model. To this end, we propose a Token Causal Importance Selection module to identify the causal tokens and noncausal tokens (e.g., background and objects). Additionally,
non-causal tokens could provide potentially beneficial cues
but may be redundant. We further introduce a non-causal tokens clustering module to merge the similar non-causal tokens. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on three large-scale benchmark datasets.

With the continual breakthroughs of deep learning algorithms and models (Yao, Li, and Xiao 2024; Hu et al. 2024b),
AI has achieved success in various fields (Shuai et al. 2023;
Chen et al. 2024c; Guan et al. 2024b). For pose estimation, one line of work focuses on designing different network structures. (Artacho and Savakis 2020) adopts CNNs
and LSTM to extract the intrinsic motion dynamic of persons. (Feng et al. 2023) proposes feature difference method
to capture spatio-temporal dependencies in videos. Another
line of work introduces specific loss functions to supervise
the network. (Liu et al. 2022a; Feng et al. 2023) propose
a mutual information objective to align the features of sequences and obtain an informative representation.
Though promising, there are a few clouds on the horizon for video-based pose estimation. 1) Robustness. Overtailored network structures (Tang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024)
and the lack of causal perceptual capabilities compromise
the robustness of models (Zhang, Ji, and Liu 2023). Challenging scenes such as pose occlusion and video defocus
often appear in videos, where the model fails to accurately
estimate the human poses. For instance, when multiple people play football, the legs of the persons in the video occlude each other. Existing methods primarily concentrate on
the occluded parts and attempt to identify the positions of
the occluded keypoints. However, they usually sacrifice an
explicit understanding of observed (non-entangled region)
visual cues. In other words, they lack an ability to causal
reasoning, utilizing observed variables to speculate about
unknown (entangled region) variables. 2) Interpretability.
For pose estimation tasks, each frame is a mixture of causal
(keypoint-relevant) and non-causal (e.g., background, objects) factors (Liu et al. 2024). Obviously, the contribution
of causal factors is much greater than that of non-causal factors. Existing methods struggle to capture the causal features

Introduction
Estimating human poses from videos is a fundamental topic
in artificial intelligence, which aims to identify and localize
anatomical keypoints on the human body. In recent years,
* Corresponding to: Yingying Jiao, Sifan Wu, Zhigang Wang,
Yingda Lyu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2052

