The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Integrating Inference and Experimental Design for
Contextual Behavioral Model Learning
Gongtao Zhou, Haoran Yu∗
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
zhougt3@qq.com, yhrhawk@gmail.com

Abstract
robo-advisor

The strategic behavior of users is significantly influenced by
their hidden information such as private valuations, risk preferences, and price sensitivities. Contextual behavioral model
learning refers to learning the dependence of users’ hidden
information on their observable context information. While
many existing studies use offline data to learn contextual behavioral models, we study how to design sequential experiments to collect the most informative user behavioral data for
learning. We propose a basic inference-then-design method.
In each experimental period, it infers a probabilistic contextual behavioral model using historical experimental data, and
then designs the new experiment to maximize the gain of information about the probabilistic model. We further improve
the basic method in two aspects. First, we improve the inference step by specifying a more informative prior for learning the probabilistic contextual behavioral model. Second, we
integrate the inference and design steps instead of conducting them separately. Our rigorous theoretic analysis reveals
that the optimization objective of the inference step can be
modified to account for the downstream experimental design
step. Numerical experiments show that our methods lead to
more effective experiments, i.e., the collected experimental
data can help in learning a more accurate behavioral model.

1

Which portfolio would you prefer to invest in?
Portfolio 1: ...

Portfolio 2: ...

Portfolio 3: ...

Portfolio 4: ...

None of the above

design 

observable: context information 

investor
I would prefer ...

unobservable: risk preference ,
rationality 
(i.e., choice )

Figure 1: A Portfolio Choice Experiment.

collect the behavioral data of users with different contexts.
For example, it is increasingly common for trading platforms to use robo-advisors to interact with investors and
elicit hidden information from their choices across portfolios
(Alsabah et al. 2021; Wang and Yu 2021; Dai et al. 2021).
As shown in Figure 1, a robo-advisor queries an investor
regarding its preference over several portfolios with different return means and variances. The investor’s choice helps
the trading platform infer the relation between an investor’s
observable context information and its hidden information
(e.g., risk preference and decision-making rationality).
Our work studies how to design sequential experiments
to learn an accurate contextual behavioral model. We consider a general unknown mapping from context information
to hidden information, and model it using a neural network.
Essentially, our problem is to design experiments that collect
the most informative data for learning the network weights.
We focus on the application of portfolio choice model
learning in Figure 1, while our solution applies to general
contextual behavioral model learning problems. Our basic
idea is to conduct the inference step and design step in each
period. First, we use all historical data to infer the distribution of the neural network weights (which characterize the
mapping from the context to hidden information). Second,
we choose the next experimental design to maximize the
gain of information about the neural network weights.
Our work identifies the limitations of the above basic

Introduction

One key challenge in predicting user strategic behavior is
that it depends on some hidden information that is not observed by the platforms. For example, purchasing behavior relies on users’ hidden utilities across different products
(Donnelly et al. 2021), and bidding behavior depends on
users’ private valuations of the items being sold (Duan et al.
2022). Platforms can only observe users’ context information (e.g., demographic information and searching history),
and users’ hidden information is usually assumed to be dependent on their context information (Donnelly et al. 2021;
Duan et al. 2022). Accurately learning the dependence between users’ context information and hidden information is
crucial for platforms to predict user strategic behavior and
optimize their operations.
To learn users’ contextual behavioral models, platforms
can actively design experiments to interact with users and
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14520

