The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rebalancing Multi-Label Class-Incremental Learning
Kaile Du1, 2 * , Yifan Zhou1, 2 * , Fan Lyu3 , Yuyang Li1 , Junzhou Xie1 ,
Yixi Shen4 , Fuyuan Hu4, 5, 6 , Guangcan Liu1†
1
School of Automation, Southeast University, China
Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of CSE, Ministry of Education, China
3
NLPR, MAIS, CASIA, China
4
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, China
5
Suzhou Key Laboratory of Intelligent Low Carbon Technology Application, China
6
Jiangsu Industrial Intelligent Low Carbon Technology Engineering Center, China
2

Task 1
Training label space 𝐶!

Abstract
Multi-label class-incremental learning (MLCIL) is essential
for real-world multi-label applications, allowing models to
learn new labels while retaining previously learned knowledge continuously. However, recent MLCIL approaches can
only achieve suboptimal performance due to the oversight of
the positive-negative imbalance problem, which manifests at
both the label and loss levels because of the task-level partial
label issue. The imbalance at the label level arises from the
substantial absence of negative labels, while the imbalance
at the loss level stems from the asymmetric contributions of
the positive and negative loss parts to the optimization. To
address the issue above, we propose a Rebalance framework
for both the Loss and Label levels (RebLL), which integrates
two key modules: asymmetric knowledge distillation (AKD)
and online relabeling (OR). AKD is proposed to rebalance
at the loss level by emphasizing the negative label learning
in classification loss and down-weighting the contribution of
overconfident predictions in distillation loss. OR is designed
for label rebalance, which restores the original class distribution in memory by online relabeling the missing classes.
Our comprehensive experiments on the PASCAL VOC and
MS-COCO datasets demonstrate that this rebalancing strategy significantly improves performance, achieving new stateof-the-art results even with a vanilla CNN backbone.

Task 2
Training label space 𝐶 "

…

Task T
Training label space 𝐶 #

…
cat

cat, person, dog person, car

𝑓!"

𝑓!#

person, dog dog, motorcycle

…

𝑓!$

…
cat

cat, person person, car

Test label space 𝐶!

Test label space 𝐶!:"

…

cat, dog person, motorcycle
Test label space 𝐶!:#

Figure 1: A diagram of multi-label class-incremental learning. Labels are trained and tested across tasks from Task 1
to Task T . Missing labels are highlighted in red. The training label space is task-specific, while the testing label space
progressively expands with the addition of each new task.

there has been limited exploration into the more practical
domain of multi-label class-incremental learning (MLCIL)
(Dong et al. 2023; Du et al. 2024b). In MLCIL, training images for new classes are partially labeled to minimize the
cost of manual annotation. Specifically, only the classes for
the new task are labeled, while the past and future ones are
not annotated, a phenomenon called task-level partial label
(PL) (Du et al. 2024b) or category-incomplete (Dong et al.
2023) issue. For example, as shown in Figure 1, there is a
training image of Task 2 containing the labels “cat”, “person” and “dog”, only the labels for the current task (“person”) are annotated, while the labels for past (“cat”) and future (“dog”) tasks remain unannotated.
However, most recent MLCIL methods focus on designing new network architectures for MLCIL to fit the PL setting, ignoring the positive-negative imbalance issue. AGCN
(Du et al. 2022, 2024a) utilizes pseudo-labels to construct
statistical label relationships within the Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN). KRT (Dong et al. 2023) is the knowledge restoration and transfer framework based on a crossattention mechanism (CAM). CSC (Du et al. 2024b) leverages a learnable GCN to calibrate label relationships. In

Code — https://github.com/Kaile-Du/RebLL

Introduction
Class-incremental learning (CIL) (Buzzega et al. 2020;
Douillard et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2023)
continuously learn new classes without the need to retrain on
the entire dataset. However, as the model learns new classes,
it may overwrite the knowledge of previous tasks, resulting
in a significant decline in performance on older classes, a
phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
and Cohen 1989). While numerous methods have been developed for single-label class-incremental learning (SLCIL)
(Sun et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Lyu et al. 2023, 2024),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16372

