The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Multi-Policy Evaluation for Reinforcement Learning
Shuze Daniel Liu1 , Claire Chen2 , Shangtong Zhang1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
2
School of Arts and Science, University of Virginia
shuzeliu@virginia.edu, clairechen@email.virginia.edu, shangtong@virginia.edu

Abstract

titioners heavily use online methods to evaluate the performance of policies.
To efficiently evaluate multiple policies, previous works
try to reuse online samples generated by other target policies. Agarwal et al. (2017) show that naively combining data
generated by other policies may actually worsen the estimation. Data from other policies must be carefully reweighed
before consideration. However, in multi-step reinforcement
learning, those weights require knowing complicated covariance terms between every pair of target policies (Lai,
Zou, and Song 2020). Such strong prior knowledge is rarely
available and makes these methods impractical. To avoid
complex weights, other literature (Dann, Ghavamzadeh, and
Marinov 2023) tried to reuse online samples by assuming
deterministic policies and a flexible environment that can
start from any desired state. These assumptions rarely hold.
In our work, we design a tailored behavior policy to efficiently and unbiasedly evaluate all target policies. Our
method does not require knowing any complex covariance
and applies to general RL settings without any restrictive assumptions. Our contribution is two-fold.
Theoretically, our method is always unbiased (Theorem 1)
and is proven to achieve lower variance than the on-policy
estimator for each target policy under characterized conditions (Theorem 4, Theorem 3). Moreover, we introduce a
similarity metric between policies and prove that the number of required samples for our method does not scale with
the number of target policies under the similarity condition.
Empirically, compared with previous best methods, we
show our estimator has a substantially lower variance. Our
method requires much fewer samples to reach the same level
of accuracy and achieves state-of-the-art performance in a
broad range of environments.

To unbiasedly evaluate multiple target policies, the dominant
approach among RL practitioners is to run and evaluate each
target policy separately. However, this evaluation method is
far from efficient because samples are not shared across policies, and running target policies to evaluate themselves is actually not optimal. In this paper, we address these two weaknesses by designing a tailored behavior policy to reduce the
variance of estimators across all target policies. Theoretically,
we prove that executing this behavior policy with manyfold
fewer samples outperforms on-policy evaluation on every target policy under characterized conditions. Empirically, we
show our estimator has a substantially lower variance compared with previous best methods and achieves state-of-theart performance in a broad range of environments.

Introduction
We explore the multi-policy evaluation problem, where we
aim to estimate the performance of multiple target policies.
In reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton and Barto (2018)),
multi-policy evaluation is prevalent for model selections
(Schulman et al. 2017; Prechelt 2002). A simple method to
evaluate multiple policies is to perform online policy evaluation for each target policy separately. However, the number
of required online samples scales up quickly with the number of target policies.
In many scenarios, heavily relying on massive online data
is not preferable. Firstly, collecting massive online data can
be both expensive and slow when interacting with the real
world (Li 2019; Zhang 2023; Chen, Liu, and Zhang 2024;
Liu, Chen, and Zhang 2024a). Secondly, even if there is a
simulator, for complex problems such as data center cooling,
each step may still cost 10 seconds (Chervonyi et al. 2022).
Thus, building an RL system demanding millions of steps
remains expensive.
To address the expensive nature of online data, offline RL
is proposed to mitigate the dependency on online data. However, RL systems built only on offline datasets have uncontrolled bias. A policy showing high performance on offline
data may actually perform very poorly in real deployment
(Levine 2018). Therefore, both online and offline RL prac-

Related Work
Multiple target policies. In multi-policy evaluation, traditional approaches often evaluate each policy separately using on-policy Monte Carlo methods. However, this ordinary
method ignores the potential similarity between target policies and is crude for two reasons. First, the method does not
utilize data sampled by other policies, causing the number
of required online samples to scale quickly with the number
of target policies. Second, even for a single target policy, the
on-policy evaluation method is still not the optimal choice.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18951

