The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TinySubNets: An Efficient and Low Capacity Continual Learning Strategy
Marcin Pietroń1 , Kamil Faber1 , Dominik Żurek1 , Roberto Corizzo2
1

AGH University of Krakow, Krakow, Poland
American University, Washington DC, USA
pietron@agh.edu.pl, kfaber@agh.edu.pl, dzurek@agh.edu.pl, rcorizzo@american.edu
2

Abstract

Continual learning (CL) is a machine learning paradigm aiming at designing effective methods and strategies to analyze
data in complex and dynamic real-world environments (Parisi
et al. 2019). As models are challenged with multiple tasks
over their lifetime, a desired property for CL strategies is to
maintain a high performance across all tasks. This paradigm
is receiving increasing attention, which led to many works
being proposed (Parisi et al. 2019; Baker et al. 2023; Faber
et al. 2023; Wortsman et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2023). There
are three main types of CL strategies: rehearsal (also known
as experience replay), regularization, and architectural.

Among architectural strategies, forget-free approaches are
particularly relevant. They typically accommodate new tasks
by assigning a subset of available model weights to each task.
State-of-the-art approaches in this category include Packnet
(Mallya and Lazebnik 2017), WSN (Kang et al. 2022), AdaQPacknet (Pietron et al. 2023), and DyTox (Douillard et al.
2022). However, their effectiveness strongly depends on the
degree to which they can exploit model capacity to accommodate as many tasks as possible. One important pitfall of most
existing pruning-based architectural forget-free methods is
that they are limited in their ability to exploit model sparsity,
since each layer is pruned with the same constant sparsity
level. As a result, they do not properly tune the number of
weights to be removed while preserving classification accuracy (Xu et al. 2021). A possible approach to address this
issue is incorporating different sparsity levels for each layer
(Pietron et al. 2023). Another general limitation of recent
forget-free methods is that they are prone to a quick saturation of the available model capacity in that they cannot
assign more than one value to each weight and are, therefore,
limited by the available weights, as in (Douillard et al. 2022).
In this paper, we propose TinySubNets (TSN), a novel
forget-free method for continual image classification that
addresses these limitations by incorporating adaptive pruning with sparsity-level identification and adaptive non-linear
weight quantization (Figure 1). To effectively exploit model
sparsity, TSN incorporates pruning with different sparsity
levels for each layer. Moreover, to deal with the issue of
quickly saturating model capacity, TSN performs an adaptive
quantization stage, where each task quantizes its weights via
a stored codebook obtained via clustering. Quantized weights
can be shared between tasks if their KL-divergence is low,
or they can be separated into components, i.e. subsets of the
available 32 bits, if their KL-divergence is high, resulting in
totally independent memory banks with reduced bit-widths.
Weight sharing is carried out through a trainable mask that automatically selects relevant weights for the current task from
previous tasks during gradient descent learning, minimizing
the bias associated with learning previous tasks. Thanks to
these capabilities, our strategy allows model capacity to be
drastically reduced while preserving model accuracy.
In summary, the contributions of our paper are as follows:

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a forget-free model-agnostic continual strategy that adapts model architectures via adaptive pruning,

Continual Learning (CL) is a highly relevant setting gaining traction in recent machine learning research. Among CL
works, architectural and hybrid strategies are particularly effective due to their potential to adapt the model architecture as
new tasks are presented. However, many existing solutions do
not efficiently exploit model sparsity, and are prone to capacity saturation due to their inefficient use of available weights,
which limits the number of learnable tasks. In this paper, we
propose TinySubNets (TSN), a novel architectural CL strategy
that addresses the issues through the unique combination of
pruning with different sparsity levels, adaptive quantization,
and weight sharing. Pruning identifies a subset of weights that
preserve model performance, making less relevant weights
available for future tasks. Adaptive quantization allows a single weight to be separated into multiple parts which can be assigned to different tasks. Weight sharing between tasks boosts
the exploitation of capacity and task similarity, allowing for
the identification of a better trade-off between model accuracy
and capacity. These features allow TSN to efficiently leverage
the available capacity, enhance knowledge transfer, and reduce
computational resources consumption. Experimental results
involving common benchmark CL datasets and scenarios show
that our proposed strategy achieves better results in terms of
accuracy than existing state-of-the-art CL strategies. Moreover, our strategy is shown to provide a significantly improved
model capacity exploitation.

Code — https://github.com/lifelonglab/tinysubnets

Introduction

19913

