The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Energy-Guided Optimization for Personalized Image Editing with Pretrained
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Rui Jiang1 * , Xinghe Fu1 * , Guangcong Zheng1 , Teng Li1 , Taiping Yao2 , Xi Li1†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{jrss, xinghefu, guangcongzheng, tengli19}@zju.edu.cn, taipingyao@tencent.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Diffusion
Model

(a)

The rapid advancement of pretrained text-driven diffusion
models has significantly enriched applications in image generation and editing. However, as the demand for personalized
content editing increases, new challenges emerge especially
when dealing with arbitrary objects and complex scenes. Existing methods usually mistakes mask as the object shape
prior, which struggle to achieve a seamless integration result.
The mostly used inversion noise initialization also hinders
the identity consistency towards the target object. To address
these challenges, we propose a novel training-free framework
that formulates personalized content editing as the optimization of edited images in the latent space, using diffusion models as the energy function guidance conditioned by reference
text-image pairs. A coarse-to-fine strategy is proposed that
employs text energy guidance at the early stage to achieve a
natural transition toward the target class and uses point-topoint feature-level image energy guidance to perform finegrained appearance alignment with the target object. Additionally, we introduce the latent space content composition to
enhance overall identity consistency with the target. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method excels in object replacement even with a large domain gap, highlighting
its potential for high-quality, personalized image editing.

𝑥𝑡

𝑥0

𝑐0

𝑥𝑡−1
Diffusion
Model

(b)

𝑥0

𝑥𝑡

𝑥𝑡−1

𝜀

𝛻𝑥𝑡−1
Optimize W/ Sampling

𝑐0
Diffusion
Diffusion
Model
Model

(c)

𝑥0

𝜖 ∼ 𝒩(0, 𝐈)

𝛻𝑥0

𝜀 Optimize W/O

𝑥𝑡

Sampling
Optimized Image

Training-required
𝑐0

𝑐𝑡

Training-free

Inversion

𝜀 Energy function

Figure 1: Comparisons among different methods in personalized content editing. (a) Inpainting-based methods usually
require fine-tuning the diffusion model with reference images as the condition. (b) Sampling-based methods initialize
the noise with inversion to maintain the background information from the source image. (c) The proposed method iteratively optimizes the latent code to perform training-free
and inversion-free editing.

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of pretrained text-driven diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022;
Saharia et al. 2022), the field of image generation has experienced unprecedented growth in guided image manipulation techniques through textual directives. The development of pretrained text-to-image (T2I) generation models
has significantly enriched various domains, particularly image editing (Mou et al. 2024, 2023; Mokady et al. 2023), offering novel approaches to understanding and manipulating
images. However, as the demand for personalized content
editing increases, new challenges arise, particularly when
dealing with arbitrary objects and complex scenes. Existing
methods primarily focus on personalized image generation
(Gal et al. 2022; Ruiz et al. 2023), aiming to create new images with customized content.

Personalized image editing involves placing a target object into a desired position within a scene image or replacing
objects in a source image with those from a reference image.
The primary challenges in this task are accurately integrating personalized content harmoniously into the target image
and maintaining editing flexibility.
To address these challenges, there are two main categories of personalized image editing methods: inpaintingbased and sampling-based (as shown in Fig. 1). These methods attempt to remove and regenerate objects to edit specific
image regions. Other methods like SelfGuidance (Epstein
et al. 2023) and Diffeditor (Mou et al. 2024) provide guidance in the sampling process and manipulate the sampling
direction based on reference images.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4048

