The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Limitations in Employing Natural Language Supervision for Sensor-Based
Human Activity Recognition – And Ways to Overcome Them
Harish Haresamudram1 , Apoorva Beedu1 , Mashfiqui Rabbi2
Sankalita Saha2 , Irfan Essa1 , Thomas Ploetz1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology
2
Optum AI
hharesamudram3@gatech.edu, abeedu3@gatech.edu, mashfiqui.rabbi@optum.com
sankalita.saha@optum.com, irfan@gatech.edu, thomas.ploetz@gatech.edu
Abstract

(HAR), which involves automatically predicting which activity is being performed. It has numerous applications, including health and fitness monitoring (Koskimäki, Siirtola,
and Röning 2017) and eating detection (Bin Morshed et al.
2022). From a wearables standpoint, advantages of NLS
such as predicting unseen activities and performing recognition through text queries are desirable, as they would allow
new capabilities to be added on the fly.
Despite the astonishing success of NLS across modalities,
domains, and applications, we discover and demonstrate in
this paper that it is highly challenging to apply it in a plugand-play manner to wearables based HAR. Pre-training on a
large-scale dataset (Capture-24) followed by zero shot prediction of activities is drastically worse by around 30-40%,
than simple end-to-end and self-supervised training, across
six target datasets. We discover two reasons that explain
this reduction in performance, underpinned by challenges
unique to wearable sensors and the HAR task: (i) Sensor
Heterogeneity: Diversity in sensors results in significant differences in data distributions due to hardware constraints
and settings such as gain, data and signal processing, differences in sampling rates – even if the sensor locations and
activities are the same (Stisen et al. 2015). This renders zero
shot prediction very difficult, as pre-trained models cannot
deal well with shifting distributions causing substantial performance degradation when there is no opportunity for adaptation to (vastly) different test conditions; and (ii) Lack of
Rich Descriptions of Activities: Learning such joint embedding spaces is data intensive, relying on diverse and unique
text descriptions to learn wide ranging concepts. However,
many HAR datasets contain only a handful of activity labels and (in some cases) demographics information (Kwon
et al. 2020; Plötz 2023) – a far cry from the 400M imagetext pairs in the original CLIP paper (Radford et al. 2021).
Therefore, in scenarios with diverging data distributions, or
when there is paucity of diverse descriptions of data, NLS
can be an inferior option.
We develop strategies to tackle these challenges, leading
to improved HAR performance, and more broader applicability across scenarios. To deal with varying data distributions between pre-training and target datasets, we show how
updating/adapting some layers of the pre-trained network on
target data with as little as 4 mins of data/activity leads to
substantially improved recognition. This demonstrates that

Cross-modal contrastive pre-training between natural language and other modalities, e.g., vision and audio, has
demonstrated astonishing performance and effectiveness
across a diverse variety of tasks and domains. In this paper,
we investigate whether such natural language supervision can
be used for wearable sensor based Human Activity Recognition (HAR), and discover that–surprisingly–it performs substantially worse than standard end-to-end training and selfsupervision. We identify the primary causes for this as: sensor heterogeneity and the lack of rich, diverse text descriptions of activities. To mitigate their impact, we also develop
strategies and assess their effectiveness through an extensive experimental evaluation. These strategies lead to significant increases in activity recognition, bringing performance
closer to supervised and self-supervised training, while also
enabling the recognition of unseen activities and cross modal
retrieval of videos. Overall, our work paves the way for better
sensor-language learning, ultimately leading to the development of foundational models for HAR using wearables.

1

Introduction

Learning joint embedding spaces by pairing modalities with
natural language descriptions of their contents (e.g., image
captions or sound descriptions for audio) has proven successful across modalities (Radford et al. 2021; Xu et al.
2021; Wu et al. 2022). Here, the task is to predict which
description goes with which input, for large-scale datasets.
The expressiveness of natural language enables it to oversee
a wider array of concepts, culminating in highly effective
representations (Radford et al. 2021).
Some advantages of such setups include: (i) zero-shot
prediction of classes through text descriptions, potentially
aided by useful auxiliary and context information (Shen
et al. 2022); and (ii) cross-modal retrieval, where natural
language can be utilized to retrieve relevant images, audio,
or sensor data, akin to performing search. The promise of
these models is that they are plug-and-play: they can be utilized without further training or adaptation in diverse application scenarios.
This paper focuses on Natural Language Supervision
(NLS) for wearables based Human Activity Recognition
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

273

