The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Personalized Clustering via Targeted Representation Learning
Xiwen Geng1,2 , Suyun Zhao1,2 * , Yixin Yu3 , Borui Peng3 , Pan Du1,2
Hong Chen1,2 , Cuiping Li1,2 , Mengdie Wang1,2
1

Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering of MOE Renmin University of China
2
School of Information, Renmin University of China
3
School of Statistics, Remin University of China
{xiwen, zhaosuyun, yuyixin3642, pengborui, chong, licuiping}@ruc.edu.cn, {du pan, wangmd ruc}@163.com
Abstract
Clustering traditionally aims to reveal a natural grouping
structure within unlabeled data. However, this structure may
not always align with users’ preferences. In this paper,
we propose a personalized clustering method that explicitly performs targeted representation learning by interacting
with users via modicum task information (e.g., must-link or
cannot-link pairs) to guide the clustering direction. We query
users with the most informative pairs, i.e., those pairs most
hard to cluster and those most easy to miscluster, to facilitate
the representation learning in terms of the clustering preference. Moreover, by exploiting attention mechanism, the targeted representation is learned and augmented. By leveraging the targeted representation and constrained contrastive
loss as well, personalized clustering is obtained. Theoretically, we verify that the risk of personalized clustering is
tightly bounded, guaranteeing that active queries to users do
mitigate the clustering risk. Experimentally, extensive results
show that our method performs well across different clustering tasks and datasets, even when only a limited number of
queries are available.

1

Figure 1: The diversity of cluster orientation. Different tasks
have different orientations for feature learning and image
clustering.

Introduction

Deep clustering refers to some unsupervised machine learning techniques that leverage deep learning to reveal the
grouping structures hidden in data samples. Unlike traditional clustering methods, deep clustering aims to learn latent representations of the data that facilitate clustering in
terms of its underlying patterns (Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi
2016; Caron et al. 2018; Li et al. 2021; Zhong et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022, 2023).
Usually, most of the existing methods conduct clustering
with the unique goal of maximizing clustering performance,
while ignoring the personalized demand of clustering tasks.
In real scenarios, however, users may tend to cluster unlabeled data according to their preferences, such as distinctive
objectives (animals, architectures, and characters etc.), and
then some personalized clustering demands are put forward.
For example, Fig.1 depicts the diverse criteria of clustering.
There are multiple objects in each image, such as animals
and architectures. Some users require clustering in terms of

animals, so the two images with dogs should be grouped in
the same cluster, classified as dogs. In contrast, some others
may prefer to group images according to architectures; thus,
the two images with the Eiffel Tower should be clustered together. In cases with such personalized demands, many existing clustering techniques may decline or even be unworkable without user guidance.Therefore, it is still a challenging
problem to cluster along a desired orientation.
A candidate solution to this issue is constrained clustering, which incorporates prior knowledge through constraints
to guide the neural network toward a desired cluster orientation (Wagstaff et al. 2001). The most commonly used constraint is the pairwise constraint, which provides information
by indicating whether a pair of samples belongs to the same
(must-link) or distinct (cannot-link) clusters. While they use
constraints to facilitate models to achieve superior clustering
performance, rather than towards a desired configuration.
Sometimes, randomly selected constraint pairs (Manduchi
et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2022) may lead to inferior clustering results in personalized scenarios, just as demonstrated in

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16790

