The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decentralized Projected Riemannian Stochastic Recursive Momentum Method for
Nonconvex Optimization
Kangkang Deng1 , Jiang Hu2 *
1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410073, China
2
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, US
freedeng1208@gmail.com, hujiangopt@gmail.com

St(d, r) := {x ∈ Rd×r : x⊤ x = Ir }. Problem (1) is
prevalent in machine learning, signal processing, and deep
learning, see, e.g., the principal component analysis (Ye and
Zhang 2021), the low-rank matrix completion (Boumal and
Absil 2015; Kasai, Jawanpuria, and Mishra 2019; Deng and
Hu 2023), the low-dimensional subspace learning (Ando,
Zhang, and Bartlett 2005; Mishra et al. 2019), and the deep
neural networks with batch normalization (Cho and Lee
2017; Hu et al. 2024). One challenge in solving (1) comes
from the nonconvexity of the manifold constraint, which
causes difficulty in achieving the consensus (Chen et al.
2021; Deng and Hu 2023; Hu et al. 2023; Deng, Hu, and
Wang 2023).
In this paper, we investigate an online setting where each
node i interacts with its local cost function fi through a
stochastic first-order oracle (SFO). This SFO setting is particularly relevant in various online learning and expected
risk minimization problems, where the noise introduced by
the SFO stems from the variability of sampling over streaming data received at each node. A notable example is online
principal component analysis (Cardot and Degras 2018).
Our primary focus is on the oracle complexity, defined as the
total number of SFO queries required at each node to compute an ϵ-stationary point tuple {x1 , · · · , xn }, as formalized
in Definition 1.

Abstract
This paper studies decentralized optimization over a compact
submanifold within a communication network of n nodes,
where each node possesses a smooth non-convex local cost
function, and the goal is to jointly minimize the sum of these
local costs. We focus particularly on the online setting, where
local data is processed in real-time as it streams in, without the need for full data storage. We propose a decentralized projected Riemannian stochastic recursive momentum
(DPRSRM) method that employs local hybrid stochastic gradient estimators and uses the network to track the global gra3
dient. DPRSRM achieves an oracle complexity of O(ϵ− 2 ),
−2
outperforming existing methods that have at most O(ϵ )
complexity. Our method requires only O(1) gradient evaluations per iteration for each local node and does not require restarting with a large batch gradient. Furthermore, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods compared to state-of-the-art ones through numerical experiments
on principal component analysis problems and low-rank matrix completion.

Introduction
Decentralized optimization has emerged as a prominent area
of research, particularly for its application in large-scale systems, such as sensor networks, distributed computing, and
machine learning. In these contexts, data is often partitioned
across numerous nodes, rendering centralized optimization
approaches impractical due to challenges such as privacy
limitations and restricted computational resources. In this
work, we are concerned with the distributed smooth optimization on a compact submanifold

Related Works
Decentralized optimization in Euclidean space (i.e., M =
Rd×r ) has been extensively studied over the past few
decades (see, e.g., (Bianchi and Jakubowicz 2012; Shi et al.
2015; Xu et al. 2015; Qu and Li 2017; Di Lorenzo and Scutari 2016; Tatarenko and Touri 2017; Wai et al. 2017; Yuan
et al. 2018; Hong, Hajinezhad, and Zhao 2017; Zeng and
Yin 2018; Scutari and Sun 2019; Sun, Lu, and Hong 2020)).
However, since problem (1) involves a manifold M, which
is often nonlinear and nonconvex, these works may fail when
directly applied to solve problem (1).
Perhaps the earliest works for solving (1) are (Mishra
et al. 2019; Shah 2017). However, these methods require
an asymptotically infinite number of consensus steps for
convergence, which limits their practical applicability. For
the case where M is the Stiefel manifold, (Chen et al.
2021) propose a decentralized Riemannian gradient descent
method and its gradient-tracking version. To use a single

n

min
s.t.

1X
fi (xi ),
n i=1
x 1 = · · · = xn ,
xi ∈ M, ∀ i = 1, 2, . . . , n,

(1)

where n is the number of nodes, fi is the smooth nonconvex local objective at the i-th node, and M is a (nonconvex) compact smooth submanifold embedded in Rd×r with
the extrinsic dimensions (d, r), e.g., the Stiefel manifold
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11203

