The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-view Granular-ball Contrastive Clustering
Peng Su1,2 , Shudong Huang1,2 * , Weihong Ma3 , Deng Xiong4 , Jiancheng Lv1,2
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education, China
3
Information Technology Research Center, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100097, China
4
Stevens Institute of Technology, 1 Castle Point Terrace, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
supeng@stu.scu.edu.cn, huangsd@scu.edu.cn, mawh@nercita.org.cn, dxiong@stevens.edu, lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

learning. These methods often involve matrix decomposition and fusion, resulting in high computational complexity,
making them difficult to apply to large-scale datasets, which
severely hinders their practical application.
In recent years, deep-based multi-view learning methods
have gained significant attention due to their excellent representation capabilities. These methods extend deep singleview clustering and typically select appropriate feature extractors based on the properties of the views. DCCA (Andrew et al. 2013) projects data from two views into a common space using deep neural networks, where the representations of the two views are highly linearly correlated, making it a nonlinear extension of canonical correlation analysis. PARTY (Peng et al. 2016) is a deep subspace clustering method with sparse priors that projects input data into a
latent space, maintaining local structure by minimizing reconstruction loss while introducing sparse prior information
into the latent representation learning to preserve sparse reconstruction relationships across the entire dataset. DIMC
(Wen et al. 2020) extracts high-level features of multiple
views through view-specific autoencoders and introduces fusion graph-based constraints to preserve the local geometric
structure of the data. DMCE (Zhao, Yang, and Nie 2023) applies ensemble clustering to fuse similarity graphs from different views, using graph autoencoders to learn a common
spectral embedding. These methods combine deep learning with traditional multi-view learning ideas by introducing constraints from traditional methods such as neighbor
graph constraints or self-expression constraints into the latent space projected by deep modules. This allows the models to learn concise but comprehensive representations that
maximally preserve the structural information of the input
data.
Multi-view contrastive learning is another important
branch of deep multi-view clustering. It can generally be divided into two categories: instance-level contrastive learning
and cluster-level contrastive learning. The basic idea of the
former is that instances of the same sample from different
views should be as close as possible in the latent space, typically forming positive pairs. In these methods (Liu et al.
2023; Su et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2023b; Xu et al. 2023a),
the construction and handling of negative pairs is a key
focus due to the unknown instance labels in unsupervised
paradigms. Improper negative pairs can degrade the model’s

Previous multi-view contrastive learning methods typically operate at two scales: instance-level and cluster-level.
Instance-level approaches construct positive and negative
pairs based on sample correspondences, aiming to bring positive pairs closer and push negative pairs further apart in
the latent space. Cluster-level methods focus on calculating cluster assignments for samples under each view and
maximize view consensus by reducing distribution discrepancies, e.g., minimizing KL divergence or maximizing mutual information. However, these two types of methods either introduce false negatives, leading to reduced model discriminability, or overlook local structures and cannot measure relationships between clusters across views explicitly. To
this end, we propose a method named Multi-view Granularball Contrastive Clustering (MGBCC). MGBCC segments
the sample set into coarse-grained granular balls, and establishes associations between intra-view and cross-view granular balls. These associations are reinforced in a shared latent
space, thereby achieving multi-granularity contrastive learning. Granular balls lie between instances and clusters, naturally preserving the local topological structure of the sample
set. We conduct extensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Code — https://github.com/Duo-laimi/mgbcc main

Introduction
Multi-view data refers to data collected from different sensors or obtained by different feature extractors, often exhibiting heterogeneity (Fang et al. 2023). For example, a web
page typically contains images, text, and videos, each of
which can be considered a view, reflecting the same sample from different perspectives. Multi-view clustering has
received continuous attention in recent years, aiming to partition multi-view data into different clusters in an unsupervised manner (Huang et al. 2019, 2022; Liu 2023; Deng
et al. 2024). The key challenge in multi-view clustering is
balancing the consistency and diversity between different
views to learn the most comprehensive shared representation. Traditional multi-view learning methods mainly include subspace learning, graph learning, and multi-kernel
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20637

