The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Communication in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
with Implicit Consensus Generation
Dapeng Li1,2 , Na Lou1,2 , Zhiwei Xu3 , Bin Zhang∗1,2 , Guoliang Fan* 1,2
1

The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shandong University
{lidapeng2020, na.lou, zhangbin2020, guoliang.fan}@ia.ac.cn,zhiwei xu@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract

et al. 2020; Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and Fergus 2016), and using the received communication messages to enhance local
observations for policy selection and learning. These methods can effectively reduce uncertainty among agents and improve cooperative performance. However, high communication costs limit the practicality and effectiveness of these
algorithms in real-world applications with strict bandwidth
and real-time requirements (Roth, Simmons, and Veloso
2006). Additionally, excessive communication can introduce
unnecessary or even harmful information (Zhang, Zhang,
and Lin 2019; Guan et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2020), potentially impairing the convergence of the learning process.
Therefore, how to reduce communication costs and send efficient messages becomes a valuable problem.
In contrast to explicit communication, implicit consensus cooperation (Xu et al. 2023; Ruan et al. 2023; Pagello
et al. 1999) involves agents inferring a consistent consensus
through their respective local observations. By leveraging
the consensus, agents can develop a shared understanding of
the environment and the group, thereby enhancing cooperative performance without additional communication costs.
However, the drawback of implicit consensus is that, due
to the limitations of local observations, forming a complex
consensus can be challenging when there are significant discrepancies in observations among agents. Furthermore, excessive reliance on consensus may result in a lack of diversity in agent strategies.
Both methods mentioned above have their respective advantages, yet most existing works only consider these two
approaches separately, neglecting the potential benefits of
their combination. This paper proposes a COnsensus-based
COMmunication algorithm framework called COCOM. In
COCOM, each agent infers a consensus in a decentralized
manner and subsequently uses its consensus and local observations to generate messages. The entire process can be
divided into two main parts: consensus generation and message generation. In the consensus generation part, we design a consensus learning mechanism tailored to the CTDE
paradigm. During execution, the consensus module generates local consensus based on individual observation. During training, agents utilize global information to produce a
global consensus. This global consensus is used to guide the
local consensus, ensuring that the consensus among agents
is meaningful and consistent. In the message generation part,

A key challenge in multi-agent collaborative tasks is reducing
uncertainty about teammates to enhance cooperative performance. Explicit communication methods can reduce uncertainty about teammates, but the associated high communication costs limit their practicality. Alternatively, implicit consensus learning can promote cooperation without incurring
communication costs. However, its performance declines significantly when local observations are severely limited. This
paper introduces a novel multi-agent learning framework that
combines the strengths of these methods. In our framework,
agents generate a consensus about the group based on their
local observations and then use both the consensus and local observations to produce messages. Since the consensus
provides a certain level of global guidance, communication
can be disabled when not essential, thereby reducing overhead. Meanwhile, communication can provide supplementary
information to the consensus when necessary. Experimental
results demonstrate that our algorithm significantly reduces
inter-agent communication overhead while ensuring efficient
collaboration.

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has garnered
increasing research attention in recent years, with applications spanning a wide range of scenarios such as video
games (Berner et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 2019), energy networks (Wang et al. 2021), and robot control (Li et al. 2024a).
Many MARL algorithms adopt the centralized training and
decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm due to its scalability and effectiveness in handling non-stationarity in multiagent environments (Lowe et al. 2017; Foerster et al. 2018;
Rashid et al. 2018; Sunehag et al. 2018). Despite the advancements achieved with CTDE, agents can only access local observations during execution, leading to significant uncertainty about the states and information about their teammates. This uncertainty can result in severe discoordination
and suboptimal strategies.
To address the above issue, some methods enable explicit
communication between agents, such as exchanging agents’
local observations or embeddings (Das et al. 2019; Wang
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23240

