The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exponential-Family Harmoniums with Neural Sufficient Statistics
Azwar Abdulsalam and Joseph G. Makin
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
465 Northwestern Ave.
West Lafayette, IN 47907
azwar.abdulsalam1729@gmail.com, jgmakin@purdue.edu

Abstract

the distribution over latent variables (ẑ), given the observations (x), under the generative model. The same is true of
diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015), although the
generative and recognition models can be more faithfully
aligned by extending the directed graph over hundreds of
vertices. There is, in turn, a cost in generation: it requires
a large number of steps (Song and Ermon 2019; Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020), perhaps in the form of an ODE solver
(Song et al. 2021)), distillation (Yin et al. 2023), or some
approximation. Or again, the recognition model can be dispensed with altogether if the map from simply-distributed
latent variables to the data is designed to be deterministic
and invertible (Bell and Sejnowski 1995; Dinh, Krueger, and
Bengio 2015; Rezende and Mohamed 2015). But in practice
the latent variables in such models—which must have the
same dimension as the observed data—learn to encoder visual rather than semantic features of the (e.g.) images on
which they are trained (Kirichenko, Izmailov, and Wilson
2020).
One long-standing alternative is define the generative
model directly in terms of the posterior distribution,
p̂(ẑ|x̂; θ), as well as the “emission” distribution, p̂(x̂|ẑ; θ).
(Circumflexes indicate models throughout.) A joint distribution is implied by these specifications, but can itself be determined only up to an intractable normalizer. Thus, inference
is easy, but sampling from the joint (generation) is hard. It
generally takes the form of block Gibbs sampling, i.e. repeated iterations of sampling first from the posterior and
then from the emission distribution. In the best known example of this approach, both emission and posterior are defined
to be products over Bernoulli probability mass functions; the
resulting undirected graphical model is the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) (Smolensky 1986).
Even with simple emissions and posteriors, as in the
RBM, this architecture can model arbitrarily complex
marginal distributions in the observation space (Le Roux
and Bengio 2008). Furthermore, the emission and posterior
can be generalized to any exponential-family distributions
(or combinations thereof) (Welling, Rosen-Zvi, and Hinton
2004), in which case they are known as exponential-family
harmoniums (EFHs). This is particularly important for the
visible units, since not all data are well represented by (or
can be coerced into) binary vectors. On the other hand, it can
be shown that certain non-pathological distributions cannot

Exponential-family harmoniums (EFHs) generalize the restricted Boltzmann machine beyond Bernoulli random variables to other exponential families. Here we show how to
extend the EFH beyond standard exponential families (Poisson, Gaussian, etc.), by allowing the sufficient statistics for
the hidden units to be arbitrary functions of the observed
data, parameterized by deep neural networks. This rules out
the standard sampling scheme, block Gibbs sampling, so we
replace it with a form of Langevin dynamics within Gibbs,
inspired by a recent method for training Gaussian restricted
Boltzmann machines (GRBMs). With Gibbs-Langevin, the
GRBM can successfully model small data sets like MNIST
and CelebA-32, but struggles with CIFAR-10, and cannot
scale to larger images because it lacks convolutions. In contrast, our neural-network EFHs (NN-EFHs) generate highquality samples from CIFAR-10 and scale well to CelebAHQ. On these datasets, the NN-EFH achieves FID scores that
are 25–50% lower than a standard energy-based model with a
similar neural-network architecture and the same number of
parameters; and competitive with noise-conditional score networks, which utilize more complex neural networks (U-nets)
and require considerably more sampling steps.

Introduction
A basic trade-off in the design of generative models is between facility of generation and facility of inference. For
example, (vanilla) variational autoencoders (Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014; Kingma and Welling 2014) correspond to directed graphical models with two vertices, so
generation is trivial because it involves only an “ancestral
pass” (from parent to child) through the graph. The generative process can still be made highly expressive without
much computational overhead by retaining standard parametric distributions (e.g., normal) but letting their parameters (mean, variance, etc.) depend on the latent variables
through deep neural networks. There is, however, a price
to paid for these highly expressive generative processes: inference must be approximate, since Bayes rule will not be
computable (it will involve either an intractable integral or
an infeasible summation). VAEs therefore employ a separate
“recognition model” for inference, that is, for approximating
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15284

