The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RAZOR: Sharpening Knowledge by Cutting Bias with Unsupervised Text
Rewriting
Shuo Yang* , Bardh Prenkaj* , Gjergji Kasneci
Technical University of Munich
name.surname@tum.de

Abstract

Spielberg is a great spinner of a yarn, however
this time he just didn’t do it for me. (fθ : ✓, Φ: ×)

Despite the widespread use of LLMs due to their superior
performance in various tasks, their high computational costs
often lead potential users to opt for the pretraining-finetuning
pipeline. However, biases prevalent in manually constructed
datasets can introduce spurious correlations between tokens
and labels, creating so-called shortcuts and hindering the generalizability of fine-tuned models. Existing debiasing methods often rely on prior knowledge of specific dataset biases,
which is challenging to acquire a priori. We propose RAZOR
(Rewriting And Zero-bias Optimization Refinement), a novel,
unsupervised, and data-focused debiasing approach based
on text rewriting for shortcut mitigation. RAZOR leverages
LLMs to iteratively rewrite potentially biased text segments
by replacing them with heuristically selected alternatives in
a shortcut space defined by token statistics and positional information. This process aims to align surface-level text features more closely with diverse label distributions, thereby
promoting the learning of genuine linguistic patterns. Compared with unsupervised SoTA models, RAZOR improves by
3.5% on the FEVER and 6.5% on MNLI and SNLI datasets
according to the F1 score. Additionally, RAZOR effectively
mitigates specific known biases, reducing bias-related terms
by ×2 without requiring prior bias information, a result that is
on par with SoTA models that leverage prior information. Our
work prioritizes data manipulation over architectural modifications, emphasizing the pivotal role of data quality in enhancing model performance and fairness. This research contributes to developing more robust evaluation benchmarks for
debiasing methods by incorporating metrics for bias reduction and overall model efficacy.

The benefits of a New York Subway system are that a person can get from A to B without being stuck in traffic and
subway trains are faster than buses. (fθ : ×, Φ: ✓)

Figure 1: Example of spurious correlation in sentiment classification tasks, where a classifier fθ takes Spielberg and
New York Subway as shortcuts and makes wrong predictions
w.r.t. the ground truth (Φ). The classifier concentrates on the
bold tokens to make the prediction; however, the underlined
tokens might be more useful in producing the correct label.

healthcare, education, and e-commerce adhere to the conventional approach of using open-source language models
followed by fine-tuning (Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum
2019).
LLMs absorb linguistic features from extensive corpora
during pre-training by predicting specific lexical units. This
foundational learning phase is then followed by fine-tuning
domain-specific data, enhancing their ability to perform
domain-specific tasks effectively.
Unlike linguistic features, surface biases are reported as
commonly existing in manually curated datasets and can
detrimentally affect the fine-tuning phase (Jiménez, Mendes
Oliveira, and Soares 2020). In other words, models may
achieve untruthfully elevated performance during training
by exploiting specific shortcuts. For instance, analyses of
the FEVER dataset (Thorne et al. 2018), used for fact verification tasks, revealed a pronounced association between
the occurrence of negations within the claim and the corresponding label “refutes” (Karimi Mahabadi, Belinkov, and
Henderson 2020). This suggests that models might erroneously generalize that claims containing negations are invariably fake.
The contemporary debiasing methods are relatively effective but require prior knowledge of biases. For example, recent approaches like CLEVER (Xu et al. 2023a)
stand on the prior knowledge that shortcuts originate solely
from tokens of specific parts within the input. Therefore,

Code — https://github.com/ShuoYangtum/RAZOR
Appendices — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.07675

1

Introduction

With the progression of instructional learning, prominent
LLMs such as ChatGPT (Ouyang et al. 2024) and Vicuna (Zheng et al. 2023) are extensively utilized across diverse domains owing to their versatility and outstanding performance (Chang et al. 2024). However, their utility is significantly constrained by the high training and API licensing costs. As a result, numerous researchers in domains like
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25633

