The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Relationship Between Monotone and Squared Probabilistic Circuits
Benjie Wang, Guy Van den Broeck
University of California, Los Angeles
benjiewang@cs.ucla.edu, guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

such as arithmetic circuits (Darwiche 2003), sum-product
networks (Poon and Domingos 2011) and cutset networks
(Rahman, Kothalkar, and Gogate 2014). The standard approach to modeling is to directly represent the probability
distribution (density/mass function) using a PC. In order to
enforce non-negativity of the PC output, one typically restricts to the PC to have non-negative parameters; these are
known as monotone PCs (Darwiche 2003; Poon and Domingos 2011). However, recent works have also shown that there
exist many tractable classes of probability distributions that
provably cannot be expressed in this way (Zhang, Holtzen,
and Broeck 2020; Yu, Trapp, and Kersting 2023; Broadrick,
Zhang, and Van den Broeck 2024).
This motivates the development of new approaches for
practically constructing and learning generalized tractable
models. To this end, Loconte et al. (2024b) recently proposed squared circuits, where the probability distribution
is defined to be (proportional to) the square of the circuit
function. In this formulation, a PC can employ real (possibly negative parameters) while still defining a valid probability distribution. This was shown theoretically to lead to an
exponential advantage in expressive efficiency compared to
monotone PCs, for certain classes of distributions.
In this work, we reexamine monotone and squared
(structured-decomposable) PCs, and show that they are incomparable in general: either can be exponentially more expressive efficient than the other. Motivated by this observation, we draw on the latent variable interpretation of PCs
(Peharz et al. 2016) and show an elegant connection between the two types of circuits; namely, that they simply
correspond to summing the latent variables outside or inside the square, i.e. a deep sum-of-squares or square-ofsums. By combining these two types of latent variables,
we introduce a novel class of tractable models representing deep sum-of-square-of-sums, which we call Inception
PCs (IncPC), strictly generalizing and extending (structureddecomposable) monotone and squared PCs.
We further investigate learning Inception PCs effectively
at scale. Following recent trends in PC learning (Peharz
et al. 2020b,a; Liu and Van den Broeck 2021; Mari, Vessio, and Vergari 2023), we design an efficient tensorized
implementation of Inception PCs that subsumes tensorized
(structured-decomposable) monotone and squared PCs. Empirical results validate the improved expressive efficiency of

Probabilistic circuits are a unifying representation of functions as computation graphs of weighted sums and products.
Their primary application is in probabilistic modeling, where
circuits with non-negative weights (monotone circuits) can
be used to represent and learn density/mass functions, with
tractable marginal inference. Recently, it was proposed to instead represent densities as the square of the circuit function
(squared circuits); this allows the use of negative weights
while retaining tractability, and can be exponentially more expressive efficient than monotone circuits. Unfortunately, we
show the reverse also holds, meaning that monotone circuits
and squared circuits are incomparable in general. This raises
the question of whether we can reconcile, and indeed improve
upon the two modeling approaches. We answer in the positive by proposing Inception PCs, a novel type of circuit that
naturally encompasses both monotone circuits and squared
circuits as special cases, and employs complex parameters.
Empirically, we validate that Inception PCs can outperform
both monotone and squared circuits on a range of tabular and
image datasets.

Code — https://github.com/wangben88/InceptionPCs
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00876

1

Introduction

The philosophy of tractable probabilistic modeling advocates for modeling high-dimensional probability distributions using model architectures that support exact and efficient inference for various probabilistic queries by-design.
This property makes them extremely useful for probabilistic reasoning; for example, tractable models have found
wide-ranging applications from enhancing and controlling
intractable generative models (Zhang et al. 2023; Liu,
Niepert, and Van den Broeck 2024), to neuro-symbolic AI
(Ahmed et al. 2022; Ahmed, Chang, and Van den Broeck
2023), to causal discovery and inference (Wang, Wicker, and
Kwiatkowska 2022; Wang and Kwiatkowska 2023).
The lingua franca for tractable models is the probabilistic
circuits framework (PC) (Choi, Vergari, and Van den Broeck
2020), which specify functions using computation graphs of
sums and products, unifying many previous tractable models
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21026

