The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DivGCL: A Graph Contrastive Learning Model for Diverse Recommendation
Wenwen Gong1 , Yangliao Geng2 , Dan Zhang3 , Yifan Zhu4 , Xiaolong Xu5 , Haolong Xiang5 , Amin
Beheshti6 , Xuyun Zhang6 , Lianyong Qi7,8 *
1

School of Information and Electrical Engineering, China Agricultural University, China
2
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
4
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
5
School of Software, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
6
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
7
College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China), China
8
State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
wenweng@cau.edu.cn, gengyla@bjtu.edu.cn, zd21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yifan zhu@bupt.edu.cn,
{xlxu, hlxiang}@nuist.edu.cn, {xuyun.zhang, amin.beheshti}@mq.edu.au, lianyongqi@upc.edu.cn
Abstract

Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL), as a primary paradigm
of graph self-supervised learning, spurs a fruitful line of research in tackling the data sparsity issue by maximizing the
consistency of user/item embeddings between different augmented views with random perturbations. However, diversity,
as a crucial metric for recommendation performance and user
satisfaction, has received rather little attention. In fact, there
exists a challenging dilemma in balancing accuracy and diversity. To address these issues, we propose a new Graph
Contrastive Learning model for Diversifying recommendations (DivGCL). Inspired by the excellence of the determinant point process (DPP), DivGCL adopts a DPP likelihoodbased loss function to achieve an ideal trade-off between diversity and accuracy, optimizing it jointly with the advanced
Gaussian noise-augmented GCL objective. Extensive experiments on four popular datasets demonstrate that DivGCL surpasses existing approaches in balancing accuracy and diversity, with an improvement of 23.47% at T@20 (abbreviation
for trade-off metric) on ML-1M.

1

L

Figure 1: The motivation of DivGCL. Existing accuracy vs.
diversity of current methods on Beauty dataset.

Introduction

With the advent of the era of information overload, recommender systems, as effective means to provide users with the
most useful information from massive data, including time
series data (Fan et al. 2023, 2022), have attracted much attention and become irreplaceable (Zhang et al. 2019; Zhao
et al. 2021; He et al. 2017; Fan Wang 2024; Wang et al.
2025). With the prevalence of graph neural networks (GNN),
a typical pipeline of GNN-based recommendations (Zhang
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024b) first model user-item interaction data as a bipartite graph and then generate node embeddings by aggregating ones from their own neighbors, which
yields outstanding accuracy performance. Especially, graph
contrastive learning (GCL) has achieved remarkable success
in the field of recommendation for tackling the data sparsity issue, since its powerful ability to extract self-supervised

signals from the original bipartite graph.
However, GCL-based recommendation models often favor popular items and pursue the recommendation accuracy,
leading to unsatisfactory diversity (Lin et al. 2022; Lee et al.
2021; Yu et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024c,a). This will lead to a
large redundancy in the recommendation list and then hurt
user satisfaction and enterprise profits. Thus, accuracy is no
longer the only goal pursued by researchers, then, how to obtain more diverse recommendation results has attracted more
and more attention from scholars (Yang et al. 2023; Zheng
et al. 2021). In fact, a well-developed recommender model
often be comprehensively evaluated from distinct perspectives, e.g. diversity. Early tremendous endeavors at diversification mainly target the downstream post-processing stage
after the recommendation candidate stage. The two stages
are independent of each other, i.e., diversification signals are
interrupted and manifest in the upstream optimization of the

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16853

