The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Anywhere: A Multi-Agent Framework for User-Guided, Reliable, and Diverse
Foreground-Conditioned Image Generation
Xie Tianyidan2 , Rui Ma3 , Qian Wang4 * , Xiaoqian Ye4 , Feixuan Liu5 , Ying Tai1,2 , Zhenyu Zhang1,2 ,
Lanjun Wang6 , Zili Yi1,2 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
3
Jilin University, Changchun, China
4
China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing, China
5
Beijing Shuzhimei Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China
6
School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
sealical@outlook.com, yi@nju.edu.cn
Abstract

and gaming by generating contextually appropriate backgrounds. Its significance lies in its wide-ranging applications, including virtual try-on, personalized advertising, and
augmented reality.
The complexity of foreground-conditioned image generation stems from its multifaceted nature, requiring simultaneous attention to object integrity, contextual relevance, and
creative diversity. This task demands a deep understanding
of visual semantics, spatial relationships, and creative composition. Existing inpainting methods often fail in three critical aspects: see Fig. 1.

Recent advancements in image-conditioned image generation have demonstrated substantial progress. However,
foreground-conditioned image generation remains underexplored, encountering challenges such as compromised object
integrity, foreground-background inconsistencies, limited diversity, and reduced control flexibility. These challenges arise
from current end-to-end inpainting models, which suffer from
inaccurate training masks, limited foreground semantic understanding, data distribution biases, and inherent interference between visual and textual prompts. To overcome these
limitations, we present Anywhere, a multi-agent framework
that departs from the traditional end-to-end approach. In this
framework, each agent is specialized in a distinct aspect,
such as foreground understanding, diversity enhancement,
object integrity protection, and textual prompt consistency.
Our framework is further enhanced with the ability to incorporate optional user textual inputs, perform automated quality assessments, and initiate re-generation as needed. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that this modular design
effectively overcomes the limitations of existing end-to-end
models, resulting in higher fidelity, quality, diversity and controllability in foreground-conditioned image generation. Additionally, the Anywhere framework is extensible, allowing it
to benefit from future advancements in each individual agent.

1

• Violated object integrity: Existing inpainting methods
often struggle to maintain the integrity of foreground objects, leading to the generation of unwanted elements
or extensions. This issue arises because these methods
rely on a single network to generate backgrounds in an
end-to-end manner, heavily dependent on large datasets
of foreground-background pairs obtained through autolabeling with existing segmentation models or random
masking. However, the accuracy of these segmentation
masks is not always reliable, resulting in compromised
object integrity and the inadvertent introduction of unwanted elements around the foreground object.
• Foreground-background inconsistency: Current image
generation models, through trained to extend coherent
structures from the input foreground, lack a deep semantic understanding of the foreground object and its relationship to the background, leading to contextually inappropriate or implausible scenes.
• Limited diversity: Existing models tend to generate
monotonous or stereotypical backgrounds, failing to
fully explore creative possibilities, as existing image generation models tend to incorporate and amplify biases
from their training data (e.g., photographs with uniform
or monotonous backgrounds).
• Compromised Textual Consistency: When applied
to text-guided inpainting, the consistency of textual
prompts can be compromised due to mutual interference
that occurs during the joint integration of visual and textual inputs. This issue arises because text-guided inpaint-

Introduction

Image generation conditioned on visual inputs has made remarkable strides in recent years, fueled by advancements
in diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Zhang,
Rao, and Agrawala 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Avrahami
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023). These models have enabled
sophisticated techniques for tasks such as inpainting, image expansion, and object insertion (Rombach et al. 2022;
Podell et al. 2023; Manukyan et al. 2023; Ju et al. 2024;
Zhang and Agrawala 2024). However, the image generation
task that attempts to complete the background based on a
given foreground object remains underexplored. This technique enhances content creation, e-commerce visualization,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7410

