The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Matching-Based Algorithm for the Traveling Tournament Problem
Jingyang Zhao, Mingyu Xiao*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
jingyangzhao1020@gmail.com, myxiao@gmail.com

Abstract

• No-repeat: No pair of teams play against each other in
two consecutive games.
• At-most-k: Each team plays at most k consecutive home
games or away games.

The Traveling Tournament Problem (TTP-k) is a well-known
benchmark problem in tournament timetabling. It involves
designing a feasible double round-robin tournament for a
sports league of n teams under several feasibility requirements, while minimizing the total traveling costs of the teams.
The parameter k requires that in the tournament at most k
consecutive home games or away games for each team are allowed. TTP-k with a small k, especially for k = 2, 3 and 4,
have been extensively studied in the literature. In this paper,
we focus on TTP-4 and design an efficient algorithm for it
based on minimum weight matching. In theory, we prove that
our algorithm has an approximation ratio of 1.625 + ε for any
constant ε > 0, improving the best-known approximation ratio of 1.7 + ε. In practice, our experimental results indicate
an average improvement of 6.65% over the best-known solutions on 9 benchmark instances.

When calculating the traveling distance, we assume that
each team begins at his home venue before the first game
and returns home after the last game; for two consecutive
days, each team travels directly from the first game venue to
the second game venue; the distances are metric.
Although TTP-k is an interesting problem with many applications, it is challenging in terms of computation. Due to
the feasibility constraints, it is not even easy to find a feasible solution (Verduin, Thomson, and van den Berg 2024).
In the online benchmark website (Trick 2024), the optimal
solutions to most instances with 12 teams are not found yet
even computed by high-performance computers for a long
time. On the other hand, efficient heuristic and approximation algorithms play a pivotal role in addressing the complexities of TTP-k by devising optimal schedules that meet
the constraints and objectives of the problem. In the literature, these algorithms leverage techniques from combinatorial optimization, graph theory, constraint programming,
and other computational methods to generate schedules that
are not only practical but also exhibit qualities of fairness,
balance, and cost-effectiveness.
In this paper, we focus on TTP-4, where at most 4 consecutive home games or away games for each team are allowed.
We will design a practical algorithm with a good theoretical
guarantee on approximation quality.

Introduction
The Traveling Tournament Problem (TTP-k) is a combinatorial optimization problem that combines elements of the
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and sports scheduling.
In TTP-k, we are going to design a double round-robin tournament under some additional feasibility constraints, aiming to minimize the total distance traveled by all teams.
TTP-k was initially introduced in (Easton, Nemhauser, and
Trick 2001) for scheduling Major League Baseball games
in real life. Later, it finds practical applications in diverse
fields such as professional sports leagues, international tournaments, college sports, youth leagues, and more. These illustrate how TTP-k is not just a theoretical concept but also
a practical tool used at various levels of sports scheduling to
enhance the overall experience for players and organizers.
Next, we give the definition of TTP-k. In a double roundrobin tournament, a set of n teams must play against each
other twice, one home game at its own venue and one away
game at its opponent’s venue, in 2(n − 1) consecutive days,
with each team playing exactly one game per day. TTPk is to design a double round-robin tournament satisfying
the following two constraints, minimizing the total distance
traveled by all teams.

Related Work
The NP-hardness of TTP-k was established in several papers (Thielen and Westphal 2011; Chatterjee 2021; Bhattacharyya 2016). To solve TTP-k, many heuristic algorithms have been proposed, such as algorithms based
on combinatorial methods (Easton, Nemhauser, and Trick
2002; Lim, Rodrigues, and Zhang 2006), simulated annealing (Anagnostopoulos et al. 2006; Hentenryck and Vergados 2007), tabu search (Di Gaspero and Schaerf 2007), integer programming (Goerigk and Westphal 2016), and beam
search (Frohner et al. 2023).
In order to guarantee the solution quality, we also work
on approximation algorithms (Thielen and Westphal 2012;

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26750

