The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Polarization Guided Mask-Free Shadow Removal
Chu Zhou1 † , Chao Xu2 , Boxin Shi3,4 #
1
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of IST, Peking University, China
3
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of CS, Peking University, China
4
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of CS, Peking University, China
zhou chu@hotmail.com, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

their applicability is limited since they are based on timeconsuming numerical optimization. Recently, deep-learning
has been introduced to handle it with higher efficiency, by
adopting deep neural networks with different architectures
(e.g., CNN (Li et al. 2023; Niu et al. 2022; Wan et al.
2022), GAN (Liu et al. 2023a,b; Zhang et al. 2020), vision
Transformer (Guo et al. 2023a), and diffusion model (Guo
et al. 2023b)) to extract image features from a large amount
of training data. Despite that these learning-based methods
could produce plausible results, they still encounter two key
issues: (1) Dependency on the shadow mask: As shown in
Fig. 1 (a), many of them require a shadow mask as a necessary part of the input data (Li et al. 2023; Niu et al. 2022;
Wan et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023a; Guo et al. 2023a,b), while
obtaining the mask usually relies on external shadow detection or manual annotation approaches, introducing additional workload; besides, as mentioned in (Guo et al. 2023b),
since the externally obtained mask is always not that accurate, their performance would degenerate near the shadow
boundary. (2) Artifacts inside the shadow region: there are
also some methods do not require the shadow mask (Liu
et al. 2023b; Zhang et al. 2020), however, the problem they
face is highly ill-posed since it requires to simultaneously
consider the restoration of the brightness and color information along with the preservation of the texture and structure
information inside the shadow region without external clues,
making the results prone to artifacts (e.g., false color and
less-distinctive textures, as shown in Fig. 1 (b)).

Shadow is a phenomenon that degenerates image quality and
decreases the performance of downstream vision algorithms.
Despite the fact that current image shadow removal methods
have achieved promising progress, many of them require an
externally obtained shadow mask as a necessary part of the
input data, which not only introduces additional workload
but also leads to degenerated performance near the shadow
boundary due to the inaccuracy of the mask. Some of them
do not require the shadow mask, however, they need to simultaneously consider the restoration of the brightness and
color information along with the preservation of the texture
and structure information inside the shadow region without
external clues, which poses highly ill-posedness and makes
the results prone to artifacts. In this paper, we propose PolShaRe, the first Polarization-guided image Shadow Removal
solution, to remove shadow in a mask-free manner with fewer
artifacts. Specifically, it consists of a two-stage pipeline to relieve the ill-posedness and a neural network tailored to the
pipeline to suppress the artifacts. Experimental results show
that our Pol-ShaRe achieves state-of-the-art performance on
both synthetic and real-world images.

Introduction
Shadow is a frequently occurring phenomenon present in
natural images when the light is partially or completely
blocked in a certain region. The existence of shadow degenerates the image quality with color and brightness degradation, which would decrease the performance of downstream
vision applications and lead to poor photography experience
of users. Unlike the common image enhancement tasks that
solve global degradation problems (e.g., dehazing and deraining in the whole image plane), shadow removal aims to
solve a spatially non-uniform partial degradation problem
(i.e., recovering the original pixel values inside the shadow
region), posing unique challenges (Guo et al. 2023a,b).
Early works (Tian and Tang 2011; Guo, Dai, and Hoiem
2012; Yang, Tan, and Ahuja 2012; Khan et al. 2015) use
priors from image statistics to solve this problem. However,

In this paper, we analyze the shadow image formation
model, and propose Pol-ShaRe, the first Polarization-guided
image Shadow Removal solution, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). By
exploiting the priors in both the intensity and polarization
domains to indicate the per-pixel shadow confidence, our solution can get rid of the dependency on the shadow mask.
It consists of a processing pipeline and a neural network
tailored to the pipeline. To relieve the ill-posedness of the
problem, we design the pipeline to be two-stage to explicitly
decouple the restoration of the brightness and color information from the preservation of the texture and structure
information, by reformulating the shadow removal problem into two consecutive guided information reconstruction
problems. Specifically, under the guidance of the priors, the
first stage aims to reconstruct the total intensity modulated
by the degree of polarization of the incoming light to the

† Most of this work was done as a PhD student at Peking
University.
# Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10716

