The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Prompt-Based Semantic Embedding with Inspire Potential of
Implicit Knowledge for Cross-Modal Retrieval
Xin Huang1 , Shilong Wang1 , Tong Jia2 , Zhihang Gou1 , Jingjing Li1*
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Software Engineering, Nanyang Normal University, Henan, China
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
huangxin@nynu.edu.cn, wangshilong@nynu.edu.cn, jia.tong@pku.edu.cn, gouzhihang@nynu.edu.cn, jingjl101@nynu.edu.cn

Abstract

Paired A tennis player is swinging
the racket .

In the era of big data, cross-modal retrieval is increasingly
important in research and application. Given the latent complexity and non-intuitive nature of cross-modal relationships,
leveraging external knowledge such as large models has become a popular approach to facilitate modality alignment.
Existing methods typically address these challenges by finetuning model encoders or using a fixed number of prompts.
However, these approaches struggle with the significant information asymmetry between image-text pairs and the high distribution diversity of image data. These limitations not only
introduce noise during training but also reduce the accuracy
and generalization capabilities in cross-modal retrieval tasks.
To address the above issues, this paper proposes Adaptive
Prompt-Based Semantic Embedding with Inspired Potential
of Implicit Knowledge (APSE-IPIK). On one hand, we propose an inspire potential strategy to extract fine-grained
and multi-perspective text descriptions from large-scale pretrained multimodal models, which can be seen as implicit
knowledge injection. These descriptions are integrated into
the visual-semantic embedding through cross-modal semantic alignment with images, balancing the information asymmetry between modalities and reducing the embedding of
inaccurate mapping relationships. On the other hand, we
construct an instance-level query-based prompt pool strategy to adaptively extract the most relevant prompts, addressing alignment biases caused by intra-modal (especially image) data diversity and improving alignment accuracy. Extensive experiments are conducted on two widely used datasets,
Flickr30k and MSCOCO, which show the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

Missing Semantics
Referee；
Logo on the background wall ；
Green sports field；
……

(a) Information asymmetry between modalities

(b) Distribution diversity of images

Figure 1: Subfigure (a) illustrates the asymmetry of information between modalities (some visual information in the
image is not described in the text description) , while subfigure (b) demonstrates the distribution diversity of images,
which are randomly sampled from the MSCOCO dataset.
offers more accurate and personalized services, driving the
development of next-generation intelligent systems.
The main challenge of cross-modal retrieval is the inconsistent representation space for different modalities, i.e., heterogeneity gap. The most direct and mainstream approach is
to learn a unified representation that is structurally consistent, thereby eliminating inconsistencies in modalities while
preserving semantic consistency. Traditional methods use
linear mapping (i.e., mapping matrices) as the unified representation model. These types of methods is exemplified by
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1992) and
Orthogonal Canonical Correlation Analysis (OCCA) (Wang
et al. 2020a). However, due to the complexity of the relationships in cross-modal data, linear models often have significant limitations in their effectiveness. To overcome these
limitations, researchers have turned to deep networks as the
basic mapping model (Ngiam et al. 2011; Wei et al. 2017).

Introduction
Under the background of today’s digital society, the value
and significance of cross-modal retrieval are increasingly
prominent. With the rapid growth of primary modalities such
as images and text, information retrieval and utilization are
no longer confined to a single modality (Peng, Huang, and
Zhao 2018). Cross-modal retrieval allows users to query in
one modality (e.g., text) and retrieve results in another (e.g.,
images or videos), significantly enhancing the scope and efficiency of information retrieval. By effectively handling semantic differences across modalities, cross-modal retrieval
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17485

