The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Comprehensive Evaluation on Event Reasoning of Large Language Models
Zhengwei Tao1−4 , Zhi Jin1,2 , Yifan Zhang1,2 , Xiancai Chen1,2 , Haiyan Zhao1,2 , Jia Li1,2
Bin Liang3,4 , Chongyang Tao5 , Qun Liu6 , Kam-Fai Wong3,4
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University,
MoE Key Lab. of High Confidence Software Technologies(PKU), China
3
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
MoE Key Lab. of High Confidence Software Technologies(Hong Kong), China
5
Beihang University,
6
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{tttzw, xiancaich, yifanzhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {zhijin, zhhy.sei, lijiaa}@pku.edu.cn, chongyang@buaa.edu.cn,
bin.liang@cuhk.edu.hk, qun.liu@huawei.com, kfwong@se.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Event reasoning is a fundamental ability that underlies many
applications. It requires event schema knowledge to perform
global reasoning and needs to deal with the diversity of the
inter-event relations and the reasoning paradigms. The extent
to which LLMs excel in event reasoning across various relations and reasoning paradigms has not been thoroughly investigated. Additionally, it is still unclear whether LLMs utilize
event knowledge in the same way humans do. To mitigate this
disparity, we comprehensively evaluate the abilities of event
reasoning of LLMs on different relations, paradigms, and levels of abstraction. We introduce a novel benchmark EV2 for
EValuation of EVent reasoning. EV2 consists of two levels of
evaluation on schema and instance and is comprehensive in
relations and reasoning paradigms. We conduct extensive experiments on EV2 . We find that 1) LLMs have abilities to
accomplish event reasoning but their performances are far
from satisfactory. 2) There are imbalances of event reasoning abilities on different relations and paradigms. 3) LLMs
have event schema knowledge, however, they’re not aligned
with humans on how to utilize the knowledge. Based on these
findings, we guide the LLMs in utilizing the event schema
knowledge as memory for improvements in event reasoning.

Context

Avoiding
John underwent a life-saving treatment at
Mercy General Hospital on April 5th, 2021, …

Causes

Enjoy Life
John embraced a new lease on life, dedicating
his time to traveling around the world…

Before

Celebrate
John decided to spend his Rebirth Day with his
friends from various countries.

Causes

Hold Party
John invited guests to his home. His friends sang
and danced together to their heart‘s content.

CEC Which could be a subevent?
Begin
Travel
John
meticulously
planned his
itinerary, …

Introduction
Events are instances or occurrences that form the basic semantic building units encompassing the meanings of Activities, Accomplishments, Achievements, and States (Vendler
1957). Event Reasoning is the ability to process and analyze events and their complex interconnections. Compared
with other abilities, event reasoning is unique in some aspects. Firstly, it requires knowledge in the form of event
schemas, capturing the progress of event evolution in scenarios, then performing global reasoning (Li et al. 2021a;
Mao et al. 2021). As shown in Figure 1, each event instance
is associated with an event type. All event types and their
relations form the event schema knowledge which reflects
the logic of event evolution. Knowing the event occurrence

Intense
Exercise
John and his
friends
celebrated
by running a
race…

Recover
Health
John
engaged in a
physical
therapy
program, …
Express
Emotion
John told his
friends
about this
dangerous

CRR

Which is the
causal
relationship
between
Make
Friends
People were
moved by
these stories
and spirits…
Answer:

Causes

Figure 1: The red words are event schema knowledge where
event instances are below. There are various paradigms such
as Contextual Event Classification (CEC) and Contextual
Relation Reasoning (CRR), and diverse relations.

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25273

