The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Online Reinforcement Learning with Meta-Learned Objective from
Offline Data
Shilong Deng1 , Zetao Zheng1,2 , Hongcai He1 , Paul Weng3 , Jie Shao1,2 *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Sichuan Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Yibin, China
3
Data Science Research Center, Duke Kunshan University, Kunshan, China
{sldeng, hehongcai}@std.uestc.edu.cn, {ztzheng, shaojie}@uestc.edu.cn, paul.weng@dukekunshan.edu.cn
: No reward
: Goal (with reward)

Abstract
A major challenge in Reinforcement Learning (RL) is the
difficulty of learning an optimal policy from sparse rewards.
Prior works enhance online RL with conventional Imitation
Learning (IL) via a handcrafted auxiliary objective, at the cost
of restricting the RL policy to be sub-optimal when the offline data is generated by a non-expert policy. Instead, to better leverage valuable information in offline data, we develop
Generalized Imitation Learning from Demonstration (GILD),
which meta-learns an objective that distills knowledge from
offline data and instills intrinsic motivation towards the optimal policy. Distinct from prior works that are exclusive to a
specific RL algorithm, GILD is a flexible module intended for
diverse vanilla off-policy RL algorithms. In addition, GILD
introduces no domain-specific hyperparameter and minimal
increase in computational cost. In four MuJoCo tasks with
sparse rewards, we show that three RL algorithms enhanced
with GILD significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods.

: Demonstration data
: RL+IL
: RL only

Policy improved
with rewards

Start
Early stage:
Imitation guides RL to
obtain reward signals

Start
Later stage:
Imitation restricts RL
policy to sub-optimal

Figure 1: Illustration of RL+IL with sparse rewards. Conventional IL guides RL to obtain reward signals in early
stage (left), while restricting RL policy to be sub-optimal
in later stage (right).

in later stage. This observation leads to the following research question: Is it possible to leverage sub-optimal offline
demonstrations for viable online RL with sparse rewards,
while not restricting the policy to be sub-optimal? A natural answer is to manually control or decay the influence
of imitation on policy optimization with some pre-defined
schedule, but at the cost of either spending massive time on
hyperparameter tuning or being exclusive to a specific RL algorithm (Fujimoto and Gu 2021; Rengarajan et al. 2022a,b).
By contrast, our key insight is to enhance online RL with
a meta-learned objective that leverages valuable information
in sub-optimal offline demonstrations, instead of RL with
a handcrafted objective in conventional IL. To achieve this,
we develop Generalized Imitation Learning from Demonstration (GILD), a flexible module intended for diverse
vanilla off-policy RL algorithms. We devise a novel bi-level
optimization framework for RL algorithms enhanced with
GILD, with meta-optimization of GILD at the upper level
and meta-training of RL at the lower level supported by
the meta-learned objective. We select off-policy RL as the
vanilla algorithm due to its superior sample efficiency compared with on-policy alternatives. The advantage of sample efficiency extends to meta-optimization, which updates
GILD such that the policy learned with RL+GILD is superior to that with RL+IL. We emphasize that, in contrast to
prior works that either augment RL with a handcrafted IL

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL), which learns through trial
and error experience to maximize the cumulative reward, has
achieved great success in various dense reward tasks (Wang
et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023). However, RL agents still struggle to learn the optimal policy from real-world scenarios
with sparse rewards. For instance, there might be a reward
only if a navigation robot reaches the goal, with no reward
feedback on the numerous intermediate steps taken to arrive.
To address the challenge of sparse rewards, prior works
improve online RL with conventional Imitation Learning
(IL) by guiding the agent to acquire reward signals that are
essential for policy improvement (Mendonca et al. 2019; Fujimoto and Gu 2021; Rengarajan et al. 2022a). These RL+IL
methods augment RL with conventional IL via a handcrafted
auxiliary objective, which constrains the agent to stay close
to behaviors observed in offline demonstration data. However, striking a balance between RL and IL remains intractable, especially when the agent is fed with sub-optimal
demonstrations generated by humans. As shown in Figure 1,
conventional IL guides the agent to obtain reward signals in
early stage, but restricts the learned policy to be sub-optimal
* Corresponding author: Jie Shao.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16244

