The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Gaussian Filter-Based 3D Registration Method for Series Section Electron
Microscopy
Zhenbang Zhang1,2† , Hongjia Li3† , Zhiqiang Xu4 , Wenjia Meng1∗ , Renmin Han2 *
1

School of Software, Shandong University
Research Center for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Shandong University
3
School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{zhangzhenbang2021,lihongjia96}@gmail.com, zhiqiang.xu@mbzuai.ac.ae, {wjmeng, hanrenmin}@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Series Section Electron Microscopy (ssEM) is a crucial technique for visualizing three-dimensional (3D) biological structures, which involves collecting electron microscopy images
from a series of biological sections along the z-axis and reconstructing the 3D structure. 3D registration is an essential step in ssEM, designed to eliminate axial misalignment
and nonlinear distortions introduced during sample sectioning. A significant challenge in 3D registration is eliminating
nonlinear distortions while preserving natural deformations.
In this paper, we present a new formulation of the 3D registration problem from a frequency domain perspective and
propose a Gaussian filtering-based 3D registration method,
which defines 3D registration as a superposition problem of
high-frequency and low-frequency components. We extend
the concept of a one-dimensional Gaussian filter to threedimensional image stacks and integrate it with optical flow
networks to consolidate the deformation field within the receptive field. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method can successfully decouple nonlinear distortions and
natural deformations in the frequency domain, proving superior to existing methods in rapidly and accurately eliminating
nonlinear distortions and restoring biological structures, and
has the potential to be extended to large datasets.

Figure 1: (a) One-dimensional signal with high frequency
noise (Original Signal) and Gaussian-filtered signal (Denoised Signal). (b) The side view (y-z plane) of original
ssEM data (Raw Data) and registered ssEM data (Registered
Data). Our method can effectively remove nonlinear distortions while preserving natural deformations.

along the z-axis into a series of microscope sections, which
are then subjected to staining, digital imaging, 2D stitching,
3D registration, and finally, reconstruction to obtain the 3D
structure (Kievits et al. 2022). Notably, 3D registration is
the most critical step in this process, which serves to eliminate axial nonlinear distortions introduced during sectioning
and restore the faithful 3D structure. However, the complexity of cellular structures, coupled with the inevitable accumulation of errors in the registration of long-sequence large
datasets, poses significant challenges. Furthermore, distinguishing between nonlinear distortions and natural deformation adds to the difficulty in solving the problem of 3D
registration.
3D registration typically is cast as an optimization problem over slices, with numerous energy-based methods developed (Arganda-Carreras et al. 2006; Saalfeld et al. 2012).
However, these traditional techniques often suffer from
complex parameter tuning, leading to suboptimal performance. Deep learning methods (Yoo et al. 2017; Zhou et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2023) have shown significant progress in
registration speed. Nevertheless, most of these methods often struggle to handle natural deformations between slices,
potentially leading to damage to axial structures.
In this paper, we examine the 3D registration problem

Introduction
Series Section Electron Microscopy (ssEM) is a widely used
high-resolution three-dimensional (3D) visualization technique for biological tissues (Terasaki et al. 2013; Müller
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021) and cells (Ryan, Lu, and Meinertzhagen 2016; Wilson et al. 2022), which has been adopted
across various domains, including life sciences (Morgan
and Lichtman 2020; Baena and Terasaki 2019), medicine
(de Senneville et al. 2021; Johnson et al. 2022), and clinical diagnostics (Weidner et al. 2009; Shoemark et al. 2020).
Specifically, it has been instrumental in connectomics studies elucidating neuronal connections (Zheng et al. 2018) and
in reconstructing the 3D ultrastructure of diverse cells and
tissues (Yin et al. 2020; Wilson and Babadi 2023). In ssEM,
the workflow typically involves slicing biological samples
* Corresponding authors; † Joint first authors. This work is done
during Zhang’s internship in RCMIS.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1156

