The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Multi-Focus-Driven Multi-Branch Network for Robust Multimodal Sentiment
Analysis
Chuanqi Tao* , Jiaming Li* , Tianzi Zang, Peng Gao
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
{taochuanqi, ljiaming, zangtianzi, gaopengnj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual

Multimodal sentiment analysis aims to integrate diverse
modalities for precise emotional interpretation. However, external factors such as sensor malfunctions or network issues
may disrupt certain modalities. This may lead to missing data,
which poses challenges in real-world deployment. Most existing approaches focus on designing feature reconstruction
strategies, overlooking the collaborative integration of reconstruction and fusion strategies. Moreover, they fail to capture
the relationships between features in the global dimension
and those in the local dimension. These limitations hinder the
full capture of the complex nature of multimodal data, especially in scenarios involving missing modalities. To address
the above issues, this paper proposes a robust model named
MFMB-Net with multiple branches for feature multi-focus
fusion and reconstruction. We design a two-stream fusion
branch where macro-fusion focuses on the fusion of features
in the global dimension and micro-fusion targets local dimension features. This dual-stream fusion branch distributes
multi-focus across both pathways, simultaneously capturing
global coarse-grained and local fine-grained features. Additionally, the reconstruction branch interacts collaboratively
with the fusion branch to reconstruct and enhance the missing
data. It integrates the reconstructed feature information with
the fused information thus refining the representation fidelity
of the missing information. Experiments performed on two
benchmarks show that our approach obtains results superior
to state-of-the-art models.

Text

Audio

This is a good movie.

Camera Malfunctions

Transcript Missing

Environmental Noise

Figure 1: Scenarios that may result in modality missing.

The core of MSA lies in multimodal representation learning and multimodal fusion. These components are crucial to
MSA’s effectiveness in modeling and analyzing emotional
expressions. The former is the process of extracting features
from different sources and transforming these features into
representations that can be processed by the model. The latter combines representations learned from different modalities to form a unified, integrated representation that more
comprehensively reflects the complexity of emotions. And
so far, many models have been proposed to address multimodal representation learning (Hazarika, Zimmermann, and
Poria 2020; Yu et al. 2021; Lin and Hu 2022; Zhang et al.
2023; Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018) and multimodal fusion
(Han et al. 2021; Lv et al. 2021; Nagrani et al. 2021; Cheng
et al. 2021) through the tireless efforts of researchers.
The basic premise of the above is that the multimodal
data is complete. However, in real-world deployment, we
often encounter situations where modalities are missing.
As shown in Figure 1, for instance, camera malfunctions
may result in occluded visual features and extensive environmental noise can render audio information unusable.
These can affect model performance, therefore, addressing missing modalities is indispensable in practical applications.Recently, several translation-based (Pham et al. 2019;
Tang et al. 2021) and generative model-based (Zhao, Li, and
Jin 2021; Zeng, Zhou, and Liu 2022) approaches have been
proposed to address MSA in missing modalities to retain
the maximum information from all modalities. While these
approaches are attractive, the former is developed to deal
with the total missing of one or more modalities, which is
unlikely to happen in the real world. And thus we mainly

Code — https://github.com/MFMB-Net/MFMB-Net

Introduction
Recently, with the increased use of social media and the
improvement of video quality, multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) has become a significant domain in the field
of sentiment analysis and has attracted widespread attention
(Morency, Mihalcea, and Doshi 2011). MSA broadens traditional text-based sentiment analysis by adding audio and visual modalities, enabling the detection of subtle cues missed
in text-only analysis. This comprehensive approach provides
insights into online behaviors and emotional expressions.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Corresponding authors.

1547

