The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Simulation-Free Hierarchical Latent Policy Planning for Proactive Dialogues
Tao He1 * , Lizi Liao2 , Yixin Cao3 , Yuanxing Liu1 , Yiheng Sun1 , Zerui Chen1 , Ming Liu1† , Bing Qin1
1

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{the, yxliu, mliu, zrchen, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn, lzliao@smu.edu.sg, caoyixin2011@gmail.com

Abstract

passively follow user instructions, which leads them to align
with the user’s opinions and decisions, lacking the necessary
proactivity (Deng et al. 2023b; He et al. 2024).
The advancement of LLMs in instruction-following and
text generation capabilities has provided a foundation for
exploring proactive dialogue systems, allowing a focus
on high-level strategic research, i.e. dialogue policy planning (Deng et al. 2023b), which plans the next dialogue policy to guide generating appropriate responses. Some efforts
have sought to directly enhance the strategic capabilities of
LLMs by designing heuristic prompts or complex prompting processes (Deng et al. 2023a; Yu, Chen, and Yu 2023).
However, these approaches often face limitations in performance or are criticized for high inference costs and inefficiency due to the need for continuous interactions. Other approaches aim to develop specialized policy planners to guide
LLM responses strategically (Deng et al. 2023b), allowing
the separation of strategy from LLM and enabling a focused
effort on learning policy planning capabilities.
However, developing advanced policy planners requires
rich exposure to diverse dialogue scenarios and access to
a comprehensive policy repository. Previous works (Deng
et al. 2023a) have used LLM like ChatGPT to simulate interactions, engaging in role-play and real-time learning. This
methodology presents two critical drawbacks: first, the significant disparity between simulated and real-world interactions, as the toneless communication style of ChatGPT
contrasts with the diverse and dynamic traits of actual human users; second, the reliance on continuous real-time interactions and frequent API calls for training, which introduces inefficiencies and escalates costs. Moreover, these
approaches often depend on manually defined, contextindependent, coarse-grained dialogue policies (Zhou et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2021a), which not only require substantial
expert involvement but also raise concerns about the completeness and effectiveness of predefined policies.
In this study, we introduce a novel paradigm that shifts
away from relying on predefined policy sets and online
learning in simulated environments, instead directly learning
policy planning from raw, unlabeled dialogue records. This
paradigm effectively addresses two key challenges: 1) It allows for discovering fine-grained policies directly from
realistic dialogues, reducing the need for expert intervention and enhancing the completeness and relevance of re-

Recent advancements in proactive dialogues have garnered
significant attention, particularly for more complex objectives (e.g. emotion support and persuasion). Unlike traditional task-oriented dialogues, proactive dialogues demand
advanced policy planning and adaptability, requiring rich scenarios and comprehensive policy repositories to develop such
systems. However, existing approaches tend to rely on Large
Language Models (LLMs) for user simulation and online
learning, leading to biases that diverge from realistic scenarios and result in suboptimal efficiency. Moreover, these
methods depend on manually defined, context-independent,
coarse-grained policies, which not only incur high expert
costs but also raise concerns regarding their completeness. In
our work, we highlight the potential for automatically discovering policies directly from raw, real-world dialogue records.
To this end, we introduce a novel dialogue policy planning
framework, LDPP. It fully automates the process from mining policies in dialogue records to learning policy planning.
Specifically, we employ a variant of the Variational Autoencoder to discover fine-grained policies represented as latent
vectors. After automatically annotating the data with these
latent policy labels, we propose an Offline Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm in the latent space to develop effective policy planning capabilities. Our experiments
demonstrate that LDPP outperforms existing methods on two
proactive scenarios, even surpassing ChatGPT with only a
1.8-billion-parameter LLM.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in dialogue tasks that require proactive engagement to achieve
complex objectives, such as negotiation (He et al. 2018), persuasion (Samad et al. 2022), and emotional support (Cheng
et al. 2022). Unlike traditional task-oriented dialogues (Liu
et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023), these tasks require agents to be more proactive and possess sophisticated
dialogue strategy skills (Cheng et al. 2024). Previous research has demonstrated that even LLMs often struggle on
such tasks (Yang, Li, and Quan 2021; Zhao et al. 2023; Kang
et al. 2024; Song et al. 2024). LLMs are typically trained to
* Work was done during an internship at SMU.
†

Corresponding Author: Ming Liu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24032

