The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Bandit Whisperer: Communication Learning for Restless Bandits
Yunfan Zhao1, 2 * Tonghan Wang1 * , Dheeraj Mysore Nagaraj3 , Aparna Taneja3 , Milind Tambe1, 3
1

Harvard University,
2
GE Healthcare,
3
Google Deepmind

Abstract
Applying Reinforcement Learning (RL) to Restless Multi-Arm
Bandits (RMABs) offers a promising avenue for addressing
allocation problems with resource constraints and temporal
dynamics. However, classic RMAB models largely overlook
the challenges of (systematic) data errors, a common occurrence in real-world scenarios due to factors like varying data
collection protocols and intentional noise for differential privacy. We demonstrate that conventional RL algorithms used
to train RMABs can struggle to perform well in such settings.
To solve this problem, we propose the first communication
learning approach in RMABs, where we study which arms,
when involved in communication, are most effective in mitigating the influence of such systematic data errors. In our setup,
the arms receive Q-function parameters from similar arms as
messages to guide behavioral policies, steering Q-function updates. We learn communication strategies by considering the
joint utility of messages across all pairs of arms and using a
Q-network architecture that decomposes the joint utility. Both
theoretical and empirical evidence validate the effectiveness
of our method in significantly improving RMAB performance
across diverse problems.

1

Introduction

Restless Multi-Arm Bandits (RMABs) have been successfully applied to a range of multi-agent constrained resource allocation problems, such as healthcare, online advertising, and
anti-poaching (Ruiz-Hernández, Pinar-Pérez, and DelgadoGómez 2020; Lee, Lavieri, and Volk 2019; Hodge and Glazebrook 2015; Mate et al. 2022; Modi, Mary, and Moy 2019;
Zhao, Krishnamachari, and Liu 2008; Bagheri and Scaglione
2015; Tripathi and Modiano 2019). In classical RMABs,
there are a fixed number of arms, each may be described as an
MDP with two actions (active and passive). At each timestep,
constrained by the global budget, the RMAB strategically
selects a subset of arms to play the active action with the
objective of maximizing long-term accumulated rewards. Although finding an exact RMAB solution is PSPACE-hard (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1999), the whittle index solution is
known to be near optimal (Whittle 1988; Weber and Weiss
1990) in this situation. Beyond classical RMABs, important
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23404

applications of RMABs involve more complex systems with
multiple actions, continuous state spaces, and arms opting in
and out of the system. Recent studies have explored a variety
of methods to address these challenges (Hawkins 2003; Killian, Perrault, and Tambe 2021; Verloop 2016; Zayas-Caban,
Jasin, and Wang 2019; Ghosh et al. 2023), with deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) emerging as a particularly effective
approach, achieving state-of-the-art results across various
RMAB settings (Zhao et al. 2023; Xiong and Li 2023; Wang
et al. 2023; Killian et al. 2022).
Unfortunately, these previous studies consider RMAB
models where the reward data can be collected from every
arm reliably. In real-world scenarios modeled via RMABs,
such as maternal healthcare (Biswas et al. 2021; Verma et al.
2024; Behari et al. 2024) and SIS epidemic model concerning
COVID intervention (Yaesoubi and Cohen 2011), each arm
represents a different entity, which could be a beneficiary or
a geographical region, where data collection protocols are
potentially different. Different arms may be affected by noise
caused by systematic errors that arise due to the following
practical reasons. (1) Variability in data collection and handling protocols. There may be differences in data collection
in different arms (entities), e.g., differences in the frequency
and quality of data collected, in worker awareness or standards for data preprocessing, cleaning, and digitization. This
variability represents sampling bias (Paulus et al. 2023) and
may cause systematic errors (Dubrow 2022) in some arms.
For example, in maternal care, specific data collection approaches may cause systematic overestimation of expected
delivery dates (Fulcher et al. 2020). (2) Data integrity and
privacy. For example, when data is gathered through surveys,
topical or political bias (Paulus et al. 2023) can introduce
systematic errors in some arms due to influence of authorities
or impacted populations (e.g., keeping the number of COVID
cases low (Paulus et al. 2023)). Additionally, driven by the
principle of differential privacy, noise might be intentionally
added to the data (Dwork, Roth et al. 2014).
Motivated by these scenarios, in this paper we study the
RMAB model where some arms are affected by noise in
their observed rewards at some states, with these noisy arms
and rewards not known a priori. The challenge of applying
existing RL methods to this setting is that systematic errors
might create false optima, preventing the exploration of states
with true high rewards and leading to suboptimal actions

