The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Precision-Enhanced Human-Object Contact Detection via Depth-Aware
Perspective Interaction and Object Texture Restoration
Yuxiao Wang1 * , Wenpeng Neng2 * , Zhenao Wei1 , Yu Lei3 , Weiying Xue1 , Nan Zhuang4 , Yanwu
Xu1 , Xinyu Jiang1 , Qi Liu1†
1

School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology
2
Ningbo Konfoong Bioinformation Tech Co., Ltd.
3
School of Information Science & Technology, Southwest Jiaotong University
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
ftwangyuxiao@mail.scut.edu.cn, nengwenpeng@gmail.com, drliuqi@scut.edu.cn
Abstract

can be used in various areas such as human-computer interaction (Wang, Liu, and Lei 2024), virtual reality (Illahi et al.
2023), gesture recognition (Cui et al. 2023), among others,
providing new opportunities in these fields.
At present, certain studies are mainly concentrated on particular areas such as hand-object contact (Yang et al. 2024;
Shiota et al. 2024), or they only take into account interactions between feet and the ground (Rempe et al. 2021). They
rely on contact information as previous knowledge, which
only identifies interactions between certain body parts and
objects. Other studies focus on identifying interaction in particular settings (Huang et al. 2022; Shimada et al. 2022), but
the applicability of these methods is restricted and may not
be relevant to more intricate situations.
Current methods used for HOT fail to take into account
the spatial relationship between humans and objects, resulting in possible misidentification of contact areas. In Figure 1, in a two-dimensional view, the overlap of the human, skateboard, and wall may appear like the human is
touching the wall, leading to a possible misinterpretation.
Moreover, the current HOT method has not effectively utilized the interaction data between humans and objects. This
approach (Chen et al. 2023) simplifies HOT to a semantic
segmentation task and does not take into account the frequent instances of occlusion by humans or objects. Occlusion makes it difficult for them to identify the shape of the
hidden area, which in turn impacts the accuracy of determining the boundary of contact. The bench’s shape is lost because the human body covers it, as illustrated in Figure 2(a).
Figure 2(b) displays the real contact labels, but the human
completely obscures the segmentation boundary and object
in Figure 2(c), presenting challenges in the HOT task. The
intrinsic quality of the 2D image makes it challenging to deduce the meaning of the covered area based on the image’s
surroundings. The occlusion phenomenon limits the visibility of important edge information in the approach, resulting
in inaccuracies when determining the contact area’s location. Additionally, because the 2D image is just a projection
from the 3D space, it lacks important spatial information
in terms of depth. The spatial relationship is important evidence for determining if actual contact occurs in occlusion
scenarios, as illustrated in Figure 2(d).

Human-object contact (HOT) is designed to accurately identify the areas where humans and objects come into contact. Current methods frequently fail to account for scenarios
where objects are frequently blocking the view, resulting in
inaccurate identification of contact areas. To tackle this problem, we suggest using a perspective interaction HOT detector
called PIHOT, which utilizes a depth map generation model
to offer depth information of humans and objects related to
the camera, thereby preventing false interaction detection.
Furthermore, we use mask dilatation and object restoration
techniques to restore the texture details in covered areas, improve the boundaries between objects, and enhance the perception of humans interacting with objects. Moreover, a spatial awareness perception is intended to concentrate on the
characteristic features close to the points of contact. The experimental results show that the PIHOT algorithm achieves
state-of-the-art performance on three benchmark datasets for
HOT detection tasks. Compared to the most recent DHOT,
our method enjoys an average improvement of 13%, 27.5%,
16%, and 18.5% on SC-Acc., C-Acc., mIoU, and wIoU metrics, respectively.

Code — https://drliuqi.github.io/
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09920

Introduction
Human-object contact (HOT) (Chen et al. 2023) refers to
the process where humans come into proximity with and
touch objects, a regular part of everyday life that helps us
connect with the world around us. In Figure 1, as a person
skateboards, the area where their feet touch the skateboard
creates a connection between the person and the skateboard.
Research on HOT detection within the field of human-object
interaction (HOI) focuses on accurately identifying the areas
where humans and objects come into contact, allowing machines to precisely detect interactions between them. This
technology has a wide range of potential applications and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8187

