The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Infer the Whole from a Glimpse of a Part: Keypoint-Based Knowledge Graph for
Vehicle Re-Identiﬁcation
Kai Lv1,2 , Yunlong Li1,2 , Zhuo Chen3,4,5 , Shuo Wang1,2 , Sheng Han1,2 , Youfang Lin1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Trafﬁc Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence
3
Zhejiang University
4
CSSC Intelligent Innovation Research Institute
5
CSSC Systems Engineering Research Institute
{lvkai, 21120379}@bjtu.edu.cn, huntercz@126.com, {19112029, shhan, yﬂin}@bjtu.edu.cn
2

input image

Abstract
Vehicle re-identiﬁcation aims to match vehicles across nonoverlapping camera views. Many existing methods extract
features from one speciﬁc image, and these methods lack
view-invariance when comparing vehicles of different orientations. As a result, discriminative parts obscured by viewpoint changes cannot contribute effectively to matching. This
work presents a novel keypoint-based framework for vehicle Re-ID. We propose to explicitly model the intrinsic structural relationships between vehicle components via knowledge graph. By establishing connection between keypoints,
our approach aims to leverage such prior to match vehicles even when some parts are not directly comparable due
to orientation inconsistencies. Speciﬁcally, given query and
gallery images, we ﬁrst detect visible keypoints. Then, a
transformer-based model infers features for non-overlapped
keypoints by conditioning on visible correspondences deﬁned
in the knowledge graph. The ﬁnal representation integrates
visible and inferred features. Extensive experiments demonstrate our method outperforms state-of-the-arts on standard
benchmarks under cross-view matching scenarios. To our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work introducing structural priors via keypoint knowledge graphs for view-invariant vehicle
re-identiﬁcation.

input image

inferred image

Infer

Infer

input image
(a)

inferred image

(b)

input image

Figure 1: a) Most previous works directly calculate the similarity. b) Our brain generally associates vehicles between
different orientations and compares their similarity when
they have similar orientations. In this work, we intend to
simulate this process to bridge the appearance between different orientations.

discriminative parts of the vehicles, such as the front logo,
may not be present in both images simultaneously, making
it challenging to use these distinctive details to re-identify
the vehicles. Therefore, relying solely on global features extracted from a single image could diminish the ability to reidentify a speciﬁc vehicle. Thus, it is crucial to deal with the
problems caused by partial observations of vehicles.
Human’s inherent deductive reasoning abilities can help
solve the above problems. Human brains can infer the whole
from a glimpse. For example, when we observe the front
view of a vehicle as shown in Figure 1 (b), our brain leverages structural knowledge from past experience to implicitly
infer the rear view. The main reason is that we understand
the structural relationships and typical arrangements of different discriminative regions on the vehicle. This cognitive
capability provides valuable insights for re-identiﬁcation.
On one hand, explicitly modeling these structural priors allows more effective utilization of the keypoint clues. When
only partial views are observed, we can take hints from vis-

Introduction
Vehicle re-identiﬁcation is critical for intelligent transportation systems, where the primary goal is to accurately match
a speciﬁc vehicle across various non-overlapping cameras.
Traditional approaches in vehicle re-identiﬁcation often focus on extracting global features from a single image of a vehicle. These features typically learn the overall shape, color,
and structural characteristics of the vehicle, which are then
used to search and match against a database of vehicle images taken from different angles and under varying lighting
conditions.
However, these global features may not effectively capture the similarities between vehicle images in vehicle reidentiﬁcation. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), when comparing two vehicle images taken from different views, some
* Corresponding Author: Youfang Lin (yﬂin@bjtu.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5901

