The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DASK: Distribution Rehearsing via Adaptive Style Kernel Learning for
Exemplar-Free Lifelong Person Re-Identification
Kunlun Xu1 , Chenghao Jiang1 , Peixi Xiong2 , Yuxin Peng1 , Jiahuan Zhou1 *
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Intel Labs
xkl@stu.pku.edu.cn, cj533@scarletmail.rutgers.edu, peixi.xiong@intel.com, {pengyuxin, jiahuanzhou}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Lifelong person re-identification (LReID) is an important but
challenging task that suffers from catastrophic forgetting due
to significant domain gaps between training steps. Existing
LReID approaches typically rely on data replay and knowledge distillation to mitigate this issue. However, data replay
methods compromise data privacy by storing historical exemplars, while knowledge distillation methods suffer from limited performance due to the cumulative forgetting of undistilled knowledge. To overcome these challenges, we propose
a novel paradigm that models and rehearses the distribution of
the old domains to enhance knowledge consolidation during
the new data learning, possessing a strong anti-forgetting capacity without storing any exemplars. Specifically, we introduce an exemplar-free LReID method called Distribution Rehearsing via Adaptive Style Kernel Learning (DASK). DASK
includes a Distribution Rehearser Learning mechanism that
learns to transform arbitrary distribution data into the current
data style at each learning step. To enhance the style transfer
capacity, an Adaptive Kernel Prediction network is explored
to achieve an instance-specific distribution adjustment. Additionally, we design a Distribution Rehearsing-driven LReID
Training module, which rehearses old distribution based on
the new data via the old AKPNet model, achieving effective knowledge accumulation. Experimental results show our
DASK outperforms the existing methods by 3.6%-6.8% and
4.5%-6.5% on seen and unseen domains, respectively.

Knowledge of Domain -1

Knowledge of Model

Knowledge of Domain

Sample of Domain -1

Domain -1
Domain
(a) Knowledge of Different Domains
Exemplar Buffer -1

Sample of Domain
Generated Sample
of Domain -1 Style

Model
(b) Knowledge Distillation-based Method
Distribution Rehearsing Module -1

Privacy
Model
(c) Replay-based Method

Model
(d) Distribution Rehearsing (Ours)

Figure 1: (a) Cross-domain distribution gap entails knowledge difference and catastrophic forgetting. (b) Knowledge
distillation suffers inadequate anti-forgetting capacity. (c)
Replay-based methods require an exemplar buffer, compromising data privacy. (d) Our method rehearses old distribution via old-style data generation, possessing a strong antiforgetting capacity without storing historical exemplars.

LReID is catastrophic forgetting, where the model’s performance on previously learned datasets deteriorates drastically
after being trained on new data (Li et al. 2024).
Recently, various LReID methods have emerged, which
can be broadly categorized into two main branches: data
replay-based and knowledge distillation-based. Data replaybased methods (Yu et al. 2023) rely on storing historical
exemplars to rehearse old knowledge while training new
models (Fig. 1 (c)). Despite their promising anti-forgetting
capabilities, these methods pose significant challenges regarding data privacy and impose a substantial storage burden, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios (Pu
et al. 2022). On the other hand, knowledge distillation-based
methods (Pu et al. 2021) focus on maintaining feature consistency between old and new models to preserve historical knowledge. However, due to the pronounced domain gap
between old and new data (Fig. 1 (a)), the features learned
from historical data may not be adequately represented in
the new data (Xu, Zou, and Zhou 2024). Consequently, the

Code — https://github.com/zhoujiahuan1991/AAAI2025LReID-DASK

Introduction
Person Re-identification (ReID) aims to identify a person of
interest across different camera viewpoints (Shi et al. 2023).
Extensive research has shown that ReID models trained on
a specific dataset often perform poorly when applied to new
datasets due to significant domain gaps (Zhao et al. 2021b;
Zhou, Su, and Wu 2022). This limitation has spurred a growing interest in the Lifelong Person Re-identification (LReID)
task, which focuses on training models with non-stationary
datasets step by step, to enhance their adaptability across
various domains (Pu et al. 2021). A primary challenge in
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8915

