The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Query-efficient Attack for Black-box Image Inpainting Forensics via
Reinforcement Learning
Xianbo Mo1 , Shunquan Tan1 * , Bin Li2 , Jiwu Huang1
1

2

Faculty of Engineering, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, China
6420240106@smbu.edu.cn,tanshunquan@gmail.com,libin@szu.edu.cn,jwhuang@smbu.edu.cn

Abstract

Mian 2018) has shown that it is vulnerable to adversarial
attacks. These attacks introduce perturbations to manipulate
input data, thereby misleading the target network into producing incorrect predictions. They are typically classified
as either white-box or black-box attacks, depending on the
level of prior knowledge about the target network. Whitebox attacks have full access to the details of the target network, while black-box attacks have no access to these internal details. In inpainting forensics, adversarial attacks pose
a severe challenge. The reason is that inpainting forensics
methods remain the only reliable way to identify inpainting regions, as human eyes struggle to detect manipulated
areas within meticulously crafted inpainting images. Consequently, the incorrect forensics results caused by adversarial
attacks are of utmost concern. Moreover, since anti-forensics
attacks expose vulnerabilities in existing forensics methods,
research on these attacks can further promote the design of
more robust forensics methods. To address these challenges,
many anti-forensics methods have been proposed in recent
years (Barni et al. 2019; Carlini and Farid 2020; Xie, Ni, and
Shi 2021; Ding et al. 2022; Fan, Hu, and Ding 2024).
However, existing attack methods are inappropriate for
image inpainting forensics. First, current anti-forensics
methods have focused on attacking image-wise classifiers,
whereas pixel-wise segmentation networks are used in inpainting forensics. Secondly, in real-world scenarios, inpainting forensics operate as black-box systems, with only
query results available to attackers. This makes querybased attacks the most suitable approach for inpainting
forensics. Unfortunately, existing anti-forensics methods are
predominantly designed for white-box attacks, with several relying on transfer-based black-box attacks. Besides,
for query-based black-box adversarial examples methods(Li
and Chen 2021; Andriushchenko et al. 2020; Maho, Furon,
and Le Merrer 2021) designed for computer vision tasks,
current research(Li et al. 2022) has shown that they can
be easily detected based on the similarity of successive
queries. Nevertheless, this detection method suffers from extremely high false alarm rates when the number of queries
is less than 10. Therefore, there is an urgent need for queryefficient anti-forensics methods tailored for black-box image inpainting forensics, capable of constructing successful
attacks with fewer than 10 queries.
To address this, we propose RLGC(Reinforcement

Recently, image inpainting has become a common tool for
manipulating nature images in a malicious manner, which
has led to the rapid advancement of inpainting forensics. Although current forensics methods have shown precise location of inpainting regions and reliable robustness against image post-processing operations, it remains unclear whether
they can effectively resist the possible attacks in realworld scenarios. To identify potential flaws, we propose a
novel black-box anti-forensics framework to attack inpainting
forensics methods, which employs reinforcement learning to
generate a query-efficient countermeasure, named RLGC. To
this end, we define reinforcement learning paradigm to model
the Markov Decision Process of query-based black-box antiforensics scenario. Specifically, pixel-wise agents are used
to modulate anti-forensics images based on action selection
and query forensics methods to obtain corresponding outputs.
Later, reward function evaluates attack effect and image distortion with these outputs. To maximize the cumulative reward, policy and value networks are integrated and trained
by Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic algorithm. Experimental results demonstrate that, without visually detectable
distortion on anti-forensics images, RLGC achieves remarkable attack effects in a highly query-effcient way against various black-box inpainting forensics methods, even outperforming the most representative white-box attack method.

Introduction
The rapid development of image forgery technologies such
as image inpainting has seriously challenged the authenticity and integrity of digital images (Verdoliva 2020). As digital images are frequently employed as evidence and reliable
records in contexts such as criminal investigations, journalistic reporting, and intellectual property protection, the detection and localization of inpainted regions within images
have emerged as significant research challenges. Numerous
forensic methods(Mayer and Stamm 2018; Li and Huang
2019; Wu and Zhou 2022; Yang, Cai, and Kot 2022; Zhang
et al. 2023) based on deep learning have been proposed to
address these issues in the past decade.
Although deep learning technology has significantly advanced inpainting forensics, current research (Akhtar and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19503

