The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hierarchical Context Pruning: Optimizing Real-World Code Completion with
Repository-Level Pretrained Code LLMs
Lei Zhang1,2, 3 , Yunshui Li1,2 , Jiaming Li1,2 , Xiaobo Xia4, 5 , Jiaxi Yang1,2
Run Luo1,2 , Minzheng Wang2,7 , Longze Chen1,2 , Junhao Liu6 , Qiang Qu1 , Min Yang1,3 *
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory for High Performance Data Mining, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Normal University
4
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
5
University of Science and Technology of China
6
University of California, Irvine
7
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lei.zhang2, min.yang}@siat.ac.cn
Abstract

such as GitHub Copilot, have become integral to daily development workflows, significantly boosting developer productivity. As research on Code LLMs continues to advance
(Bavarian et al. 2022; Sun et al. 2024), a new generation
of models (Guo et al. 2024; Lozhkov et al. 2024; Team
et al. 2024) trained on repository-level code data (RepoCode LLMs) has emerged. These models address the shortcomings of earlier file-level models, which struggled to
comprehend repository structures and integrate code across
multiple files during completion tasks. However, in realworld development scenarios, directly concatenating an entire code repository often exceeds the context window size
of these Repo-Code LLMs, resulting in significant performance degradation and increased inference latency. Thus,
effectively harnessing the capabilities of Repo-Code LLMs
to integrate cross-file information and construct high-quality
completion prompts within the model’s context window remains an open challenge for further research.

Some of the latest released Code Large Language Models
(Code LLMs) have been trained on repository-level code
data, enabling them to perceive repository structures and utilize cross-file code information. This capability allows us to
directly concatenate the content of repository code files in
prompts to achieve repository-level code completion. However, in real development scenarios, directly concatenating
all code repository files in a prompt can easily exceed the
context window of Code LLMs, leading to a significant decline in completion performance. Additionally, overly long
prompts can increase completion latency, negatively impacting the user experience. In this study, we conducted extensive
experiments, including completion error analysis, topology
dependency analysis, and cross-file content analysis, to investigate the factors affecting repository-level code completion. Based on the conclusions drawn from these preliminary
experiments, we proposed a strategy called Hierarchical
Context Pruning (HCP) to construct high-quality completion prompts. We applied the HCP to six Code LLMs and
evaluated them on the CrossCodeEval dataset. The experimental results showed that, compared to previous methods,
the prompts constructed using our HCP strategy achieved
higher completion accuracy on five out of six Code LLMs.
Additionally, the HCP managed to keep the prompt length
around 8k tokens (whereas the full repository code is approximately 50k tokens), significantly improving completion
throughput. Our code and data will be publicly available.

In this study, we first evaluated six Repo-Code LLMs on
the CrossCodeEval (Ding et al. 2023) benchmark by constructing completion prompts through randomly concatenating all repository code. We conducted a detailed analysis
and categorization of the erroneous completions produced
by these models. The analysis revealed that at least 30%
of the errors were caused by cross-file information issues,
highlighting the importance of constructing high-quality
repository-level completion prompts. Next, considering the
causal architecture characteristics of Code LLMs, we performed a topological sort of code files based on their dependency relationships and conducted topological dependency
analysis experiments. The results showed that maintaining
the topological dependency order of code files within the
prompt significantly improved the accuracy of code completions. Finally, we analyzed cross-file code content through
experiments and found that global context information in
cross-file code can be completely removed without affecting completion accuracy. Even when the specific implementations of all functions and class methods in cross-file code

Code — https://github.com/Hambaobao/HCP-Coder
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18294

Introduction
Code completion tools powered by Code Large Language
Models (Code LLMs) (Chen et al. 2021; Nijkamp et al.
2023b; Li et al. 2023; Fried et al. 2023; Allal et al. 2023),
* Min Yang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25886

