The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Uncertainty-Aware Contrastive Learning With Hard Negative Sampling for
Code Search Tasks
Han Liu1 2 , Jiaqing Zhan1 , Qin Zhang1 *
1

2

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University
han.liu@szu.edu.cn, zhanjiaqing2023@email.szu.edu.cn, qinzhang@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

tween queries and codes through enhancing their representation in an embedding space. Specifically, a pre-trained language model that is adapted to a code search task is expected
to produce meaningful embeddings of queries and codes,
such that the similarity of each query-code pair can be measured accurately. In other words, it is generally expected to
align queries and codes in an embedding space, where contrastive learning has been adopted typically to achieve the
alignment by pulling each positive query-code pair closer
and pushing each negative pair further away (Wang et al.
2021b,a; Jain et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2022). Some recent
code search methods driven by contrastive learning include
CodeRetriever (Li et al. 2022) and CoCoSoDa (Shi et al.
2023), which have demonstrated their effectiveness in representation alignment of each positive query-code pair.
Despite the above-mentioned effectiveness of existing
code search methods, it is worth noting that diverse language
styles can be used in user queries and codes for presenting
the same semantic meaning, so it may be inappropriate to
consider the representation of queries and codes in an embedding space to be deterministic. In other words, it seems
more reasonable to produce diverse embeddings for queries
and codes for expecting a representation enhancement.
We address above concerns by proposing an uncertaintyaware contrastive learning with hard negative sampling approach. Specifically, we propose a strategy of uncertainty
learning to produce diverse embeddings for queries and
codes, and design a way of constructing hard negative querycode pairs, in order to improve the effectiveness of intermodality alignment (for positive query-code pairs) and intramodality alignment (for positive pairs of queries and codes).
The contributions of this paper are summarised as follows:

Code search is a highly required technique for software
development. In recent years, the rapid development of
transformer-based language models has made it increasingly
more popular to adapt a pre-trained language model to a code
search task, where contrastive learning is typically adopted
to semantically align user queries and codes in an embedding space. Considering that the same semantic meaning can
be presented using diverse language styles in user queries
and codes, the representation of queries and codes in an embedding space may thus be non-deterministic. To address
the above-specified point, this paper proposes an uncertaintyaware contrastive learning approach for code search. Specifically, for both queries and codes, we design an uncertainty
learning strategy to produce diverse embeddings by learning
to transform the original inputs into Gaussian distributions
and then taking a reparameterization trick. We also design a
hard negative sampling strategy to construct query-code pairs
for improving the effectiveness of uncertainty-aware contrastive learning. The experimental results indicate that our
approach outperforms 10 baseline methods on a large code
search dataset with six programming languages. The results
also show that our strategies of uncertainty learning and hard
negative sampling can really help enhance the representation
of queries and codes leading to an improvement of the code
search performance.

Introduction
In software development, a code search technique is highly
required for programmers to retrieve relevant programming
libraries (Singer et al. 2010; Nie et al. 2016; McMillan et al.
2011). In recent years, transform-based language models
have become increasingly more powerful, so it has been a
popular strategy to adapt a pre-trained language model to a
code search task (Feng et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2021, 2022;
Romera-Paredes et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024; Phan and Jannesari 2024). In this context, code search can be achieved by
measuring the matching degree of each query-code pair and
then ranking the retrieved codes according to their degrees
of matching with the given natural language query.
In recent years, related studies have paid more attention to
improving the effectiveness of measuring the similarity be-

• We have proposed an uncertainty-aware embedding strategy to obtain diverse representation of queries and codes
for better aligning positive pairs of queries and codes.
• We have designed a strategy of hard negative sampling to
augment the negative query-code pairs for better aligning
positive query-code pairs.
• Experimental results show that our approach outperforms
baselines of code search on a dataset with six programming languages and indicate the effectiveness of incorporating uncertainty learning and hard negative sampling
into a contrastive learning-driven method of code search.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18807

