The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Pareto Set Learning for Expensive Multi-objective Optimization
via Stein Variational Hypernetworks
Minh-Duc Nguyen1 , Phuong Mai Dinh1, 2 , Quang-Huy Nguyen1, 3 ,
Long P. Hoang4 , Dung D. Le1
1

College of Engineering and Computer Science, VinUniversity, Vietnam
2
VinUni-Illinois Smart Health Center, VinUniversity, Vietnam
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, USA
4
Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
duc.nm2@vinuni.edu.vn, phuong.dm2@vinuni.edu.vn, nguyen.2959@osu.edu,
long hoang@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, dung.ld@vinuni.edu.vn
Abstract
Expensive multi-objective optimization problems (EMOPs)
are common in real-world scenarios where evaluating objective functions is costly and involves extensive computations
or physical experiments. Current Pareto set learning methods for such problems often rely on surrogate models like
Gaussian processes to approximate the objective functions.
These surrogate models can become fragmented, resulting
in numerous small uncertain regions between explored solutions. When using acquisition functions such as the Lower
Confidence Bound (LCB), these uncertain regions can turn
into pseudo-local optima, complicating the search for globally
optimal solutions. To address these challenges, we propose a
novel approach called SVH-PSL, which integrates Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) with Hypernetworks for
efficient Pareto set learning. Our method addresses the issues
of fragmented surrogate models and pseudo-local optima by
collectively moving particles in a manner that smooths out the
solution space. The particles interact with each other through
a kernel function, which helps maintain diversity and encourages the exploration of underexplored regions. This kernelbased interaction prevents particles from clustering around
pseudo-local optima and promotes convergence towards globally optimal solutions. Our approach aims to establish robust
relationships between trade-off reference vectors and their corresponding true Pareto solutions, overcoming the limitations
of existing methods. Through extensive experiments across
both synthetic and real-world MOO benchmarks, we demonstrate that SVH-PSL significantly improves the quality of the
learned Pareto set, offering a promising solution for expensive
multi-objective optimization problems.

Introduction
Multi-objective optimization (MOO) has numerous essential
and practical applications across various fields, from textto-image generation (Lee et al. 2024) to ejector design for
fuel cell systems (Hou, Chen, and Pei 2024). However, realworld MOO problems often involve multiple conflicting and
expensive-to-evaluate objectives. For example, recommendation systems must achieve a balance between precision
and efficiency (Le and Lauw 2017) or between precision and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19677

revenue (Milojkovic et al. 2019), battery usage optimization
requires trade-offs between performance and lifetime (Attia
et al. 2020), robotic radiosurgery involves coordination of
internal and external motion (Schweikard et al. 2000). Traditional MOO methods, such as hyperparameter tuning, seek a
finite set of Pareto-optimal solutions representing trade-offs
between objectives. However, as the number of objectives
increases, approximating the Pareto front becomes exponentially costly, leading to a trade-off between generalization
and computational time (Swersky, Snoek, and Adams 2013).
Pareto Set Learning (PSL) (Navon et al. 2021; Hoang et al.
2023; Tuan et al. 2024) is a promising approach that allows
users to explore the entire Pareto front for MOO problems
by learning a parametric mapping to align trade-off preference weights assigned to objectives with their corresponding
Pareto optimal solutions. The optimized mapping model enables real-time adjustments between objectives.
Expensive objective problems refer to a class of real-world
problems in which evaluating each objective is expensive. For
example, evaluating a battery’s lifetime costs a newly developed battery or evaluating robotic radiosurgery costs a lot of
one-time-use medical equipment. To address this challenge,
researchers have developed surrogate model techniques (He
et al. 2023) that estimate the actual objective functions, thus
minimizing the necessity for costly evaluations. Lin et al.
(Lin et al. 2022) is one of the pioneer teams in the study of
Pareto set learning for the EMOPs by acquiring knowledge
of the entire Pareto front, referred to as PSL-MOBO. This
work employs the Pareto set learning with Multi-objective
Bayesian Optimization (MOBO) (Laumanns and Ocenasek
2002) to effectively solve black- box expensive optimization
problems by minimizing the number of function evaluations.
Challenge. We observed that PSL-MOBO often struggles
with instability due to its tendency to become trapped in
pseudo-local optima. This issue arises because the optimization process can mistakenly identify these false optima as
true optimal solutions, causing the algorithm to converge prematurely and fail to explore the solution space thoroughly. As
a result, PSL-MOBO might not effectively approximate the
true Pareto front, especially in complex or high-dimensional
spaces where numerous local optima are present. Consequently, learning the Pareto front requires an advanced algo-

