The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Progressive Distribution Matching for Federated Semi-Supervised Learning
Dongping Liao* 1 , Xitong Gao* 2,3 , Yabo Xu4 , Chengzhong Xu†1
1

State Key Lab of IoTSC, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
3
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology, Shenzhen, China
4
DataStory Information Technology Co., Ltd
yb97428@um.edu.mo, xt.gao@siat.ac.cn, arber@datastory.com.cn, czxu@um.edu.mo
Abstract

Ground Truth

Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative learning from
distributed data while preserving the privacy of participating clients. While supervised federated learning with labeled
data has made notable strides and achieved success, federated semi-supervised learning (FSSL) lags in its progress. Existing works for FSSL heavily rely on fully-labeled clients,
while ignoring the distribution of pseudo-labels generated
from skewed unlabeled data. In this work, we offer empirical
and theoretical insights into the challenges encountered when
applying conventional semi-supervised algorithms in the federated regime. Specifically, we highlight how the inherent
data heterogeneity in FSSL can exacerbate issues within the
pseudo-labeling process. Motivated by these observations,
we propose FL with progressive distribution matching (FedPDM) to regularize the distribution of pseudo-labels, aiming to progressively reshape it to align with the ground-truth
distribution. The matching problem could be formulated as
an optimal transport (OT) problem and efficiently solved by
Sinkhorn-Knopp iteration. Through extensive experiments,
we demonstrate the superiority of FedPDM on a variety of
models and datasets compared with prior arts for FSSL.

1

#Epochs = 1

#Epochs = 3

60%

60%

40%

40%

20%

20%

0%

0%

(a) After 50 rounds.

#Epochs = 5

(b) After 200 rounds.

Figure 1: Classes (x-axis, sorted by true frequency) vs.
Probability (y-axis, %) on CIFAR-10. As training rounds
progress, client model gains an increasing prediction bias towards certain classes, leading to a distribution mismatch (deviation from “Ground-Truth”) for unlabeled data. “Ground
Truth”: true class distribution, “#Epochs”: number of local
training epochs.

are less frequently annotated, primarily due to constraints
related to the budgets and expertise, and a lack of incentive for data owners to undertake such efforts. Consequently,
demanding fully-labeled data for FL may prove impractical
in many real-world scenarios. These constraints have thus
propelled research into Federated Semi-Supervised Learning (FSSL) (Jeong et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021).
To leverage unlabeled data, earlier attempts for
FSSL (Jeong et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2021) focus on adapting existing semi-supervised algorithms into federated scenarios. Nonetheless, these efforts
tend to neglect the heterogeneity (i.e. non-IID-ness) inherent in local data. To resolve this issue, RSCFed (Liang
et al. 2022) employs random sub-sampling and distancereweighed model aggregation, while CBAFed (Li, Li, and
Wang 2023) introduces adaptive confidence thresholding.
Despite yielding positive outcomes, these approaches
exhibit profound limitations. On one hand, they fail to
uncover the underlying difficulties in accurately assigning
pseudo-labels to samples — a task complicated by the
presence of data heterogeneity. On the other hand, even with
accurately assigned pseudo-labels, training still contends
with the challenges of data heterogeneity, as they do not
account for the data imbalance.
To this end, we delve into the distribution of the model

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) enables a group of clients to jointly
optimize a model using distributed data, ensuring that the
data remain locally stored and only privately accessible.
This new paradigm distinguishes itself from traditional distributed optimization and offers advantages such as privacy
preservation, secure aggregation, and improved communication efficiency. To date, there has been a notable surge of interest on this topic, such as pioneering applications in mobile
computing (Hard et al. 2018) and healthcare domains (Liu
et al. 2021). Despite extensive research efforts devoted to
address data (Wang et al. 2020; Acar et al. 2020; Liao, Gao,
and Xu 2024) and system heterogeneity (Diao, Ding, and
Tarokh 2020; Liao et al. 2023; Gao et al. 2019), communication footprint (Wang, Lin, and Chen 2022; Hönig, Zhao,
and Mullins 2022), these endeavors primarily assume the
availability of fully-labeled data. However, real-world data
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5191

