The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mixture of Knowledge Minigraph Agents for Literature Review Generation
Zhi Zhang1 , Yan Liu1, * , Sheng-hua Zhong2 , Gong Chen1 , Yu Yang3 , Jiannong Cao1
2

1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, the Department of Computing, Hong Kong, 999077, China
Shenzhen University, the College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen, 518052, Guangdong, China
3
The Education University of Hong Kong, Centre for Learning, Teaching, and Technology, Hong Kong, 999077, China
zhi271.zhang@connect.polyu.hk, yan.liu@polyu.edu.hk, csshzhong@szu.edu.cn, csgchen@comp.polyu.edu.hk,
yangyy@eduhk.hk, jiannong.cao@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

Referencing Paper 1 (understanding)

Literature reviews play a crucial role in scientific research
for understanding the current state of research, identifying
gaps, and guiding future studies on specific topics. However,
the process of conducting a comprehensive literature review
is yet time-consuming. This paper proposes a novel framework, collaborative knowledge minigraph agents (CKMAs),
to automate scholarly literature reviews. A novel promptbased algorithm, the knowledge minigraph construction agent
(KMCA), is designed to identify relations between concepts
from academic literature and automatically constructs knowledge minigraphs. By leveraging the capabilities of large language models on constructed knowledge minigraphs, the
multiple path summarization agent (MPSA) efficiently organizes concepts and relations from different viewpoints to generate literature review paragraphs. We evaluate CKMAs on
three benchmark datasets. Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed method, further revealing promising applications of LLMs in scientific research.

𝐴 (Method) is used for 𝑇 (Task) … 𝑴𝟏
(Material) is used for A (Method).
Referencing Paper 2 (understanding)
𝐵 (Method) is used for 𝑇 (Task) … 𝑴𝟏 and 𝑀"
(Material) are used for 𝑩 (Method).

Graph (structure)
Material
𝑀"

Material
𝑴𝟏

Method 𝑩
Method 𝑨

Task 𝑇

Summary (good)
𝑨 and 𝑩 employ 𝑴𝟏 for 𝑇. Compared with 𝐴, 𝐵 further employs 𝑀" .
Summary (trivial)
𝑨 employs 𝑴𝟏 for 𝑇. 𝑩 employs 𝑴𝟏 and 𝑀" for 𝑇.

Figure 1: Illustration of relations between concepts in literature review.

Project — https://minigraph-agents.github.io/
trends and gaps in recent research outputs, and uncover insights that might be overlooked in manual reviews (Wagner,
Lukyanenko, and Paré 2022).
Automatic literature review algorithms typically involve
two stages (Shi et al. 2023): (1) selecting relevant reference
documents and (2) summarizing the reference documents to
compose a summary that presents the evolution of a specific field (these stages can be applied iteratively). Multiple
scientific document summarization (MSDS), which aims to
generate coherent and concise summaries for clusters of relevant scientific papers on a topic, is the representative work
in the second stage. Over the past decades (Jin, Wang, and
Wan 2020), researchers have developed various summarization methods. Extractive methods directly select important
sentences from original papers, while abstractive methods
can generate new words and sentences but are technically
more challenging than extractive methods.
Large Language Models (LLMs), pre-trained on massive
text data, have shown human-like performance in language
understanding and coherent synthesis, recently attracting interest in abstractive summarization. Though advanced in
natural language processing, MSDS involves concepts that
form complex relations, which LLMs are not naturally designed for and face challenges to organize. As shown in Fig.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is being increasingly integrated
into scientific discovery to augment and accelerate scientific research (Wang et al. 2023). Researchers are developing
AI algorithms for various purposes, including literature understanding, experiment development, and manuscript draft
writing (Liu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024; Martin-Boyle
et al. 2024).
Literature reviews play a crucial role in scientific research,
assessing and integrating previous research on specific topics (Bolanos et al. 2024). They aim to meticulously identify and appraise all relevant literature related to a specific
research question. Recent advancements in AI have shown
promising performance in understanding research papers
(Van Dinter, Tekinerdogan, and Catal 2021). By leveraging
AI capabilities, automatic literature review algorithms enable researchers to save time and effort in the manual process of conducting literature reviews, rapidly identify key
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26012

