The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Motion Artifact Removal in Pixel-Frequency Domain
via Alternate Masks and Diffusion Model
Jiahua Xu1 * , Dawei Zhou1 * , Lei Hu2 * , Jianfeng Guo3 , Feng Yang3 ,
Zaiyi Liu2† , Nannan Wang1† , Xinbo Gao4
1
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
Department of Radiology, Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China
3
Department of Radiology, Xiangyang No. 1 People’s Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, Xiangyang, China
4
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
jhxu.xidian@gmail.com, dwzhou.xidian@gmail.com, hulei@gdph.org.cn, jianfengguo@hbmu.edu.cn,
haitang76@163.com, liuzaiyi@gdph.org.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Inverse Fourier Transform

Motion artifacts present in magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) can seriously interfere with clinical diagnosis. Removing motion artifacts is a straightforward solution and has been
extensively studied. However, paired data are still heavily
relied on in recent works and the perturbations in k-space
(frequency domain) are not well considered, which limits
their applications in the clinical field. To address these issues, we propose a novel unsupervised purification method
which leverages pixel-frequency information of noisy MRI
images to guide a pre-trained diffusion model to recover clean
MRI images. Specifically, considering that motion artifacts
are mainly concentrated in high-frequency components in kspace, we utilize the low-frequency components as the guide
to ensure correct tissue textures. Additionally, given that
high-frequency and pixel information are helpful for recovering shape and detail textures, we design alternate complementary masks to simultaneously destroy the artifact structure and exploit useful information. Quantitative experiments
are performed on datasets from different tissues and show that
our method achieves superior performance on several metrics. Qualitative evaluations with radiologists also show that
our method provides better clinical feedback.

Motion

Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model

Low
Frequency

Acquisition

Motion-free

Alternate
Masks

Alternate
Masks

High
Frequency

Pixel
Information

Inverse Fourier Transform
Artifact
Corrupted
Phase perturbations

Figure 1: Schematic of our research problem and solution.
During the MRI imaging process, motion artifacts are produced due to the patient’s motion. Removing artifacts via a
diffusion model and alternate masks in pixel-frequency domain can help radiologists make better diagnosis.

thus seriously interfering with clinical diagnosis and treatment. Therefore, we need to explore how to effectively alleviate the affects of motion artifacts.
Several approaches have been proposed to solve this problem (Hu et al. 2024b,a). They can be classified into prospective motion artifact prevention and retrospective motion artifact removal. For the former, researchers aim to preemptively avoid motion artifacts by tracking the motion (Schulz
et al. 2012; Zaitsev et al. 2006), such as modifying imaging sequences and parameters (Cruz et al. 2016; Vasanawala
et al. 2010b; Cruz et al. 2017). But this strategy often entails
additional equipment or prolonged scanning times, resulting
in higher costs. For the latter, researchers use compressed
sensing to iteratively correct motion artifacts (Vasanawala
et al. 2010a; Yang, Zhang, and Xie 2013; Küstner et al. 2017;
Hansen et al. 2012). However, these approaches typically require raw k-space data which poses a data barrier to effectively building models. Additionally, traditional approaches
usually require paired data for training (Isola et al. 2017;

Code — https://github.com/medcx/PFAD

Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive medical imaging technique and has been widely used in clinical
diagnostics. However, it usually requires extended acquisition time (Zaitsev, Maclaren, and Herbst 2015) and some patients (e.g., elderly or those with conditions such as claustrophobia and epilepsy (Chen 1990)) may experience motions
due to discomfort during the long scanning duration. These
motions may destroy the k-space (aka frequency domain)
signal distribution of MRI, leading to motion artifacts and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8878

