The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedSPU: Personalized Federated Learning for Resource-Constrained Devices with
Stochastic Parameter Update
Ziru Niu1 , Hai Dong1 * , A. K. Qin2
1

RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia
Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, VIC 3122, Australia
ziru.niu@student.rmit.edu.au, hai.dong@rmit.edu.au, kqin@swin.edu.au
2

Abstract

et al. 2017; Imteaj et al. 2022). Among these devices, some
resource-constrained devices might be incapable of training
the entire global model with a too complex structure.
To overcome the non-iid data problem, the Personalized
Federated Learning (PFL) framework is introduced by empowering each client to maintain a unique local model tailored to its local data distribution. To address system heterogeneity, the technique of federated dropout (i.e. model
pruning) is employed. Resource-constrained devices are allowed to train a sub-model, which is a subset of the global
model. This approach reduces computation and communication overheads for training and transmitting the sub-model,
aiding resource-constrained devices in overcoming computation and communication bottlenecks (Caldas et al. 2018;
Horváth et al. 2021).
Various PFL frameworks have been developed to tackle
the non-iid data challenge (Khodak, Balcan, and Talwalkar
2019; Fallah, Mokhtari, and Ozdaglar 2020; Arivazhagan
et al. 2019; Sattler, Müller, and Samek 2021; Smith et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2021; Marfoq et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2023; Dinh, Tran, and Nguyen 2020; Mansour et al. 2020;
Deng, Kamani, and Mahdavi 2021; Zhang et al. 2023). Nevertheless, the inherent communication or computation bottleneck of resource-constrained edge devices is often overlooked in these frameworks. To tackle the computation and
communication bottlenecks, federated dropout is applied
(Caldas et al. 2018; Wen, Jeon, and Huang 2022; Horváth
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2022, 2023), where
resource-constrained devices are allowed to train a subset
of the global model, i.e. a sub-model. Compared with a full
model, the computation and communication overheads for
training and transmitting sub-models are reduced, facilitating resource-constrained devices to complete the training
task within constraints. For example, in (Caldas et al. 2018;
Wen, Jeon, and Huang 2022), the server randomly prunes
neurons in the global model. In (Horváth et al. 2021), the
server prunes the rightmost neurons in the global model.
These works fail to meet the personalization requirement, as
the server arbitrarily decides the architectures of local submodels without considering the importance of neurons based
on the local data distributions of clients.
On the other hand, (Jiang et al. 2023; Li et al. 2021; Jiang
et al. 2022) let clients adaptively prune neurons to obtain the
optimal architecture of the local sub-model. Each client first

Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) is widely employed
in the Internet of Things (IoT) to handle high-volume, noniid client data while ensuring data privacy. However, heterogeneous edge devices owned by clients may impose varying degrees of resource constraints, causing computation and
communication bottlenecks for PFL. Federated Dropout has
emerged as a popular strategy to address this challenge,
wherein only a subset of the global model, i.e. a sub-model,
is trained on a client’s device, thereby reducing computation
and communication overheads. Nevertheless, the dropoutbased model-pruning strategy may introduce bias, particularly towards non-iid local data. When biased sub-models
absorb highly divergent parameters from other clients, performance degradation becomes inevitable. In response, we
propose federated learning with stochastic parameter update
(FedSPU). Unlike dropout that tailors local models to smallsize sub-models, FedSPU maintains the full model architecture on each device but randomly freezes a certain percentage
of neurons in the local model during training while updating
the remaining neurons. This approach ensures that a portion
of the local model remains personalized, thereby enhancing
the model’s robustness against biased parameters from other
clients. Experimental results demonstrate that FedSPU outperforms federated dropout by 4.45% on average in terms of
accuracy. Furthermore, an introduced early stopping scheme
leads to a significant reduction of the training time in FedSPU
by 25% ∼ 71% while maintaining high accuracy.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
paradigm that allows edge devices to collaboratively train a
model without revealing private data (McMahan et al. 2017).
However, the efficacy of FL in real-world IoT systems is
usually impeded by both data and system heterogeneities of
IoT clients. First, clients comprise edge devices from various geographical locations collecting data that are naturally
non-independent identical (non-iid). In such a scenario, a
single global model struggles to generalize across all local
datasets (Kulkarni, Kulkarni, and Pant 2020; Li et al. 2021).
Second, IoT clients consist of physical devices with varying processor, memory, and bandwidth capabilities (Smith
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19721

