The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Do Transformer Interpretability Methods Transfer to RNNs?
Gonçalo Paulo* , Thomas Marshall* , Nora Belrose
EleutherAI
goncalo@eleuther.ai, thomas@eleuther.ai, nora@eleuther.ai

Abstract

In this paper, we assess whether popular interpretability
tools originally designed for the transformer will also apply
to these new RNN models. In particular, we reproduce the
following findings from the transformer interpretability literature:

Recent advances in recurrent neural network architectures,
such as Mamba and RWKV, have enabled RNNs to match or
exceed the performance of equal-size transformers in terms of
language modeling perplexity and downstream evaluations,
suggesting that future systems may be built on completely
new architectures. In this paper, we examine if selected interpretability methods originally designed for transformer language models will transfer to these up-and-coming recurrent
architectures. Specifically, we focus on steering model outputs via contrastive activation addition, on eliciting latent predictions via the tuned lens, and eliciting latent knowledge
from models fine-tuned to produce false outputs under certain
conditions. Our results show that most of these techniques are
effective when applied to RNNs, and we show that it is possible to improve some of them by taking advantage of RNNs’
compressed state.

1. Contrastive activation addition (CAA): Rimsky et al.
(2023) find that transformer LMs can be controlled using
“steering vectors,” computed by averaging the difference
in residual stream activations between pairs of positive
and negative examples of a particular behavior, such as
factual versus hallucinatory responses.
2. The tuned lens: Belrose et al. (2023) find that interpretable next-token predictions can be elicited from intermediate layers of a transformer using linear probes, and
that the accuracy of these predictions increases monotonically with depth.
3. “Quirky” models: Mallen and Belrose (2023) find that
simple probing methods can elicit a transformer’s knowledge of the correct answer to a question, even when it has
been fine-tuned to output an incorrect answer. They further find that these probes generalize to problems harder
than those the probe was trained on.

Code — https://github.com/EleutherAI/rnngineering
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05971

Introduction
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) has all
but replaced the recurrent neural network (RNN) in natural language processing in recent years due to its impressive
ability to handle long-distance dependencies and its parallelizable training across the time dimension. But the selfattention mechanism at the heart of the transformer suffers
from quadratic time complexity, making it computationally
expensive to apply to very long sequences.
Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023) and RWKV (Peng et al. 2023)
are RNNs1 that allow for parallelized training across the
time dimension by restricting the underlying recurrence relation to be associative (Martin and Cundy 2017; Blelloch
1990). Empirically, these architectures exhibit comparable
perplexity and downstream performance to equal-size transformers, making them attractive alternatives for many usecases.

We also introduce state steering, a modification of CAA
that operates on an RNN’s compressed state, rather than on
its residual stream.

Architectures
We focus on the Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023) and RWKV
v5 architectures in this paper, for which there are strong pretrained models freely available on the HuggingFace Hub. We
chose to exclude Poli et al. (2023)’s Striped Hyena 7B model
because it includes attention blocks of quadratic time complexity, and is therefore not an RNN by our definition.

Mamba
The Mamba architecture is depicted in Figure 1. Each
Mamba layer relies on two different mechanisms to route
information between token positions: a causal convolution
block, and a selective state-space model (SSM). The selective SSM is the primary innovation of Gu and Dao (2023),
and it allows the parameters of the SSM to depend on the
input, enhancing the model’s expressivity.

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, we use the term “RNN” to refer to any causal
sequence modeling architecture which allows for constant-memory
and linear-time autoregressive generation.

27565

