The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Contrastive Representation for Interactive Recommendation
Jingyu Li, Zhiyong Feng, Dongxiao He, Hongqi Chen, Qinghang Gao, Guoli Wu
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{lijingyu working, zyfeng, hedongxiao, hongqi, gaoqh, wuguoli it999}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

based on Human Feedback (RLHF) mechanism in ChatGPT
(OpenAI 2024). There has been a variety of commercial services on interactive recommendation systems based on DRL
(Chen et al. 2019b; Yu, Shen, and Jin 2019; Zhou et al. 2020;
Cai et al. 2023a).
However, sample inefficiency is a significant issue that
hinders the further development of IR (Yu 2018). Sample
efficiency refers to the training performance which can be
achieved limited to a certain number of training samples. It
measures the training difficulty of an RL agent. For IR tasks,
the DRL models usually turn out to be even more sampleinefficient than other typical DRL tasks (e.g., robotic control, game agents, etc.) (Chen et al. 2021). Because conducting DRL from high dimensional observations is empirically
observed to be sample-inefficient (Lake et al. 2017; Kaiser
et al. 2024). Unfortunately, IR usually has to encode users’
profiles into high dimensional observations to convey abundant semantic information. This makes the IR agents can be
hardly trained to the ideal effect within limited online interaction. So it cannot quickly attract users’ interest, leading to
the failure of maintaining a certain number of active users
(Gao et al. 2023b). This is a fatal problem for the online recommendation business.
Some approaches have been proposed to address the sample efficiency problem in IR. Commonly, they can be classified into three streams of methods based on different intention (some methods may belong to more than one category):
(i) Improve functional components in DRL; (ii) Increase significative reward signals. (iii) Enhancing the state representation method. The first class enhance the policy for making
action (Zou et al. 2020) or the way of exploiting samples
(Chen et al. 2022b). The second class usually trains offline user simulator to simulate users’ behaviours and give
reward feedback towards recommendation (Shi et al. 2019;
Ie and other 2019; Rohde et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2023).
The last class aims at enhancing the representation methods for extracting users’ profile (Liu et al. 2020; Xi et al.
2023). Works of the last class are usually based on the consensus (Laskin, Srinivas, and Abbeel 2020): If an agent can
acquire high quality semantic information from high dimensional observations, DRL-based recommendation methods
built on top of those representations should be significantly
more sample-efficient. In this paper we name it DRL Representation Consensus.

Interactive Recommendation (IR) has gained significant attention recently for its capability to quickly capture dynamic
interest and optimize both short and long term objectives. IR
agents are typically implemented through Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), because DRL is inherently compatible
with the dynamic nature of IR. However, DRL is currently
not perfect for IR. Due to the large action space and sample inefficiency problem, training DRL recommender agents
is challenging. The key point is that useful features cannot
be extracted as high-quality representations for the recommender agent to optimize its policy. To tackle this problem,
we propose Contrastive Representation for Interactive Recommendation (CRIR). CRIR efficiently extracts latent, highlevel preference ranking features from explicit interaction,
and leverages the features to enhance users’ representation.
Specifically, the CRIR provides representation through one
representation network, and refines it through our proposed
Preference Ranking Contrastive Learning (PRCL). The key
insight of PRCL is that it can perform contrastive learning without relying on computations involving high-level
representations or large potential action sets. Furthermore,
we also propose a data exploiting mechanism and an agent
training mechanism to better adapt CRIR to the DRL backbone. Extensive experiments have been carried out to show
our method’s superior improvement on the sample efficiency
while training an DRL-based IR agent.

1

Introduction

Interactive Recommendation (IR) is recently popular and
becoming accepted as an reasonable recommender workflow. Traditionally, the recommendation problem was considered to be a classification or prediction task (such us
collaborative filtering and content-based filtering methods).
However, this may not match the real recommendation scenario. It is now widely agreed that formulating it as a sequential decision problem can better reflect the user-system
interaction (Lin et al. 2023). Therefore, IR can be formulated as a Markov decision process and be solved by Reinforcement Learning (RL) or Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL). DRL-based IR can naturally capture users’ unique
dynamic interests and balance between short and long term
targets, similar to the well-known Reinforcement Learning
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12058

