The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CodeHalu: Investigating Code Hallucinations in LLMs via
Execution-based Verification
Yuchen Tian1 * , Weixiang Yan2 * † , Qian Yang3,4 , Xuandong Zhao5
Qian Chen6 , Wen Wang6 , Ziyang Luo1 , Lei Ma7,8† , Dawn Song5†
1
Hong Kong Baptist University
University of California, Santa Barbara
3
Mila - Québec AI Institute
4
Université de Montréal
5
University of California, Berkeley
6
Alibaba Group
7
The University of Tokyo
8
University of Alberta
yctian@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, weixiangyan@ucsb.edu
2

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant
progress in code generation, offering developers groundbreaking automated programming support. However, LLMs often
generate code that is syntactically correct and even semantically plausible, but may not execute as expected or fulfill specified requirements. This phenomenon of hallucinations in the
code domain has not been systematically explored. To advance
the community’s understanding and research on this issue, we
introduce the concept of code hallucinations and propose a
classification method for code hallucination based on execution verification. We categorize code hallucinations into four
main types: mapping, naming, resource, and logic hallucinations, with each category further divided into different subcategories to understand and address the unique challenges faced
by LLMs in code generation with finer granularity. Additionally, we present a dynamic detection algorithm called CodeHalu designed to detect and quantify code hallucinations. We
also introduce the CodeHaluEval benchmark, which includes
8,883 samples from 699 tasks, to systematically and quantitatively evaluate code hallucinations. By evaluating 17 popular
LLMs using this benchmark, we reveal significant differences
in their accuracy and reliability in code generation, offering
detailed insights for further improving the code generation
capabilities of LLMs. The CodeHalu benchmark and code are
publicly available at https://github.com/yuchen814/CodeHalu.

Introduction
Deep neural networks often generate erroneous information
that contradicts the original content, cannot be verified, or
conflicts with real-world knowledge. This phenomenon, commonly known as model hallucination, attracts widespread
attention in the fields of natural language processing and multimodal learning (Ji et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2024), with the community actively exploring methods to
* These authors contributed equally.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25300

mitigate hallucinations (Peng et al. 2023; Elaraby et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2023). However, the issue of model hallucination
in the code generation domain remains unexplored.
Conducting a thorough and dedicated study on code hallucinations is crucial for improving the quality of code generated by LLMs. Firstly, the purpose of code is to solve
problems, and its value is realized only when the code executes successfully and passes tests (Chen et al. 2021; Austin
et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2023). This necessitates that the generated code not only maintain strict logic and precision but
also undergoes execution verification to confirm its correctness. Therefore, the practical use and verification of code
differ significantly from Natural Language(NL) texts, meaning we cannot directly apply the definitions and methods used
for NL hallucinations to code. Secondly, code snippets containing hallucinations may trigger runtime errors, or exhibit
functional defects, which hinder the reliable deployment of
LLMs in automated software development scenarios. Lastly,
by exploring and verifying code hallucinations in a targeted
manner, we can effectively uncover their causes and contribute to improving the architecture and training methods of
LLMs.
To fill this gap, we define the concept of code hallucination in LLMs, based on the unique purpose and function of
the code. Code hallucinations refer to the phenomenon
where code generated by LLMs is syntactically correct or
even semantically plausible but ultimately cannot execute
as expected or fails to meet specified requirements.1 This
phenomenon typically arises from various factors, such as
errors or outdated information in the training data, an inadequate grasp of the syntax rules and programming paradigms
of the programming languages, and limitations in the logical
1
We test 16 LLMs using 105,958 code samples. The experimental results demonstrate that only 9 models occasionally exhibit
syntactic errors in the generated code, with an exceptionally low
average error rate of 0.0020. These findings support our initial hypothesis that the code generated by LLMs is generally syntactically
correct and even semantically plausible or appropriate.

