The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-Attentive Spatio-Temporal Calibration for Precise Intermediate Layer
Matching in ANN-to-SNN Distillation
Di Hong1,2,3 , Yueming Wang1,2,3 *
1 The College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2 Nanhu Brain-computer Interface Institute, Hangzhou, China
3 The State Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China

{hongd, ymingwang} @zju.edu.cn
Abstract

and SNNs. To address this, ANN-to-SNN knowledge distillation has been employed to transfer relevant knowledge
from ANNs to SNNs.
However, previous distillation methods have either failed
to transfer sufficient knowledge or have faced spatial and
temporal disparities in semantic information, resulting in degraded performance. This paper introduces a Self-Attentive
mechanism to address the semantic mismatch problem by
autonomously identifying the most relevant semantic layer
patterns across spatial and temporal dimensions and allocating attention based on semantic relevance. The key contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
1. We propose a self-attention mechanism to address semantic mismatching during ANN-to-SNN knowledge
distillation by autonomously aligning the most relevant
layer patterns between ANN and SNN both spatially and
temporally.
2. Through extensive experiments across various settings
and prevalent network architectures, our method significantly boosts SNN performance in ANN-to-SNN distillation, surpassing current benchmarks across various
datasets, including both static and neuromorphic ones.
3. Our analysis demonstrates that SASTC successfully
achieves semantic matching in ANN-to-SNN distillation,
advancing its applications in robust representation.

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are promising for lowpower computation due to their event-driven mechanism but
often suffer from lower accuracy compared to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). ANN-to-SNN knowledge distillation
can improve SNN performance, but previous methods either
focus solely on label information, missing valuable intermediate layer features, or use a layer-wise approach that neglects
spatial and temporal semantic inconsistencies, leading to performance degradation. To address these limitations, we propose a novel method called self-attentive spatio-temporal calibration (SASTC). SASTC uses self-attention to identify semantically aligned layer pairs between ANN and SNN, both
spatially and temporally. This enables the autonomous transfer of relevant semantic information. Extensive experiments
show that SASTC outperforms existing methods, effectively
solving the mismatching problem. Superior accuracy results
include 95.12% on CIFAR-10, 79.40% on CIFAR-100 with
2 time steps, and 68.69% on ImageNet with 4 time steps for
static datasets, and 97.92% on DVS-Gesture and 83.60% on
DVS-CIFAR10 for neuromorphic datasets. This marks the
first time SNNs have outperformed ANNs on both CIFAR10 and CIFAR-100, shedding the new light on the potential
applications of SNNs.

Code — https://github.com/ieveresthd/SASTC.git

Introduction

Related Work

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), considered the third generation of neural networks (Maass 1997), offer a promising advancement in low-power computing. Unlike artificial
neural networks (ANNs), which use continuous-valued activations, SNNs emulate the brain’s discrete, spike-based information transmission, making them ideal for event-driven
and energy-efficient neuromorphic hardware (Akopyan et al.
2015). Two main approaches have emerged for developing
supervised deep SNNs: 1) direct training from scratch using
surrogate gradients to approximate the discontinuous derivatives of spiking neurons, and 2) ANN-to-SNN conversion,
which aligns ANN neuron functions with spiking neurons.
Despite progress, a performance gap persists between ANNs

Direct Training from Scratch
We briefly summarize some significant achievements in direct training. Lee et al. directly train SNNs in terms of spikes
by regarding the membrane potential as the combination
of differentiable signals and discontinuous noisy (Lee, Delbruck, and Pfeiffer 2016). Wu et al. use an approximate
derivative to construct an iterative LIF neuron model and
propose a spatio-temporal backpropagation (STBP) method
to train SNNs from scratch (Wu et al. 2018). Zheng et al.
propose a threshold-dependent batch normalization (tdBN)
method for tuning the loss function (Zheng et al. 2021).
Rathi et al. propose to optimize the leakage and threshold
in the LIF neuron model. Furthermore, many direct training
method have been proposed based on designing various surrogate gradients and coding schemes to achieve SNNs with
low latency and high performance (Wu et al. 2019).

* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17240

