The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

H-MBA: Hierarchical MamBa Adaptation for Multi-Modal Video Understanding
in Autonomous Driving
Siran Chen1,2 , Yuxiao Luo 1,5 , Yue Ma 4 , Yu Qiao1, 3 , Yali Wang1, 3, *
1

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
5
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
chensiran17@mails.ucas.ac.cn, luoyuxiao@polyu.connect.hk, mayuefighting@gmail.com,
{yu.qiao, yl.wang}@siat.ac.cn

2

Abstract

incorporate natural language interaction and interpretability.
Equipped with language models (i.e. BERT (Devlin et al.
2018)), driving sensor data could be translated into natural language prompts to reveal how the models understand
driving scenes. However, these methods can only respond to
predefined questions due to the limitations of language models, failing to work when faced with open-domain questions.
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) with extensive general knowledge and reasoning capabilities have been
regarded as the future direction for such problems (Zhou
et al. 2023), offering the potential as AI agent for AD tasks.

With the prevalence of Multimodal Large Language Models(MLLMs), autonomous driving has encountered new opportunities and challenges. In particular, multi-modal video
understanding is critical to interactively analyze what will
happen in the procedure of autonomous driving. However,
videos in such a dynamical scene that often contains complex spatial-temporal movements, which restricts the generalization capacity of the existing MLLMs in this field. To
bridge the gap, we propose a novel Hierarchical Mamba
Adaptation (H-MBA) framework to fit the complicated motion changes in autonomous driving videos. Specifically, our
H-MBA consists of two distinct modules, including Context
Mamba (C-Mamba) and Query Mamba (Q-Mamba). First, CMamba contains various types of structure state space models, which can effectively capture multi-granularity video
context for different temporal resolutions. Second, Q-Mamba
flexibly transforms the current frame as the learnable query,
and attentively selects multi-granularity video context into
query. Consequently, it can adaptively integrate all the video
contexts of multi-scale temporal resolutions to enhance video
understanding. Via a plug-and-play paradigm in MLLMs, our
H-MBA shows the remarkable performance on multi-modal
video tasks in autonomous driving, e.g., for risk object detection, it outperforms the previous SOTA method with 5.5%
mIoU improvement.

1

However, the existing MLLM approaches (Ding et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2023; Fu et al. 2024) are limited to model
complex temporal characteristics in the first perspective
driving videos, e.g., background changes, motions of vehicles and pedestrians, and traffic signals. Hence, they usually
fail in multi-modal video understanding in AD tasks, for
example, video MLLMs often get low performance in risk
object localization (Ding et al. 2023). To solve the above
limitation, we introduce a novel Hierarchical MamBa Adaptation (H-MBA) paradigm, which can effectively and efficiently adapt MLLMs with hierarchical mamba modeling
for video understanding in complex driving scenarios.
Specifically, H-MBA consists of two distinct modules, Context Mamba (C-Mamba) and Query Mamba (QMamba). C-Mamba can flexibly learn video contexts by
developing multi-granularity mamba models in multi-scale
temporal branches. In particular, we introduce the low and
high temporal resolution branches to model appearance and
motion contexts in the driving videos, as shown in Fig 1(a),
the low temporal resolution branch captures more obvious
motion changes, while the high resolution branch provides
additional details. To master the diversified details in these
ego-like videos, With both of them, we get more comprehensive understanding of the video. we further leverage
three mamba structures for each temporal branch, namely
T-Mamba, DST-Mamba and JST-Mamba, to respectively
learn Time-only, Divided Space-Time and Joint Space-Time
granularity contexts. After obtaining all the contexts, QMamba generates a learnable query from the current frame,
and attentively integrates multi-granularity contexts into
this query, via performing latent mamba in both temporal

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of modern artificial intelligence
technologies, autonomous driving (AD) has made significant progress. Traditional end-to-end autonomous driving
relies on precise environmental perception to make safe
predictions and planning, Although it can directly generate
planning routes or control signals from raw sensor data,this
process resembles a black box that excludes human drivers,
making them difficult to understand the driving process
and interact with the driving system. To address the challenges, numerous studies have introduced datasets and methods (Kim et al. 2018; Deruyttere et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2019;
Atakishiyev et al. 2021; Malla et al. 2023; Jin et al. 2023) to
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2212

