The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Inverse Reinforcement Learning by Estimating Expertise of Demonstrators
Mark Beliaev, Ramtin Pedarsani
University of California, Santa Barbara
mbeliaev@ucsb.edu, ramtin@ucsb.edu

Abstract
In Imitation Learning (IL), utilizing suboptimal and heterogeneous demonstrations presents a substantial challenge due
to the varied nature of real-world data. However, standard IL
algorithms consider these datasets as homogeneous, thereby
inheriting the deficiencies of suboptimal demonstrators. Previous approaches to this issue rely on impractical assumptions like high-quality data subsets, confidence rankings, or
explicit environmental knowledge. This paper introduces IRLEED, Inverse Reinforcement Learning by Estimating Expertise of Demonstrators, a novel framework that overcomes
these hurdles without prior knowledge of demonstrator expertise. IRLEED enhances existing Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (IRL) algorithms by combining a general model for
demonstrator suboptimality to address reward bias and action
variance, with a Maximum Entropy IRL framework to efficiently derive the optimal policy from diverse, suboptimal
demonstrations. Experiments in both online and offline IL settings, with simulated and human-generated data, demonstrate
IRLEED’s adaptability and effectiveness, making it a versatile
solution for learning from suboptimal demonstrations.

Code — https://github.com/mbeliaev1/IRLEED
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01886

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has proven to be a powerful
tool across a wide range of applications, from controlling
robotic systems, to playing complex games like Go and Chess.
The efficacy of RL algorithms is largely attributed to their
ability to optimize hand-crafted reward functions (Brockman
et al. 2016). However, designing these functions is often challenging and impractical in complex environments (HadfieldMenell et al. 2017). A prevalent alternative to this dilemma
is Imitation Learning (IL), which bypasses the need for cumbersome reward engineering by leveraging expert demonstrations to instill desired behaviors (Argall et al. 2009).
The two main approaches utilized in IL are: behavioral
cloning (Pomerleau 1991), which acquires a policy through
a supervised learning approach using state-action pairs provided by the expert, and Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(IRL) (Ng and Russell 2000), which solves for the reward
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15532

function that makes the expert’s behavior optimal, subsequently facilitating the training of an IL policy. Despite the
effectiveness of behavior cloning in simple environments
with large amounts of data, learning a policy to fit single time
step decisions leads to compounding errors due to covariance
shift (Ross and Bagnell 2010). On the other hand, IRL learns
a reward function that prioritizes entire trajectories over others, considering the sequential nature of the decision making
problem at hand (Abbeel and Ng 2004). Consequently, the
success of IRL has spurred the development of IL techniques
that either explicitly or implicitly incorporate environment
dynamics (Ho and Ermon 2016; Fu, Luo, and Levine 2018;
Kostrikov, Nachum, and Tompson 2019; Garg et al. 2021).
However, a critical assumption in these methodologies is
the availability of high-quality demonstration data. In many
practical situations, especially with crowd-sourced or varied
data, the quality of demonstrations is inconsistent (Mandlekar
et al. 2021; Belkhale, Cui, and Sadigh 2023). For robotics,
data curation becomes vital, since utilizing smaller real world
datasets with noise or biases can lead to hazardous situations.
Furthermore, assuming uniformity in demonstration quality
overlooks the unique intentions of individual demonstrators,
potentially leading to suboptimal learning outcomes (Eysenbach et al. 2018). Therefore, it is critical to develop IL methods that can account for the heterogeneity and suboptimality
of demonstration data.
Related Work Addressing the challenges posed by learning from suboptimal and heterogeneous demonstrations is
complex. One line of research focuses on heterogeneous
demonstrations without considering their quality (Chen et al.
2020, 2023), assuming that all demonstrations are optimal.
Other works consider suboptimal demonstrations, but require
unrealistic prerequisites such as explicit knowledge of environment dynamics (Brown, Goo, and Niekum 2020; Chen,
Paleja, and Gombolay 2021), a set of confidence scores over
the demonstrations (Zhang et al. 2021; Cao and Sadigh 2021;
Wu et al. 2019; Kuhar et al. 2023), or direct access to a subset
of expert demonstrations (Shiarlis, Messias, and Whiteson
2016; Xu et al. 2022; Yang, Levine, and Nachum 2021).
A recent approach that avoids these assumptions is
ILEED (Beliaev et al. 2022), which directly models the expertise of demonstrators within a supervised learning framework,
thus enabling one to learn from the optimal behavior while
filtering out the suboptimal behavior of each demonstrator.

