The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MAPF-GPT: Imitation Learning for Multi-Agent Pathfinding at Scale
Anton Andreychuk1 * , Konstantin Yakovlev2,1 , Aleksandr Panov1,2,3 , Alexey Skrynnik1,2,3 *
2

1
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
Federal Research Center “Computer Science and Control” of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
3
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
andreychuk@airi.net, yakovlev@isa.ru, panov@airi.net, skrynnikalexey@gmail.com

Abstract

Recently, learning-based MAPF solvers have come on
stage (Skrynnik et al. 2021; Alkazzi and Okumura 2024;
Skrynnik et al. 2023). They mostly rely on deep reinforcement learning and typically involve additional components
to enhance their performance, such as single-agent planning,
inter-agent communication, etc. Meanwhile, in the realm of
machine learning, currently, the most impressive progress is
driven by self-supervised learning (at scale) on expert data
and employing transformer-based architectures (Vaswani
et al. 2023). It is this combination that recently led to the
creation of the seminal large-language models (LLMs) and
(large) vision-language models (VLMs) that achieve an unprecedented level of performance in text, image and video
generation (Dubey et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024; Zhu et al.
2024). Moreover, such data-driven approach has become
widespread in robotics, where an imitation policy is trained
based on a variety of expert trajectories (Chen et al. 2021;
Chi et al. 2023). Thus, in this work we are motivated by the
following question: Is it possible to create a strong learnable
MAPF solver (that outperforms state-of-the-art competitors)
purely on the basis of supervised learning (at scale) on expert data omitting additional decision-aiding routines? Our
answer is positive.

Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) is a problem that generally requires finding collision-free paths for multiple agents
in a shared environment. Solving MAPF optimally, even
under restrictive assumptions, is NP-hard, yet efficient solutions for this problem are critical for numerous applications, such as automated warehouses and transportation systems. Recently, learning-based approaches to MAPF have
gained attention, particularly those leveraging deep reinforcement learning. Typically, such learning-based MAPF solvers
are augmented with additional components like single-agent
planning or communication. Orthogonally, in this work we
rely solely on imitation learning that leverages a large dataset
of expert MAPF solutions and transformer-based neural network to create a foundation model for MAPF called MAPFGPT. The latter is capable of generating actions without additional heuristics or communication. MAPF-GPT demonstrates zero-shot learning abilities when solving the MAPF
problems that are not present in the training dataset. We show
that MAPF-GPT is able to outperform the state-of-the-art
learnable MAPF solvers on a diverse range of problem instances and is computationally efficient during inference.
Project Page — https://sites.google.com/view/mapf-gpt/

To create our learning-based MAPF solver, which we
name MAPF-GPT, we, first, design a vocabulary of terms,
called tokens in machine learning, that are used to describe
any observation an individual agent may perceive and any
action it may perform. Next, we create a diverse dataset
of expert data, i.e., successful MAPF solutions, utilizing
a state-of-the-art MAPF solver. Consequently, we convert
these MAPF solutions into sequences of observation-action
tuples, encoded with our tokens, and utilize a transformerbased non-autoregressive neural network to learn to predict the correct action provided with the observation. In our
extensive empirical evaluation, we show that MAPF-GPT
notably overpasses the current best-performing learnableMAPF solvers (without any usage of additional planning or
communication mechanisms), especially when it comes to
out-of-distribution evaluation, i.e., evaluating the solvers on
the problem instances that are not similar to the ones used for
training (a common bottleneck for learning-based solvers).
We also report ablation studies and evaluate MAPF-GPT in
another type of MAPF, i.e. the Lifelong MAPF (both in zeroshot and fine-tuning regimes).

Introduction
Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) (Stern et al. 2019) is a
combinatorial computational problem that asks to find a set
of paths for the agents that operate in a shared environment, such that accurately following these paths does not
lead to collisions and, preferably, each agent reaches its
specified goal as soon as possible. On the one hand, even
under simplified assumptions, such as a graph representation of the workspace, discretized time, uniform duration
of actions, optimally solving MAPF is NP-Hard (Surynek
2010). On the other hand, efficient MAPF solutions are
highly demanded in numerous real-world applications, such
as automated warehouses (Li et al. 2021), railway scheduling (Svancara and Barták 2022), transportation systems (Li
et al. 2023), etc. This has resulted in a noticeable surge of
interest in MAPF and the emergence of a large body of research devoted to this topic.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23126

