The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Modeling Latent Non-Linear Dynamical System over Time Series
Ren Fujiwara, Yasuko Matsubara, Yasushi Sakurai
SANKEN, Osaka University
r-fujiwr88@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp, yasuko@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp, yasushi@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract

the data can help us address various challenges. For example, distinguishing between noise and non-linearity is challenging when modeling data as non-linear dynamics from
noisy data. However, it is easily identifiable by employing
a fitting algorithm based on the time dependencies because
non-linearity is time-dependent while noise is independent
at each time point. In addition, the sequential nature of the
data helps stabilize future predictions. Initial states are critical for prediction in non-linear models, and unstable initial
states reduce prediction accuracy. This can also be resolved
by tracking state transitions in the model and estimating initial states based on them. In time series analysis, such problems are treated as modeling dynamics in the latent state,
i.e., modeling dynamics where noise in the data is removed
or compressed to a dimension lower than that of the data.
Intuitively, we wish to solve the following problem:
Given a time series, how can we estimate the latent states
and dynamics with mathematical expressions?
This problem presents us with the following two challenges: (1) how to formulate a model in latent states and (2)
how to estimate model parameters and latent states simultaneously. A crucial insight into many dynamical systems of
interest is that the function representing the transition consists of only a few but various types of terms (Brunton, Proctor, and Kutz 2016). In other words, transitions among latent states must be represented by the non-linear dynamical
system consisting of various terms of the latent states, and
the estimation algorithm must incorporate a sparsity of these
terms. The presence of latent states also causes the following circular dependency in the algorithm: good latent states
require well-estimated models, and the latent states must
be properly estimated to find a suitable model. Non-linear
state transitions and parameter sparsity further complicate
this circular dependency. Specifically, non-linear state transitions introduce challenges in estimating latent states, while
sparsity introduces challenges in estimating parameters.
In this paper, we tackle the above challenging problem
and propose a method called Latent Non-Linear equation
modeling (LaNoLem). LaNoLem can estimate the latent
states and dynamics with mathematical expressions from
observed data. Our model has two components: (a) a nonlinear dynamical system consisting of various terms of latent states and (b) criteria based on the minimum description
length (MDL) principle to determine our model complexity.

We study the problem of modeling a non-linear dynamical
system when given a time series by deriving equations directly from the data. Despite the fact that time series data
are given as input, models for dynamics and estimation algorithms that incorporate long-term temporal dependencies
are largely absent from existing studies. In this paper, we introduce a latent state to allow time-dependent modeling and
formulate this problem as a dynamics estimation problem in
latent states. We face multiple technical challenges, including
(1) modeling latent non-linear dynamics and (2) solving circular dependencies caused by the presence of latent states. To
tackle these challenging problems, we propose a new method,
Latent Non-Linear equation modeling (LaNoLem), that can
model a latent non-linear dynamical system and a novel alternating minimization algorithm for effectively estimating latent states and model parameters. In addition, we introduce
criteria to control model complexity without human intervention. Compared with the state-of-the-art model, LaNoLem
achieves competitive performance for estimating dynamics
while outperforming other methods in prediction.

Code — https://github.com/renfujiwara/LaNoLem
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08114

1

Introduction

The past few years have seen a surge in methods for
modeling dynamics as mathematical expressions from observed data, encompassing both advancements in traditional
evolutionary algorithms and novel machine learning-based
techniques (La Cava et al. 2018; Udrescu and Tegmark
2020; Burlacu, Kronberger, and Kommenda 2020; Landajuela et al. 2022; Shojaee et al. 2023). In particular, the
sparse identification of non-linear dynamics (SINDy) framework (Brunton, Proctor, and Kutz 2016) has emerged as a
leading approach for parsimonious modeling, and its variants have been proposed over a number of years (Boninsegna, Nüske, and Clementi 2018; Champion et al. 2020;
Kaptanoglu et al. 2021; Bertsimas and Gurnee 2023).
Despite these advances, limited research considers the
temporal dependencies between data, even though many
data are given as time series data. The sequential nature of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11663

