The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-modal Multi-task Learning for Multimedia Event Extraction
Jianwei Cao1 , Yanli Hu1 * , Zhen Tan1 , Xiang Zhao2
1

National Key Laboratory of Information Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, China
2
Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, National University of Defense Technology, China
{caojianwei, huyanli, tanzhen08a, xiangzhao}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

Multimedia Documents
Call for federal investigation-After the meeting,
some protesters gathered in the lobby of the
Government Center and demanded a federal
investigation into the Scott shooting.

Multimedia event extraction aims to jointly extract event
structural knowledge from multiple modalities, thus improving the comprehension and utilization of events in the growing multimedia content (e.g., multimedia news). A key challenge in multimedia event extraction is to establish crossmodal correlations during training without multimedia event
annotations. Considering the complexity and cost of annotation across modalities, the multimedia event extraction task
only provides parallel annotated data for evaluation. Previous works attempt to learn implicit correlations directly
from unlabeled image-text pairs, but do not yield substantially better performance for event-centric tasks. To address
this problem, we propose a cross-modal multi-task learning
framework X-MTL to establish cross-modal correlations at
the task level, which can simultaneously address four key
tasks of multimedia event extraction: trigger detection, argument extraction, verb classification, and role classification.
Specifically, to process inputs from different modalities and
tasks, we utilize two separate modality-specific encoders and
a modality-shared encoder to learn joint task representations,
and introduce textual and visual prompt learning methods
to enrich and unify task inputs. To resolve task conflict in
cross-modal multi-task learning, we propose a pseudo label based knowledge distillation method, combined with dynamic weight adjustment method, which can effectively lift
the performance to surpass the separately-trained models. On
the MultiMedia Event Extraction benchmark M2E2, experimental results show that X-MTL surpasses the current stateof-the-art (SOTA) methods by 4.1% for multimedia event
mention and 8.2% for multimedia argument role.

O2
O5
O4
O1
O3

Police detain two people during protests following
the police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott, in
Charlotte, North Carolina, Sept. 21, 2016. (...)

Text

Trigger
Detection

Verb
Classification

Argument
Extraction

Role
Classification

Textual
Events

Multimedia Events

Image

Coreference

Visual
Events

Multimedia Event Extraction

EventType
Type Justice:Arrest-Jail
Justice:Arrest-Jail(detain)
(detain)
Event
Agent
Agent

(Person),OO2(Person)
(Person)
OO11(Person),
2

Person
Person

(Person),OO4(Person)
(Person)
OO33(Person),
4

Instrument
Instrument
Place
Place

(Handcuffs)
OO55(Handcuffs)
Charlotte
Charlotte

Figure 1: The overview of multimedia event extraction.

such as modality gap and annotation scarcity. In this paper, we conduct research on the multimedia event extraction
task, which aims to jointly extract event structural knowledge from multiple modalities, thus improving the comprehension and utilization of events in the multimedia content
(e.g., multimedia news).
A basic multimedia event extraction pipeline typically
comprises three parts, as shown in Figure 1. (1) Textual
event extraction to identify event triggers and arguments
from text; (2) Visual event extraction to identify verbs (i.e.,
triggers) and roles (i.e., arguments) from image; (3) Coreference to integrate events from multiple modalities that refer to the same real-world event into the multimedia events.
Considering the complexity and cost of annotation across
modalities, the task only provides parallel annotated data for
evaluation, while training is conducted on independent annotated data, such as ACE 2005 (Walker et al. 2006) and
imSitu (Yatskar, Zettlemoyer, and Farhadi 2016).
Hence, how to establish cross-modal correlations without
multimedia event annotations is one of the significant challenges in multimedia event extraction. Previous works attempt to learn correlations from additional image-text pairs.
For example, WASE (Li et al. 2020) and UniCL (Liu, Chen,
and Xu 2022) use an image-text pair dataset to align modal-

Introduction
With the rapid growth of multimedia content, multimodal
information extraction (Yu et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021)
has gradually gained attention. However, most related studies focus on leveraging additional modalities to enhance the
extraction of information from text, without fully exploring
and utilizing the rich information contained in those modalities. Only a few studies (Li et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2023)
have investigated methods for jointly extracting information
from multiple modalities, which face significant challenges
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11454

