The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Navigating Towards Fairness with Data Selection
Yixuan Zhang1 , Zhidong Li2 , Yang Wang2 , Fang Chen2 , Xuhui Fan3 , Feng Zhou4,5 *
1

School of Statistics and Data Science, Southeast University, China
Data Science Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
3
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
4
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China, China
5
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing, China
zh1xuan@hotmail.com, {zhidong.li, yang.wang, fang.chen}@uts.edu.au, xuhui.fan@mq.edu.au, feng.zhou@ruc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

these methods is to develop a fair labeling function that reflects the true underlying distribution, thereby improving the
robustness of the fairness techniques. However, when handling large-scale datasets, these methods often lack flexibility due to the necessity of training with the complete dataset,
which can slow down model convergence and substantially
increase training costs.
To meet the needs of complex machine learning systems
in practical applications, employing data selection methods
to filter out a subset of useful data for training proves to be an
effective solution. Apart from efficiency improvement, data
selection techniques have been very effective in mitigating
the impact of noisy data. These methods typically prioritize
training with either difficult (Loshchilov and Hutter 2015;
Katharopoulos and Fleuret 2018; Jiang et al. 2019) or easy
samples (Bengio et al. 2009) based on the training loss. Nevertheless, such a singular filtering strategy limits the ability
to handle the diversity of real-world situations since the difficulty of samples often arises from incorrect annotations,
inherent ambiguity, or atypical patterns (Mindermann et al.
2022; Deng, Cui, and Zhu 2023). To overcome this limitation, Mindermann et al. (2022) introduces a new data selection criterion, the reducible holdout loss selection (RHOLOSS), based on the impact on generalization loss, which
further prevents the selection of redundant or noisy samples.
Inspired by this new selection criterion, this paper aims
to extend this method to the field of fairness. We revisit
the derivation of RHO-LOSS, aligning the predicted posterior distribution of selected samples with the fair data distribution. Instead of relying on a holdout set and training an
auxiliary validation model, we establish a more accurate approximation by incorporating zero-shot predictors from pretrained models. This approach eliminates the need for an additional holdout set. To further prevent discrimination leakage in pre-trained models, we implement the peer prediction
mechanism during training. This ensures fairness when using the zero-shot predictor to evaluate generalization loss.
We conduct comprehensive empirical evaluations on several benchmark datasets. The experiments on the image classification tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed data selection principle, which can adaptively select
fair instances that are less impacted by label bias. Although
not explicitly emphasized in this paper, we also offer a solution to reduce the impact of selection bias by resampling the

Machine learning algorithms often struggle to eliminate inherent data biases, particularly those arising from unreliable labels, which poses a significant challenge in ensuring fairness. Existing fairness techniques that address label
bias typically involve modifying models and intervening in
the training process, but these lack flexibility for large-scale
datasets. To address this limitation, we introduce a data selection method designed to efficiently and flexibly mitigate
label bias, tailored to more practical needs. Our approach utilizes a zero-shot predictor as a proxy model that simulates
training on a clean holdout set. This strategy, supported by
peer predictions, ensures the fairness of the proxy model and
eliminates the need for an additional holdout set, which is a
common requirement in previous methods. Without altering
the classifier’s architecture, our modality-agnostic method effectively selects appropriate training data and has proven efficient and effective in handling label bias and improving fairness across diverse datasets in experimental evaluations.

Introduction
Fairness is a critical and essential problem in real-world applications. In recent years, it has attracted great attention,
especially in high-stake domains such as finance (Khandani, Kim, and Lo 2010; Yeh and Lien 2009; Mukerjee
et al. 2002), law (Brennan, Dieterich, and Ehret 2009; Lin
et al. 2020), recruiting (Faliagka et al. 2012; Bertrand and
Mullainathan 2004), school admissions (Moore 1998) and
medicine (Kim et al. 2015). Although many fairness-aware
learning methods have been proposed recently, they often
assume that the data collected for training is representative
of the true data distribution. However, these methods are still
validated on so-called “clean data,” which neglects the impact of label bias.
Recent studies (Wang, Liu, and Levy 2021; Dai 2020;
Zhang et al. 2023; Konstantinov and Lampert 2022) have
increasingly focused on the adverse impacts of label bias
and have proposed methodologies to improve fairness in this
setting. These efforts involve adjusting models and intervening in the training process by considering the amount of
bias present in labels during fair learning. The objective of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22632

