The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learn2Aggregate: Supervised Generation of Chvátal-Gomory Cuts
Using Graph Neural Networks
Arnaud Deza * 1 , Elias B. Khalil1 , Zhenan Fan2 , Zirui Zhou2 , Yong Zhang2
1

Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto
2
Huawei Technologies Canada

Abstract

However, optimizing over the extremely large set of possible aggregation weights for all constraints becomes computationally prohibitive for large MILPs. Screening rules to
eliminate constraints for the special case of {0, 1/2}-CG cuts
have been proposed (Koster, Zymolka, and Kutschka 2009),
but they have not been explored for general CG cuts.
This paper bridges the gap between heuristic and
optimization-based cut generation by using machine learning (ML) to accelerate the optimization of aggregationbased cuts. We address the computational bottleneck of cut
optimization by leveraging a model trained to screen constraints, eliminating unnecessary ones from consideration
for aggregation. This allows us to solve a reduced separation problem over a much smaller subset of constraints and
can be seen as a heuristic version of an exact optimization
formulation for cut separation. Our method involves a care-

We present Learn2Aggregate, a machine learning (ML)
framework for optimizing the generation of Chvátal-Gomory
(CG) cuts in mixed-integer linear programming (MILP). The
framework trains a graph neural network to classify useful
constraints for aggregation in CG cut generation. The MLdriven CG separator selectively focuses on a small set of impactful constraints, improving runtimes without compromising the strength of the generated cuts. Key to our approach
is the formulation of a constraint classification task which
favours a sparse aggregation of constraints. This, in conjunction with a careful constraint labeling scheme and a hybrid
of deep learning and feature engineering, results in enhanced
CG cut generation across five diverse MILP benchmarks. On
the largest test sets, our method closes roughly twice as much
of the integrality gap as the standard CG method while running 40% faster. This performance improvement is due to
eliminating 75% of the constraints prior to aggregation.

x2
1

1

x2 ≤ 1

e
tiv
ec
bj

1

0.2 x +

O

Code — https://github.com/khalil-research/ML4Cuts
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.06559

Introduction

MILP is an established mathematical optimization framework used in many industrial applications such as operation
room scheduling, supply chain, and transportation. The integrality requirement makes MILP NP-hard in general and
thus highly challenging to solve exactly in practice. Cutting
planes (or cuts) play a pivotal role in strengthening the linear
programming (LP) relaxation of MILPs, leading to tighter
bounds on the optimal integer value. Cuts can be separated
heuristically or by optimizing an appropriate measure of cut
quality. For instance, Gomory Mixed-Integer (GMI) cuts are
read from the simplex tableau of the LP relaxation; a simple,
fast heuristic which may nonetheless generate weak cuts.
In contrast, optimization-based separation, such as that
of Chvátal-Gomory (CG) cuts, produces strong cuts but requires solving challenging auxiliary MILPs. A CG cut is a
weighted aggregation of a subset of the original constraints
followed by a rounding-down of the resulting coefficients.

0

LP Opt.
x1 + 0.13x2 ≤ 1

ILP Opt. 1 x1

Figure 1: A binary two-variable problem. Constraints are
solid and their associated normal vectors (excluding the
bound constraints) are drawn, along with the maximization
objective vector. Point “LP Opt.” is the solution of the LP
relaxation whereas “ILP Opt.” is the desired integer optimum. The dashed cut, x1 + x2  1 in purple, is a strong cut
which we would like to derive by aggregating the (normal
vectors of the) dashed constraints; this cut tightens the LP
such that its optimum is “ILP Opt.”. The normal vector of the
desired cut is in the cone of the blue and orange constraints
and thus can be derived by aggregating them with appropriate weights (e.g., multiplying both of them with 0.9, adding
them up, then rounding down the resulting vector; this is a
CG cut). The green constraint is not useful and can be excluded from consideration when aggregating.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26947

