The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Relaxed Class-consensus Consistency
for Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation
Huayu Mai∗ , Rui Sun* , Feng Wu†
Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
{mai556, issunrui}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fengwu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

data to improve the model’s generalization performance is
thus extremely challenging.
Recently, the teacher-student scheme (Tarvainen and
Valpola 2017) encapsulating pseudo-labeling (Lee et al.
2013; Arazo et al. 2020) and the consistency regularization paradigm (Laine and Aila 2016; Bachman, Alsharif, and
Precup 2014) has dominated this field credited to their simplicity yet competitive performance. The core idea is to construct consistency regularization to align the pseudo labels
generated by the teacher network under weakly augmented
perturbation view with the prediction of the student network
featuring strongly augmented perturbation view (where the
teacher and student can be identical).
The supervision signal constituted by consistency involves hard pseudo labeling (selectively recruiting the
classes with the highest confidence for training (Chen et al.
2021a)) and soft pseudo labeling (retaining scores for all
classes as soft pseudo-labels to measure deviation under
the presence of KL divergence (Ke et al. 2020) in Figure 1 (a)). Despite their promising results, these methods are
lured into the trap of taking each class independently (i.e.,
class-independent consistency) and neglecting the fact that
semantic dependencies exist among classes (i.e., class consensus). For example, the class truck and car featuring high
class consensus share similar visual patterns (e.g., wheels)
with each other. In this case, the i.i.d. assumption manifested
in the class-independent consistency tends to be hysteresis
to comprehensively probe unlabeled data. To make matters
worse, the negative impact is inevitably amplified by inbuilt low-data regimes of semi-supervised semantic segmentation, compromising the capability of the model. Therefore,
it is highly desirable to characterize the class consensus, that
is, leverage the inter-class relationship to model structure
information in pursuit of additional supervision to complement pure class-independent consistency.
In this paper, we analyze the bottlenecks of classindependent consistency inherent in previous methods and
offer a fresh perspective of cooperative game theory to explicitly encourage class-consensus alignment (i.e., classconsensus consistency) between the teacher network (weak
augmented view) and student network (strong augmented
view). We formulate classes as players in a cooperative game
to model their interpretable consensus and shed light on the
possibility of closer collaboration between consensus them-

The key to semi-supervised semantic segmentation lies in
how to fully exploit a large amount of unlabeled data to improve the model’s generalization performance. Most methods are lured into the trap of taking each class independently
(i.e., class-independent consistency) and neglecting the fact
that there exist semantic dependencies among classes. In this
paper, we analyze the bottlenecks of class-independent consistency inherent in previous methods and offer a fresh perspective of cooperative game theory to explicitly encourage
class-consensus alignment (i.e., class-consensus consistency)
between the teacher (weak augmented view) and student network (strong augmented view). We formulate classes as players in an cooperative game to model their interpretable consensus and shed light on the possibility of closer collaboration
between consensus themselves and consistency regularization, yielding more comprehensive and effective supervision
signals. To this end, we carefully design the class-consensus
consistency without introducing any external knowledge to
model class structure information which renders better interpretability, and further, prepend relaxed class-consensus consistency (RCC) to unlock the potential of modeling class consensus by relaxing the strict alignment of direct class consensus values to ranking alignment. Extensive experimental results on multiple benchmarks demonstrate that RCC performs
favorably against state-of-the-art methods. Particularly in the
low-data regimes, RCC achieves significant improvements.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task that has
achieved conspicuous achievements attributed to the recent
advances in deep neural network (Long, Shelhamer, and
Darrell 2015) with widespread applications such as visual
understanding (Everingham et al. 2010), autonomous driving (Feng et al. 2020), etc. However, its data-driven nature
makes it laborious and time-consuming to gather massive
pixel-level annotations as training data. To alleviate the datahunger issue, considerable works (Wang et al. 2023b; Yang
et al. 2022a; Hu et al. 2021) have turned their attention to
semi-supervised semantic segmentation. Since only limited
labeled data is accessible, how to fully exploit vast unlabeled
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6045

