The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MapExpert: Online HD Map Construction with Simple and Efficient
Sparse Map Element Expert
Dapeng Zhang1 , Dayu Chen2 , Peng Zhi1 * , Yinda Chen3 , Zhenlong Yuan4 ,
Chenyang Li1 , Sunjing1 , Rui Zhou1 , Qingguo Zhou1 *
1

School of Information Science & Engineering, Lanzhou University, China
2
Smart (Shanghai) Robotics Technology Co., Ltd., China
3
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, China
4
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{zhangdp22, zhip13, lchengyang2024, sjing2023, zr, zhouqg}@lzu.edu.cn, cassidy.chen@smart.com,
cyd0806@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yuanzhenlong21b@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

the widespread use of transformers in vision tasks, HDMapNet (Li et al. 2022b) emerged, utilizing queries to predict
HD map elements. Inspired by HDMapNet, (Liu et al. 2023,
2024b; Qiao et al. 2023b; Xu, Wong, and Zhao 2024; Zhou
et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024b; Li 2024; Xiong et al. 2024;
Shin et al. 2023) extracted structured map information and
constructed vectorized maps by sampling elements as point
sets, many of these works have improved performance by
designing more reasonable content queries or embedding
specified positional information into the queries. Recently,
some scientists introduced novel tracking-based methods to
enhance the HD map prediction performance, they associate
HD map elements between frames via attention queries that
evolve a set of track predictions (Yuan et al. 2023; Chen et al.
2024).
However, these DETR-like methods overlook the fact that
online HD map construction elements are different from traditional detection objects. Traditional detection objects, such
as cars and pedestrians, are typically cube-like and relatively
uniform in shape, with centralized offsets. In contrast, HD
map elements are vastly different: lane dividers are normally
smooth Bézier curves, road boundaries are erratic slender
lines that can be jagged or closed, and pedestrian crossings
are closed rectangle shapes. Fitting these diverse non-cubic
map elements with a single DETR-like design is challenging. Additionally, these methods stack previous BEV features to enhance the BEV feature expression, but this can
lead to current BEV features being dominated by outdated
data from historical features. These factors constrain prior
methods from achieving optimal performance.
In this paper, we theoretically analyze these issues and
propose a novel online map construction method based on
map element experts, named MapExpert, the architecture
is illustrated in Figure 1. Instead of using the unified modeling methods introduced by (Liao et al. 2023a; Yuan et al.
2023; Chen et al. 2024), which geometrically abstract different map elements into a unified representation, we employ distinct expert layers to accurately fit various map elements, such as lane dividers, pedestrian crossings, and road
boundaries. We also mathematically analyze the drawbacks
of stacking BEV features, and design MapExpert to not only
strengthen current feature expression but also sieve and ex-

Constructing online High-Definition (HD) maps is crucial
for the static environment perception of autonomous driving
systems (ADS). Existing solutions typically attempt to detect vectorized HD map elements with unified models; however, these methods often overlook the distinct characteristics
of different non-cubic map elements, making accurate distinction challenging. To address these issues, we introduce
an expert-based online HD map method, termed MapExpert.
MapExpert utilizes sparse experts, distributed by our routers,
to describe various non-cubic map elements accurately. Additionally, we propose an auxiliary balance loss function to distribute the load evenly across experts. Furthermore, we theoretically analyze the limitations of prevalent bird’s-eye view
(BEV) feature temporal fusion methods and introduce an efficient temporal fusion module called Learnable Weighted
Moving Descent. This module effectively integrates relevant
historical information into the final BEV features. Combined
with an enhanced slice head branch, the proposed MapExpert
achieves state-of-the-art performance and maintains good efficiency on both nuScenes and Argoverse2 datasets.

Introduction
High-definition (HD) maps are essential for autonomous
driving, conventionally constructed offline with SLAMbased methods (Zhang and Singh 2014; Shan et al. 2020),
along with manual annotation. However, these methods are
limited by scalability issues and high maintaining costs. In
recent years, bird’s-eye-view (BEV) feature extractors have
introduced a novel thought (Philion and Fidler 2020; Li et al.
2022c; Zhang et al. 2023a), enabling the online construction
of HD Maps from BEV features. These online approaches
reduce offline human efforts by predicting HD Map elements in real-time, leading to cost savings and the ability
to update changes in the environment promptly.
Early researchers leveraged segmentation tasks to obtain
rasterized maps based on the BEV feature maps. These
methods presented each rasterized pixel as a key point and
then extracted map elements and their occupancy presentation (Zhou and Krähenbühl 2022; Hu et al. 2021). With
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14745

