The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MarkovType: A Markov Decision Process Strategy for Non-Invasive
Brain-Computer Interfaces Typing Systems
Elifnur Sunger1 , Yunus Bicer1 , Deniz Erdogmus1 , Tales Imbiriba2
1

Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA, USA
{sunger, bicer, erdogmus}@ece.neu.edu, tales.imbiriba@umb.edu
2

Abstract

2011). In certain cases, one paradigm may be more suitable
than others. For example, individuals with severe speech
and motor impairments, such as those with locked-in syndrome, ALS, or cerebral palsy, might not have the precise
gaze control required for eye-tracking systems and matrix
layout-based P300 spellers. However, precise gaze control is
not required in RSVP to distinguish between symbols (Acqualagna et al. 2010; Orhan et al. 2012).
This paper focuses on the RSVP paradigm, where users
type a target symbol from a predefined alphabet without
physical movement, while the system rapidly presents candidate symbols (a query) and collects continuous EEG data.
Users perform multiple sequences, and the model updates
symbol probabilities based on their responses to each query.
Typing stops when the probability of any symbol exceeds a
confidence threshold or when the maximum number of sequences is reached. In RSVP setups, users do not observe the
entire set of symbols at once. Instead, they observe a subset
of symbols at each sequence. This makes RSVP suitable for
formulation as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP). In POMDPs, the true state of the environment is unknown, and the agent or neural network receives
only partial observations at each step (Kaelbling, Littman,
and Cassandra 1998).
We introduce “MarkovType”, which formulates the RSVP
typing task as a POMDP and enhances the recursive typing
performance. We state our contributions as follows:

Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) help people with severe
speech and motor disabilities communicate and interact with
their environment using neural activity. This work focuses
on the Rapid Serial Visual Presentation (RSVP) paradigm of
BCIs using noninvasive electroencephalography (EEG). The
RSVP typing task is a recursive task with multiple sequences,
where users see only a subset of symbols in each sequence.
Extensive research has been conducted to improve classification in the RSVP typing task, achieving fast classification.
However, these methods struggle to achieve high accuracy
and do not consider the typing mechanism in the learning procedure. They apply binary target and non-target classification
without including recursive training. To improve performance
in the classification of symbols while controlling the classification speed, we incorporate the typing setup into training by
proposing a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) approach. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work to formulate the RSVP typing task as a POMDP
for recursive classification. Experiments show that the proposed approach, MarkovType, results in a more accurate typing system compared to competitors. Additionally, our experiments demonstrate that while there is a trade-off between accuracy and speed, MarkovType achieves the optimal balance
between these factors compared to other methods.

Code — https://github.com/neu-spiral/MarkovType

1

Introduction

Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) allow people with severe
speech and motor disabilities to communicate and interact
with their environments (Orhan et al. 2012). Recent BCI research spans applications like typing tasks (Bigdely-Shamlo
et al. 2008; Lawhern et al. 2018; Smedemark-Margulies
et al. 2023) and prosthetic arm control (Bright et al. 2016).
Common BCI paradigms include steady-state visual evoked
potentials (SSVEP) (Norcia et al. 2015), imagined motor
movements (MI) (Wierzgała et al. 2018), rapid serial visual
presentation (RSVP) (Acqualagna et al. 2010), and matrix
layout-based P300-speller (Krusienski et al. 2008), which
uses P300 event-related potentials observed in EEG to enable individuals to communicate without relying on voluntary muscle activity (Farwell and Donchin 1988; Mak et al.

• We propose a Markov Decision Process for non-invasive
BCI typing systems (MarkovType) and formulate the
BCI typing procedure as a Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process (POMDP), incorporating the typing
mechanism into the learning procedure. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first time that the BCI typing
procedure has been formalized as a POMDP and used for
the typing task classification.
• We evaluate MarkovType in a simulated typing task and
show it outperforms previous approaches using Recursive Bayesian Estimation in classification accuracy and
information transfer rate.
• We also show that there is a trade-off between accuracy
and the number of sequences in the typing task. This
opens the door for future improvements and explorations.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28422

