The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UniDet3D: Multi-dataset Indoor 3D Object Detection
Maksim Kolodiazhnyi1 , Anna Vorontsova2 , Matvey Skripkin1 ,
Danila Rukhovich3 , Anton Konushin1
1

Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Moscow, Russia
2
NEURA Robotics GmbH, Metzingen, Germany
3
University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
kolodiazhnyi@airi.net, anna.vorontsova@neura-robotics.com, skripkin@airi.net, danila.rukhovich@uni.lu, konushin@airi.net
Existing approaches

Abstract
Growing customer demand for smart solutions in robotics
and augmented reality has attracted considerable attention to
3D object detection from point clouds. Yet, existing indoor
datasets taken individually are too small and insufficiently
diverse to train a powerful and general 3D object detection
model. In the meantime, more general approaches utilizing
foundation models are still inferior in quality to those based
on supervised training for a specific task. In this work, we
propose UniDet3D, a simple yet effective 3D object detection model, which is trained on a mixture of indoor datasets
and is capable of working in various indoor environments.
By unifying different label spaces, UniDet3D enables learning a strong representation across multiple datasets through a
supervised joint training scheme. The proposed network architecture is built upon a vanilla transformer encoder, making
it easy to run, customize and extend the prediction pipeline
for practical use. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
UniDet3D obtains significant gains over existing 3D object
detection methods in 6 indoor benchmarks: ScanNet (+1.1
mAP50 ), S3DIS (+9.1 mAP50 ), ARKitScenes (+19.4 mAP25 ),
MultiScan (+9.3 mAP50 ), 3RScan (+3.2 mAP50 ), and ScanNet++ (+2.7 mAP50 ).

1

Dataset

Dataset-specific
Architecture and Weights

SOTA

Unified
Architecture and Weights

SOTA

UniDet3D, ours
Dataset

Figure 1: Existing 3D object detection methods use different
architectures and weights to achieve state-of-the-art metrics
on different datasets. We propose UniDet3D trained single
time on a mixture of datasets and achieving even better results.

versity and volume to train a general model which can be
transferred between datasets without severe loss of quality.
Applying a 3D scene understanding model outside the
single training domain is possible to a certain extent with
visual-language models, that encapsulate the fundamental
knowledge about the world via establishing relations between imagery and textual data.
However, visual-language models imply open-vocabulary
problem formulation rather than limiting label spaces to
predefined categories. In 3D scene understanding, visuallanguage models are used to precompute 2D image features, which are lifted to 3D space. Still, these 2D-to-3D approaches in 3D instance segmentation (Nguyen et al. 2024;
Takmaz et al. 2024) and 3D object detection (Lu et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2024) are inferior to supervised baselines (Schult et al. 2023; Misra, Girdhar, and Joulin 2021). In
the meantime, the size of existing real-world indoor datasets
is currently insufficient for training visual-language models
that can provide high-quality 3D features directly (Jia et al.
2024).
State-of-the-art 3D object detection accuracy in indoor
benchmarks is achieved via classic supervised training on
categorical labels. Not only do they struggle to generalize to
new visually distinct scenes and unseen objects – but handling novel categories remains an unresolved issue.
In 2D object detection, training using data from other

Introduction

3D object detection from point clouds aims at simultaneous
localization and recognition of 3D objects given a 3D point
set. As a core technique for 3D scene understanding, it is
widely applied in robotics, AR, and 3D scanning.
Due to major variations in scale and visual appearance of
indoor scenes, complemented with different selections and
placement of objects, indoor 3D data tends to be complex
and diverse. Besides, captured by various sensors ranging
from Kinect to generic smartphone cameras, indoor data is
inconsistent regarding point cloud density and scene coverage. This leads to a domain gap between different datasets.
Indoor benchmarks contain at most thousands of scenes,
e.g., the popular ScanNet (Dai et al. 2017) has 1513
scenes, a more recent ARKitScenes (Baruch et al. 2021)
has 5042 scenes, while S3DIS (Armeni et al. 2016), ScanNet++ (Yeshwanth et al. 2023) are the order of magnitude
smaller. None of the datasets contains data of sufficient diCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4365

