The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Recoverable Compression: A Multimodal Vision Token Recovery Mechanism
Guided by Text Information
Yi Chen1,2 , Jian Xu1,2 , Xu-Yao Zhang1,2 , Wen-Zhuo Liu1,2 , Yang-Yang Liu1,2 , Cheng-Lin Liu1,2(B)
1
School of Artificial Intelligence,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institution of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
{yi.chen, xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {jian.xu, liuwenzhuo2020, liuyangyang2021}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

LLMs can better understand natural language and generate
high-quality text based on the given context.
The multimodal large language models (MM-LLMs) (Liu
et al. 2023a, 2024b; OpenAI 2023; Team et al. 2023) take
LLMs as the core and use this powerful language generation, zero-shot transfer, and context learning capabilities
to solve multi-modal tasks. Specifically, MM-LLMs use a
vision encoder, such as the NFNet-F6 (Brock et al. 2021),
Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) and the
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), to convert them into vision features, align them with the text input of LLMs through the
projection layer, and finally concatenate the vision features
and text features into the LLMs.

With the advancement of large-scale language modeling techniques, large multimodal models combining visual encoders
with large language models have demonstrated exceptional
performance in various visual tasks. Most of the current large
multimodal models achieve this by mapping visual features
obtained from the visual encoder into a large language model
and using them as inputs alongside text for downstream tasks.
Therefore, the number of visual tokens directly affects the
training and inference speed of the model. There has been
significant work on token pruning for visual transformers, but
for large multimodal models, only relying on visual information for token pruning or compression may lead to significant loss of important information. On the other hand, the
textual input in the form of a question may contain valuable
information that can aid in answering the question, providing additional knowledge to the model. To address the potential oversimplification and excessive pruning that can occur with most purely visual token pruning methods, we propose a text information-guided dynamic visual token recovery mechanism that does not require training. This mechanism leverages the similarity between the question text and
visual tokens to recover visually meaningful tokens with important text information while merging other less important
tokens, to achieve efficient computation for large multimodal
models. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
method achieves comparable performance to the original approach while compressing the visual tokens to an average of
10% of the original quantity.

Figure 1: The key areas of the same image under different
questions.
Due to the massive number of model parameters, both
training and inference of MM-LLM require significant computational resources. While the vision encoder of MM-LLM
has relatively fewer parameters compared to the entire LLM,
subsequent LLMs contribute significantly to the computational demands. Therefore, there are two main approaches
to improve the efficiency of LLM. The first approach is
to directly use LLMs with smaller parameter sizes. By reducing the number of parameters in the model, computational requirements can be significantly reduced, leading to
faster training and inference. The other approach is to reduce the output of the vision encoder. Since LLMs typically
employ Transformer structures, the computational cost of
Transformers often grows quadratically with the length of
the input context. By reducing the input length of LLMs,
the overall training and inference speed of the model can
be greatly improved. Both approaches offer potential solutions for enhancing the efficiency of MM-LLM, allowing for
faster and more resource-efficient training and inference.
Previous research efforts have focused on the first method,

Code — https://github.com/banjiuyufen/RecoverableCompression

Introduction
With the continuous development of deep learning and
semiconductor technology, large language models (LLMs)
(Brown et al. 2020; Ouyang et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2023;
Touvron et al. 2023) have made amazing achievements in
natural processing language tasks. LLMs usually adopt a
Transformer structure with hundreds of billions of parameters and use large-scale text language materials for pretraining. By scaling up data size and model parameters, the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2293

