The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Harnessing Language Model for Cross-Heterogeneity
Graph Knowledge Transfer
Jinyu Yang1 , Ruijia Wang2 , Cheng Yang1 * , Bo Yan1 , Qimin Zhou1 , Juan Yang1 , Chuan Shi1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
China Telecom Cloud Computing Research Institute, Beijing, China
{jinyu.yang, yangcheng, mjkbyb, zhouqimin, yangjuan, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, wangrj12@chinatelecom.cn
2

Abstract

the high cost of data annotation, researchers have shifted to
a new paradigm that initially pretrains the model on source
HGs and then fine-tunes it on a target HG to handle fewshot scenarios (Zhang et al. 2022b, 2024b). However, these
methods usually assume that source and target HGs share a
same heterogeneity (Zhuang et al. 2021), meaning that they
have the same types of nodes and edges. Such approaches
frequently lead to poor outcomes in cross-heterogeneity scenarios that are closer to real-world applications.
To achieve cross-heterogeneity graph knowledge transfer, a recent research (Ding, Wang, and Liu 2023) has
made some preliminary attempts. Considering the structural
characteristics of HG relations, they distinguish HG relations into two categories: Affiliation Relations (ARs) with
one-centered-by-another structures and Interaction Relations (IRs) with peer-to-peer structures. Subsequently, ARs
and IRs are viewed as the general knowledge shared across
different HGs and are used to facilitate knowledge transfer.
However, the selection and definition of general knowledge
heavily rely on predefined patterns from human knowledge,
which lacks flexibility and harms generality. Besides, ARs
and IRs are extracted based on node degree discrepancies,
which solely considers local structures and ignores the longrange semantic relationships inherent in HGs, thus leading
to suboptimal performance.
To address the problems, we propose a novel Language
Model-enhanced Cross-Heterogeneity learning model,
namely LMCH. The core idea of LMCH is to first unify HG
representations as languages for automatically extracting
general knowledge from source HGs, and then transfer this
knowledge to the target HG. Specifically, firstly, given that
metapaths can capture both local structures and long-range
semantic relationships, we design a metapath-based corpus
construction method to unify HG representations using
natural language as shown in Figure 1 and fine-tune a
language model on source HG corpora, enabling the LM
to autonomously extract the general knowledge of source
HGs. Secondly, to fully leverage the rich information of
abundant unlabeled nodes in the target HG, we propose an
iterative training pipeline with the help of an extra GNN
predictor. The LM initially generates enhanced features to
train the GNN, and then the GNN produces soft labels for
the unlabeled nodes to fine-tune the LM. Lastly, to further
narrow the performance gap between the LM and the

Heterogeneous graphs (HGs) that contain various node and
edge types are ubiquitous in real-world scenarios. Considering the common label sparsity problem in HGs, some researchers propose to pretrain on source HGs to extract general
knowledge and then fine-tune on a target HG for knowledge
transfer. However, existing methods often assume that source
and target HGs share a single heterogeneity, meaning that
they have the same types of nodes and edges, which contradicts the real-world scenarios requiring cross-heterogeneity
transfer. Although a recent study has made some preliminary attempts in cross-heterogeneity learning, its definition
of general knowledge heavily rely on human knowledge,
which lacks flexibility and further leads to a suboptimal
transfer. To address the problem, we propose a novel Language Model-enhanced Cross-Heterogeneity learning model,
namely LMCH. Specifically, we first design a metapath-based
corpus construction method to unify HG representations as
languages. The corpora of source HGs are then used to finetune a pretrained Language Model (LM), enabling the LM
to autonomously extract general knowledge across different
HGs. Furthermore, to fully utilize the extensive unlabeled
nodes in a few-labeled target HG, we propose an iterative
training pipeline with the help of an extra Graph Neural Network (GNN) predictor, enhanced by LM-GNN contrastive
alignment at the end of each iteration. Extensive experiments
on four real-world datasets have demonstrated the superior
performance of LMCH over state-of-the-art methods.

Code — https://github.com/BUPT-GAMMA/LMCH

1

Introduction

Heterogeneous graphs that contain a diverse range of node
and edge types are ubiquitous in real-world scenarios, such
as social networks (Dong et al. 2012), recommendation
systems (Yan et al. 2024) and biological networks (Ma
et al. 2023). Embedding the structure and attribute information of HGs into a low-dimensional vector space, Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks (HGNNs) that typically
trained in an end-to-end manner have demonstrated promising performance in plenty of graph tasks (Dong et al. 2012;
Schlichtkrull et al. 2018). Recently, due to label sparsity and
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13026

