The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Argumentative Large Language Models
for Explainable and Contestable Claim Verification
Gabriel Freedman* , Adam Dejl* , Deniz Gorur* , Xiang Yin* , Antonio Rago, Francesca Toni
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
{gif22, adam.dejl18, d.gorur22, xy620, a.rago, ft}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
The profusion of knowledge encoded in large language models (LLMs) and their ability to apply this knowledge zeroshot in a range of settings makes them promising candidates
for use in decision-making. However, they are currently limited by their inability to provide outputs which can be faithfully explained and effectively contested to correct mistakes.
In this paper, we attempt to reconcile these strengths and
weaknesses by introducing argumentative LLMs (ArgLLMs),
a method for augmenting LLMs with argumentative reasoning. Concretely, ArgLLMs construct argumentation frameworks, which then serve as the basis for formal reasoning in
support of decision-making. The interpretable nature of these
argumentation frameworks and formal reasoning means that
any decision made by ArgLLMs may be explained and contested. We evaluate ArgLLMs’ performance experimentally
in comparison with state-of-the-art techniques, in the context
of the decision-making task of claim verification. We also define novel properties to characterise contestability and assess
ArgLLMs formally in terms of these properties.

Code and Datasets —
https://github.com/CLArg-group/argumentative-llms
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02079

1

Introduction

The profusion of knowledge encoded in large language
models (LLMs) and their ability to apply this knowledge
zero-shot in a range of settings (e.g. as in Brown et al.
(2020); Bubeck et al. (2023); Achiam et al. (2023)) makes
them promising candidates for supporting automated decision making (Zhang et al. 2023; Ouyang and Li 2023; Wang
et al. 2023). However, they are currently limited by their inability to explain their outputs faithfully, i.e. in a way that
reflects their “reasoning” and knowledge. LLMs also lack
contestability, meaning that there is no mechanism for external agents to reliably dispute and correct the reasoning
steps taken by the model: although users may attempt contestation through prompting, the highly stochastic nature of
LLMs provides no guarantee of this achieving the intended
outcome. These abilities (to be explainable and contestable)

Figure 1: Comparison of our approach (ArgLLM, here in
combination with Mixtral) with existing alternatives. The
example claim is adapted from TruthfulQA.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14930

