The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Column-Oriented Datalog on the GPU
Yihao Sun1 , Sidharth Kumar2 , Thomas Gilray3 , Kristopher Micinski1
1
Syracuse University
University of Illinois at Chicago
3
Washington State University
{ysun67, kkmicins}@syr.edu, sidharth@uic.edu, thomas.gilray@wsu.edu
2

Abstract

minimally-locking data structures such as B-Trees and tries
(Jordan et al. 2019a,b). However, row-based storage can
face scalability challenges on modern CPUs, especially
those with multiple Core Chiplet Dies (CCDs) that do not
share caches. Accessing entire rows can lead to suboptimal
cache alignment and increased memory access latency,
particularly for tasks such as joins and indexing, which
frequently access only a subset of columns. Additionally,
these systems are not entirely lock-free, which can further
limit scalability as core counts increase. Our benchmarks
show that both engines’ performance saturates at 32 cores
and declines rapidly when scaling up to 64 cores.
Some CPU-based in-memory Datalog reasoners, such
as VLog and Nemo (Urbani, Jacobs, and Krötzsch 2016;
Ivliev et al. 2023), adopt a column-oriented tuple representation (Abadi, Madden, and Hachem 2008) along with compression techniques such as run-length encoding (Robinson and Cherry 1967). On CPU-based systems, the columnoriented approach trades space for time, enabling these engines to run on machines with limited RAM.
However, the performance claim between these two storage layouts shifts with the emergence of new hardware,
particularly datacenter GPUs. These SIMD-like superchips,
such as the NVIDIA H100, can execute more than 16 k
threads simultaneously and are supported by 96 GB of highbandwidth memory (HBM) (JEDEC 2021), and have significant potential to accelerate data-intensive workloads. Such
massively parallel systems demand higher memory locality
and fully lock-free code, making it challenging to migrate
existing row-oriented Datalog engines to this hardware. In
contrast, the column-oriented storage layout, with its smaller
tuple size, naturally fits the SIMD architecture. This layout has already proven to be more cache-friendly and offers better memory locality for SIMD-enhanced CPU-based
systems, as demonstrated in the database community (Ailamaki et al. 1999; Zukowski, Nes, and Boncz 2008), and
is widely used in high-performance OLAP databases such
as DuckDB (Raasveldt and Mühleisen 2019) and MonetDB/X100 (Boncz, Zukowski, and Nes 2005).
Due to the data-intensive nature of Datalog and the similarities between GPUs and SIMD processors, we believe
that column-oriented storage could be a better fit for modern datacenter GPUs. In this paper, we present FV LOG, a
column-oriented Datalog Engine backend designed for mod-

Datalog is a logic programming language widely used in
knowledge representation and reasoning (KRR), program
analysis, and social media mining due to its expressiveness
and high performance. Traditionally, Datalog engines use either row-oriented or column-oriented storage. Engines like
VLog and Nemo favor column-oriented storage for efficiency
on limited-resource machines, while row-oriented engines
like Soufflé use advanced data structures with locking to perform better on multi-core CPUs. The advent of modern datacenter GPUs, such as the NVIDIA H100 with its ability to
run over 16k threads simultaneously and high memory bandwidth, has reopened the debate on which storage layout is
more effective. This paper presents the first column-oriented
Datalog engines tailored to the strengths of modern GPUs.
We present FV LOG, a CUDA-based Datalog runtime library
with a column-oriented GPU datastructure that supports all
necessary relational algebra operations. Our results demonstrate over 200× performance gains over SOTA CPU-based
column-oriented Datalog engines and a 2.5× speedup over
GPU Datalog engines in various workloads, including KRR.

Introduction
Datalog (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995) has become
a de-facto standard for reasoning across a breadth of
fields, including deductive databases (Sáenz-Pérez, Caballero, and Garcı́a-Ruiz 2011), program analysis (Bravenboer and Smaragdakis 2009), business analytics (Aref et al.
2015a), and knowledge representation (Nenov et al. 2015).
For example, popular applications of RDF, such as OWL 2
RL ontologies (Motik et al. 2019) with SWRL rules (Horrocks et al. 2004), are easily transliterated into Datalog rules.
A Datalog engine then executes these rules to a fixed point,
materializing a database for subsequent querying. While
early systems such as OWLIM (Kolovski, Wu, and Eadon
2010) and WebPIE (Urbani et al. 2010) were challenged by
slow performance, modern Datalog engines enable scaling
useful queries to internet-scale datasets (Ajileye and Motik
2022).
High-performance Datalog engines such as RDFox (Motik et al. 2014) and Soufflé (Jordan, Scholz,
and Subotić 2016) are typically designed for CPUbased hardware, storing tuples in row-based format with
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15177

