The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MOCID: Motion Context and Displacement Information Learning
for Moving Infrared Small Target Detection
Mingjin Zhang1 , Yuanjun Ouyang1 * , Fei Gao1 , Jie Guo1 , Qiming Zhang2 * , Jing Zhang3
1

Xidian University, China
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
{mjinzhang, fgao, jguo}@xidian.edu.cn, 23011211078@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {qmzhangzz, jingzhang.cv}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
In the field of Moving Infrared Small Target Detection
(MIRSTD), current methods typically use sequential modeling with two individual modules for spatial and temporal
processing. However, such a modeling strategy lacks clear
guidance on the motion and displacement difference between moving targets and background noise, thereby limiting the feature discriminability and resulting in error-prone
target localization. This paper addresses this issue from clip
and frame levels and proposes a novel architecture MOCID for MIRSTD. For clip-level feature fusion, we design
a spatio-temporal backbone consisting of several proposed
Fourier-inspired Spatio-temporal Attention (FISTA) layers.
Each FISTA layer sequentially processes the features from
spatial and temporal views to capture clip-level temporal
motion context, where Fourier Transformation and Inverse
Fourier Transformation are employed for each view. This
context is then embedded into dynamic convolutional kernels for subsequent spatial feature extraction, thereby enabling clear motion difference guidance and generating comprehensive features. For frame-level feature fusion, we design
a Displacement-aware Mamba Module (DAM) to capture detailed frame-to-frame displacement information. DAM utilizes an innovative Temporal Interpolation and Displacementaware Scan technique to perform spatio-temporal differenceaware displacement modeling, introducing elaborate temporal indicators into feature extraction. Combining the above
improvements, our model captures comprehensive motion
and displacement contexts, significantly improving the detection of the small target. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MOCID achieves state-of-the-art detection accuracy on popular IRDST and DAUB datasets. Furthermore,
MOCID offers a superior balance between throughput and
performance compared to other methods.

(a)

T-3

T-2

T-1

T

T-3

T-2

T-1

T

(b)

Figure 1: Video clips from two infrared videos. The target and noise regions are highlighted with green and yellow boxes, respectively. Green and yellow arrows denote target and background noise motion, respectively. The lighter
green and yellow boxes in time T denote the historical position. The clear clip-level motion difference and frame-level
displacement difference illustrate the motivation of MOCID.

challenges associated with MIRSTD: (1) Small target sizes
complicate the extraction of informative features, such as
shape and texture, and feature preservation in deep neural
network (Zhang et al. 2023). (2) Low contrast due to factors
such as complex backgrounds and non-target noise with similar appearance and shape hinders target recognition. While
the first challenge can be effectively addressed by integrating
semantic-rich high-level features with detail-rich low-level
features (Dai et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019), the second still
remains difficult to overcome (Zhang et al. 2024).
As shown in Figure 1, targets typically exhibit distinct
motion patterns compared to background noise across multiple frames. Therefore, recent works (Tong et al. 2024; Li
et al. 2023) address the challenges in MIRSTD by leveraging these motion and temporal contexts. Most existing
methods adopt a spatial-then-temporal framework: a spatialonly feature extractor first independently extracts features
from each frame, and then a carefully designed temporal
module models the temporal contexts to enhance target features. In terms of temporal contexts utilization, semanticbased methods (Gong et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2021; Zhang
et al. 2020) rely on modeling temporal semantic similarity
across frames to extract useful target features, while spatio-

Code — https://github.com/TanzanOY/MOCID

Introduction
Moving Infrared Small Target Detection (MIRSTD) involves locating the moving small targets within the target
frame by modeling spatio-temporal information across target frame and its reference frames. Figure 1 illustrates the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10022

