The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Auto-Regressive Diffusion for Generating 3D Human-Object Interactions
Zichen Geng1 , Zeeshan Hayder2 , Wei Liu1 , Ajmal Saeed Mian 1 *
1

The University of Western Australia
35 Stirling Highway,
Perth, WA 6009 Australia
2
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
Synergy building Black Mountain
Canberra, ACT 2601 Australia
zen.geng@research.uwa.edu.au, zeeshan.hayder@data61.csiro.au wei.liu@uwa.edu.au, ajamal.mian@uwa.edu.au
Abstract
Text-driven Human-Object Interaction (Text-to-HOI) generation is an emerging field with applications in animation, video
games, virtual reality, and robotics. A key challenge in HOI
generation is maintaining interaction consistency in long sequences. Existing Text-to-Motion-based approaches, such as
discrete motion tokenization, cannot be directly applied to
HOI generation due to limited data in this domain and the
complexity of the modality. To address the problem of interaction consistency in long sequences, we propose an autoregressive diffusion model (ARDHOI) that predicts the next
continuous token. Specifically, we introduce a Contrastive
Variational Autoencoder (cVAE) to learn a physically plausible space of continuous HOI tokens, thereby ensuring that
generated human-object motions are realistic and natural. For
generating sequences autoregressively, we develop a Mambabased context encoder to capture and maintain consistent sequential actions. Additionally, we implement an MLP-based
denoiser to generate the subsequent token conditioned on
the encoded context. Our model has been evaluated on the
OMOMO and BEHAVE datasets, where it outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of both performance and
inference speed. This makes ARDHOI a robust and efficient
solution for text-driven HOI tasks.

Figure 1: Text guided Human-Object interaction motion sequences generated by our ARDHOI.

The success of generative paradigms in Text-to-Motion
tasks has also driven significant advancements in related
tasks, such as multi-person motion generation (Liang et al.
2024) and motion prediction (Xu et al. 2023b; Guo et al.
2022b). These paradigms primarily include diffusion-based
and autoregressive models. Among them, autoregressive
models, such as T2M-GPT (Zhang et al. 2023), AttT2M
(Zhong et al. 2023), MotionGPT (Jiang et al. 2024), MoMask (Guo et al. 2024) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in Text-to-Motion.
The success of autoregressive models is driven by the consistent nature of the teacher-forcing mechanism, which explicitly supervises the prediction of subsequent positions in
a sequence. In contrast, diffusion-based models have no such
contextual awareness. Additionally, diffusion-based models
typically require the sequence length (either learned or provided as ground truth) to truncate the sequence to a desired
duration, while autoregressive models can intrinsically determine when the sequence should end. This feature streamlines the generation process and improves efficiency.
We believe that such autoregressive mechanisms can also
benefit Text-to-HOI. However, directly migrating previous
paradigms and architectures to Text-to-HOI is challenging.
Firstly, conventional autoregressive motion generative models such as T2M-GPT (Zhang et al. 2023) and Motion-GPT
(Jiang et al. 2024) are highly dependent on discrete tokenization, where each next token is predicted by optimizing

Code — https://github.com/gengzichen/ARDHOI

Introduction
Text-driven Human-Object Interaction (Text-to-HOI) is a
derived task of Text-to-Motion. Text-to-Motion aims to synthesize realistic human motion sequences with text prompts,
while Text-to-HOI generates both human motions and object motions. Generating realistic interactions has extensive
applications in animation, video games, film-making, virtual reality, embodied intelligence (Wang et al. 2023), and
robotics (Liu et al. 2021).
Text-to-Motion has been gaining significant traction in
the research community lately, thanks to the development of
universal network architectures like Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017) and generative algorithms like the diffusion
model (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3131

