The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust Self-Paced Hashing for Cross-Modal Retrieval with Noisy Labels
Ruitao Pu 1 , Yuan Sun 1 * , Yang Qin 1 , Zhenwen Ren 2 , Xiaomin Song 3 , Huiming Zheng 3 ,
Dezhong Peng 1,3
1
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, 610044,
Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, China, 621010,
3
Sichuan National Innovation New Vision UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu, China, 610095,
ruitaopu@gmail.com, sunyuan work@163.com, qinyang.gm@gmail.com, rzw@njust.edu.cn, songxiaomin@uptcsc.com,
michaelzheng@uptcsc.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn.
2

Abstract

of collecting annotations, some unsupervised CMR methods
(Zhang et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2024b; Qin et al. 2023) have
been proposed to eliminate the reliance on abundant labels.
However, their performance often suffers without supervised
semantic guidance. Recently, numerous supervised CMH
methods (Li et al. 2024a; Chen, Cao, and Liu 2021) have
been proposed and achieved pleasing performance. Most of
them implicitly assume that all collected labels are correctly
labeled, which is unrealistic due to inevitable noisy labels
from manual or non-expert annotations (Song et al. 2022a;
Kuznetsova et al. 2020). These noisy labels can mislead hash
models, significantly degrading retrieval performance. Besides, learning from multi-modal instances with noisy labels
is difficult due to a great heterogeneity gap. Thus, it is a
challenging problem to mitigate the performance degradation caused by noisy labels for cross-modal retrieval.

Cross-modal hashing (CMH) has appeared as a popular technique for cross-modal retrieval due to its low storage cost and
high computational efficiency in large-scale data. Most existing methods implicitly assume that multi-modal data is correctly labeled, which is expensive and even unattainable due
to the inevitable imperfect annotations (i.e., noisy labels) in
real-world scenarios. Inspired by human cognitive learning,
a few methods introduce self-paced learning (SPL) to gradually train the model from easy to hard samples, which is often
used to mitigate the effects of feature noise or outliers. It is
a less-touched problem that how to utilize SPL to alleviate
the misleading of noisy labels on the hash model. To tackle
this problem, we propose a new cognitive cross-modal retrieval method called Robust Self-paced Hashing with Noisy
Labels (RSHNL), which can mimic the human cognitive process to identify the noise while embracing robustness against
noisy labels. Specifically, we first propose a contrastive hashing learning (CHL) scheme to improve multi-modal consistency, thereby reducing the inherent semantic gap. Afterward,
we propose center aggregation learning (CAL) to mitigate
the intra-class variations. Finally, we propose Noise-tolerance
Self-paced Hashing (NSH) that dynamically estimates the
learning difficulty for each instance and distinguishes noisy
labels through the difficulty level. For all estimated clean
pairs, we further adopt a self-paced regularizer to gradually
learn hash codes from easy to hard. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed RSHNL performs remarkably
well over the state-of-the-art CMH methods.

To alleviate the impact of noisy labels, many CMR methods (Xu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024, 2021) have been developed. For example, ELRCMR utilizes dynamic weights
to prevent overfitting noisy labels. However, most of them
rely on real-valued representation, leading to high storage
and computational costs. Although hash representations are
more lightweight, unreliable labels could expand quantization errors. To this end, a few CMH methods have been
proposed. For instance, NrDCMH adopts the difference between label similarity and feature similarity to detect noise.
Although remarkable progress, most of them implicitly assume constant learning priorities for each instance, making
the model biased toward hard instances with noisy labels and
leading to the overfitting problem. Inspired by human cognitive learning, self-paced learning (SPL) was presented to explore more valuable discriminative information contained in
hard instances gradually. In other words, SPL can gradually
train the model from easy to hard instances to improve generalization. However, SPL is usually used for feature noise
or outliers. It is a less-touched problem to employ the SPL
paradigm to mitigate the negative effects of noisy labels.

Code — https://github.com/perquisite/RSHNL

Introduction
With the explosive growth of multi-modal data, cross-modal
retrieval (CMR) has attracted a wide range of attention in the
community (Zhou, Hassan, and Hoon 2023), which retrieves
relevant samples across different modalities. For large-scale
multi-modal data, cross-modal hashing (CMH) (Zhu et al.
2023) offers an efficient solution due to its low storage cost
and high retrieval efficiency. The basic idea of CMH is to
learn discriminative hash codes to alleviate the heterogeneity gap between different modalities. Due to the complexity

In this paper, we propose a new cognitive cross-modal
retrieval method, termed Robust Self-paced Hashing with
Noisy Labels (RSHNL), which could enable the model to
learn with noisy labels. As shown in Fig.1, our RSHNL
mimics the human cognitive process to learn each instance
in Hamming space from easy to hard, thereby embracing the

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19969

