The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SemStereo: Semantic-Constrained Stereo Matching Network for Remote Sensing
Chen Chen1,2 , Liangjin Zhao1 , Yuanchun He1 , Yingxuan Long1,2 ,
Kaiqiang Chen1 * , Zhirui Wang1 , Yanfeng Hu1 , Xian Sun1
1

Key Laboratory of Target Cognition and Application Technology,
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chenchen235, longyingxuan23}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {zhaolj004896, heyc, chenkq, wangzr, huyf, sunxian}@aircas.ac.cn
Abstract
Semantic segmentation and 3D reconstruction are two fundamental tasks in remote sensing, typically treated as separate
or loosely coupled tasks. Despite attempts to integrate them
into a unified network, the constraints between the two heterogeneous tasks are not explicitly modeled, since the pioneering studies either utilize a loosely coupled parallel structure or engage in only implicit interactions, failing to capture the inherent connections. In this work, we explore the
connections between the two tasks and propose a new network that imposes semantic constraints on the stereo matching task, both implicitly and explicitly. Implicitly, we transform the traditional parallel structure to a new cascade structure termed Semantic-Guided Cascade structure, where the
deep features enriched with semantic information are utilized
for the computation of initial disparity maps, enhancing semantic guidance. Explicitly, we propose a Semantic Selective
Refinement (SSR) module and a Left-Right Semantic Consistency (LRSC) module. The SSR refines the initial disparity map under the guidance of the semantic map. The LRSC
ensures semantic consistency between two views via reducing the semantic divergence after transforming the semantic
map from one view to the other using the disparity map. Experiments on the US3D and WHU datasets demonstrate that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance for both semantic segmentation and stereo matching.

Figure 1: A comparison between our and previous methods.

Further studies (Cheng et al. 2017; Kendall, Gal, and
Cipolla 2018; Song et al. 2020; Liao et al. 2023) attempt
to fuse the two heterogeneous tasks in a multi-task network
to achieve higher accuracy. The typical multi-task learning
methods usually adopt a parallel structure with two branches
for semantic segmentation and stereo matching respectively,
as illustrated in Figure 1 (a). Shallow features are shared
to establish implicit and weak connections between the distinct tasks (Zhang et al. 2019b; Dovesi et al. 2020; Liao et al.
2023). Even though it is demonstrated that semantic segmentation improves stereo matching in areas with less texture and occlusions (Yang et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Dovesi
et al. 2020), and stereo matching aids in distinguishing confusing categories in semantic segmentation (Liao et al. 2023;
Yang et al. 2024), the underlying mechanisms remain unexplored, leading to a failure to capture the inherent connections between the heterogeneous tasks.
In this work, we aim to uncover the connections between
semantic categories and disparities in remote sensing and
bridge the task domain gap, with the goal of guiding efficient and interpretable network design for improved accuracy. As illustrated in Figure 2, disparities corresponding
to the same category are concentrated within a distinct and
narrow range in remote sensing images, while this characteristic does not apply to typical images taken from a groundlevel perspective. We assume that this might (partially) explain why the heterogeneous tasks can mutually benefit each
other. Based on this assumption, we propose a novel network termed SemStereo which imposes the semantic constraints on the stereo matching task via implicitly and explicitly modeling their connections.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation and stereo matching are two underlying tasks towards semantic urban 3D reconstruction,
which requires both semantic and 3d details derived from
high-resolution remote sensing images (Kadhim, Mourshed,
and Bray 2016; Bosch et al. 2019). They are usually considered as two independent tasks due to the inherent domain
gap that characterizes each task, using a semantic segmentation network (Xie et al. 2021; Jing et al. 2021; Kang et al.
2021, 2022) for classification and a stereo matching network
for height extraction (Zhang et al. 2019a, 2020; Xu et al.
2022, 2023a,b), respectively. Afterwards, post-processing is
conducted to fuse the parallel results (Qin et al. 2019; Kunwar et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15758

