The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamics-Based Feature Augmentation of Graph Neural Networks for Variant
Emergence Prediction
Majd Al Aawar 1 , Srikar Mutnuri 2 , Mansooreh Montazerin 1 , Ajitesh Srivastava1
1

University of Southern California
2
University of Virginia
malaawar@usc.edu, nmp8rj@virginia.edu, mmontaze@usc.edu, ajiteshs@usc.edu

Abstract

of the new variant (Markov et al. 2023). We can observe
how a new variant, that has not appeared in region A yet,
spreads in region B. We can study the spread in the region
B to understand the properties of this new variant. If it is a
highly transmissible or immune-evading variant (Lambrou
et al. 2022), we can expect it to spread in the region A eventually. However, precisely when it would happen in region
A remains unknown. Making a good prediction of arrival
time would lead to more effective preparation and resource
management.
We focus on the problem of predicting the arrival of a
new variant in a given region provided that it has appeared
somewhere else. Due to testing delays and the fact that not
all cases are genomically analyzed, it is difficult to pin down
when a variant arrives. Therefore, we consider measuring
the delay to reach a certain proportion of prevalence.
Figure 1 shows the proportions of different variants over
time in the United Kingdom and Sweden. We can see that
there is often a clear delay (see 20.Alpha.V1 and 21.J.Delta)
in arrival of the variants in Sweden. Furthermore, a variant
may start to spread, but quickly get dominated by another
variant before it reaches a significant proportion of the circulating cases (e.g., 21.A.Delta in Figure 1). Therefore, we
reformulate the problem as the following:

During the COVID-19 pandemic, a major driver of new
surges has been the emergence of new variants. When a new
variant emerges in one or more countries, other nations monitor its spread in preparation for its potential arrival. The impact of the new variant and the timings of epidemic peaks in
a country highly depend on when the variant arrives. The current methods for predicting the spread of new variants rely on
statistical modeling, however, these methods work only when
the new variant has already arrived in the region of interest
and has a significant prevalence. Can we predict when a variant existing elsewhere will arrive in a given region? To address this question, we propose a variant-dynamics-informed
Graph Neural Network (GNN) approach. First, we derive the
dynamics of variant prevalence across pairs of regions (countries) that apply to a large class of epidemic models. The dynamics motivate the introduction of certain features in the
GNN. We demonstrate that our proposed dynamics-informed
GNN outperforms all the baselines, including the currently
pervasive framework of Physics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs). To advance research in this area, we introduce a
benchmarking tool to assess a user-defined model’s prediction performance across 87 countries and 36 variants.

Code — https://github.com/itssmutnuri/gnnvariants

Problem 1 (Emergence Delay Prediction) Given the proportion of a variant in regions A1 , A2 , . . . , predict when the
variant will reach a proportion of θ in region B, provided
that this variant has not yet reached region B.

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic presented an unprecedented
global health crisis, severely affecting millions of people
worldwide and demanding swift and effective responses
from governments and healthcare providers (Organization
2023b). As the pandemic progressed, multiple variants of
COVID-19 emerged, each possessing genetic mutations that
can significantly impact transmissibility, virulence, and even
vaccine efficacy. During much of the COVID-19 epidemic,
the surge in cases and severe outcomes (hospitalizations and
deaths) have been driven by the emergence of new variants (Wiemken et al. 2023). Consequently, monitoring the
emergence and spread of these variants is crucial for devising appropriate public health measures and optimizing
containment strategies (Organization 2023a). A critical factor driving the surge in a given region is the arrival time

Here, the term “proportion” refers to the fraction of new
cases created by the variant under consideration out of total
new cases. Note that this is a regression problem – we seek
to predict a quantity, which is the delay between the current
date and the date of reaching the desired threshold. Further,
we wish to perform this prediction for a given region before
any sample of the variant of interest is observed there.
Prior works have focused on the problem of predicting
the prevalence of a variant when it has already arrived in the
region of interest (Sun et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2020). Specifically, logistic regression turns out to provide a good estimate
of the prevalence over time (Shah et al. 2021; Palaniappan,
V, and David 2022). However, these techniques require the
variant to have a non-zero proportion already in the region
of interest. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work ex-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27793

