The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LRM-LLaVA: Overcoming the Modality Gap of Multilingual Large
Language-Vision Model for Low-Resource Languages
Junchen Li1 * , Qing Yang1 * , Bojian Jiang1 , Shaolin Zhu2† ,Qingxuan Sun1
1

Du Xiaoman Finance, Beijing, China
2
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{lijunchen, yangqing, jiangbojian, sunqingxuan}@duxiaoman.com
zhushaolin@tju.edu.cn
Abstract

En
Zh

Multilingual large language-vision models (LVLMs), which
understand and generate both text and images across multiple languages, have achieved remarkable performance on
English-centric multimodal generation tasks. However, their
performance on non-English tasks has been underwhelming.
One major challenge with multilingual LVLMs is the modality gap between visual inputs and multilingual textual inputs/outputs due to the lack of high-quality multilingual training data. In this paper, we propose LRM-LLaVA, a multilingual large language-vision model designed for low-resource
languages to overcome the modality gap. It is composed of
four components: a visual encoder, a multilingual large language model, a vision-text representation projector, and a
cross-modal regularizer. Both the projector and regularizer
aim at reducing the modality gap and improving multilingual
performance. To train LRM-LLaVA, we employ a two-stage
training strategy including pre-training and instruction finetuning. Meanwhile, we construct a multilingual visual question answering dataset based on English open-source datasets
and adopt multiple task instructions. To evaluate the performance of LVLMs across various languages, we construct
four multilingual benchmarks for 10 languages, based on English open-source benchmarks. Experimental results show
that LRM-LLaVA achieves competitive performance compared to other multilingual LVLMs of similar parameters.

Cs

1600
1400
1200
1000
800

Sp

De
InstructBLIP
LVIS-Instruct 4V
Fr

Ru

LLaVA-1.5
ShareGPT4V
Qwen-VL-Chat

Ro

Hr
It

Figure 1: Performance of various large language-vision
models on multilingual MME (Fu et al. 2023) benchmark.

et al. 2024). However, their performance on non-English
tasks has been underwhelming as shown in Figure 1. This
disparity is due to the limited availability of high-quality
multilingual training data for low-resource languages.
As a cross-modal task, a major challenge of multilingual
LVLMs for low-resource languages is the representation discrepancy across the textual and visual modality. This discrepancy arises because the modalities have distinct semantic spaces, and aligning them requires learning complex relationships between visual features and textual descriptions.
The lack of sufficient text-image pairs for non-English languages makes it incredibly difficult for multilingual LVLMs
to effectively bridge this gap (Zhu et al. 2023b).
Previous efforts for multilingual LVLMs for non-English
languages, e.g., the method presented in Li et al. (2023d),
use contrastive learning to align visual and textual representations by pulling positive pairs (text and image depicting the same concept) closer while pushing negative pairs
(text and image depicting different concepts) further apart.
Such methods may not be able to sufficiently leverage crossmodal knowledge as they require careful selection of training data and techniques to minimize the discrepancy across
the textual and visual modalities and do not explicitly deal

Introduction
Multilingual large language-vision models (LVLMs), which
receive images and multilingual text as input and then conduct multi-round dialogues or provide corresponding text
reasoning (Zhou et al. 2024), have recently attracted significant interest (You et al. 2023; Ying et al. 2024). Recent mainstream multilingual LVLMs are mainly trained
on English image-text pairs to achieve semantic alignment
between text and images, e.g., BLIP-2 (Li et al. 2023b),
LLaVA (Liu et al. 2024b), and LLaVAR (Zhang et al. 2023).
Those multilingual LVLMs have achieved remarkable performance on English multimodal generation tasks, such as
image captioning (Wang et al. 2024), visual question answering (Liu et al. 2024c), and image-text retrieval (Zhu
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24449

