The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Deep Reinforcement Learning for Robotics:
A Survey of Real-World Successes
Chen Tang* 1 , Ben Abbatematteo* 1 , Jiaheng Hu* 1 , Rohan Chandra2 ,
Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n1 , Peter Stone1,3
1

The University of Texas at Austin,
2
The University of Virginia,
3
Sony AI

Abstract

board games (Schrittwieser et al. 2020), video games (Wurman et al. 2022), healthcare (Yu et al. 2021), and recommendation systems (Afsar, Crump, and Far 2022).

Reinforcement learning (RL), particularly its combination
with deep neural networks referred to as deep RL (DRL), has
shown tremendous promise across a wide range of applications, suggesting its potential for enabling the development of
sophisticated robotic behaviors. Robotics problems, however,
pose fundamental difficulties for the application of RL, stemming from the complexity and cost of interacting with the
physical world. This overview article provides a concise summary of our recently released survey paper “Deep Reinforcement Learning for Robotics: A Survey of Real-World Successes”, which has been accepted for publication in Annual
Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems. The
survey paper provides a modern survey of DRL for robotics,
with a particular focus on evaluating the real-world successes
achieved with DRL in realizing several key robotic competencies. Our analysis aims to identify the key factors underlying those exciting successes, reveal underexplored areas, and
provide an overall characterization of the status of DRL in
robotics. We highlight several important avenues for future
work, emphasizing the need for stable and sample-efficient
real-world RL paradigms, holistic approaches for discovering and integrating various competencies to tackle complex
long-horizon, open-world tasks, and principled development
and evaluation procedures. The survey is designed to offer
insights for both RL practitioners and roboticists toward harnessing RL’s power to create generally capable real-world
robotic systems.

These successes underscore the potential of DRL for controlling robotic systems with high-dimensional state or observation spaces and highly nonlinear dynamics to perform
challenging tasks that conventional decision-making, planning, and control approaches (e.g., classical control, optimal control, sampling-based planning) cannot handle effectively. Yet, the most notable milestones of DRL so far have
been achieved in simulation or game environments, where
RL agents can learn from extensive experience. In contrast,
robots must complete tasks in the physical world, which
presents additional challenges. It is often inefficient and/or
unsafe for the RL agents to collect trial-and-error samples
directly in the physical world, and it is usually impossible
to create an exact replica of the complex real world in simulation. These challenges notwithstanding, recent advances
have enabled DRL to succeed at some real-world robotic
tasks. For instance, DRL has enabled champion-level drone
racing (Kaufmann et al. 2023) and versatile quadruped locomotion control integrated into production-level quadruped
systems (e.g., ANYbotics, Swiss-Mile, and Boston Dynamics). However, the maturity of state-of-the-art DRL solutions
varies significantly across different robotic applications. In
some domains, such as urban autonomous driving, DRLbased solutions remain limited to simulation or strictly confined cases (Kiran et al. 2021).

Full Version — https://www.arxiv.org/abs/2408.03539

Introduction

Our survey aims to comprehensively evaluate the current
progress of DRL in real-world robotic applications, identifying key factors behind the most exciting successes and
open challenges that remain in less mature areas. Specifically, we assess the maturity of DRL for a variety of problem
domains and contrast the DRL literature across domains to
pinpoint broadly applicable techniques, under-explored areas, and common open challenges that need to be addressed
to advance DRL’s applications in robotics. We aim for the
survey to provide researchers and practitioners with a thorough understanding of the status of DRL in robotics, offering valuable insights to guide future research and facilitate
broadly deployable DRL solutions for real-world robotic
tasks.

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) refers
to a class of decision-making problems in which an agent
must learn through trial-and-error to act in such a way that
maximizes its accumulated return, as encoded by a scalar
reward function that maps the agent’s states and actions to
immediate rewards. RL algorithms, particularly their combination with deep neural networks referred to as deep RL
(DRL) (François-Lavet et al. 2018), have shown remarkable
capabilities in solving complex decision-making problems
even with high-dimensional observations in domains such as
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28694

