The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Transforming Healthcare Decision Making Using Artificial Intelligence
Shengpu Tang
Emory University
Department of Computer Science
shengpu.tang@emory.edu

Decision making is at the core of healthcare: clinicians
constantly make complex decisions that span diagnosis,
treatment, care coordination, and resource allocation. Yet,
human decisions are never perfect, leading to suboptimal
patient care. My research uses AI to augment and improve
decision-making in healthcare, following a synergistic approach that combines novel AI methods with practical, realworld implementation. Here, I will explore two key themes:
Application-Inspired AI Innovations, focused on novel AI
methods grounded in practical healthcare problems; and
Path to Deployment and Impact, which addresses AI integration into clinical workflows for real-world improvements.
Part 1. Application-Inspired AI Innovations. Among AI
methods, reinforcement learning (RL) offers a promising
framework to create decision support tools that could assist
clinicians in selecting appropriate treatments. Despite RL’s
success in areas such as gaming and chat-bots, many existing approaches not well-suited to the unique challenges of
clinical decision-making problems in healthcare. In my recent work, I have developed several methods to improve the
applicability of RL, particularly offline RL, for clinical settings (Tang et al. 2020a; Tang and Wiens 2021; Tang et al.
2022; Tang and Wiens 2023; Rebello et al. 2023). For example, by leveraging compositionality of real-world problems,
such as factored action spaces (Tang et al. 2022; Rebello
et al. 2023), we show learning and evaluation can be made
more data-efficient. To support clinician-in-the-loop decision making, I introduced new algorithms to learn set-valued
policies, which capture near-equivalent actions that achieve
similar outcomes (e.g., survival) (Tang et al. 2020a). Additionally, to improve offline RL policy evaluation before online deployment, I proposed model selection pipelines (Tang
and Wiens 2021) and techniques to incorporate human annotations of counterfactual outcomes (Tang and Wiens 2023).
Part 2. Path to Deployment and Impact. While numerous clinical prediction models have been built, such as in
my own work (Tang et al. 2020b; Tang, Hur et al. 2021),
most have yet to impact decision making in hospitals. In
this part, I will share my experience deploying two such
models at Michigan Medicine (MM). The first model, MCURES (Tang, Kamran et al. 2022), was developed during

the COVID-19 pandemic to predict early deterioration in
emergency department patients. After extensive validation
using data from 13 U.S. hospitals, we deployed M-CURES
within MM’s electronic health record system, and the rapid
response team now uses the model in their daily rounding
decisions. In another notable project tackling C. difficile infections, I designed an AI-guided infection prevention protocol to reduce both pathogen exposure and host susceptibility.
A three-year quasi-experimental study at MM demonstrated
a tangible impact of AI in reducing infections and improving
antimicrobial stewardship (Tang et al. 2024).
Future Directions. I will discuss promising directions with
open questions in areas such as compositionality, humancentered designs, and ML deployment pipelines in hospitals
– all in the context of clinically relevant problems.

References
Rebello, A. P.; Tang, S.; Wiens, J.; and Parbhoo, S. 2023.
Leveraging Factored Actions for Off-Policy Evaluation.
ICML workshop: Counterfactuals in Minds&Machines.
Tang, S.; Hur, J.; et al. 2021. Predicting postoperative opioid
use with machine learning and insurance claims in opioidnaı̈ve patients. The American Journal of Surgery.
Tang, S.; Kamran, F.; et al. 2022. Early identification of
patients admitted to hospital for covid-19 at risk of clinical
deterioration. BMJ.
Tang, S.; Makar, M.; Sjoding, M.; Doshi-Velez, F.; and
Wiens, J. 2022. Leveraging Factored Actions for Efficient
Offline Reinforcement Learning in Healthcare. NeurIPS.
Tang, S.; Modi, A.; Sjoding, M.; and Wiens, J. 2020a.
Clinician-in-the-Loop Decision Making: Reinforcement
Learning with Near-Optimal Set-Valued Policies. ICML.
Tang, S.; and Wiens, J. 2021. Model Selection for Offline
RL: Practical Considerations for Healthcare. MLHC.
Tang, S.; and Wiens, J. 2023. Counterfactual-Augmented
Importance Sampling for Semi-Offline Evaluation. NeurIPS.
Tang, S.; et al. 2020b. Predicting aGVHD Using ML and
Longitudinal Vital Signs. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics.
Tang, S.; et al. 2024. Targeting C. difficile Infection Prevention Efforts with AI. IDWeek 2024.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28729

