The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Realizing AI for Impact: Towards Participatory Human-AI Collaboration for
Water Conservation and Reproductive Health
Elizabeth Bondi-Kelly
University of Michigan
12260 Hayward St
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
ecbk@umich.edu

References

My research interests are focused on use-inspired work in
artificial intelligence for social impact, in which I develop
novel techniques in the fields of multi-agent systems and
machine learning for domains ranging from conservation
to public health. Currently, I focus on the domains of water
conservation and reproductive health.
My commitment to developing AI for social impact has
led me to concentrate on a cycle with four components:

Balloli, V.; Beery, S.; and Bondi-Kelly, E. 2024. Are they
the same picture? adapting concept bottleneck models for
human-AI collaboration in image retrieval. In IJCAI.
Bondi, E.; Fang, F.; Hamilton, M.; Kar, D.; Dmello, D.;
Choi, J.; Hannaford, R.; Iyer, A.; Joppa, L.; Tambe, M.;
and Nevatia, R. 2018. SPOT Poachers in Action: Augmenting Conservation Drones with Automatic Detection in Near
Real Time. In IAAI.
Bondi, E.; Jain, R.; Aggrawal, P.; Anand, S.; Hannaford, R.;
Kapoor, A.; Piavis, J.; Shah, S.; Joppa, L.; Dilkina, B.; et al.
2020a. BIRDSAI: A Dataset for Detection and Tracking in
Aerial Thermal Infrared Videos. In WACV.
Bondi, E.; Koster, R.; Sheahan, H.; Chadwick, M.;
Bachrach, Y.; Cemgil, T.; Paquet, U.; and Dvijotham, K.
2022. Role of Human-AI Interaction in Selective Prediction.
In AAAI.
Bondi, E.; Oh, H.; Xu, H.; Fang, F.; Dilkina, B.; and Tambe,
M. 2020b. To Signal or Not To Signal: Exploiting Uncertain
Real-Time Information in Signaling Games for Security and
Sustainability. In AAAI.
Bondi, E.; Xu, L.; Acosta-Navas, D.; and Killian, J. A. 2021.
Envisioning Communities: A Participatory Approach Towards AI for Social Good. In AIES.
Bondi-Kelly, E.; Chen, H.; Golden, C. D.; Behari, N.; and
Tambe, M. 2023. Predicting micronutrient deficiency with
publicly available satellite data. AI Magazine, 44(1): 30–40.
Gordon, L.; Behari, N.; Collier, S.; Bondi-Kelly, E.; Killian,
J. A.; Ressijac, C.; Boucher, P.; Davies, A.; and Tambe, M.
2023. Find rhinos without finding rhinos: active learning
with multimodal imagery of south african rhino habitats. IJCAI.
Khan, J.; Andrews, D.; Beins, K.; Friedman, A.; Evans, S.;
and Bondi-Kelly, E. 2024. AI-Driven Predictive Modeling
of PFAS Contamination in Aquatic Ecosystems: Exploring
A Geospatial Approach. Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning Workshop @ NeurIPS’24.
Venugopal, A.; Bondi, E.; Kamarthi, H.; Dholakia, K.;
Ravindran, B.; and Tambe, M. 2021. Reinforcement Learning for Unified Allocation and Patrolling in Signaling
Games with Uncertainty. In AAMAS.

• Analyzing Real-World Data: I develop methods to collect and analyze real-world data, especially remotelysensed imagery. I draw on methodological approaches,
including computer vision and machine learning, to
address challenges with uncertainty, such as noise and
limited data. I will particularly emphasize the domain of
water conservation, and highlight my past work in public health and wildlife conservation (Khan et al. 2024;
Bondi-Kelly et al. 2023; Gordon et al. 2023; Bondi et al.
2020a).
• Multi-agent Reasoning: I build on the above data and
techniques to better inform multi-agent interventions.
My main methodological focus is on multi-agent systems, especially game theory, multi-armed bandits,
and reinforcement learning. For example, I have conducted studies on strategically deploying limited resources in conservation, such as park rangers and remote
sensors (Bondi et al. 2020b; Venugopal et al. 2021).
• Human-AI Collaboration: Because these systems are almost always used by humans, I analyze ways to support human-AI collaboration to improve joint performance (Bondi et al. 2022; Balloli, Beery, and BondiKelly 2024).
• Deployment: Finally, I am committed to deploying systems in the real world. I have built systems to facilitate such deployment in collaboration with domain experts, and have conducted research on participatory AI,
which involves developing and deploying AI systems
with interested and impacted communities (Bondi et al.
2018, 2021). I will also refer to ongoing work in water
conservation (Khan et al. 2024) and reproductive health
(Google Academic Research Award and work in preparation).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28701

