The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Few-Shot Domain Adaptation for Learned Image Compression
Tianyu Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Yuqi Li, Li Li, Dong Liu*
University of Science and Technology of China
{zhangtianyu,zhanghaotian,lyq010303}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {lil1,dongeliu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Learned image compression (LIC) has achieved state-of-theart rate-distortion performance, deemed promising for nextgeneration image compression techniques. However, pretrained LIC models usually suffer from significant performance degradation when applied to out-of-training-domain
images, implying their poor generalization capabilities. To
tackle this problem, we propose a few-shot domain adaptation method for LIC by integrating plug-and-play adapters
into pre-trained models. Drawing inspiration from the analogy between latent channels and frequency components, we
examine domain gaps in LIC and observe that out-of-trainingdomain images disrupt pre-trained channel-wise decomposition. Consequently, we introduce a method for channelwise re-allocation using convolution-based adapters and lowrank adapters, which are lightweight and compatible to mainstream LIC schemes. Extensive experiments across multiple
domains and multiple representative LIC schemes demonstrate that our method significantly enhances pre-trained
models, achieving comparable performance to H.266/VVC
intra coding with merely 25 target-domain samples. Additionally, our method matches the performance of full-model
finetune while transmitting fewer than 2% of the parameters.

Bits saving

In-domain

Out-of-domain

(a) Performance of LIC models and our adaptation on different domains, compared with VTM

(b) Natural Images

(c) Pixel

(d) Screen-content

(e) Craters

Figure 1: (a) BD-rate (↓) of four advanced LIC models with
or without our method on different domains. (b)-(e) Images
from different domains have visible different characteristics.

Introduction

in/out-of-domain for convenience). It is common practice to
train and evaluate LIC models on natural image benchmarks
(Franzen 1993; Agustsson and Timofte 2017; Asuni and Giachetti 2014; CLIC 2020; Li et al. 2024b). However, practical codecs may well be challenged by images from various
domains, many of which have significant domain gaps compared to natural images. For demonstration purposes, we test
advanced LIC models including Cheng2020 (Cheng et al.
2020), ELIC (He et al. 2022), TCM (Liu, Sun, and Katto
2023), and MLIC++ (Jiang and Wang 2023) in Fig. 1. While
all these models perform comparably or better than the conventional codec VTM on natural images, they exhibit varying degrees of performance drop and generally fall behind
VTM on out-of-domain images such as pixel-style art and
screen content, highlighting the necessity for efficient adaptation methods for pre-trained LIC models.
In this regard, most existing methods (Shen, Yue, and
Yang 2023; Lv et al. 2023; Tsubota, Akutsu, and Aizawa
2023) suggest instance adaptation (IA), which aims to adapt
LIC models to a single image at inference. Despite its effectiveness, IA does not perform actual domain adaptation

With the rapid growth of images in multimedia, image compression has become essential for efficient storage and transmission. Over the past decade, conventional methods including JPEG (Wallace 1991), H.265/HEVC (Sullivan et al.
2012) and H.266/VVC (Bross et al. 2021), have significantly
contributed to the real-world applications of image compression. Recently, learned image compression (LIC) has
achieved impressive progress in rate-distortion (RD) performance using non-linear transforms and end-to-end optimization. Several studies (He et al. 2022; Jiang and Wang
2023) have even surpassed VTM (the reference software for
H.266/VVC) on both PSNR and MS-SSIM, indicating LIC’s
potential for future image compression techniques.
Despite the encouraging progress, some studies (Shen,
Yue, and Yang 2023; Lv et al. 2023) have pointed out the
performance degradation of pre-trained LIC models on outof-domain images (we simplify in/out-of-training-domain as
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10139

