The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SAUGE: Taming SAM for Uncertainty-Aligned Multi-Granularity Edge Detection
Xing Liufu1 , Chaolei Tan1 , Xiaotong Lin1 , Yonggang Qi2 , Jinxuan Li1 , Jian-Fang Hu1,3,4 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, China
4
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
{liufux,tanchlei,linxt29,lijx267}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, qiyg@bupt.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract
Edge labels are typically at various granularity levels owing
to the varying preferences of annotators, thus handling the
subjectivity of per-pixel labels has been a focal point for edge
detection. Previous methods often employ a simple voting
strategy to diminish such label uncertainty or impose a strong
assumption of labels with a pre-defined distribution, e.g.,
Gaussian. In this work, we unveil that the segment anything
model (SAM) provides strong prior knowledge to model the
uncertainty in edge labels. Our key insight is that the intermediate SAM features inherently correspond to object edges
at various granularities, which reflects different edge options
due to uncertainty. Therefore, we attempt to align uncertainty
with granularity by regressing intermediate SAM features
from different layers to object edges at multi-granularity levels. In doing so, the model can fully and explicitly explore
diverse “uncertainties” in a data-driven fashion. Specifically,
we inject a lightweight module (∼ 1.5% additional parameters) into the frozen SAM to progressively fuse and adapt its
intermediate features to estimate edges from coarse to fine. It
is crucial to normalize the granularity level of human edge labels to match their innate uncertainty. For this, we simply perform linear blending to the real edge labels at hand to create
pseudo labels with varying granularities. Consequently, our
uncertainty-aligned edge detector can flexibly produce edges
at any desired granularity (including an optimal one). Thanks
to SAM, our model uniquely demonstrates strong generalizability for cross-dataset edge detection. Extensive experimental results on BSDS500, Muticue and NYUDv2 validate our
model’s superiority.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Comparison of edges obtained by SAM and manually annotated ground truth: (a) shows images from BSDS
set; (b) illustrates edge maps generated by SAM; (c) presents
edge annotations; (d) compares (b) and (c), where green indicates the shared edges, red represents edges in (b) but not
in (c), and blue represents edges in (c) but not in (b).

ground truth edge maps for a given image. The inconsistency between different edge maps can cause uncertainty in
decision-making, complicate the model training, and reduce
the overall performance. The scarcity of human annotations
may further exacerbate this issue.
Most previous works (Liu et al. 2017; He et al. 2019; Pu
et al. 2022) tend to overlook the uncertainty in annotations
by treating each edge map as equally valid, or fuse variant
edge maps into a unified version by a simple voting strategy. As a result, these methods typically fail to capture the
inherent subjectivity in the annotations. They can only produce a single edge map for a given image, lacking the ability
to control granularity. This limitation severely declines their
applicability and scalability in real-world scenarios.
To cope with the uncertainty issue of edge labels is nontrivial and remains relatively under-explored. UAED (Zhou
et al. 2023) handles edge labels from a probabilistic perspective. It is assumed that the uncertainty of edge labels
could be modeled using a Gaussian distribution, allowing
the generation of multiple edges by sampling from the distribution. However, the distribution assumption imposes strict
constraints, yielding limited diversity and a lack of control
over granularity. RankED (Cetinkaya, Kalkan, and Akbas
2024) approached to calculate the label certainty of each

Introduction
Edge detection is a fundamental AI task in low-level vision
that plays a crucial role in image understanding. It is of great
value in supporting various high-level vision tasks, including semantic segmentation (Yu et al. 2021), image enhancement (Nazeri et al. 2019; Xu, Wang, and Lu 2023), object
detection (Qin et al. 2019; Liu, Hou, and Cheng 2020; Yao
and Wang 2023), image translation (Jiang et al. 2023), etc.
However, due to the observers’ diverse levels of visual
perception (Zhou et al. 2023), there are often multiple
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5766

