The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GraphAvatar: Compact Head Avatars with GNN-Generated 3D Gaussians
Xiaobao Wei1,2 , Peng Chen1,2 , Ming Lu3 , Hui Chen1,2 * , Feng Tian1,2
1

Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Intel Labs China
weixiaobao0210@gmail.com

Abstract

on 3D morphable models (3DMM) (Li et al. 2017; Paysan
et al. 2009), these methods learn neural fields to create 3Dconsistent and interpretable digital head avatars. These approaches enable high-quality rendering and diverse applications, such as facial retargeting, expression editing, and
rapid avatar generation. Although point (Zheng et al. 2023)
and hash table (Zielonka, Bolkart, and Thies 2022a; Gao
et al. 2022) representations have been explored for acceleration, they still struggle with the excessive sampling in
the volume rendering of NeRF, which prevent them from
achieving real-time rendering easily. Moreover, due to the
implicit characteristics of NeRF, these methods lack controllability and do not generalize well to the novel poses and
expressions.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023) successfully represents a static scene as 3D Gaussians and renders with a differentiable rasterizer (Wei et al. 2024b; Huang
et al. 2024), significantly accelerating novel view synthesis.
Due to the unstructured nature of 3D Gaussian representation, 3DGS also excels in controllability and generalization
compared to NeRF (Fang et al. 2023). Many recent methods (Qian et al. 2024; Xiang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024;
Dhamo et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2024a; Chen et al. 2024) have
been proposed to apply 3DGS to head avatars. Based on
face tracking parameters, these methods initialize or bind
3D Gaussians to the geometry prior using neutral mesh (Xu
et al. 2024), tracked mesh (Qian et al. 2024), or UV mapping (Xiang et al. 2024). Subsequently, the 3D Gaussians
are learned from short RGB video inputs involving densification, such as cloning and pruning, and deformations from
canonical space. These methods leverage 3D head meshes to
incorporate prior knowledge, facilitating better convergence
of 3D Gaussians, which capture human heads’ appearance,
geometry, and dynamics.
However, existing 3DGS-based approaches still face two
obvious limitations: 1) Significant and fluctuating storage
overhead. Since the 3D head mesh contains many triangles,
assigning multiple 3D Gaussians to each triangle results in
excessive storage overhead due to the large number of triangles in the 3D head mesh. Furthermore, the number of
3D Gaussians also changes during the densification process.
This leads to a fluctuating storage overhead, posing challenges for practical applications. 2) Heavy reliance on face
tracking. Since these methods initialize or bind 3D Gaus-

Rendering photorealistic head avatars from arbitrary viewpoints is crucial for various applications like virtual reality.
Although previous methods based on Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) can achieve impressive results, they lack fidelity
and efficiency. Recent methods using 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) have improved rendering quality and real-time performance but still require significant storage overhead. In this
paper, we introduce a method called GraphAvatar that utilizes Graph Neural Networks (GNN) to generate 3D Gaussians for the head avatar. Specifically, GraphAvatar trains a
geometric GNN and an appearance GNN to generate the attributes of the 3D Gaussians from the tracked mesh. Therefore, our method can store the GNN models instead of the 3D
Gaussians, significantly reducing the storage overhead to just
10MB. To reduce the impact of face-tracking errors, we also
present a novel graph-guided optimization module to refine
face-tracking parameters during training. Finally, we introduce a 3D-aware enhancer for post-processing to enhance the
rendering quality. We conduct comprehensive experiments to
demonstrate the advantages of GraphAvatar, surpassing existing methods in visual fidelity and storage consumption. The
ablation study sheds light on the trade-offs between rendering
quality and model size.

Code — https://github.com/ucwxb/GraphAvatar

Introduction
Rendering photorealistic head avatars from any viewpoint
is essential for virtual reality and augmented reality applications. Key aspects such as visual fidelity, rendering
speed, and storage overhead are crucial. With the advancement of deep learning, methods based on neural fields have
become prevailing due to their advantages in these aspects. The seminal neural field work Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) and its variants (Wang et al.
2021; Wei et al. 2024c, 2023) have achieved impressive results for neural rendering and reconstruction.
Regarding head avatars, NeRF-based methods (Gao et al.
2022; Zielonka, Bolkart, and Thies 2022a; Zheng et al.
2023; Lombardi et al. 2019, 2021) have focused on improving the generation from short RGB video inputs. Based
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8295

