The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ME: Modelling Ethical Values for Value Alignment
Eryn Rigley1 , Adriane Chapman 1 , Christine Evers 1 , Will Mcneill 1
1

University of Southampton, United Kingdom
e.rigley@soton.ac.uk, Adriane.Chapman@soton.ac.uk, C.Evers@soton.ac.uk, will.mcneill@soton.ac.uk

Abstract

the agent receives a manually defined value given some conditional outcome as a results of its actions, are a simple approach (Abouelazm, Michel, and Zoellner 2024). For example, a reward function for a medical delivery unmanned air
vehicle (UAV) may punish 1 minute delays by −10. But,
why should the punishment be −10 and not −50, and will
this punishment work in different environments? Though
crude, this example reflects the reality and challenge of programmers manually tuning real number case-based reward
functions in line with the size and complexity of the environment (Gupta et al. 2023; Knox et al. 2023; Booth et al.
2023). At the same time, across many domains, humans
do not make ethical decisions based solely on their own
intuitions, but make use of evidence and advancements in
data availability and modelling. For this reason, we turn to
domain-specific models as an alternative to hand-set reward
functions.
Several novel contributions are made to the field of value
alignment in this paper. First, we examine the so far overlooked challenges involved in designing effective reward
functions for RL based value alignment. Second, we introduce the use of mathematical models, accepted and used
within the domains that AI systems will be deployed into,
as an alternative to capturing ethical values for reward functions. We compare the effectiveness of hand-programmed
and modelled-ethics approaches to reward function design
for aligned RL systems in three related gridworld experiments. Third, we focus on three branches of ethics rarely
applied within value alignment research but which are directly applicable to kinds of scenarios in which AI systems
will be deployed: disaster ethics, ecocentrism, and healthcare ethics.

Value alignment, at the intersection of moral philosophy and
AI safety, is dedicated to ensuring that artificially intelligent
(AI) systems align with a certain set of values. One challenge
facing value alignment researchers is accurately translating
these values into a machine readable format. In the case of
reinforcement learning (RL), a popular method within value
alignment, this requires designing a reward function which
accurately defines the value of all state-action pairs. It is common for programmers to hand-set and manually tune these
values. In this paper, we examine the challenges of handprogramming values into reward functions for value alignment, and propose mathematical models as an alternative
grounding for reward function design in ethical scenarios. Experimental results demonstrate that our modelled-ethics approach offers a more consistent alternative and outperforms
our hand-programmed reward functions.

Code — https://github.com/erynrigley/ME-ModellingEthical-Values-for-Value-Alignment

Introduction
As artificial intelligence (AI) systems are adopted for a variety of high-impact applications with increasing autonomy,
they stand to bring about morally concerning and dangerous results. These threats have catalysed research efforts
in ‘value alignment’ which, broadly speaking, refers to the
alignment of artificial agents with a value, or set of values (Ji
et al. 2024; Gabriel 2020). A major challenge facing value
alignment researchers is in accurately translating abstract
moral values into a machine readable format (Hibbard 2014;
Brundage 2014).
Reinforcement learning (RL), in which the agent learns
independently through exploration, has been used to train AI
systems to make decisions which align with the moral preferences of experts (e.g., Peschl 2021), programmers (e.g.,
Abel, MacGlashan, and Littman 2016), and lay humans
(e.g., Noothigattu et al. 2018) as well as to balance competing ethical and individual objectives (e.g., Rodriguez-Soto
et al. 2022). RL based value alignment requires defining a
reward function which promotes ethical behaviours and penalises unethical behaviours. Case-based rewards, wherein

Background
Bottom-up approaches to value alignment assume that machines can independently learn how to act ethically if they
receive enough correctly labelled input data and computing
power, employing techniques such as artificial neural networks and RL (Tolmeijer et al. 2020). RL has been an area
of particular interest to value alignment researchers, and is
argued to be the most promising, well-suited, approach, in
allowing the system freedom and flexibility to discover ethically optimal actions (Kaas 2021; Vishwanath, Dennis, and
Slavkovik 2024).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27608

