The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Supervised Score-Based Modeling by Gradient Boosting
Changyuan Zhao1,2 , Hongyang Du3 * , Guangyuan Liu1, 4 , Dusit Niyato1
1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
CNRS@CREATE, 1 Create Way, # 08-01 Create Tower, Singapore 138602
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Hong Kong
4
The Energy Research Institute @ NTU, Interdisciplinary Graduate Program
zhao0441@e.ntu.edu.sg, duhy@eee.hku.hk, liug0022@e.ntu.edu.sg, dniyato@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

pervised learning, a model is trained on labeled data with the
goal of learning a mapping from inputs to outputs, allowing it to predict the output for unseen data accurately (Cunningham, Cord, and Delany 2008). Regression and classification problems are two basic types of supervised learning tasks, which aim to train a model for prediction. For regression problems, this prediction result is the target output corresponding to the input data, while for classification problems, it is the accurate label. The learning performance of this data relationship is closely related to the
learning ability of the sophisticated structure of neural network models (He et al. 2016). Particularly, the Gradient
Boosting Machine (GBM) is a supervised learning model
that combines several weak learners into a strong learner
(Bentéjac, Csörgő, and Martı́nez-Muñoz 2021). The sequential weak learners reduce errors from previous iterations to
obtain accurate predictions, especially with large and complex datasets. Recently, GBM algorithms such as XGBoost
(Chen and Guestrin 2016) and LightGBM (Ke et al. 2017)
have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in tabular
competitions on platforms, including Kaggle.
Due to the multi-step denoising characteristic, researchers
have recently considered combining score-based generative
models with the gradient boosting algorithm to solve supervised learning tasks (Han and Zhou 2024; Beltran-Velez
et al. 2024). However, these previous methods are mainly
based on diffusion models, whose random denoising process may lead to unstable prediction results and reduce the
robustness. Moreover, diffusion models often require longer
denoising steps, increasing model inference time. If accelerated algorithms such as DDIM (Song, Meng, and Ermon
2020) are used, the quality of the generated results will usually decrease, resulting in lower prediction accuracy.
Therefore, in this paper, our goal is to propose a scorebased gradient boosting model for supervised learning to
enable quick and accurate inference. To achieve this goal,
we consider the score-based generative models via denoising score matching (Song and Ermon 2019) since its inference process does not have a specific number of denoising
steps. Based on this, we propose Supervised Score-based
Model (SSM), a score-based model by gradient boosting.
We summarize our main contributions as follows: 1) We
utilize noise-free Langevin Dynamics to establish a connection between score-based generative models and GBM al-

Score-based generative models can effectively learn the distribution of data by estimating the gradient of the distribution.
Due to the multi-step denoising characteristic, researchers
have recently considered combining score-based generative
models with the gradient boosting algorithm, a multi-step
supervised learning algorithm, to solve supervised learning
tasks. However, existing generative model algorithms are often limited by the stochastic nature of the models and the long
inference time, impacting prediction performances. Therefore, we propose a Supervised Score-based Model (SSM),
which can be viewed as a gradient boosting algorithm combining score matching. We provide a theoretical analysis of
learning and sampling for SSM to balance inference time
and prediction accuracy. Via the ablation experiment in selected examples, we demonstrate the outstanding performances of the proposed techniques. Additionally, we compare our model with other probabilistic models, including
Natural Gradient Boosting (NGboost), Classification and Regression Diffusion Models (CARD), Diffusion Boosted Trees
(DBT), and non-probabilistic gradient boosting models. The
experimental results show that our model outperforms existing models in both accuracy and inference time.

Introduction
Generative artificial intelligence (GAI) models aim to create highly realistic simulations or reproductions of data by
learning from the characteristics of the original data. Recently, score-based models (diffusion models) have become
the most powerful families of GAI due to their excellent generation performance (Yang et al. 2023; Dhariwal and Nichol
2021). In these models, a series of noises is first added to the
original data through a forward diffusion process. The model
then learns the added noise and continuously denoises it to
generate new data that follows the distribution of the original dataset. At present, many researchers have applied scorebased models to generation tasks in many fields, including
image generation, audio generation, video generation, etc.,
all with excellent performance (Rombach et al. 2021; Kong
et al. 2020; Ho et al. 2022).
Supervised learning is another important research area in
machine learning different from generative learning. In su* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22768

