The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GaitCycFormer: Leveraging Gait Cycles and Transformers
for Gait Emotion Recognition
Qingyang Zeng1, 2 , Lin Shang1, 2
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University
qy zeng@smail.nju.edu.cn, shanglin@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Gait Emotion Recognition (GER) is an emerging task within
Human Emotion Recognition. Skeleton-based GER requires
discriminative spatial and temporal features. However, current methods primarily focus on capturing spatial topology information but fail to effectively learn temporal features from long-distance frames. Moreover, these methods
are mostly sensitive to the order of sampled sequences, resulting in significant accuracy drops when sequences are randomly sampled. In order to obtain a more robust and comprehensive spatial-temporal representation of gait, we introduce
the Graph-Transformer architecture into GER for the first
time, proposing a novel framework named GaitCycFormer.
Specifically, we designed a Cycle Position Encoding (CPE)
based on the gait cycle, which explicitly segments any gait
sequence into more manageable periodic units, to enhance
temporal feature modeling. Additionally, we incorporate a bilevel Transformer, consisting of an Intra-cycle Transformer
and an Inter-cycle Transformer to capture local and global
temporal information within each gait cycle and between gait
cycles respectively. Experiments demonstrate that our GaitCycFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on popular
datasets, and proves to be more reliable and robust.

Figure 1: Gait Cycle: The interval between adjacency frames
where the same foot touches the ground. The example in
the figure is a part of the gait sequence of downsampled 48frame sequence from subject ’1684’ of EGait. Gait frames
in each row represents a gait cycle and gait frames in each
colomn mean the same position in different gait cycles.

non-Euclidean geometric spaces, graph-based methods have
gained significant attention recently (Lima et al. 2024; Yin
et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Chen and Sun 2023; Zhuang
et al. 2020). In these studies, the initial gait sequence length
is typically set to 240 frames according to the setting of the
EGait dataset (Bhattacharya et al. 2020b), utilizing the Temporal Convolution Network (TCN) module to learn temporal features. Some studies downsample the sequence interval to 48 frames (Yin et al. 2024) or 75 frames (Narayanan
et al. 2020). However, these single sampling and convolution
strategies often cause models to rely on a specific sampling
order, hindering their ability to learn deep temporal features
and limiting their generalization capacity, especially in random sampling settings or real-world environments where the
sequence order may vary.
To address these limitations, recent methods (Chen and
Sun 2023; Zhang et al. 2024) have advanced temporal feature extraction. STA-GCN (Chen and Sun 2023) employed a
multi-scale temporal convolution module, which was widely
used in skeleton-based action recognition (Chen et al. 2021).
However, this direct module migration did not fully consider
the inherent temporal characteristics of gait. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, gait is cyclic and symmetrical. Each gait cycle reflects
a local continuous motion process, and frames at the same
position in different gait cycles reflect similar postures, although walking directions may differ due to changes in the

Introduction
Human emotion recognition is a crucial aspect of affective computing, influencing various fields such as humancomputer interaction (Narayanan et al. 2023), video surveillance (Arunnehru and Kalaiselvi Geetha 2017) and healthcare (Lu et al. 2022). Gait analysis has emerged as a promising alternative for emotion recognition (Li et al. 2018; Randhavane et al. 2019; Sun, Su, and Fan 2022). which does not
require close interaction or active cooperation from the subjects. Previous studies have demonstrated that distinct gait
behaviors associated with different emotional states (Kleinsmith and Bianchi-Berthouze 2013). Recent advancements
in human pose estimation and depth sensor technologies
(Martinez et al. 2017; Song et al. 2021) have further facilitated the use of 3D skeleton data, enabling more robust and
accurate gait analysis for emotion recognition.
This paper focuses on developing and evaluating methods for Gait Emotion Recognition (GER) using 3D skeleton
data. Given the natural structure of skeleton data as graphs in
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9815

