The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unleashing the Potential of Large Language Models as Prompt Optimizers:
Analogical Analysis with Gradient-based Model Optimizers
†

Xinyu Tang1* , Xiaolei Wang1* , Wayne Xin Zhao1 , Siyuan Lu2 , Yaliang Li3 , Ji-Rong Wen1
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
International School, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Alibaba Group
txy20010310@163.com, wxl1999@foxmail.com, batmanfly@gmail.com

Abstract

36

Effectiveness

Automatic prompt optimization is an important approach to
improving the performance of large language models (LLMs).
Recent research demonstrates the potential of using LLMs as
prompt optimizers, which can generate improved task prompts
via iterative refinement. In this paper, we propose a novel
perspective to investigate the design of LLM-based prompt
optimizers, by drawing an analogy with gradient-based model
optimizers. To connect these two approaches, we identify two
pivotal factors in model parameter learning: update direction
and update method. By systematically analyzing a rich set of
improvement strategies on the two aspects, we further develop
a capable Gradient-inspired LLM-based Prompt Optimizer
called GPO. At each step, it first retrieves relevant prompts
from the optimization trajectory as the update direction. Then,
it utilizes the generation-based refinement strategy to perform
the update, while controlling the edit distance through a cosinebased decay strategy. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficiency of GPO. In particular, GPO brings
an additional improvement of up to 56.8% on Big-Bench Hard
and 62.6% on MMLU compared to baseline methods.

0.16

Effectiveness
Efficiency

35

0.12

Efficiency

2

34

0.08

33

0.04

32

APE

APO

OPRO

Method

PE2

GPO

0.00

Figure 1: Comparisons of GPO to existing LLM-based
prompt optimizers in terms of effectiveness (Accuracy) and
efficiency (improvement per dollar spent on API) on BBH.

Introduction
Nowadays, prompting has become the pivotal approach to unleashing the power of large language models (LLMs) (Zhao
et al. 2023). However, prompt engineering is not easy and
requires extensive trial-and-error efforts since LLMs are sensitive to prompts (Lu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024; Tang
et al. 2024). Although general guidelines for high-quality
prompts exist (Kojima et al. 2022; Amatriain 2024), they
cannot always lead to optimal task performance.
To improve the task performance of LLMs, automatic
prompt optimization has been proposed (Zhou et al. 2023).
Early work either performs discrete optimization through
methods like reinforcement learning (Zhang et al. 2023)
or performs continuous optimization in the embedding
space (Chen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2022a, 2023). However,
they often require access to the logits or internal states of
LLMs, which is infeasible for those only accessible through
APIs. In addition, they need to be specially trained for each
*

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

25264

task. Considering these issues, recent work proposes to model
the optimization problem in natural language and using
LLMs as prompt optimizers due to their strong understanding (Zhan et al. 2024) and generation capabilities (Schnabel
and Neville 2024). In this approach, LLMs perform optimization with only outputs from the task model and quickly adapt
to various tasks without training. However, such a method
raises a new challenge for the design of meta-prompt, which
is the prompt for LLMs to perform prompt optimization.
To tackle this issue, we aim to investigate the design of
meta-prompts. Existing methods for creating meta-prompts
typically involve either manual human effort (Yang et al.
2023) or heuristic algorithms (Fernando et al. 2023). Despite the flexibility, these studies still lack principled guidelines about their designs. Our work is inspired by the great
success of gradient-based optimizers in model optimization,
which have been systemically studied in both theory and
practice (Sun et al. 2020). Since both optimizers aim at enhancing model performance through iterative optimization, it
is feasible to connect the two different approaches via analogical analysis. In this way, we can borrow the theoretical
framework and extensive research of gradient-based model
optimizers to enhance LLM-based prompt optimizers.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose a comprehensive analogy framework for the two key factors (i.e., update direction

