The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Queries, Representation & Detection: The Next 100 Model Fingerprinting
Schemes
Augustin Godinot1, 2, 3, 5 , Erwan Le Merrer2 , Camilla Penzo5 , François Taı̈ani1, 2, 3 , Gilles Trédan4
1

Université de Rennes, France,
2
Inria, Rennes, France,
3
IRISA/CNRS, Rennes, France,
4
LAAS/CNRS, Toulouse, France,
5
PEReN, Paris, France
augustin.godinot@inria.fr
Abstract

1.0

The deployment of machine learning models in operational
contexts represents a significant investment for any organisation. Consequently, the risk of these models being misappropriated by competitors needs to be addressed. In recent
years, numerous proposals have been put forth to detect instances of model stealing. However, these proposals operate
under implicit and disparate data and model access assumptions; as a consequence, it remains unclear how they can be
effectively compared to one another. Our evaluation shows
that a simple baseline that we introduce performs on par
with existing state-of-the-art fingerprints, which, on the other
hand, are much more complex. To uncover the reasons behind
this intriguing result, this paper introduces a systematic approach to both the creation of model fingerprinting schemes
and their evaluation benchmarks. By dividing model fingerprinting into three core components – Query, Representation
and Detection (QuRD) – we are able to identify ∼ 100 previously unexplored QuRD combinations and gain insights into
their performance. Finally, we introduce a set of metrics to
compare and guide the creation of more representative model
stealing detection benchmarks. Our approach reveals the need
for more challenging benchmarks and a sound comparison
with baselines. To foster the creation of new fingerprinting
schemes and benchmarks, we open-source our fingerprinting
toolbox.

0.6
0.4
AKH baseline (ours)
Mix (ours)
IPGuard
ModelReuse
Flower102

ModelDiff
SAC
ZestOfLime

ModelReuse
SDog120

tpr@0.05

0.8

0.2
0.0
SACBench
CIFAR10

Figure 1: The TPR@5% of most of the fingerprinting
schemes proposed in the literature is at best as good as the
simple baseline we introduce. Each colored dot represents
the performance of an existing fingerprinting scheme evaluated on a given benchmark. The gray dots are fingerprinting schemes we created using our Query, Representation and
Detection (QuRD) decomposition.
though efforts have been devoted to defend models against
extraction attacks (Tang et al. 2024; Orekondy, Schiele, and
Fritz 2019; Lee et al. 2019), extraction defences have not
yet been proven secure. Therefore, in addition to preventing model stealing, companies need tools to detect it. One
such tool is model fingerprinting. Similarly to how fingerprints can analyse the provenance of an image by identifying
artefacts due to the compression scheme, the specific sensor
technology, or even the up-scaling method (Ojha, Li, and
Lee 2023), model fingerprints analyse the outputs of a ML
model h to extract artefacts that are characteristic of h itself. In order to build a fingerprint for a given model h, the
model owner first carefully selects a set of inputs S. The
model owner then extracts a unique representation Zh from
the output of their model h when given S as input. The representation Zh will serve as a fingerprint. The fingerprint
Zh can later be compared with the fingerprint Zh′ extracted
from the model h′ , which is suspected to be stolen. The fingerprint scheme depends on the input modality (e.g. text, image, or tabular data), on the model’s task (e.g. classification,
score, or recommendations), and hence on the domain of the
output of h. In this work, as in most of the model finger-

Introduction
Companies devote considerable resources (i.e. manpower,
funds and energy) to developing efficient and accurate machine learning (ML) models. Many of these models are
then deployed in production on online platforms to solve a
wide array of business-critical tasks (e.g. recommendations
or predictions of all kinds). However, it is well understood
that extraction attacks, or simply infrastructure leaks, can allow competitors to access the model architecture (Oh et al.
2018), weights (Carlini et al. 2024), and hyperparameters
(Wang and Gong 2018). From financial risks, when the attacker can provide the same functionality at a fraction of
the cost, to integrity risks, when the attacker could use the
stolen model as a step to craft adversarial examples, Model
stealing attacks pose great risks for the model developer. AlCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
16817

