The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semi-Supervised Clustering Framework for Fine-grained Scene Graph Generation
Jiarui Yang1, 2, 3 * , Chuan Wang4, 3, 5† , Jun Zhang3 , Shuyi Wu6 , Zhao Jinjing7 , Zeming Liu8 , Liang
Yang9
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing JiaoTong University
5
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing & Shenzhen Key Lab of Media Security, Shenzhen University
6
Information Research Center of Military Science, PLA Academy of Military Science
7
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information System Security, China
8
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
9
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology
Abstract
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to detect all objects
and identify their pairwise relationships existing in the scene.
Considering the substantial human labor costs, existing scene
graph annotations are often sparse and biased, which result in
confusion training with low-frequency predicates. In this work,
we design a Semi-Supervised Clustering framework for Scene
Graph Generation (SSC-SGG) that uses the sparse labeled
data to guide the generation of effective pseudo-labels from
unlabeled object pairs, thus enriching the labeled sample space,
especially for low-frequency interaction samples. We approach
from the perspective of clustering, reducing the problem of
confirmation bias in a self-training manner. Specifically, we
first enhance the model’s robustness to feature extraction via
prototype-based clustering, aggregating different relationship
augmented features onto the same prototype. Secondly, we
design a dynamic pseudo-label assignment algorithm based
on a mini-batch, which adjusts the detection sensitivity to
different frequency samples from the historical assignment.
Finally, we conduct joint training on the pseudo-labels and the
labeled data. We conduct experiments on various SGG models
and achieve substantial overall performance improvements,
demonstrating the effectiveness of SSC-SGG.

Figure 1: Confusion training caused by the long-tail distribution and the sparse annotations, thus hindering the correct prediction of low-frequency samples. (a) Relationship frequency
distribution in VG (Krishna et al. 2017). (b) Due to the insufficient samples, the confidence of low-frequency relationships
can be easily influenced by background in similar scenarios.
(c) Image with dense objects. (d) Sparse annotations result in
rich interaction relationships existing in unlabeled samples.

Introduction
A scene graph (SG) is a graphical structure including all of
the objects and their pairwise relationships, thus providing a
comprehensive and hierarchical understanding of the scene.
The SGG model is characterized by interaction relationships,
which are symbolically represented through triplets of the
form <Subject-Predicate-Object>. The culmination of these
relationships generates a well-defined graph structure that
facilitates the solution of complex computer vision tasks,
such as VQA (Zhu et al. 2020), image retrieval (Johnson et al.
2015), and image generation (Yang et al. 2022b).
Existing SGG datasets (e.g. VG) commonly suffer sparse
and biased annotation problems. Due to the substantial human

labor costs and apparent human preferences, it is impractical
to develop a densely and consistently annotated SGG dataset.
As shown in Fig. 1(c)(d), the image contains dense objects,
but the annotator only identifies three relationships between
object pairs, yet the image still contains a wealth of obvious
interaction information, such as sign-attached to-building
and wheel-mounted on-bike. In previous research, the common approach is to simply treat these unlabeled samples as
background during training. In this paper, we argue that this
approach has two drawbacks: 1) Confuse the training process. When conspicuous interaction samples are not labeled,
the model is prone to predict them as background. This situation restricts the model from generating high-confidence
predictions when faced with similar scenes, thereby affecting
the final prediction results; 2) Exacerbate biased predictions
of the model. Due to the sufficient samples, high-frequency

* Part of the work was conducted at IIE, CAS
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9220

