The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Investigating Relational State Abstraction in Collaborative MARL
Sharlin Utke1 , Jeremie Houssineau2 , Giovanni Montana1
1

University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
sharlin.utke@warwick.ac.uk, jeremie.houssineau@ntu.edu.sg, g.montana@warwick.ac.uk
2

Abstract

involve collaborative or competitive dynamics that singleagent RL struggles to capture adequately. However, the increase in dimensionality over state and action spaces, the
additional agent interactions, and the information influx this
entails make sample efficiency a key challenge.
A critical aspect to sample efficiency is how agents represent the information of what they observe. The observation
received by an agent can hold a lot of information, but not all
of it is necessary to make an optimal decision. The ability to
find abstract features allows for reasoning on a higher, conceptual level and adds robustness to small, task-irrelevant
changes; a common principle for good representations (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2012). Abstraction leverages the
underlying structure of the problem to focus on relevant information while reducing its complexity. That way, agents
can learn optimal policies with fewer interactions, leading to
improved sample efficiency and knowledge transfer to new
situations (Mohan, Zhang, and Lindauer 2024).
A natural structure to present the environment is the decomposition into objects and their relations. Recent work in
both deep single-agent RL and MARL has demonstrated the
benefits of leveraging this relational structure as a graphbased representation in the learning architecture (Bapst et al.
2019; Jiang et al. 2021; Nayak et al. 2023; Agarwal et al.
2020), improving sample efficiency and generalization capabilities. This seems especially important in MARL, where
the complexity often scales with the number of agents. The
ability of Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Scarselli
et al. 2009; Welling and Kipf 2016; Gilmer et al. 2017) to
model systems where the relationships between entities are
critical has brought them to the forefront in many fields of
multi-agent systems, ranging from modeling behavior and
trajectories in multi-agent systems (e.g. Kipf et al. 2018;
Tacchetti et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Kipf, van der Pol, and
Welling 2020) to enhancing communication (e.g Niu, Paleja,
and Gombolay 2021; Jiang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021b).
In this study, we investigate the integration of a simple
yet effective relational abstraction to MARL using the architectural flexibility of GCNs. We focus on collaborative
tasks with high spatial complexity where direct communication between agents is not permitted due to cost or security constraints, e.g., in underwater robotics (Song, Stojanovic, and Chitre 2019). We specifically emphasize spatial
relationships, as these are ubiquitous and readily available

This paper explores the impact of relational state abstraction on sample efficiency and performance in collaborative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. The proposed abstraction is based on spatial relationships in environments where
direct communication between agents is not allowed, leveraging the ubiquity of spatial reasoning in real-world multiagent scenarios. We introduce MARC (Multi-Agent Relational Critic), a simple yet effective critic architecture incorporating spatial relational inductive biases by transforming
the state into a spatial graph and processing it through a relational graph neural network. The performance of MARC is
evaluated across six collaborative tasks, including a novel environment with heterogeneous agents. We conduct a comprehensive empirical analysis, comparing MARC against stateof-the-art MARL baselines, demonstrating improvements in
both sample efficiency and asymptotic performance, as well
as its potential for generalization. Our findings suggest that
a minimal integration of spatial relational inductive biases
as abstraction can yield substantial benefits without requiring complex designs or task-specific engineering. This work
provides insights into the potential of relational state abstraction to address sample efficiency, a key challenge in MARL,
offering a promising direction for developing more efficient
algorithms in spatially complex environments.

Extended Version with Appendix —
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.15388
Code — https://github.com/sharlinu/MARC

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has emerged
as an extension of single-agent RL, where multiple agents
simultaneously interact with the environment to derive their
optimal behavior by trial and error. Despite the complexity and dynamics of the learning environment, MARL
holds significant promise for modeling real-world systems
involving nuanced interactions between multiple entities,
such as autonomous vehicle coordination (Shalev-Shwartz,
Shammah, and Shashua 2016), traffic flow optimization
(Agogino and Tumer 2012), and team robotics (Matignon,
Jeanpierre, and Mouaddib 2012). These applications often
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20947

