The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

C ROSS N EWS: A Cross-Genre Authorship Verification and Attribution Benchmark
Marcus Ma1 , Duong Minh Le1 , Junmo Kang1 , Yao Dou1 ,
John Cadigan2 , Dayne Freitag2 , Alan Ritter1 , Wei Xu1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology
2
SRI International
{marcus.ma, dminh6, junmo.kang, douy}@gatech.edu
{john.cadigan, daynefreitag}@sri.com
{wei.xu, alan.ritter}@cc.gatech.edu
Abstract
Authorship models have historically generalized poorly to
new domains because of the wide distribution of authoridentifying signals across domains. In particular, the effects
of topic and genre are highly domain-dependent and impact authorship analysis performance greatly. This paper addresses the existing data gap in authorship for these resources
by introducing C ROSS N EWS, a novel cross-genre dataset
that connects formal journalistic articles and casual social
media posts. C ROSS N EWS is the largest authorship dataset
of its kind for supporting both verification and attribution
tasks, with comprehensive topic and genre annotations. We
use C ROSS N EWS to demonstrate that current models exhibit
poor performance in genre transfer scenarios, underscoring
the need for authorship models robust to genre-specific effects. We also explore SELMA, a new LLM embedding approach for large-scale authorship setups that outperforms existing models in both same-genre and cross-genre settings.

Introduction
Accurately identifying the author of a document - also
known as authorship analysis - plays a critical role in applications spanning forensic linguistics (Yang and Chow 2014),
digital security, and content verification, all of which depend
on identifying an author’s unique and invariant writing style
markers. Existing authorship models are able to achieve near
perfect performance on popular authorship benchmarks such
as Enron (Klimt and Yang 2004) and IMDb (Seroussi, Zukerman, and Bohnert 2014), but these datasets are confined to
a single text genre.1 Simply identifying the topic of a document and using n-gram features, for example, appears to
be a reliable approximation of authorship on these datasets
(Rosen-Zvi et al. 2004; Tyo, Dhingra, and Lipton 2022).
This oversimplified approach limits the scope and scale of
authorship models in real-world scenarios, where text documents are heterogeneous and one person may write multiple
different types of texts on varied topics. Prior work studying
genre transferability (Rivera-Soto et al. 2021; Sousa-Silva

Figure 1: Authorship Verification asks if two arbitrary texts
are written by the same person. Authorship Attribution is
the task of choosing the author of a document from a set of
known authors. C ROSS N EWS features a cross-genre setup,
where texts from the same author span different genres, such
as formal news articles and informal social media posts, reflecting more challenging real-world scenarios.
2018) also assumes documents in different genres are written by separate sets of authors, such that any conclusions
based on the impact of changing genre is also confounded
by the change of the author pool.
To address these limitations, we introduce C ROSS N EWS,
a dataset that connects two different genres of texts written
by the same author: (i) formal, long news articles, and (ii)
informal, short Twitter/X posts. C ROSS N EWS consists of a
silver set and a gold set. The silver set is formed by matching news articles to Wikidata entities of writers with Twitter/X accounts, while the gold set is created manually from
three news agencies with document topic labels. Although
previous authorship research has investigated formal writing
(Zhang et al. 2018) and social media (Barbon, Igawa, and
Bogaz Zarpelão 2017; Boenninghoff et al. 2019) separately,

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use “genre” in this paper to differentiate between social
media posts, news articles, emails, and movie reviews. See Lee
(2001) for more nuanced and detailed discussions about the differences between the terms “genre,” “domain,” and “medium.”

24777

