The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Multiagent Path Search Algorithm for Large-Scale
Coalition Structure Generation
Redha Taguelmimt1 , Samir Aknine2 , Djamila Boukredera3 , Narayan Changder4 ,
Tuomas Sandholm5,6,7,8
1

Clermont Auvergne University, Clermont Auvergne INP, CNRS, LIMOS, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France.
2
Univ Lyon, UCBL, CNRS, INSA Lyon, Centrale Lyon, Univ Lyon 2, LIRIS, UMR5205, Lyon, France
3
Laboratory of Applied Mathematics, Faculty of Exact Sciences, University of Bejaia, Bejaia, Algeria
4
TCG Centres for Research and Education in Science and Technology, Kolkata, India
5
Carnegie Mellon University, Computer Science Department, Pittsburgh, USA
6
Strategy Robot, Inc.
7
Strategic Machine, Inc.
8
Optimized Markets, Inc.
redha.taguelmimt@gmail.com, samir.aknine@univ-lyon1.fr, djamila.boukredera@univ-bejaia.dz,
narayan.changder@tcgcrest.org, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract

lems. Indeed, due to this, exact algorithms can only handle small numbers of agents (around 30) (Wu and Ramchurn 2020). Furthermore, we do not expect an algorithm
that always finds an optimal solution to this problem for
large-scale settings with hundreds of agents, as there is no
proven guarantee that an algorithm can find an optimal solution without enumerating all 2n coalition values. To meet
the need of addressing this limitation, scalable solutions that
scale to hundreds and thousands of agents have been suggested. Along this line, approaches such as CSG-UCT (Wu
and Ramchurn 2020), PICS (Taguelmimt et al. 2022) and CLink (Farinelli et al. 2013) have been proposed. However, to
our knowledge, PICS, and CSG-UCT produce the best results among existing state-of-the-art algorithms for solving
large-scale problem instances.
Given the complexity of this problem, we propose SALDAE (Scalable Algorithm with Large-Scale Distributed
Agent Exploration)—a scalable and anytime algorithm for
solving the coalition structure generation problem. Specifically, we develop a variant of multiagent path finding for
coalition structure generation by gradually building a search
graph of coalition structures based on three expansion steps.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm for
this problem using any variant of path finding. This algorithm is scalable and can be run with large problem instances
with thousands of agents, which is hard to achieve with existing state-of-the-art exact algorithms. Moreover, it can return an anytime solution when time is limited. To summarize, our main contributions are:

Coalition structure generation (CSG), i.e. the problem of optimally partitioning a set of agents into coalitions to maximize social welfare, is a fundamental computational problem in multiagent systems. This problem is important for
many applications where small run times are necessary, including transportation and disaster response. In this paper,
we develop SALDAE, a multiagent path finding algorithm
for CSG that operates on a graph of coalition structures. Our
algorithm utilizes a variety of heuristics and strategies to perform the search and guide it. It is an anytime algorithm that
can handle large problems with hundreds and thousands of
agents. We show empirically on nine standard value distributions, including disaster response and electric vehicle allocation benchmarks, that our algorithm enables a rapid finding
of high-quality solutions and compares favorably with other
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Coalition formation is a major problem in artificial intelligence that is central to many practical applications. Coalitions of delivery companies can, for instance, be formed to
reduce transportation costs by sharing deliveries (Sandholm
and Lesser 1997). In disaster response, hundreds of human
responders can be quickly organized into teams to coordinate their evacuation and rescue actions (Wu and Ramchurn
2020). Central to coalition formation is the coalition structure generation problem. It consists of identifying the optimal partitioning of a set of agents— that is, an optimal set
of coalitions among agents that maximizes the sum of the
values of the coalitions (an optimal coalition structure).
Several algorithms have been proposed for this problem,
including optimal and approximate solutions. Optimal solutions require a huge execution time and a large storage
space due to the exponentiality of the input and the solution space. This limits their applicability to large-scale prob-

• We present SALDAE, a new algorithm inspired by multiagent path finding concepts to search the coalition structure graph. It is anytime and scales to thousands of
agents.
• To improve the search process, we propose various strategies inspired by MAPF (Multiagent path finding) techniques for connecting the best solutions found at a given
step during the execution in an effort to find even better ones. We also explore different techniques for select-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23313

