The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improving Cooperation in Language Games with Bayesian Inference and the
Cognitive Hierarchy
Joseph Bills, Christopher Archibald, Diego Blaylock
Computer Science Department, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA
jotbills@byu.edu, archibald@cs.byu.edu, diegonb@byu.edu

Abstract

policy may respond differently to an utterance, especially
if the meaning of an utterance is ambiguous due to restrictions on the amount of information which can be communicated. This illustrates the distinction between the semantic and pragmatic understandings of an utterance, and differences in either understanding can impede communication
between agents.
Our goal is to design an agent for a cooperative language game able to cooperate successfully with any teammate agent, regardless of the semantics of the teammate’s
language model or the pragmatics of their use of language.
We approach this using a Bayesian framework, where instead of being restricted to a single language model, our
agent is given a set of possible language models over which
it can reason probabilistically. Bayes’ rule is used to update
the agent’s beliefs as it observes its teammate acting. This
is, to our knowledge, the first example of an agent having a
probability distribution over a set of language models, updating this distribution given observations, and adapting in
this manner to any individual teammate.
We explore this idea in the cooperative language game of
Codenames. This game, described in Section 2.1, involves
using single words as clues to convey information about the
true state of the game. The linguistic concepts of semantics and pragmatics have specific interpretations within the
Codenames AI framework. In Codenames, semantics corresponds to the language model an agent uses to determine the
relationship of words in the game, while pragmatics refers
to the strategy an agent uses to determine which action to
take, based on their understanding of semantics, their partner, and any signals received. An example of a difference in
semantics would be using word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013b)
instead of GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014)
as a word embedding. A difference in pragmatics might be
guessing as many words as the clue gave in the order of increasing distance versus stopping once there are no more
words within a set distance of the clue. Most previous Codenames agent models assume a common understanding of
pragmatics where a guesser is expected to guess words based
on similarity, so their behavior is parameterized only by differences in semantics, but previous work shows alternative
pragmatics can improve performance even with teammates
using the same language model (Bills and Archibald 2023).
Our proposed Bayesian framework will model and reason

In two-player cooperative games, agents can play together
effectively when they have accurate assumptions about how
their teammate will behave, but may perform poorly when
these assumptions are inaccurate. In language games, failure
may be due to disagreement in the understanding of either the
semantics or pragmatics of an utterance. We model coarse uncertainty in semantics using a prior distribution of language
models and uncertainty in pragmatics using the cognitive hierarchy, combining the two aspects into a single prior distribution over possible partner types. Fine-grained uncertainty
in semantics is modeled using noise that is added to the embeddings of words in the language. To handle all forms of uncertainty we construct agents that learn the behavior of their
partner using Bayesian inference and use this information to
maximize the expected value of a heuristic function. We test
this approach by constructing Bayesian agents for the game
of Codenames, and show that they perform better in experiments where semantics is uncertain.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems require cooperation with AI or
human agents for success. Cooperative games provide an
important setting for the development and evaluation of cooperative AI techniques. Agents generally utilize some form
of communication to cooperate. Some settings define the semantics of the communication through actions which exist
only within the game. However, agents can differ in their
use of these actions in practice to communicate information. One challenge faced by some reinforcement learning
approaches to these problems is that agents develop their
own way of using actions to communicate during training.
When these agents interact with other agents who do not use
the actions in the same way, performance can suffer greatly.
In this paper, we focus on a specific type of cooperative
game: cooperative language games. These games require
agents to communicate using natural language. One might
expect this solves the difficulty agents have communicating, but this is not necessarily the case. Because AI agents
might use different language models to represent relationships between words, they could use language differently in
the game. Even when using the same language model, their
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13658

