The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Multiple User Distributions for Recommendation
via Guided Conditional Diffusion
Cheng Wu1 * , Liang Su1 * , Chaokun Wang1† , Shaoyun Shi2 ,
Ziqian Zhang1 , Ziyang Liu1 , Wang Peng2 , Wenjin Wu2 , Peng Jiang2
1

School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China,
2
Kuaishou Inc., Beijing 100000, China,
{wuc22, sul21, zhangzq22, liu-zy21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chaokun@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{shishaoyun, wangpeng16, wuwenjin, jiangpeng}@kuaishou.com
Target items
Negative items
Interacted items

Abstract
Recommender systems are increasingly prevalent to provide
personalized suggestions and enhance user satisfaction. Typical recommendation models encode users and items as embeddings, and generate recommendations by assessing the
similarity between these embeddings. Despite their effectiveness, these embedding-based models struggle with modeling user uncertainty and capturing diverse user interests using a single fixed user embedding. Recent studies have begun to explore a user-distribution paradigm to learn distributions for users. However, this approach employs a single distribution per user, which fails to effectively delineate semantic boundaries, resulting in sub-optimal recommendations. To
this end, we propose GCDR, a Guided Conditional Diffusion
Recommender model, to learn multiple distributions for each
user in this paper. Specifically, GCDR addresses two major challenges: 1) learning disentangled distributions, and
2) learning personalized distributions. GCDR captures interuser and intra-user distribution properties through conditional
and guided diffusion, respectively. It maintains user-specific
embeddings to encode long-term interests for conditional diffusion, while for guided diffusion, it incorporates short-term
interests encoded from recent interactions with category preferences. To align the diffusion model with the recommendation task, we train GCDR with three losses, included the user
loss, the recommendation loss and the diffusion loss. Extensive experiments on four real-world datasets show that GCDR
is able to learn effective user distributions and is superior to
thirteen state-of-the-art baseline methods.

Computers

Computers

Shoes

Games

Computers

Shoes

Cars

Shoes

Cars

Games

Cars

Games

(a) Without uncertainty (b) Uncertainty modeling (c) Uncertainty modeling
modeling
with a single distribution with multiple distributions

Figure 1: Illustration of different user modeling approaches.
(a) Without uncertainty modeling, the learned user embedding tends to be closest to the interacted items. This proximity makes it challenging to distinguish between target items
and negative items. (b) When modeling the user as a distribution, we can sample good embeddings that are close to the
target items. However, it is possible to sample bad embeddings that are near to negative items. (c) By modeling a user
as multiple distributions, such as learning a separate distribution for each category of interacted items, it becomes easy
to obtain embeddings close to the target items and far from
the negative items.

(MF) (He et al. 2016) to innovative Deep Neural Network
(DNN) (Sedhain et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2019). These models represent users and items as embeddings (i.e., vectors),
and make recommendations based on the similarity (e.g., cosine similarity) between these embeddings.
While embedding-based recommendation models have
shown impressive performance on recommendation effectiveness and efficiency (He et al. 2020; Gu et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2023a,b; Xu et al. 2023), the user-embedding
paradigm, i.e., learning a single and fixed user embedding,
encounters difficulties in user uncertainty modeling, and
fails to represent the diverse interest of users well (Li, Sun,
and Li 2023; Wu et al. 2024). For example, in Figure 1(a),
it is hard to discern whether the learned user embedding is
closer to the target items from categories “Computers” and
“Games”, or to the negative items from categories “Shoes”
and “Cars”. To address this issue, several latest research efforts (Wu et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024) shift towards a user-

Code — https://github.com/NoMultiply/GCDR

1

Good sampled user embeddings
Bad sampled user embeddings
User embedding
User distribution

Introduction

Nowadays, recommender systems have become ubiquitous
across a wide range of applications (Altenburger and Ho
2019; Gu et al. 2020; Chang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022).
They incorporate recommendation models to provide personalized suggestions, thus enhancing user experience and
satisfaction. Various recommendation models have been
proposed, evolving from traditional Matrix Factorization
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12845

