The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Stability and Generalization of Zeroth-Order Decentralized Stochastic Gradient
Descent with Changing Topology
Xiaolin Hu1 * † Zixuan Gong1 * , Gengze Xu1 , Wei Liu2 , Jian Luan2 , Bin Wang2 , Yong Liu1‡
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
XiaoMi AI Lab, Beijing, China
{xiaolinhu, liuyonggsai}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

constraints on data privacy (Chen et al. 2023), network communication (Qiu, Shanbhag, and Yousefian 2023), and gradient computation (Chen et al. 2024). In this approach, clients
perform local updates using zeroth-order estimated gradients and communicate with each other according to the network topology.
The theoretical analysis of zeroth-order stochastic algorithms can be divided into two primary categories: optimization error (Nesterov and Spokoiny 2017) and generalization error (Nikolakakis et al. 2022). Specifically, optimization error reflects the convergence speed of the algorithm on
seen data during training (Duchi et al. 2015). Generalization error measures the algorithm’s performance on unseen
data, which is fundamental for evaluating the machine learning models (Liu et al. 2024). The optimization analysis of
zeroth-order algorithms in the decentralized learning setting
concern the communication complexity (Li et al. 2019; Fang
et al. 2022), dimension dependence (Gu et al. 2024; Li et al.
2024) and convergence rate (Shamir 2017; Ling et al. 2024).
Existing generalization analysis of zeroth-order algorithms
primarily focuses on centralized settings (Nikolakakis et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024). Although these
works indicate that the generalization bounds for centralized
ZO-SGD are comparable to those of SGD in non-convex
case (Nikolakakis et al. 2022), it remains an open question
whether these bounds align in convex case (Liu et al. 2024).
Furthermore, the generalization performance of zeroth-order
stochastic algorithms in decentralized settings (Wang and
Chen 2024) has not been carefully examined.
Recent works have developed generalization error bounds
for decentralized stochastic gradient descent (DSGD) using algorithm stability tools (Richards and Rebeschini 2020;
Sun, Li, and Wang 2021; Deng et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2022;
Le Bars et al. 2024). Algorithm stability assesses the sensitivity of the random algorithm to perturbations in the training dataset, providing insights into the generalization error
of the algorithm (Bousquet and Elisseeff 2002; Lei and Ying
2020). The stability analysis of DSGD involves the randomness of the data samples and the communication topology among clients at each iteration (Wang and Chen 2024).
However, the influence of the communication topology on
the generalization performance has not been well understood. Some of the existing generalization bounds of DSGD
are topology-dependent and suggest that sparse communica-

Zeroth-order (ZO) optimization as the gradient-free method
has become a powerful tool when the first-order gradient is
unavailable or expensive to obtain, especially in decentralized
learning scenarios where data and computational resources
are distributed across multiple clients. There have been many
efforts to analyze the optimization convergence rate of zerothorder decentralized stochastic gradient descent (ZO-DSGD)
algorithms. However, the generalization of these methods has
not been well studied. In this paper, we provide a generalization analysis of ZO-DSGD with changing topology, where
the clients run zeroth-order SGD with local data and communicate with each other according to time-varying topology.
We systematically analyze the generalization error in convex,
strongly convex, and non-convex cases. The obtained results
in the convex and strongly convex cases with zeroth-order
oracles recover the results of SGD. Moreover, the generalization bounds derived in non-convex cases align with that
of DSGD. To capture the influence of communication topology on the generalization performance, we analyze local generalization bounds concerning local models held at different
clients. The obtained results reflect the influence of the number of clients, local sample size, and topology on the generalization error. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work that provides a generalization analysis of zeroth-order
decentralized stochastic gradient descent methods and recovers the results of SGD.

Introduction
Zeroth-order (ZO) optimization algorithms play an important role in scenarios where gradients are either unavailable or too costly to compute, such as black-box optimization (Chen et al. 2024; Fang et al. 2022), reinforcement
learning (Zhong et al. 2024), and prompt engineering (Liu
et al. 2023). In addition to the constraints on gradient computation, practical applications often involve decentralized
clients with limited communication capabilities (Tang et al.
2018; Koloskova et al. 2020; Martı́nez Beltrán et al. 2023).
Zeroth-order decentralized stochastic gradient descent(ZODSGD) and its variants offer a promising solution to address
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during the internship at XiaoMi.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

17342

