The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Stability-based Generalization Analysis of Randomized Coordinate Descent for
Pairwise Learning
Liang Wu1, 2 , Ruixi Hu1∗ , Yunwen Lei3
2

1
Center of Statistical Research, School of Statistics, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
Big Data Laboratory on Financial Security and Behavior, SWUFE (Laboratory of Philosophy and Social Sciences, Ministry
of Education), Chengdu, China
3
Department of Mathematics, University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong
wuliang@swufe.edu.cn, hu ruixi@163.com, leiyw@hku.hk

Abstract

the negative direction of the gradient and keeps other coordinates unchanged. This makes RCD especially effective for
large-scale problems (Nesterov 2012), where the computational cost is rather hard to handle.
The extensive applications of RCD have motivated some
interesting theoretical analysis on its empirical behavior
(Nesterov 2012; Richtárik and Takáč 2014; Beck and
Teboulle 2021; Chen, Li, and Lu 2023), which focuses on
iteration complexities and empirical risks in the optimization process. However, there is much less work considering the generalization performance of RCD, i.e., how models trained by RCD would behave on testing samples. It is
notable that the relative analysis only considers the case of
pointwise learning (Wang, Wu, and Lei 2021), which is different from pairwise learning in the structure of loss functions. Besides, this work fails to establish the generalization bound based on the `2 on-average argument stability
in a strongly convex case. Therefore, the existing theoretical
analysis of RCD is not enough to describe the discrepancy
between training and testing for pairwise learning. How to
quantify the balance between statistics and optimization under this setting still remains a challenge. In this paper, we
develop a more systematical and fine-grained generalization
analysis of RCD for pairwise learning to refine the above study. Our analysis can lead to a more appropriate design for
the optimization algorithm and the machine learning model.
In this paper, we present the generalization analysis based
on the concept of algorithmic stability (Bousquet and Elisseeff 2002). The comparison between the existing work and
this paper is presented in Table 1. Our contributions are summarized as follows.
1. Under general assumptions on L-smoothness of loss
functions, coordinate-wise smoothness and convexity of objective functions, we study the `2 on-average argument stability and the corresponding generalization bounds of RCD for pairwise learning. To achieve optimal performance,
we consider the balance between the generalization error and the optimization error. The result shows that the
early stopping strategy is beneficial to the generalization.
√
Thepexcess risk bounds enjoy the order of O(1/ n) and
O( log(n)/n) for convex and strongly-convex objective
functions respectively, where n denotes the sample size and
σ is the strong-convexity parameter.
2. We use the low noise condition F (w∗ ) = O(1/n) to

Pairwise learning includes various machine learning tasks,
with ranking and metric learning serving as the primary representatives. While randomized coordinate descent (RCD)
is popular in various learning problems, there is much less
theoretical analysis on the generalization behavior of models trained by RCD, especially under the pairwise learning
framework. In this paper, we consider the generalization of
RCD for pairwise learning. We measure the on-average argument stability for both convex and strongly convex objective functions, based on which we develop generalization
bounds in expectation. The early-stopping strategy is adopted to quantify the balance between estimation and optimization. Our analysis further incorporates the low-noise setting
into the excess risk bound to achieve the optimistic bound as
O(1/n), where n is the sample size.

Introduction
The paradigm of pairwise learning has found wide applications in machine learning. Several popular examples are
shown as the following. In ranking, we aim to find a model
that can predict the ordering of instances (Clémençon, Lugosi, and Vayatis 2008; Rejchel 2012). In metric learning,
we wish to build a model to measure the distance between
instances (Cao, Guo, and Ying 2016; Ye, Zhan, and Jiang
2019; Dong et al. 2020). Besides, various problems such
as AUC maximization (Cortes and Mohri 2003; Gao et al.
2013; Ying, Wen, and Lyu 2016; Liu et al. 2018) and learning tasks with minimum error entropy (Hu et al. 2015) can
also be formulated as this paradigm. For all these pairwise
learning tasks, the performance of models needs to be measured on pairs of instances. In contrast to pointwise learning, this paradigm is characterized by pairwise loss functions
f : H × Z × Z 7→ R, where H and Z denote the hypothesis
space and the sample space respectively. To understand and
apply the paradigm better, there is a growing interest in the
study under the uniform framework of pairwise learning.
Randomized coordinate descent (RCD) is one of the most
commonly used first-order methods in optimization. In each
iteration, RCD updates a randomly chosen coordinate along
∗

The corresponding author is Ruixi Hu.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21545

