The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RFL: Simplifying Chemical Structure Recognition with Ring-Free Language
Qikai Chang1 , Mingjun Chen1 , Changpeng Pi2 , Pengfei Hu1 , Zhenrong Zhang1 , Jiefeng Ma1 , Jun
Du1 * , Baocai Yin2 , Jinshui Hu2
1

NERC-SLIP, University of Science and Technology of China
2
iFLYTEK Research
{qkchang,mingjunchen,pengfeihu,zzr666,jfma}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jundu@ustc.edu.cn, {cppi,bcyin,jshu}@iflytek.com

Previous: Unstructured Modeling

Abstract

H2N

The primary objective of Optical Chemical Structure Recognition is to identify chemical structure images into corresponding markup sequences. However, the complex twodimensional structures of molecules, particularly those with
rings and multiple branches, present significant challenges
for current end-to-end methods to learn one-dimensional
markup directly. To overcome this limitation, we propose a
novel Ring-Free Language (RFL), which utilizes a divideand-conquer strategy to describe chemical structures in a hierarchical form. RFL allows complex molecular structures to
be decomposed into multiple parts, ensuring both uniqueness
and conciseness while enhancing readability. This approach
significantly reduces the learning difficulty for recognition
models. Leveraging RFL, we propose a universal Molecular
Skeleton Decoder (MSD), which comprises a skeleton generation module that progressively predicts the molecular skeleton and individual rings, along with a branch classification
module for predicting branch information. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed RFL and MSD can be
applied to various mainstream methods, achieving superior
performance compared to state-of-the-art approaches in both
printed and handwritten scenarios.

depth-first search
SSML:
SMILES:
H_{2}N –[:345] ?[a] ( -[:60]
NC1=CC=C(CC2C(C=C
=[:0] –[:300] ( =[:240] …
C=C3)=C3CC2)…

Implicitly modeling spatial structure
Ours: Structured Modeling
H2N

Ring Structures ℛ

H2N

Branch Information ℱ

Decouple complex spatial structure

Code — https://github.com/JingMog/RFL-MSD

1

Molecular Skeleton 𝒮𝒮

Figure 1: Comparison of Ring-Free Language with previous
modeling method. Previous methods use depth-first search
to establish one-dimension markup, where spatial structures
are implicitly expressed. Our RFL significantly simplifies
complex spatial structures by decoupling them into molecular skeleton S, ring structures R and branch information F .

Introduction

Chemical structures, including molecules and formulas, are
fundamental representations in chemistry. Optical chemical
structure recognition (OCSR) (Rajan et al. 2020) accurately
converts handwritten and printed chemical structures into
machine-readable formats across various media. This technology offers significant advantages in drug development,
scientific research, the chemical industry, and education (Hu
et al. 2023; Oldenhof et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024). Unlike
one-dimensional common text and tree-structured mathematical expressions (Zhang et al. 2020), chemical structures
are two-dimensional and graph-structured. Consequently,
they contain more complex structures, such as rings and
multiple branches. Therefore, models require not only robust capabilities to interpret the relationships between symbols and contexts but also advanced spatial analysis abilities.

Recent advances in computer vision have driven the development of bottom-up based OCSR techniques (Xu et al.
2022a; Zhang et al. 2022; Morin et al. 2023; Oldenhof et al.
2024; Yao et al. 2024). These approaches use multiple models and OCR engines to separately detect atoms and bonds,
then reconstruct molecular structures. However, these methods are time-consuming, prone to error accumulation. Consequently, many recent studies on OCSR employ end-to-end
algorithms (Weir et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022b,a; Hu et al.
2023; Qian et al. 2023), which are jointly optimized without
additional modules. These algorithms mainly rely on imageto-markup frameworks, with markup typically in SMILES
(Weininger 1988) or SSML (Hu et al. 2023). In addition,

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2007

