The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DivShift: Exploring Domain-Specific Distribution Shift in Large-Scale,
Volunteer-Collected Biodiversity Datasets
Elena Sierra1,2,3 * , Lauren E. Gillespie1,3,4,5 * , Salim Soltani2 ,
Moises Exposito-Alonso5,6 , Teja Kattenborn2
2

1
Stanford University Department of Computer Science
Chair of Sensor-based Geoinformatics (geosense), University of Freiburg
3
Carnegie Science Plant Biology
4
Federal University of Minas Gerais Department of Vegetation Biology
5
University of California, Berkeley Department of Integrative Biology
6
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
esierra@cs.stanford.edu, gillespl@cs.stanford.edu

Introduction

Abstract

Monitoring biodiversity is vital for understanding the state
of the natural world, and frequent and accurate monitoring
via automated tools is crucial for guiding decisions to protect
the world’s ecosystems. Building machine learning tools for
this automated monitoring requires large volumes of natural
world imagery. In recent years, participatory science applications that enable public volunteers to observe, share, and
help identify species in their natural environments have seen
a surge in popularity.
These scientific efforts on the part of the general public now mean that large-scale biodiversity image datasets
are readily available with the number of observations
rapidly approaching the scale of internet-scale image
datasets (Schuhmann et al. 2022). With these finely labeled volunteer-collected datasets, computer vision models have shown impressive improvement in a variety of
biodiversity monitoring-related machine learning tasks, including species recognition, species distribution modeling,
novel species identification, and visual question answering
(Van Horn et al. 2021; Huynh et al. 2024; Teng et al. 2024;
Sastry et al. 2024; Garcin et al. 2021; Goëau, Bonnet, and
Joly 2023; Gillespie, Ruffley, and Exposito-Alonso 2024;
Stevens et al. 2024). However, the volume of these opportunistic volunteer records comes at a cost: as these observations become easier for the public to collect, sampling
becomes unstructured, and injects a variety of biases into
these data (Arazy and Malkinson 2021; Pernat et al. 2021;
Geldmann et al. 2016; Isaac and Pocock 2015; Di Cecco
et al. 2021; Boakes et al. 2010; Dimson and Gillespie 2023).
These biases mean these volunteer-collected data do not reflect the state of the world’s biodiversity in many aspects and
present challenges for the general uptake of these unstructured, opportunistic data for biodiversity monitoring (Backstrom et al. 2024; Cooper 2014; Callaghan et al. 2021; Kishimoto and Kobori 2021; Johnston, Matechou, and Dennis
2023; Botts, Erasmus, and Alexander 2011; Deacon, Govender, and Samways 2023; Wolf et al. 2022).
To help quantify the effects of these biases on model performance, we introduce Diversity Shift (DivShift), a frame-

Large-scale, volunteer-collected datasets of communityidentified natural world imagery like iNaturalist have enabled marked performance gains for fine-grained visual classification of species using machine learning methods. However, such data—sometimes referred to as citizen science
data—are opportunistic and lack a structured sampling strategy. This volunteer-collected biodiversity data contains geographic, temporal, taxonomic, observers, and sociopolitical
biases that can have significant effects on biodiversity model
performance, but whose impacts are unclear for fine-grained
species recognition performance. Here we introduce Diversity Shift (DivShift), a framework for quantifying the effects of domain-specific distribution shifts on machine learning model performance. To diagnose the performance effects
of biases specific to volunteer-collected biodiversity data,
we also introduce DivShift - North American West Coast
(DivShift-NAWC), a curated dataset of almost 7.5 million
iNaturalist images across the western coast of North America partitioned across five types of expert-verified bias. We
compare species recognition performance across these bias
partitions using a diverse variety of species- and ecosystemfocused accuracy metrics. We observe that these biases confound model performance less than expected from the underlying label distribution shift, and that more data leads to better model performance but the magnitude of these improvements are bias-specific. These findings imply that while the
structure within natural world images provides generalization
improvements for biodiversity monitoring tasks, the biases
present in volunteer-collected biodiversity data can also affect model performance; thus these models should be used
with caution in downstream biodiversity monitoring tasks.

Code — github.com/moiexpositoalonsolab/DivShift
Dataset —
huggingface.co/datasets/elenagsierra/DivShift-NAWC
Extended version — arxiv.org/abs/2410.19816
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28386

