The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Better Robustness Against Natural Corruptions in Document Tampering
Localization
B

Huiru Shao1,2 , Kaizhu Huang3 , Wei Wang1 , Xiaowei Huang2 , Qiufeng Wang1
1

Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, China
2
University of Liverpool, UK
3
Duke Kunshan University, China
Qiufeng.Wang@xjtlu.edu.cn
Clean Image

Abstract
Marvelous advances have been exhibited in recent document
tampering localization (DTL) systems. However, confronted
with corrupted tampered document images, their vulnerability is fatal in real-world scenarios. While robustness against
adversarial attack has been extensively studied by adversarial
training (AT), the robustness on natural corruptions remains
under-explored for DTL. In this paper, to overcome forensic
dependency, we propose the adversarial forensic regularization (AFR) based on min-max optimization to improve robustness. Specifically, we adopt mutual information (MI) to
represent forensic dependency between two random variable
over tampered and authentic pixels spaces, where the MI can
be approximated by Jensen-Shannon-Divergence (JSD) with
empirical sampling. To further enable a trade-off between
predictive representations in clean tampered document pixels
and robust ones in corrupted pixels, an additional regularization term is formulated with divergence between clean and
perturbed pixels distribution (DDR). Following min-max optimization framework, our method can also work well against
adversarial attacks. To evaluate our proposed method, we collect a dataset (i.e., TSorie-CRP) for evaluating robustness
against natural corruptions in real scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method against
natural corruptions. Without any surprise, our method also
achieves good performance against adversarial attack on DTL
benchmark datasets.

Clean

Adv Natural

Vanilla
DTL
Transmission
Adversarial Natural

ATDTL

Ours
Corrupted Image

Figure 1: The vulnerability of DTL models against natural
corruption. Vanilla DTL model aims to localize tampered
pixels in clean tampered document images (TDI) but fails
for images after corruptions. DTL with adversarial training (AT-DTL) improves the performance on adversarial attacks while overlooking the natural corruptions like noise
and OSN. Our method can improve robustness on natural
corruption while maintaining adversarial robustness.

Datasets — https://github.com/SHR-77/CRP

Introduction

nerability on corrupted tampered document images is evident in real scenarios, which is depicted in Fig.1. Corruptions are mainly originated from adversarial and natural
corruptions. In various tasks, adversarial robustness has attracted much attention and made great progress (Madry et al.
2017; Akhtar et al. 2021; Zhang and Wang 2019). However,
very few works are proposed for document tampering localization (DTL). To our knowledge, only one paper (Shao et al.
2024) aims to improve adversarial robustness in DTL by
leveraging latent manifolds. However, the robustness against
natural corruption remains under-explored in DTL, but these
cases are very common in real scenarios. For example, after
transmission through online social networks (OSNs), forensic clues captured by vanilla DTL systems tend to be destroyed, resulting in the failure of DTL.

To maintain the trustworthiness and integrity of documents,
document tampering localization (DTL) has emerged and received significant attention in forensic and security community, which attempts to identify and segment unauthorized
alterations made to a document. Meanwhile, rapid advancement of image editing (Wang et al. 2022a; Guo et al. 2023)
with less tampered traces further promotes more researchers
to devote to document tampering localization and accelerate
great progress (Qu et al. 2023; Shao et al. 2023; Kwon et al.
2021; Dong et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022a).
Although it seems that almost entire tampered pixels are
capable to be segmented in recent DTL systems, their vulCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

703

