The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bootstraping Clustering of Gaussians for View-consistent 3D Scene Understanding
Wenbo Zhang1 , Lu Zhang1 * , Ping Hu2 , Liqian Ma3 , Yunzhi Zhuge1 , Huchuan Lu1
2

1
Dalian University of Technology
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
ZMO AI
zwbo@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zhangluu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Injecting semantics into 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has
recently garnered significant attention. While current approaches typically distill 3D semantic features from 2D foundational models (e.g., CLIP and SAM) to facilitate novel
view segmentation and semantic understanding, their heavy
reliance on 2D supervision can undermine cross-view semantic consistency and necessitate complex data preparation processes, therefore hindering view-consistent scene understanding. In this work, we present FreeGS, an unsupervised semantic-embedded 3DGS framework that achieves
view-consistent 3D scene understanding without the need
for 2D labels. Instead of directly learning semantic features,
we introduce the IDentity-coupled Semantic Field (IDSF)
into 3DGS, which captures both semantic representations and
view-consistent instance indices for each Gaussian. We optimize IDSF with a two-step alternating strategy: semantics
help to extract coherent instances in 3D space, while the resulting instances regularize the injection of stable semantics
from 2D space. Additionally, we adopt a 2D-3D joint contrastive loss to enhance the complementarity between viewconsistent 3D geometry and rich semantics during the bootstrapping process, enabling FreeGS to uniformly perform
tasks such as novel-view semantic segmentation, object selection, and 3D object detection. Extensive experiments on
LERF-Mask, 3D-OVS, and ScanNet datasets demonstrate
that FreeGS performs comparably to state-of-the-art methods
while avoiding the complex data preprocessing workload.

Figure 1: We present a novel framework, FreeGS, to inject
2D semantics ( ) into 3DGS ( ), without the need of any
2D labels. After a 2D-3D collaborative bootstrapping learning strategy, the model can support versatile applications,
such as novel-view 2D segmentation, open-vocabulary 3D
detection, and interactive object selection.

2023) have integrated learnable semantic fields into NeRF,
performing 3D feature distillation from 2D foundational
models (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022). However, the
introduction of these high-dimensional semantics increases
the computational complexity of the original rendering process, adding further burdens to both learning and inference
with NeRF’s implicit radiance field.
Unlike NeRF, 3DGS utilizes discrete Gaussians to represent scenes and leverages tile-based rasterization for acceleration, enabling real-time rendering at high resolutions. This
explicit representation allows 3DGS to perform flexible content manipulations, such as adding, removing, or editing elements within a scene. Recent approaches (Zhou et al. 2024;
Qin et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023) have incorporated the aforementioned NeRF-based advancements into 3DGS to enable
efficient novel view synthesis and semantic segmentation.
To achieve this, in addition to extracting semantic embeddings from CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), 2D class-agnostic
masks from the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov

Code — https://github.com/wb014/FreeGS

Introduction
Recently, there has been a surge in the research of 3D
scene representation techniques like Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) (Tschernezki et al. 2022) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023), owing to their remarkable
ability to represent 3D scenes from multi-view images. This
trend has spurred the development of approaches that extend the capabilities of radiance fields beyond mere scene
reconstruction, enabling semantic-aware tasks such as object
segmentation and editing. Pioneering methods (Kobayashi,
Matsumoto, and Sitzmann 2022; Kerr et al. 2023; Liu et al.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10166

