The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-clue Consistency Learning to Bridge Gaps Between General and Oriented
Object in Semi-supervised Detection
Chenxu Wang1 , Chunyan Xu1,* , Xiang Li2,* , Yuxuan Li2 , Xu Guo1 , Ziqi Gu1 , Zhen Cui1
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
2
Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
facias914@gmail.com, xiang.li.implus@nankai.edu.cn, zcablii@ucl.ac.uk
{cyx, xu.guo, ziqigu, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn
Abstract

encounter various challenges in handling semi-supervised
oriented object detection (SOOD). What makes the performance gap between general and oriented object detection
when performing semi-supervised learning? In this work,
we delve into this issue and identify the underlying causes.
With comprehensive investigations, we find that the performance of SOOD is significantly hindered by the assignment
and confidence inconsistency problems that stem from the
gaps between general and oriented object detection.
The assignment inconsistency is evident in two key aspects. First, for labeled data training branch, the positive labels selected from labeled data using general label assignment strategies are inconsistent with the supervision information required by oriented objects with larger aspect ratios. This inconsistency causes the discriminative information at the edges of oriented objects to be misclassified as
background, affecting the optimization of the detector. Furthermore, the sub-optimal label assignment strategies lead
to insufficient utilization of valuable labeled data, impairing
the performance of semi-supervised learning. Second, for
unlabeled data training branch, the oriented pseudo-boxes
predicted by teacher model from unlabeled data are difficult
to guide the semi-supervised learning process, resulting in
noisy label assignment. In general, most advanced SSOD
methods (Wang et al. 2023; Zhang, Sun, and Wei 2023)
follow the pseudo-boxes paradigm (Sohn et al. 2020) that
apply the pseudo-boxes predicted by the teacher model as
supervised signals to optimize the student model. However,
the introduction of angle parameters in rotated pseudo-boxes
makes their localization quality less controllable than that of
horizontal ones. Under the guidance of low-quality rotated
pseudo-boxes, noisy labels are inevitably introduced during
the label assignment process. Moreover, even with the aid of
NMS (Non-Maximum Suppression) and threshold filtering,
it is impossible to guarantee there are not redundant boxes
which will bring additional noisy labels.
On the other hand, the confidence inconsistency refers to
the mismatch between the predicted classification and localization qualities, affecting the selection of pseudo-labels.
Prior researches (Sun et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022a) have validated that the classification score cannot effectively measure the localization quality, and the lack of
interaction between the two confidences causes an inconsistency in predictions, leading to sub-optimal pseudo-label se-

While existing semi-supervised object detection methods perform well in general scenes, they struggle with oriented objects. Our experiments reveal two inconsistency issues that
stem from the gaps between general and oriented object detection in semi-supervised learning: 1) Assignment inconsistency: First, the common label assignment is inadequate for
oriented objects with larger aspect ratios when selecting positive labels from labeled data. Second, balancing the precision
and localization quality of oriented pseudo-boxes presents
greater challenges, introducing more noise when selecting
positive labels from unlabeled data. 2) Confidence inconsistency: there exists more mismatch between the predicted
classification and localization qualities when considering oriented objects, affecting the selection of pseudo-labels. Therefore, we propose a Multi-clue Consistency Learning (MCL)
framework to bridge the gaps between general and oriented
objects in semi-supervised detection. Specifically, Gaussian
Center Assignment is designed to select shape-aware positive labels from labeled data for oriented objects with larger
aspect ratios, while Scale-aware Label Assignment is introduced to select scale-aware pixel-level pseudo-labels instead
of unreliable pseudo-boxes from unlabeled data. The Consistent Confidence Soft Label is adopted to further boost the
detector by maintaining the alignment of the predicted confidences. Experiments on DOTA-v1.5 and DOTA-v1.0 benchmarks demonstrate that the MCL can achieve state-of-the-art
performance in the semi-supervised oriented object detection.

Code — https://github.com/facias914/sood-mcl

Introduction
Labeling adequate accurate annotations is a critical factor in
enhancing the performance of object detection algorithms,
but it is also labour-consuming, especially for oriented objects. To reduce the annotation burden, the semi-supervised
object detection (SSOD) attempts to leverage both labeled
data and unlabeled data to boost the detector performance.
Existing advanced SSOD methods primarily adopt the selftraining framework (Liu et al. 2021; Liu, Ma, and Kira 2022;
Wang et al. 2023) to exploit unlabeled data and achieve
significant performance in general scenes. However, they
*Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7582

