The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multimodal Fine-Grained Apparent Personality Trait Recognition:
Joint Modeling of Big Five and Questionnaire Item-level Scores
Ryo Masumura, Shota Orihashi, Mana Ihori, Tomohiro Tanaka,
Naoki Makishima, Satoshi Suzuki, Saki Mizuno, Nobukatsu Hojo
NTT Corporation, Japan
ryo.masumura@ntt.com

Abstract

people. This is considered expensive in terms of time and effort. Therefore, researchers have studied multimodal apparent personality trait recognition for automatically recognizing apparent personality traits by sensing human multimodal
behavior (Mehta et al. 2020; Zhao, Tang, and Zhang 2022;
Escalante et al. 2022; Ilmini and Fernando 2024).
In previous studies, several methods for multimodal personality trait recognition have been investigated (Pianesi
et al. 2008; Alam, Stepanov, and Riccardi 2013; Güçlütürk
et al. 2016; Gorbova et al. 2018; Kampman et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2020; Principi et al. 2021; Aslan, Güdükbay, and
Dibeklioğlu 2021; Suman, Saha, and Bhattacharyya 2022;
Wang et al. 2023; Liao, Song, and Gunes 2022; Curto
et al. 2021). Deep-learning-based methods for learning effective representations from multimodal human behavior
without introducing hand-crafted features are now widely
used (Güçlütürk et al. 2016; Gorbova et al. 2018; Kampman et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020; Principi et al. 2021; Aslan,
Güdükbay, and Dibeklioğlu 2021; Suman, Saha, and Bhattacharyya 2022; Wang et al. 2023; Liao, Song, and Gunes
2022; Curto et al. 2021). With these methods, humanbehavior information is individually extracted using modalspecific encoders, such as speech, visual, and text encoders,
and then integrated to estimate personality traits. The main
research topics in previous studies were feature-extraction
methods from individual modals or fusion methods of multimodal information, e.g., early or late fusions (see Sec. 2).
While handling multimodal input information has been the
focus of much attention, a modeling method of output personality traits has not received much attention. A personality trait recognition model is usually trained to directly estimate personality trait scores. In the model training phase,
ground-truth personality trait scores were often determined
from personality test results scored by many other people
using a fine-grained questionnaire. In other words, rich information in the personality test results has not been leveraged for anything other than determining the ground-truth
Big Five scores.
However, it is wasteful not to use fine-grained
questionnaire-based personality test results. Many questionnaire items (e.g., 20–360 items for Big Five) are used in such
a questionnaire, and multiple test scores can be collected
in the apparent personality trait recognition task (Goldberg
1990; McCrae and John 1992). The questionnaire item ex-

This paper presents a novel method for automatically recognizing people’s apparent personality traits as perceived by
others. In previous studies, apparent personality trait recognition from multimodal human behavior is often modeled to
directly estimate personality trait scores, i.e., the “Big Five”
scores. In the model training phase, ground-truth personality trait scores were usually determined from personality test
results scored by many other people using fine-grained questionnaires, however, rich information in the personality test
results have not been leveraged for anything other than determining the ground-truth Big Five scores. The scores assigned to each questionnaire item are thought to include more
meta-level differences in personality characteristics. Therefore, we propose joint modeling methods that can estimate
not only the Big Five scores but also questionnaire item-level
scores. This enables us to improve awareness of multimodal
human behavior. In addition, we present a newly created selfintroduction video dataset with 50-item Big Five questionnaire results since previous apparent personality trait recognition datasets do not provide such personality test results.
Experiments using the created dataset demonstrate that our
proposed joint modeling methods with a multimodal transformer backbone can improve to estimate Big Five scores and
effectively estimate questionnaire item-level scores. We also
verify that the estimation performance reached human evaluation performance.

1

Introduction

Recognizing people’s personality traits has gained increasing interest. One of the most widely used personality traits
is the “Big Five” (Goldberg 1990; McCrae and John 1992),
which is used to measure the personality in five continuous dimensions: openness, conscientiousness, extraversion,
agreeableness, and neuroticism. Two types of personality
traits have been considered; self-assessed personality traits
and apparent personality traits perceived by others (i.e., first
impression). These two types of personality traits are often measured through questionnaire-based personality tests.
While the personality test results for self-assessed personality traits can be attained by one self-trial, those for apparent personality traits need to be individually given by many
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1456

