The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SCCS: Deep Neural Spectral Clustering for Self-Supervised Subcellular Structure
Segmentation
Jimao Jiang1 , Diya Sun2 , Tianbing Wang2 , and Yuru Pei1 *
1

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE),
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University People’s Hospital, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
peiyuru@cis.pku.edu.cn
Abstract

and image processing scenarios, where neural networks parameterize the mapping from images to segmentation maps.
However, labor-intensive annotations cause scanty annotated data, impeding the generalization capacity of the supervised segmentation models (Heinrich et al. 2021; Mekuc
et al. 2020). Additional domain adaptations are required
when confronted with novel datasets and cases.
To relieve labor-intensive annotations, self-supervised
representation learning and clustering have been applied
to discovering pixel-level labels (Wang et al. 2022b, 2023;
Melas-Kyriazi et al. 2022). Considering that adjacent pixels with similar feature embedding are likely to belong to
the same category of subcellular structures, the local pixelwise correlations need to be addressed in self-supervised
segmentation. Moreover, the global correlation handles the
co-occurring subcellular structures for feature enhancement and multi-class segmentation. Transformer-based selfsupervised feature learning has shown promising outcomes
in spatial correlation modeling of contextual patches in a
variety of image processing tasks (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2021; Vaswani et al. 2017). Deep representation
learning and pre-trained models, such as DINO and MAE,
have been used in graph construction and clustering (MelasKyriazi et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2023). However, when confronted with subcellular segmentation of biological VEM
images with a large number of fine-grained structures, we
need to address two challenging issues.
First, subcellular structures in the high-resolution VEM
slices take on a large variety of morphologies, where pixel
features have critical influences on clustering and structure
segmentation. Existing work used the self-supervised feature extractor to acquire patch representations (Xie et al.
2023). Considering the low granularity of subcellular structures, the patches need to be small enough to bear homogeneous appearances, resulting in a large number of tokens and
computationally expensive test-time feature extraction. The
situation is even worse when it comes to extracting pixellevel features from VEM images. Economic feature extraction is desirable for efficient subcellular segmentation. Second, considering the random initialization of the clustering
centroid, there is no guarantee for consistent inter-image
clustering. Additional synchronization, such as Hungarian
matching, is required for consistent clustering across images
(Melas-Kyriazi et al. 2022). Furthermore, as to spectral clus-

Subcellular structure segmentation is a fundamental task
in biological imaging. Existing self-supervised representation learning combined with classical k-means clustering
achieved unsupervised image segmentation, but it was constrained by time-consuming test-time pixel-wise feature extraction and clustering synchronization. This study introduces
SCCS, a lightweight graph neural network-based spectral
clustering framework for end-to-end subcellular structure
segmentation upon superpixel graphs, greatly relieving the
computational complexity in test-time numerical spectral
clustering and inter-graph label inconsistency. Specifically,
SCCS exploits the self-supervised masked autoencoder for
representation learning and the construction of superpixel
graphs (spG). Unlike per-graph scalar affinity-based spectral clustering, the proposed SCCS parameterizes the mapping from learned deep spG representations to coordinates in
the spectral embedding space and the clustering assignments.
The SCCS is optimized under unsupervised eigendecomposition and incremental clustering criteria, which synchronize
the intra- and inter-graph spectral clustering. The proposed
approach is evaluated on a publicly available volumetric electron microscopy dataset. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and performance gains of the proposed SCCS over
the state-of-the-art in discovering a variety of subcellular
structures.

Introduction
Cellular and subcellular structure segmentation plays a critical role in a variety of biological downstream tasks, including biological organization, morphology measurement, and
function analysis (Stephens and Allan 2003; Witvliet et al.
2021). With the advent of high-throughput imaging technology, larger-scale microscopic image dataset collections
have become efficient and economic (Peddie et al. 2022;
Xu et al. 2017). Volumetric electron microscopy (VEM)
enables efficient volumetric imaging of the underlying ultrastructures of cells with superior resolutions and scales
(Peddie et al. 2022). Manual segmentation involves a tedious annotation burden and reliance on expert knowledge.
The deep neural network (DNN)-based segmentation framework has shown superior performances in computer vision
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4003

