The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mixture of Experts as Representation Learner for Deep Multi-View Clustering
†

Yunhe Zhang1,* , Jinyu Cai2,* , , Zhihao Wu3 , Pengyang Wang1 , See-Kiong Ng2
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, SKL-IOTSC, University of Macau, China
2
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{zhangyhannie, jinyucai1995, zhihaowu1999}@gmail.com, pywang@um.edu.mo, seekiong@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Multi-view clustering (MVC) (Hu et al. 2023; Yang et al.
2023; Huang, Yang, and Cai 2024) aims to integrate information from multiple views to achieve more efficient clustering than handling each view independently. Early MVC
methods typically rely on classical machine learning techniques, such as multiple kernel learning (Tzortzis and Likas
2012; Houthuys, Langone, and Suykens 2018; Wu, Zhang,
and Fan 2024), matrix factorization (Liu et al. 2013; Li et al.
2024), graph methods (Huang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2024;
Wen et al. 2024), and subspace learning (Sun et al. 2021;
Cai et al. 2024a), to fuse features from various views. However, these methods generally face limitations in scalability
and handling high-dimensional data. Fortunately, the emergence of deep learning has significantly advanced clustering
methods (Qi et al. 2022; Cai et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2023b).
Deep learning-based MVC methods (Li et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2022; Fang et al. 2023; Pu et al. 2024) leverage the powerful representation learning capability of deep neural networks to process multi-view data with high-dimensionality
and complex structures. These methods excel in extracting
representative features and uncovering the intricate correlations among different views, facilitating a more effective
information integration of multi-view data. Moreover, traditional MVC methods have also improved from their deep
variants (Chen et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a; Chen et al. 2024).

Multi-view clustering (MVC) aims to integrate information
from diverse data sources to facilitate the clustering process, which has achieved considerable success in various realworld applications. However, previous MVC methods typically employ one of two strategies: (1) designing separate feature extraction pipelines for each view, which restricts their
ability to fully exploit collaborative potential; or (2) employing a single shared representation module, which hinders the
capture of diverse, view-specific representations. To tackle
these challenges, we introduce Deep Multi-View Clustering
via Collaborative Experts (DMVC-CE), a novel MVC approach that employs the Mixture of Experts (MoE) framework. DMVC-CE incorporates a gating network that dynamically selects multiple experts for handling each data sample,
capturing diverse and complementary information from different views. Additionally, to ensure balanced expert utilization and maintain their diversity, we introduce an equilibrium
loss and a multi-expert distinctiveness enhancer. The equilibrium loss prevents excessive reliance on specific experts,
while the distinctiveness enhancer encourages each expert to
specialize in different aspects of the data, thereby promoting diversity in learned representations. Comprehensive experiments on various multi-view benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of DMVC-CE compared to state-of-theart MVC baselines.

While existing MVC methods, such as (Qi et al. 2024;
Zhang, Liu, and Fu 2019), predominantly emphasize developing powerful feature fusion mechanisms across multiple
views, one of the critical oversights is the conventional separated design of backbone networks in existing approaches.
Typically, the feature extraction process for each view operates independently, with integration occurring only at the
subsequent feature fusion stage. This can significantly limit
the collaborative potential between multiple views during
the early feature learning phase, resulting in underutilized
cross-view correlations and sub-optimal clustering performance. While another strategy (Chen et al. 2022; Wan et al.
2024, 2023) attempts to adopt a shared representation module for multi-view data, it would fail in capturing the diversity of view-specific representations. Consequently, it unveils a compelling research challenge in MVC: How can we
facilitate collaboration across multiple backbone networks
while preserving the uniqueness of view-specific representations to achieve effective multi-view clustering?

Introduction
Clustering (Xu and Wunsch 2005; Cai et al. 2022a; Wu et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2023a; Cai et al. 2024c; Ren et al. 2024) is
an essential research issue in unsupervised machine learning, which has numerous applications in real-world scenarios, e.g., drug discovery (Sadybekov and Katritch 2023) and
social network analysis (Li et al. 2017; Cai et al. 2024b).
With the rapid growth of multimedia technology, the data
can be expressed via multiple perspectives, e.g., text, image,
graph, etc, which is so-called multi-view data. Compared to
single-view data, multi-view data offer richer information
for representing an object, which provides the potential to
further improve clustering performance.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22704

