The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Turn Jailbreaking Large Language Models via Attention Shifting
Xiaohu Du1,2,3,4 , Fan Mo7 , Ming Wen1,2,3,4,6, * , Tu Gu7 , Huadi Zheng7 , Hai Jin2,3,5 , Jie Shi7
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST)
2
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
3
Services Computing Technology and System Lab
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security and Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
5
Cluster and Grid Computing Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology, HUST
6
JinYinHu Laboratory
7
Huawei International
{xhdu, mwenaa, hjin}@hust.edu.cn, {mofan10, gu.tu, zhenghuadi, shi.jie1}@huawei.com
Abstract

conducted by an internal red teaming team to mitigate the
potentially huge negative impact on society. Leading companies, such as OpenAI, Anthropic, and Meta, have all established expert teams to evaluate their models before release (OpenAI 2023a,b; Anthropic 2024; Meta 2024; Touvron et al. 2023). However, this testing and red teaming process is extremely costly due to its “handicraft nature”, involving manual querying of the model and evaluating the
responses one after another.
To accelerate the evaluation process and meanwhile reduce the cost, research works have built safety evaluation frameworks, e.g., sorry-bench (Xie et al. 2024),
safety-bench (Zhang et al. 2023), or AI Risk-bench in
HELM (Liang et al. 2023), which usually consist of queries
with malicious intention that potentially break LLMs’ alignment. Such evaluation results can then serve as feedback
for the next round of alignment. However, it is found that
conventional single-turn jailbreaking is becoming less effective in detecting LLM’s vulnerabilities with this development process. For instance, on the latest jailbreak leaderboard (Zhou et al. 2024), the average success rate of 11 jailbreak attacks on LLaMA-2 is only 31.88%. Interestingly,
such single-turn jailbreaking still leaves large attack surfaces in real scenarios where human users typically chat with
LLMs in multi-turn ways.
In scenarios with long conversational history windows,
i.e., multi-turn dialogues, LLMs have a stronger tendency to
reply to malicious queries with harmful content than singleturn dialogues. Several multi-turn jailbreaking methods have
been proposed to explore these more practical cases. As
an example, both PAIR (Prompt Automatic Iterative Refinement) (Chao et al. 2023) and Crescendo (Russinovich,
Salem, and Eldan 2024) successfully jailbreak LLMs in an
automated way without a human in the loop in multi-turn
or iterative cases. Consequently, the latest LLMs, such as
the LLaMA 3.1 series (Dubey et al. 2024), are integrating
multi-turn red teaming into the model development process,
acknowledging that multi-turn dialogues are more likely to
lead to harmful outputs.
Although current multi-turn jailbreaks have achieved
some progress, they still exhibit certain limitations. First,
from a theoretical perspective, current studies lack an anal-

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved significant
performance in various natural language processing tasks but
also pose safety and ethical threats, thus requiring red teaming and alignment processes to bolster their safety. To effectively exploit these aligned LLMs, recent studies have introduced jailbreak attacks based on multi-turn dialogues. These
attacks aim to prompt LLMs to generate harmful or biased
content by guiding them through contextual content. However, the underlying reasons for the effectiveness of multiturn jailbreaks remain unclear. Existing attacks often focus
on optimizing queries and escalating toxicity to construct dialogues, lacking a thorough analysis of the inherent vulnerabilities of LLMs. In this paper, we first conduct an in-depth
analysis of the differences between single-turn and multi-turn
jailbreaks and find that successful multi-turn jailbreaks can
effectively disperse the attention of LLMs on keywords associated with harmful behaviors, especially in historical responses. Based on this, we propose ASJA, a new multi-turn
jailbreak approach by shifting the attention of LLMs, specifically by iteratively fabricating the dialogue history through a
genetic algorithm to induce LLMs to generate harmful content. Extensive experiments on three LLMs and two datasets
show that our approach surpasses existing approaches in jailbreak effectiveness, the stealth of jailbreak prompts, and attack efficiency. Our work emphasizes the importance of enhancing the robustness of LLMs’ attention mechanism in
multi-turn dialogue scenarios for a better defense strategy.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across various natural language processing tasks, yet concerns about their safety have also become
increasingly evident. Alignment is typically performed before the release of LLMs. Nevertheless, users can still mislead LLMs to generate harmful content by prompting them
with malicious intent, a practice known as jailbreaking (e.g.,
“role-playing” (Jin et al. 2024)). The first significant wave of
jailbreaking began after the release of GPT-3.5, largely due
to its substantial user base. Preferably, such work should be
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23814

