The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3D-aware Select, Expand, and Squeeze Token for Aerial Action Recognition
Luying Peng , Xiangbo Shu* , Yazhou Yao, Guosen Xie
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
pengluying@njust.edu.cn, shuxb@njust.edu.cn, yazhou.yao@njust.edu.cn, guosen.xie@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

Video captured by UAVs

Aerial Action Recognition (AAR) in videos captured by Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) plays a vital role in numerous applications. However, current methods related to traditional action recognition primarily cater to fixed or near cameras, and rarely consider the movement disturbance of UAVs,
including their varying attitudes and positions. Those characteristics of aerial videos bring moving objects in small regions compared to broad backgrounds and relative movement
to the motion of objects, which reflect more sparse and disturbed semantic information for AAR. To address these issues, we present a novel framework, dubbed 3D-Tok, to Select, Expand, and Squeeze original visual tokens for obtaining compact yet diverse semantic-enhanced tokens. In particular, we present a 3D-token selector (3TS) to select complex
yet diverse tokens in three channels, capturing the semantic awareness of moving objects in comparatively small regions. Additionally, to get rid of disturbed semantic information caused by the UAV flight, we present an Expand-Squeeze
Converter (ESC) to adaptively expand and squeeze the 3Dselected tokens constrained by contrastive loss, thereby suppressing the semantic-irrelevant information and reinforce
semantic-relevant information via the interpolation converting.

H’

…

H

Expand
Token cube
W
T’

…

T

Squeeze
W’

…

3D-Token: Selecting, Expanding, and Squeezing

Figure 1: Insights of this work. In videos captured by UAVs,
moving objects are in small regions compared to broad backgrounds and the flying UAVs bring the disturbance of relative movement to the motion of objects, which reflects more
sparse and disturbed semantic information. Our approach
can: i) select compact yet diverse tokens for capturing the semantic awareness of moving objects in comparatively small
regions; and ii) further expand and squeeze tokens for reinforcing semantic-relevant information while suppressing
semantic-irrelevant information.

Introduction
With the rapid increase of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs), aerial videos have drawn ever-growing attention
due to their wide range of applications and flexibility in various situations. The increasing applications of UAVs have
led to a rising quantity of aerial videos, underscoring the
importance of aerial action recognition. Nonetheless, compared to traditional action recognition in videos shot on fixed
ground cameras, the human entity in UAV videos appears
rather small due to high camera altitudes (Figure 1). In addition, flying UAVs in the air cause different motion durations
and diverse perspectives. These factors engender notable obstacles in UAV-based aerial action recognition and call for
designing specific recognition approaches that are purposefully crafted to address these specific traits.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have reached
great success in general action recognition tasks (Koohzadi

and Charkari 2017). These methods excel at capturing local spatial patterns in data, making them ideal for tasks like
recognition, detection, and classification tasks. Whether 2D
convolutions (Li et al. 2016) or 3D convolutions (Tran et al.
2015), both are better at capturing spatial features and may
fall slightly short in modeling temporal relations. Nonetheless, in UAV-based videos, temporal relations are more complex due to the motion interference brought by the fast motion of flying cameras and broad backgrounds contain repetitive and similar semantic information.
In recent years, transformer-based methods (Arnab et al.
2021; Fan et al. 2021) have been developed for general
action recognition tasks due to their exceptional temporal
modeling capabilities and powerful self-attention mechanisms. Whereas in UAV videos, moving objects only occupy a small region compared to the background, and flying

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6479

