The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sound Over-Approximation of Equational Reasoning
with Variable-Preserving Rules Parameterized by Derivation Depth
Mateus de Oliveira Oliveira
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Sweden
Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
oliveira@dsv.su.se

t can be transformed into term t′ by a chain of replacements
of equals with equals.
In this work, we consider an enhanced version of this calculus where at each inference step, several axioms can be
applied to a term simultaneously as long as they do not interfere with one another. When ignoring complexity theoretic
considerations, this parallel variant of equational reasoning
has the same expressiveness as the sequential variant. Nevertheless, the minimum number of parallel inference steps
to derive a given equation t ≃ t′ may be drastically smaller
than then the minimum number of sequential steps. For example, consider the axiom x+y ≃ y+x stating that addition
is commutative. For each n ∈ N, there is a ground equation
tn ≃ t′n that is derivable from this axiom in a single parallel step, but whose sequential derivations require Ω(n) steps
(Observation 7).
It is worth noting that the problem of determining whether
a given ground equation t ≃ t′ can be inferred from equations in a set E of axioms is, in general, undecidable (McNulty 1992). The problem becomes NEXP-complete if instead we ask whether t ≃ t′ can be derived in d steps, for
a given d specified in binary 1 . In this work, we cope with
the intractability of the equational inference problem using
the framework of the theory of fixed-parameter tractability
(Downey and Fellows 1995). A computational problem is
said to be fixed-parameter tractable with respect to parameters k1 , ..., kr if there is an algorithm that solves instances
of size n in time at most f (k1 , ..., kr ) · nc for some constant
c and some function f depending only on the parameters ki .
Our main result (Theorem 11) states that for each fixed
set E of variable-preserving equations, the set of ground
equations derivable from E in depth at most d is soundly
over-approximable in fixed-parameter tractable time. More
specifically, we devise an algorithm that takes as input a set
of variable-preserving equations E and a target ground equation t ≃ t′ , and always halts with a Y ES or NO answer.

Abstract
Equational reasoning is one of the most intuitive and widely
used types of symbolic reasoning. In this setting, the goal is
to determine whether a given ground equation t ≃ t′ follows
as a consequence of a set of equational axioms E using the
process of replacing equals with equals. An equation t ≃ t′
is variable-preserving if each variable occurring in t occurs
in t′ and vice versa. Such equations have widely applicability
in algebra, since they can be used to express properties such
as commutativity, associativity, distributivity, among others.
In this work, we show that for each fixed set E of variablepreserving equations, the set of ground equations derivable
from E in depth at most d is soundly over-approximable in
fixed-parameter tractable time. More specifically, we devise
an algorithm that takes as input a set E of variable-preserving
equations and a target ground equation t ≃ t′ , and always
halts with a Y ES or NO answer.
1. If equation t ≃ t′ can be derived from E in depth at most
d, the algorithm always halts with a YES.
2. If equation t ≃ t′ does not belong to the equational closure
of E, then the algorithm always halts with a NO.
In other words, the set of Y ES instances contains the set of
ground equations that can be deduced from E in depth at
most d, and possibly other equations that require derivations
of higher depth. However, this set contains no ground equation that is not in the equational closure of E. For this reason, the algorithm is sound. Our algorithm works in time
fE (d) · |t| · |t′ |, where |t| and |t′ | are the number of symbols in t and t′ respectively, d is the depth parameter, and
fE (d) is a function whose growth depends only on d and on
parameters associated with the equations in E.

1

Introduction

Equational reasoning, or the process of replacing equals by
equals, is one of the most intuitive and widely used methods
of formal reasoning. Given a set E of equations, called axioms, and terms t and t′ , the goal is to determine whether
the equation t ≃ t′ follows as a logical consequence of
the axioms in E (Plaisted 1993; Echenim, Peltier, and Tourret 2013; Fish and Lisitsa 2014; Bachmair and Ganzinger
1998). A celebrated theorem due to Birkhoff (Birkhoff 1935)
states that such a logical implication holds if and only if term

1. If the equation t ≃ t′ is derivable from E in depth at most
d, the algorithm always halts with a YES.
2. If the equation t ≃ t′ does not belong to the equational
closure of E, then the algorithm always halts with a NO.
1

NEXP is the class of problems solvable in nondeterministic exponential time. If d is specified in unary, then the problem becomes
NP-complete.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14867

