The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HFF-Tracker: A Hierarchical Fine-grained Fusion Tracker for Referring
Multi-Object Tracking
Zeyong Zhao1 , Yanchao Hao1 * , Minghao Zhang1 ,
Qingbin Liu1 , Bo Li1 , Dianbo Sui2 , Shizhu He3 , Xi Chen1 *
1

Platform and Content Group, Tencent, Beijing 100080, China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
3
The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences., Beijing 101400, China
zc 1413@163.com, {marshao, hellomzhang, qingbinliu, ryanbli, jasonxchen}@tencent.com,
suidianbo@hit.edu.cn, shizhu.he@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Referring Multi-Object Tracking (RMOT) aims to track multiple objects based on a provided language expression. Although prior studies have sought to accomplish this by integrating an textual module into the multi-object tracker, these
methods combine text and image features in a basic way, neglecting the importance of text features. In this study, we propose a Hierarchical Fine-grained text-image Fusion tracker,
named HFF-Tracker, which can perform fine-grained fusion
of pixel-level visual features and text features across various semantic levels. Specifically, we have devised a Hierarchical Multi-Modal Fusion (HMMF) module to merge text
and image features at an early stage in a hierarchical and detailed manner. The Text-Guided Decoder (TGD) is designed
to provide the query with prior semantic information during
the decoding process. Additionally, we have crafted a TextGuided Prediction Head (TGPH) that utilizes text information
to enhance the performance of the prediction head. Furthermore, we have implemented an adaptive Look-Back training
strategy to maximize the utilization of valuable labeled data.
Extensive experiments on the Refer-KITTI dataset and the
Refer-KITTI-V2 dataset demonstrate that our proposed HFFTracker outperforms other state-of-the-art methods with remarkable margins.

Figure 1: HOTA-AssA-DetA comparisons of different trackers on the Refer-KITTI, and the radius of circle is DetA.
Our HFF-Tracker achieves 52.41% HOTA, 66.65% AssA
and 41.29% DetA, outperforming all previous trackers.

several challenges. Primarily, the fusion of image and text
features is frequently basic, suggesting that the information
derived from text prompts is not being fully leveraged. This
is crucial, as the data from text prompts is fundamental to
the RMOT task and directly impacts the ultimate tracking
results. Furthermore, insufficient analysis and utilization of
RMOT datasets can lead to ineffective use of valuable labeled data during training. Consequently, the robustness and
performance of the methods often fail to meet expectations.
Inspired by these challenges, we propose a Hierarchical
Fine-grained text-image Fusion framework, HFF-Tracker,
based on TransRMOT. This framework integrates text and
visual information at the early fusion stage, queries, and prediction head. Specifically, we propose a Hierarchical MultiModal Fusion module (HMMF) for fine-grained fusion of
pixel-level visual and text features across semantic levels,
generating expressive visual-textual features. We also design
a Text-Guild Decoder (TGD) that uses text features to guide
query inputs, enhancing target identification and tracking.
Furthermore, we integrate text semantic information into the
visual features of queries in the prediction head’s referring
branch, named Text-Guide Predict Head (TGPH), improv-

Introduction
Referring Multi-Object Tracking (RMOT) (Wu et al. 2023a)
is a newly proposed task that addresses the limitations of traditional Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) tasks, particularly in
terms of flexibility and generalization. It aims to detect and
track all specific objects that match a given reference description frame by frame, while maintaining a unique identifier for each object. Although it is an emerging task, RMOT
has gained widespread attention due to its potential advantages in various applications, including but not limited to autonomous driving (Liao, Li, and Ye 2024), human-computer
interaction (Zhang et al. 2024), and animal surveys (Jiao
et al. 2023).
Despite the swift advancement of RMOT algorithms over
the past two years, current methods continue to grapple with
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10528

