The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TTA-FedDG: Leveraging Test-Time Adaptation to Address Federated Domain
Generalization
Haoyuan Liang , Xinyu Zhang , Shilei Cao , Guowen Li , Juepeng Zheng*
School of Artificial Intelligence , Sun Yat-sen University , China
{lianghy68 , zhangxy869 , caoshlei , ligw8}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn , zhengjp8@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, Federated Domain Generalization (FedDG)
has succeeded in generalizing to unknown clients (domains).
However, current methods only utilize training data, and when
there is a significant difference between the unknown client
and source client domains (domain shift), these methods cannot ensure model performance. This limitation appears to
have caused research in FedDG to reach a bottleneck. On
the other hand, test data is a resource that can help models
adapt while previous FedDG approaches have not taken this
into account. In this paper, we introduce a new framework
TTA-FedDG to address the FedDG problem, which leverages
test-time adaptation (TTA) to adapt across different domains,
thereby enhancing the generalization of the model. We propose the method Federated domain generalization based on
select Strong Pseudo Label (FedSPL), which combines fast
feature matching and knowledge distillation. Our method consists of two parts. Firstly, we use fast feature reordering for
feature mixing during local updates on the client side, improving the robustness of the global model and enhancing its
generalization ability to mitigate domain shift. Secondly, we
employ a teacher-student model with contrastive learning and
label selection during the testing phase, enabling the global
model to better adapt to the distribution of the target client,
thereby alleviating domain shift. Extensive experiments have
demonstrated the effectiveness of FedSPL in handling domain
shift, outperforming existing FedDG methods across multiple
datasets and model architectures.

Figure 1: This illustration highlights the two major differences between FL and TTA-FedDG. First, the clients served
by the global model differ: FL emphasizes the applicability
of the model to known clients, whereas TTA-FedDG focuses
on its generalization to unknown clients. Second, in TTAFedDG, we use unlabeled test data to adapt the global model,
which is not the case in traditional FL.

Introduction
As deep learning models(Zhang et al. 2024a,b) continue to
evolve, more data is required to train larger models, such as
ChatGPT. However, some clients consider their data private,
making them reluctant to share it for training, resulting in
data silos. Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017)
has emerged as a solution to address data privacy and data
silo issues, garnering significant attention in recent years.
However, in the traditional FL paradigm, each client trains a
local model using their data and then aggregates these models into a global model to accommodate the participating
clients. Various approaches, such as adaptive weights (Yu,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18658

Bagdasaryan, and Shmatikov 2020) and personalized federated learning (Shamsian et al. 2021), have been proposed to
improve the performance of global models on local clients.
However, as FL becomes more widespread, it attracts new
clients who want to use the global model on their dataset.
Traditional Federated Learning faces challenges in adapting
effectively to new clients, particularly when the data distribution of these new clients differs significantly from that of the
training clients. To address this, Liu et al. (2021) proposed
the Federated Domain Generalization (FedDG) paradigm
and the ELCFS method to enhance the generalization of the
global model to new clients. However, in ELCFS, sharing distribution information during client local training can lead to
privacy leaks. Consequently, much of the current research has
shifted toward leveraging local models during the aggregation phase, leading to the development of adaptive weighting
methods such as FedDG-GA (Zhang et al. 2023) within the

