The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Out-of-Distribution Detection with Prototypical Outlier Proxy
Mingrong Gong1 , Chaoqi Chen1 * , Qingqiang Sun2 , Yue Wang3 , Hui Huang1
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
School of Engineering, Great Bay University
3
Department of Computer Science, University College London
{gmr52333, cqchen1994, hhzhiyan}@gmail.com, qqsun@gbu.edu.cn, zcabwaa@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a crucial task for deploying deep learning models in the wild. One of the major
challenges is that well-trained deep models tend to perform
over-confidence on unseen test data. Recent research attempts
to leverage real or synthetic outliers to mitigate the issue,
which may significantly increase computational costs and be
biased toward specific outlier characteristics. In this paper, we
propose a simple yet effective framework, Prototypical Outlier Proxy (POP), which introduces virtual OOD prototypes to
reshape the decision boundaries between ID and OOD data.
Specifically, we transform the learnable classifier into a fixed
one and augment it with a set of prototypical weight vectors. Then, we introduce a hierarchical similarity boundary
loss to impose adaptive penalties depending on the degree of
misclassification. Extensive experiments across various benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of POP. Notably, POP
achieves average FPR95 reductions of 7.70%, 6.30%, and
5.42% over the second-best methods on CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, and ImageNet-200, respectively. Moreover, compared to
the recent method NPOS, which relies on outlier synthesis,
POP trains 7.2 times faster and performs inference 19.5 times
faster.

Figure 1: Illustration of our motivation. Left: Vanilla training.
Middle: Training with the mixture of ID data and outliers.
Right: Training with prototypical outlier proxies.

Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved remarkable success
across various tasks such as image classification (He et al.
2016), face recognition (Deng et al. 2019), and object detection (He et al. 2017). However, the safety requirements of
these models pose significant challenges when deployed in
real-world applications, such as autonomous driving (Chen
et al. 2023b), robotics (Levine et al. 2016), and medical diagnostics (Amodei et al. 2016). Albeit the extraordinary performance on in-distribution (ID) data, such models struggle to
deal with out-of-distribution (OOD) data, which may result
in misclassifications, misguided decisions, and even catastrophe. As shown in Fig. 1 (left), to achieve higher training
accuracy, deep models tend to make overconfident predictions (Guo et al. 2017), even in the low-density regions. To
solve this issue, many existing methods strive to directly introduce outliers to enhance the unknown-aware ability during
the training phase, using either real outlier data, i.e., outlier
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16835

exposure (OE) (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019;
Yu and Aizawa 2019; Yang et al. 2021; Ming, Fan, and Li
2022; Zhang et al. 2023b), or feature-based outlier synthesis (Pei et al. 2022; Du et al. 2022; Tao et al. 2023). Fig. 1
(middle) shows that training with outliers will create a specific region to accommodate potential OOD data. Despite the
promise, these methods may still be constrained by two bottlenecks: (i) Incorporating extra outliers in the training phase
can be time-consuming and resource-intensive. For example,
synthesizing outliers requires density estimation (parametric (Du et al. 2022) or non-parametric (Tao et al. 2023)) of ID
data first. (ii) In practice, OOD data are diverse and typically
distribution-free (Fang et al. 2022). Thus, OE methods may
only be effective in certain specific domains because it is
impossible to cover all potential scenarios. These methods
may cause the model to be biased towards specific outlier
characteristics, leading to a loss of generality. For instance,
the model might learn spurious correlations between the data
and binary labels (Ming, Yin, and Li 2022). To this premise,
we raise an open question:
Can we enable deep models to perceive unseen data without
introducing any specific outliers?
In this paper, we introduce a novel framework, Prototypical
Outlier Proxy (POP), which enables the model to learn about
unknowns without exposing it to real or synthesized outliers.
As shown in Fig. 1 (right), POP, which acts as a virtual class
center, can attract nearby OOD data and thereby compress
the decision boundaries to mitigate the over-confidence of
the deep model. First, we transform the learnable classifier
into a fixed one by using the hierarchical structure of ID
data. Then, we add prototypical outlier proxies to the fixed

