The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Can Students Beyond The Teacher?
Distilling Knowledge from Teacher’s Bias
Jianhua Zhang1 , Yi Gao1 , Ruyu Liu2, 3 * , Xu Cheng1, 3 * , Houxiang Zhang,4 Shengyong Chen1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin, 300384, China
School of Information Science and Technology, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, 311121, China
3
the Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
4
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
zjh@ieee.org, gaoyi01020304@stud.tjut.edu.cn, lry@hznu.edu.cn, xu.cheng@ieee.org, hozh@ntnu.no, sy@ieee.org
2

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a model compression technique that transfers knowledge from a large teacher model to
a smaller student model to enhance its performance. Existing
methods often assume that the student model is inherently
inferior to the teacher model. However, we identify that the
fundamental issue affecting student performance is the bias
transferred by the teacher. Current KD frameworks transmit
both right and wrong knowledge, introducing bias that misleads the student model. To address this issue, we propose
a novel strategy to rectify bias and greatly improve the student model’s performance. Our strategy involves three steps:
First, we differentiate knowledge and design a bias elimination method to filter out biases, retaining only the right knowledge for the student model to learn. Next, we propose a bias
rectification method to rectify the teacher model’s wrong predictions, fundamentally addressing bias interference. The student model learns from both the right knowledge and the rectified biases, greatly improving its prediction accuracy. Additionally, we introduce a dynamic learning approach with
a loss function that updates weights dynamically, allowing
the student model to quickly learn right knowledge-based
easy tasks initially and tackle hard tasks corresponding to biases later, greatly enhancing the student model’s learning efficiency. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first strategy
enabling the student model to surpass the teacher model. Experiments demonstrate that our strategy, as a plug-and-play
module, is versatile across various mainstream KD frameworks.

Figure 1: Diagram of the knowledge transfer process in KD.
(a) The KD framework based on a teacher-student network
model. (b) Right knowledge transfer helps the student model
learn effectively. (c) Bias knowledge transfer can mislead
the student model with biased knowledge.

embedded devices, real-time image processing, and video
analysis. Despite efforts to improve student model performance through various KD methods (Park et al. 2019; Tian,
Krishnan, and Isola 2019; Chen et al. 2021; Sarridis et al.
2022; Patel, Mopuri, and Qiu 2023), including those based
on logit layers (Müller, Kornblith, and Hinton 2019; Zhao
et al. 2022) and intermediate feature layers (Park and No
2022; Sarridis et al. 2022; Liang, Huang, and Liu 2024; Tang
et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024), these approaches have consistently failed to surpass the teacher model. The fundamental reason is that these methods overlook the fact that the
knowledge transmitted by the teacher is not entirely accurate. Bias from the teacher can misguide the student, thereby
limiting the student model’s performance. Moreover, as data
types become more diverse and tasks become more complex,
the impact of bias knowledge will further intensify.
We acknowledge the bias present in the KD framework.
As shown in Fig. 1, the student model learns from the true
labels and the teacher model’s predictions through crossentropy (CE) loss and Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL)
loss, respectively. The student’s learning is enhanced when
T
the teacher’s predictions (Pright
) align with the true labels.
T
Conversely, when the teacher’s predictions (Pwrong
) do not
match the true labels, they mislead the student, causing its

Code — https://github.com/smartyige/BTKD

Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) was proposed by (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015). This method uses a pre-trained
model as a teacher, from which useful knowledge is extracted and transferred to train a smaller student model. This
process enables the student model to achieve performance
close to that of the teacher model. Consequently, KD effectively compresses models while maintaining their performance, making it widely applicable in scenarios that require both efficiency and accuracy, such as on mobile and
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22434

