The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Strategy Representation for Imitation Learning in Multi-Agent Games
Shiqi Lei1 * , Kanghoon Lee2 * , Linjing Li1,3 , Jinkyoo Park2†
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
3
Beijing Wenge Technology Co., Ltd.
leishiqi2022@ia.ac.cn, leehoon@kaist.ac.kr, linjing.li@ia.ac.cn, jinkyoo.park@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract

from multiple demonstrators to enlarge dataset scale and diversity (Sharma et al. 2018; Mandlekar et al. 2019, 2021),
which leads to a dataset of behaviors with various characteristics. However, standard IL algorithms treat all data samples in the dataset as homogeneous, potentially learning undesired behaviors from sub-optimal trajectories.
To address the above issue, the key insight in our proposed
method is to assign each trajectory in the offline dataset
with a unique learned attribute, i.e., strategy representation,
so that we can further analyze each trajectory considering
its specificity and filter out sub-optimal data. With a precise depiction of each trajectory and their distribution on
the representation space, we can judge the performance of
each trajectory by only collecting a few (less than 5%) data
with trajectory rewards or even without any reward information. In this work, we introduce Strategy Representation for
Imitation Learning (STRIL), an efficient and interpretable
approach designed to improve IL by filtering sub-optimal
demonstrations from offline datasets.
Figure 1 illustrates an overview of STRIL. Note that
STRIL is a plug-in method compatible with existing IL algorithms. It consists of three components: strategy representation learning using a Partially-trainable-conditioned Variational Recurrent Neural Network (P-VRNN), indicator estimation, and filtered IL. The detailed steps and corresponding
contributions are outlined as follows:

The offline datasets for imitation learning (IL) in multi-agent
games typically contain player trajectories exhibiting diverse
strategies, which necessitate measures to prevent learning algorithms from acquiring undesirable behaviors. Learning representations for these trajectories is an effective approach
to depicting the strategies employed by each demonstrator.
However, existing learning strategies often require player
identification or rely on strong assumptions, which are not
appropriate for multi-agent games. Therefore, in this paper,
we introduce the Strategy Representation for Imitation Learning (STRIL) framework, which (1) effectively learns strategy representations in multi-agent games, (2) estimates proposed indicators based on these representations, and (3) filters
out sub-optimal data using the indicators. STRIL is a plugin method that can be integrated into existing IL algorithms.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of STRIL across competitive multi-agent scenarios, including Two-player Pong, Limit
Texas Hold’em, and Connect Four. Our approach successfully acquires strategy representations and indicators, thereby
identifying dominant trajectories and significantly enhancing
existing IL performance across these environments.

Introduction
Although reinforcement learning has become a powerful
technique for sequential decision-making in various domains such as robotic manipulation (Andrychowicz et al.
2020), autonomous driving (Chen, Yuan, and Tomizuka
2019), and game playing (Vinyals et al. 2019), conventional
reinforcement learning demands substantial online interactions with the environment, which can be costly and sample
inefficient while potentially leading to safety risks (Berner
et al. 2019; Bojarski et al. 2016). To address these issues,
many methods have emerged to enable efficient learning using offline datasets generated by demonstrators. For example, imitation learning (IL) (Pomerleau 1988) replicates actions from the offline dataset without reward information,
while offline reinforcement learning (Fujimoto, Meger, and
Precup 2019; Kumar et al. 2020) is provided access to reward signals. Offline learning datasets are usually collected

• We propose an unsupervised framework with P-VRNN
to efficiently extract strategy representations from multiagent game trajectories. Strategy representation for each
trajectory is customized as a network condition.
• We define the Randomness Indicator (RI) and Exploited
Level (EL), which utilize strategy representation to effectively evaluate offline trajectories in a zero-sum game.
EL can be precisely estimated even with limited reward
data, while RI requires no reward data.
• We enhance existing IL methods by filtering out suboptimal trajectories using the RI and EL indicators, ensuring that IL is trained only on the dominant trajectory.
• We demonstrate that STRIL can provide effective strategy learning without player identification and significantly enhance the performance of various IL algorithms
in competitive zero-sum games, including Two-player
Pong, Limit Texas Hold’em, and Connect Four.

* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18163

