The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Scalable and Deep Graph Neural Networks via Noise Masking
Yuxuan Liang1 , Wentao Zhang2 * , Zeang Sheng3 , Ling Yang3 , Quanqing Xu4 ,
Jiawei Jiang5 , Yunhai Tong1 , Bin Cui 3,6 *
1

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
3
School of CS & Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (MOE), Peking University
4
OceanBase, Ant Group
5
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
6
Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao)
{liangyx, yangling}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {wentao.zhang, shengzeang18, yhtong, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn,
jiawei.jiang@whu.edu.cn, xuquanqing.xqq@oceanbase.com
Abstract

2024; Zhang, Ni, and Fu 2023). Despite the success of
GNNs, scaling them to large graphs is challenging due to
the high computational and storage costs of repeated feature
propagation during training. Consequently, these limitations
impede the scalability of GNNs on large graphs, limiting
their applicability and advancement in real-world scenarios.
To address the scalability issues, model-simplification
GNNs, as a promising direction for scalable performance
has aroused great interest recently. The most representative
work is SGC (Wu et al. 2019), which puts feature propagation in the pre-processing step by removing nonlinearities
and collapsing weight matrices between consecutive layers.
Following the design principle of SGC, piles of works have
been proposed to improve the performance of SGC further
while maintaining high scalability, such as SIGN, S2 GC,
GBP, GAMLP (Rossi et al. 2020; Zhu and Koniusz 2021;
Chen et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). Generally, these modelsimplification GNNs can be disentangled into two independent operations: Propagation (P) and Combination (C). The
P operation can be viewed as aggregating the information of
first-order neighbors for each node. The C operation can be
viewed as a combination of consecutive P operations. Continuous P operations are used to capture deeper receptive
fields and C operations are used to combine these receptive
fields for better performance. Existing model-simplification
GNNs mainly focus on designing different C. Despite their
high scalability and predictive performance, existing modelsimplification GNNs still face the following two limitations:
Propagation with Noise Information. Despite the success of model-simplification GNNs, the exploration of deep
propagation steps remains limited because simply stacking
P leads node representations to become indistinguishable
and results in performance degradation, i.e., over-smoothing
problem. Existing model-simplification GNNs, as shown in
Figure 1(a) (left), pay more attention to designing different
combination methods of propagation steps without considering the noise problem within each hop. From Figure 1(a)
(left), we can see that each hop contains overlapping graph
structure information of the previous hop, such noise information will be propagated along the edges and hinder the
extraction of truly useful high-hop information. As shown in
Figure 1(a) (right), we conducted an experiment using four

In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
achieved remarkable success in many graph mining tasks.
However, scaling them to large graphs is challenging due to
the high computational and storage costs of repeated feature
propagation and non-linear transformation during training.
One commonly employed approach to address this challenge
is model-simplification, which only executes the Propagation
(P) once in the pre-processing, and Combine (C) these receptive fields in different ways and then feed them into a simple
model for better performance. Despite their high predictive
performance and scalability, these methods still face two limitations. First, existing approaches mainly focus on exploring different C methods from the model perspective, neglecting the crucial problem of performance degradation with increasing P depth from the data-centric perspective, known as
the over-smoothing problem. Second, pre-processing overhead takes up most of the end-to-end processing time, especially for large-scale graphs. To address these limitations,
we present random walk with noise masking (RMask), a
plug-and-play module compatible with the existing modelsimplification works. This module enables the exploration
of deeper GNNs while preserving their scalability. Unlike
the previous model-simplification works, we focus on continuous P and found that the noise existing inside each P
is the cause of the over-smoothing issue, and use the efficient masking mechanism to eliminate them. Experimental
results on six real-world datasets demonstrate that modelsimplification works equipped with RMask yield superior
performance compared to their original version and can make
a good trade-off between accuracy and efficiency.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved great success in graph representation learning. In recent years, GNNs
have been widely used in many graph-based applications,
such as databases (Piao et al. 2023; Helali et al. 2022; Cui
et al. 2021), data management (Li et al. 2023; Chen et al.
2023; Zhong et al. 2023), and data mining (He, Chen, and
Chen 2024; Wu, Sun, and Yang 2024; Hao, Liu, and Bai
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18693

