The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Low-Light Image Enhancement via Generative Perceptual Priors
Han Zhou1 * , Wei Dong1 * , Xiaohong Liu2† , Yulun Zhang2 , Guangtao Zhai2 , Jun Chen1
1

McMaster University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhouh115, dongw22, chenjun}@mcmaster.ca, {xiaohongliu, yulzhang, zhaiguangtao}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

learning approaches, which exploit the data fitting capability
of neural networks (Yan et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2020; Lore,
Adedotun, and Soumikm 2017), still suffer from poor adaptability in real-world scenarios. Image priors (i.e., edge) (Xu,
Wang, and Lu 2023; Deepanshu, Lal, and Parihar 2021; Kim
et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2020), semantic priors (Wu et al. 2023;
Fan et al. 2020), and illumination maps (Wang et al. 2020)
are commonly used for improving image quality. However,
their effectiveness in generating realistic details is limited
due to the difficulty of predicting robust priors from severely
degraded inputs. Semantic priors are also constrained by the
reliance on predefined semantic categories, which affects
their ability to generalize in practical applications. Recent
work (Luo et al. 2024) has attempted to fine-tune pre-trained
VLMs to align the content embedding for degraded images
to that for clean images. Yet, fine-tuning VLMs on limited
data has a risk of over-fitting and demonstrates limited generalizability on unseen data.
On the other hand, several recent generative LLIE approaches (Jiang et al. 2023a; Zhou et al. 2023a; He et al.
2023; Yin et al. 2023) are proposed based on Diffusion
Model (DM) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Dhariwal and
Nichol 2021), which demonstrates impressive capacity to
represent intricate distributions without succumbing to the
mode collapse and training instability often associated with
GANs. Despite the prevailing choice of convolutional U-Net
network as the de facto backbone, (Peebles and Xie 2023)
indicates that the inductive biases inherent in U-Net may not
be pivotal for the remarkable performance of diffusion models and introduces the transformer-based diffusion model
(DiT) with good scalability for image synthesis. However,
directly employing DiT for LLIE is unfeasible: (1) The original DiT network is designed to output images with specific
resolutions, whereas LLIE models typically process images
of varying sizes; (2) The computational complexity of the
Vision Transformer in DiT scales quadratically with the input size, which limits its applicability to high-resolution images; (3) Lacking prior information, the original DiT often
demonstrates limited generalization to real-world images.
In view of the aforementioned challenges, we propose a novel LLIE framework with the guidance of
Generative Perceptual Priors (GPP-LLIE) derived from
vision-language models (VLMs). Firstly, we propose incorporating external perceptual priors to help LLIE model to

Although significant progress has been made in enhancing
visibility, retrieving texture details, and mitigating noise in
Low-Light (LL) images, the challenge persists in applying
current Low-Light Image Enhancement (LLIE) methods to
real-world scenarios, primarily due to the diverse illumination conditions encountered. Furthermore, the quest for generating enhancements that are visually realistic and attractive remains an underexplored realm. In response to these
challenges, we introduce a novel LLIE framework with the
guidance of Generative Perceptual Priors (GPP-LLIE) derived from vision-language models (VLMs). Specifically, we
first propose a pipeline that guides VLMs to assess multiple
visual attributes of the LL image and quantify the assessment to output the global and local perceptual priors. Subsequently, to incorporate these generative perceptual priors to
benefit LLIE, we introduce a transformer-based backbone in
the diffusion process, and develop a new layer normalization
(GPP-LN) and an attention mechanism (LPP-Attn) guided
by global and local perceptual priors. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our model outperforms current SOTA methods on paired LL datasets and exhibits superior generalization
on real-world data.

Code — https://github.com/LowLevelAI/GPP-LLIE

1

Introduction

Images captured in low-light conditions exhibit compromised quality, characterized by diminished visibility, reduced contrast, and loss of detail, which complicates both
human observation and vision-based tasks (Huang et al.
2016; Dong, Zhou, and Xu 2018; Xu, Dong, and Zhou
2022). Enhancing these images is particularly challenging
in real-world scenarios due to complex degradation caused
by diverse illumination levels and elevated noise intensities.
Although substantial progress has been made for lowlight image enhancement (LLIE) (Zhou et al. 2024; Li et al.
2023; Dong et al. 2024c), traditional methods, which rely
on handcrafted descriptors(Fu et al. 2016; Jobsob, Zia-ur,
and Woodell 1997; Shen and Gupta 2022) and existing deep
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10752

