The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Path-Adaptive Matting for Efficient Inference Under
Various Computational Cost Constraints
Qinglin Liu 1 , Zonglin Li1 , Xiaoqian Lv1 * , Xin Sun1 , Ru Li1 , Shengping Zhang1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
qinglin.liu@outlook.com, zonglin.li@hit.edu.cn, xiaoqian.hit@gmail.com,
sunxintyc@hit.edu.cn, liru@hit.edu.cn, s.zhang@hit.edu.cn

matte by distinguishing foreground and background or propagating color information, which often struggle in scenarios
with overlapping color distributions. Recently, deep matting
methods (Qiao et al. 2020; Park et al. 2022; Yao et al. 2024)
have employed neural networks to estimate the alpha matte,
leveraging high-level semantics to distinguish foreground
and background, thereby achieving significant progress.
Despite the remarkable performance achieved by deep
image matting methods, real-world image editing applications prioritize achieving efficient inference across different hardware. Unfortunately, most of these methods rely
on complex architectures, making them only suitable for
GPU deployment. For instance, FBAMatting, a popular matting method (Forte and Pitié 2020), consists of 34.8 million
parameters and requires 686 GFlops to process a 1024 ×
1024 image, making it impractical for smartphones. Furthermore, the architectures of current matting methods are
non-scalable and require extensive tuning and retraining to
achieve optimal performance under different computational
cost constraints (Hu et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2024), leading
to substantial computational overhead and carbon dioxide
emissions. While dynamic network methods based on the
Gumbel-Softmax technique (Yu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021;
Han et al. 2022, 2024) hold promise for constructing scalable matting networks under computational cost constraints,
their path-learning strategies largely suffer from the wellknown performance collapse issue due to the aggregation of
skip connections (Xu et al. 2019; Chu and Zhang 2021).
In this paper, we present Path-Adaptive Matting (PAM),
a framework that learns to dynamically adjust the network
path based on image contexts and computational cost constraints, specifically FLOP limitations, for efficient inference. Our approach first formulates computational costconstrained matting network training as a bilevel optimization problem, which optimizes the matting network and the
path estimator successively (Anandalingam and Friesz 1992;
Colson, Marcotte, and Savard 2007). Based on this formulation, we then design a path-adaptive matting architecture
by incorporating path selection layers and learnable connect layers to estimate optimal paths and perform efficient
inference within a unified network. Then, we propose a
performance-aware path learning strategy to generate network path labels online by evaluating only a few network
paths sampled from the prior distribution of optimal paths

Abstract
In this paper, we explore a novel image matting task aimed
at achieving efficient inference under various computational
cost constraints, specifically FLOP limitations, using a single matting network. Existing matting methods which have
not explored scalable architectures or path-learning strategies, fail to tackle this challenge. To overcome these limitations, we introduce Path-Adaptive Matting (PAM), a framework that dynamically adjusts network paths based on image contexts and computational cost constraints. We formulate the training of the computational cost-constrained matting network as a bilevel optimization problem, jointly optimizing the matting network and the path estimator. Building
on this formalization, we design a path-adaptive matting architecture by incorporating path selection layers and learnable connect layers to estimate optimal paths and perform efficient inference within a unified network. Furthermore, we
propose a performance-aware path-learning strategy to generate path labels online by evaluating a few paths sampled
from the prior distribution of optimal paths and network estimations, enabling robust and efficient online path learning.
Experiments on five image matting datasets demonstrate that
the proposed PAM framework achieves competitive performance across a range of computational cost constraints.

Introduction
Natural image matting is a classic computer vision task,
aiming to estimate the alpha matte of the foreground in a
given image. This technique serves as a key technology in
many applications such as remote meetings, live streaming,
and post-production in film. Hence, it has been extensively
researched over the past few decades. Mathematically, the
matting problem aims to estimate the alpha matte α given
an image I and its foreground F and background B as
α = arg min |I − α · F + (1 − α) · B|
α

(1)

Since only I is known while F and B are both unknown,
image matting is an ill-posed problem necessitating additional assumptions or knowledge for resolution. Traditional
matting methods (Wang and Cohen 2007; Ranjbar, Abdelaziz, and Jauhar 2008; He et al. 2011) estimate the alpha
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5532

