The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TG-LLaVA: Text Guided LLaVA via Learnable Latent Embeddings
Dawei Yan1,2 , Pengcheng Li2 , Yang Li2 , Hao Chen3 , Qingguo Chen2 , Weihua Luo2 ,
Wei Dong4 , Qingsen Yan5 , Haokui Zhang1* , Chunhua Shen3
1

School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
AI Business, Alibaba Group
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
College of Information and Control Engineering, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology
5
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
Abstract
Currently, inspired by the success of vision-language models
(VLMs), an increasing number of researchers are focusing
on improving VLMs and have achieved promising results.
However, most existing methods concentrate on optimizing
the connector and enhancing the language model component,
while neglecting improvements to the vision encoder itself.
In contrast, we propose Text Guided LLaVA (TG-LLaVA) in
this paper, which optimizes VLMs by guiding the vision encoder with text, offering a new and orthogonal optimization
direction. Specifically, inspired by the purpose-driven logic
inherent in human behavior, we use learnable latent embeddings as a bridge to analyze textual instruction and add the
analysis results to the vision encoder as guidance, refining it.
Subsequently, another set of latent embeddings extracts additional detailed text-guided information from high-resolution
local patches as auxiliary information. Finally, with the guidance of text, the vision encoder can extract text-related features, similar to how humans focus on the most relevant parts
of an image when considering a question. This results in generating better answers. Experiments on various datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Remarkably,
without the need for additional training data, our proposed
method can bring more benefits to the baseline (LLaVA-1.5)
compared with other concurrent methods. Furthermore, the
proposed method consistently brings improvement in different settings.

Figure 1: Percentage performance improvements of TGLLaVA over the baseline LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al. 2024a)
across ten benchmarks, using Vicuna-7B (left) and 13B
(right), respectively.

Current adopted VLMs typically consist of three main
components: vision encoder, large language model, and
connector. The vision encoder, trained on vast amounts of
image-text pairs using contrastive learning, encodes images
into a shared space with text. Widely used examples include
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and SigLIP (Zhai et al. 2023).
LLMs such as Llama (Touvron et al. 2023), Vicuna (Chiang et al. 2023), Qwen (Bai et al. 2023a), and Yi (Young
et al. 2024) have made significant strides in natural language
processing tasks, paving the way for integrating vision with
text in VLMs. Connector focuses on aligning visual and language features, serving as bridges between modalities.
Corresponding to the main architecture of VLMs, current improvement methods primarily focus on optimizing
the connector and enhancing the language model component
among the three major components. For instance, BLIP2 (Li
et al. 2023b) carefully designs multiple loss functions for
both contrastive and generative learning, which allows it to
achieve precise cross-modal alignment through a multi-stage
training process. MoE-LLaVA (Lin et al. 2024) incorporates
a mixture of experts into the second feature forward network layer to enhance the connector component. DenseConnector (Yao et al. 2024) uses dense connections to merge
features from various levels, providing more visual information to the LLM. ImageBind-LLM (Han et al. 2023) transforms image features using a binding network and then integrates these transformed features with the word tokens of
the LLM. Besides improving the model structure, increasing

Code — https://github.com/AIDC-AI

Introduction
By incorporating visual information into large language
models (LLMs), visual language models (VLMs) build on
the success of LLMs like ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023a) and
Llama (Touvron et al. 2023), taking their capabilities a step
further. VLMs are not limited to language-based dialogue
with humans, they can also discuss the image content, answer questions related to the visual inputs, etc. Recently,
centered around VLMs, researchers have conducted extensive works (Wu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024; Awadalla
et al. 2023; Reid et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9076

