The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

As Pseudo-label Free As Possible: Leveraging Adaptive Feature Generation for
Sparsely Annotated Object Detection
Shuilian Yao 1 , Yu Liu 1 , Qi Jia 1 * , Sihong Chen 2 , Wei Zhuo 3
School of Software Technology, DUT-RU International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of
Technology, Dalian, China
2
AILab, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
shuilian yao@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {liuyu8824,jiaqi}@dlut.edu.cn, whalechen@tencent.com, weizhuo@szu.edu.cn

person
motorbike

Inputs

Compared to fully supervised object detection, training with
sparse annotations typically leads to a decline in performance
due to insufficient feature diversity. Existing sparsely annotated object detection (SAOD) methods often rely on pseudolabeling strategies, but these pseudo-labels tend to introduce
noise under extreme sparsity. To simultaneously avoid the
impact of pseudo-label noise and enhance feature diversity,
we propose a novel Adaptive Feature Generation (AdaptFG)
model that generates features based on class names. This
model integrates a pre-trained CLIP into a VAE-based feature generator, with its core innovation being an Adaptor that
adaptively maps CLIP semantic embeddings to the object
detector domain. Additionally, we introduce inter-class relationship reasoning in detector, which effectively mitigates
misclassifications stemming from similar features. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that AdaptFG consistently
outperforms state-of-the-art SAOD methods on the PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO benchmarks.

Weak
Aug

Strong
Aug

(b) Pseudo-label method
Pseudo labels
Detector

(a) Sparsely annotated data

Detector

Abstract

bicycle (×) cow (×) person (√)

loss

Incorrect
labels

Correct
labels

Adaptor

bicycle

VAE
Decoder

(c) Pseudo-label free method (Ours)
[“person”,
“sheep”，
…
“bicycle”]

…

RoI Pooling

(d) Performance under different sparsity levels

sheep

AP on COCO
Split-1

1

44

24

30%

Co-mining
Ours

50%

70%

Unbiased Teacher
Oracle

Figure 1: Comparison of the pseudo-label method with
our approach. (a) Three figures exhibit typical examples of
sparsely annotated data, in which only a few objects are labeled. (b) The pseudo-label method mines more proposals
as foreground, but it is prone to producing incorrect predictions under extreme sparsity. (c) Our pseudo-label free
method innovatively integrates a CLIP-infused VAE and an
Adapter, alongside leveraging target feature correlations, to
address the challenges posed by limited annotations. (d) AP
performance on COCO under different sparsity levels. The
horizontal axis represents the sparsity, i.e., the percentage
of annotations removed. Our method demonstrates greater
robustness compared to other methods, with performance
close to that of the fully annotated scenario (Oracle).

Code — https://github.com/YAOSL98/AdaptFG

Introduction
In contrast to traditional object detection approaches (Lin
et al. 2017; Ren et al. 2015; Tan, Pang, and Le 2020;
Wang, Bochkovskiy, and Liao 2023), which generally require a substantial number of labeled instances for each
class to achieve high performance, sparsely annotated object detection (SAOD) offers a remedy that makes a detector
learn with a limited number of labeled samples. Researching
SAOD is particularly significant because acquiring fully annotated samples in practical applications is not only costly
but also labor-intensive. However, training such a detector
becomes challenging, as limited class labels and bounding
boxes hinder the network from acquiring sufficient target
features for training, as shown in Figure1(a).
To address this challenge, several seminal works, such
as Unbiased Teacher (Niitani et al. 2019) and Comining (Wang et al. 2021), typically employ pseudolabeling to explore objects misclassified as background.
However, the generated pseudo-labels often plagued by substantial noise, evident from the red corsses in Figure1(b).

Figure 1 demonstrates a 70% reduction in the number of labels (indicating increased sparsity along the horizontal axis)
significantly degrades performance, underscoring the unresolved issue of sparsity sensitivity.
The sparsity sensitivity primarily arises from the detector’s exclusive dependence on the visual information
throughout the learning phase. Firstly, the scarcity of labeled data inherently restricts the diversity of features, inadequately fulfilling the detector’s learning prerequisites.
While pseudo-labeling techniques can augment the number
of foreground proposals, enhancing feature diversity, they

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9418

