The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semantic Segmentation on Raindrop Degraded Images Using Two-Stage Dual
Teacher-Student Learning
Xin Yang1 , Wending Yan2 , Yuan Yuan2 , Michael Bi Mi2 , Robby T. Tan1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Huawei International Pte Ltd
e0674612@u.nus.edu, {yan.wending,yuanyuan10@huawei}.com, michaelbimi@yahoo.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing semantic segmentation methods face challenges
when processing input images degraded by raindrops on the
lens or windshield. Unlike other adverse conditions such as
fog and nighttime, which degrade visual quality, raindrops
not only impair visual appearances but also introduce misleading occlusion, leading to significant performance drops in
current models. The novelty of our approach lies in our twostage, dual teacher-student framework. We tackle the complex problem of raindrop degradation by dividing it into two
distinct challenges: degraded visual appearance and raindrop
occlusion. These challenges are then addressed individually
in two stages, utilizing two pairs of teacher-student networks.
This division enables the networks to develop specialized expertise in handling each aspect of raindrop degradation, enabling their collaboration to achieve superior performance.
In the first stage, one teacher-student pair focuses on learning to extract information from visual degraded areas. Building on this, the second teacher-student pair focuses specially
on the raindrop occlusion. As such, unlike the existing methods, our approach employs a collaborative approach to decompose and address raindrop-induced degradations. In the
second stage, we introduce a mask-based recovery technique
to identify and rectify areas that likely contain misleading
information, thus further refining the predictions. Additionally, this stage encourages both pairs to expand knowledge
by swapping their specialized expertise. Our method achieves
a performance of 60.3 mIoU on Rainy WCity (Zhong et al.
2022) and 72.8 mIoU on ACDC Rainy (Sakaridis, Dai, and
Van Gool 2021), representing an improvement of +4.4 mIoU
and +2.3 mIoU over the existing state-of-the-art methods, respectively.

(a) Image

(b) Ground Truth

(c) SAM

(d) Wea. Diff.

(e) MIC

(f) Ours

Figure 1: (a) Input rainy image. (b) Ground-truth annotated
by human. (c) Result from Weather Diffusion (Özdenizci
and Legenstein 2023) with a semantic segmentation
model (Hoyer, Dai, and Van Gool 2022a) trained on clear
images. (d) Result from SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023), which
uses a different class protocol as ours. (e) Result from
MIC (Hoyer et al. 2023), indicating incorrect predictions
due to adherent raindrops. (f) Our method shows better performance particularly in the white rectangular area. Zoom in
for better visualization.

A few unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods
(e.g., (Hoyer et al. 2023; Kennerley et al. 2023)) address adverse weather degradations, such as rain streaks, haze, nighttime, etc., without relying on annotated data for the weatherdegraded targets. However, they are ineffective in handling
raindrops. This is largely attributed to the unique characteristics of raindrops: transparent, blurred, varying in size, and
unevenly distributed across an image. These features pose
challenges for UDA methods to accurately distinguish regions affected by adherent raindrops from the background
image. Moreover, transparent yet blurred raindrops occlude
the background scene, introducing misleading visual cues
that can misguide the methods.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to tackle
complex raindrop degradation by incorporating two pairs
of teacher-student networks, each with different expertise,
across two stages, along with a mask-based raindrop recovery strategy. Learning to extract correct information from
the complex raindrop degradation presents a challenge. We
address this problem with two pairs of teacher-student net-

Introduction
The presence of raindrops on camera lenses or windshields
can significantly degrade images, posing challenges for semantic segmentation. One possible approach to address
this issue is to remove raindrops from the input image
(e.g., (Shao et al. 2021; Özdenizci and Legenstein 2023))
before applying semantic segmentation. However, raindrop
removal itself remains a challenging problem, as these methods may generate artifacts that impact the performance of
the subsequent semantic segmentation.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9292

