The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The Value of Recall in Extensive-Form Games
Ratip Emin Berker1, 2 , Emanuel Tewolde1, 2 , Ioannis Anagnostides1 ,
Tuomas Sandholm1, 4, 5, 6 , Vincent Conitzer1, 2, 3
1
Carnegie Mellon University
Foundations of Cooperative AI Lab (FOCAL)
3
University of Oxford
4
Strategic Machine, Inc.
5
Strategy Robot, Inc.
6
Optimized Markets, Inc.
{rberker, etewolde, ianagnos, sandholm, conitzer}@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract

forget less important aspects of previously held information. Indeed, imperfect-recall abstractions have been a crucial component of state-of-the-art algorithms in poker solving (Brown, Ganzfried, and Sandholm 2015; Johanson et al.
2013; Waugh et al. 2009; Ganzfried and Sandholm 2014;
Čermák, Bosanský, and Lisý 2017). Imperfect recall also
naturally arises in so-called adversarial team games (Celli
and Gatti 2018; Zhang, Farina, and Sandholm 2023; Zhang,
An, and Subrahmanian 2022; Emmons et al. 2022; von Stengel and Koller 1997), wherein a team of players—which
can be construed as a single player with imperfect recall—
faces an adversary. The benefit of reinforcing the communication capacity of the team in such settings—corresponding
to boosting recall—is an active area of research, prominently featured in a recent NeurIPS competition (Meisheri
and Khadilkar 2020; Resnick et al. 2020). Relatedly, natural notions of correlated equilibria can be modeled via an
imperfect-recall mediator, endowed with the ability to provide recommendations (Zhang and Sandholm 2022); in that
context, imperfect recall can serve to safeguard players’ private information, a consideration that also arises in other
settings (Conitzer 2019). Finally, another possible application revolves around simulating and testing AI agents before their deployment in the real world (Kovarı́k, Oesterheld,
and Conitzer 2023, 2024; Chen, Ghersengorin, and Petersen
2024). As a result, it is becoming increasingly pressing to
expand our scope beyond the assumption of perfect recall.
In this paper, we examine a question at the heart of this
research agenda: how does perfect recall affect players’ utilities under various natural solution concepts? More specifically, we contrast the utilities obtained by a player in an initial imperfect-recall game (in extensive form) to those in a
perfect recall refinement thereof; we refer to the corresponding ratio as the value of recall (VoR). Here, our main contribution is to provide a broad characterization of VoR for different solution concepts in terms of natural game properties.
Many strategic interactions demonstrate that perfect recall offers a significant advantage. In the popular card game
blackjack, the house is expected to prevail in the long run
against a player with poor recall, but certain memorization
strategies tip—at least under the earlier rules followed by
casinos—the balance in the player’s favor (Thorp 2016), as
pop-culture has hyperbolically portrayed. The role of mem-

Imperfect-recall games—in which players may forget previously acquired information—have found many practical applications, ranging from game abstractions to team games and
testing AI agents. In this paper, we quantify the utility gain by
endowing a player with perfect recall, which we call the value
of recall (VoR). While VoR can be unbounded in general, we
parameterize it in terms of various game properties, namely
the structure of chance nodes and the degree of absentmindedness (the number of successive times a player enters the
same information set). Further, we identify several pathologies that arise with VoR, and show how to circumvent them.
We also study the complexity of computing VoR, and how to
optimally apportion partial recall. Finally, we connect VoR
to other previously studied concepts in game theory, including the price of anarchy. We use that connection in conjunction with the celebrated smoothness framework to characterize VoR in a broad class of games.

Introduction
Game theory offers a principled framework for reasoning about complex interactions involving multiple strategic players. It continues to propel landmark results in longstanding challenges in artificial intelligence (AI), ranging
from poker (Bowling et al. 2015; Moravčı́k et al. 2017;
Brown and Sandholm 2018) to diplomacy (Bakhtin et al.
2022). A common premise in game-theoretic modeling is
perfect recall—players never forget information once acquired. The perfect-recall assumption is often called into
question for games involving human players; however, it
is difficult to come up with a faithful model in such cases
due to the unpredictability of when and what human players will forget. In contrast, AI agents can be specifically
designed to relinquish certain information, thereby making
the imperfect-recall framework directly applicable. But why
should one consider AI agents with imperfect recall?
An early, influential application of imperfect-recall games
revolves around abstraction: games encountered in practice
are typically too large to represent exactly, and so one resorts
to abstraction to compress its description. In particular, one
way of doing so consists of allowing players to carefully
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13631

