The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SR-FoT: A Syllogistic-Reasoning Framework of Thought for Large Language
Models Tackling Knowledge-based Reasoning Tasks
Wentao Wan1 , Zhuojie Yang1 , Yongcan Chen3 , Chenglin Luo1 , Ruilin Wang1 , Kehao Cai1 , Nan
Kang1 , Liang Lin1 , Keze Wang1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
3
South China Normal University
{wanwt3, yangzhj53}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, bebobi@163.com, chenglinluo@foxmail.com, wangrlin23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
caikehao@triody.tech, {kangn5@mail2, linlng@mail}.sysu.edu.cn, kezewang@gmail.com
Abstract

Because formal language-based reasoning requires a predefined library of formalized premises, many knowledgebased reasoning tasks, including common-sense question
answering, involve a diverse array of premises. It is difficult to prepare and rigorously formalize such a large library
of premises in advance. Therefore, performing correct deductive reasoning in natural language holds significant importance.
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Chang et al. 2024;
Floridi and Chiriatti 2020; Touvron et al. 2023; Chiang et al.
2023; Huang and Chang 2022; DeepSeek-AI 2024) pretrained on extensive corpora possess inherent soft deductive reasoning capabilities (Seals and Shalin 2023). With the
aid of the Chain-of-Thought prompt (CoT) (Lyu et al. 2023;
Wei et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Turpin et al. 2024; Lee
et al. 2024; Liu, Pang, and Fan 2023), the cognitive abilities of LLMs are further enhanced. However, reasoning with
CoT often does not constitute strict deductive reasoning and
thus can lack rigor. Fig. 4 illustrates the different processes
of handling the same problem using CoT and classic syllogistic deductive reasoning, clearly showing that the syllogistic deductive approach is more rigorous. We believe that
guiding large language models to perform deductive reasoning, rather than merely multi-step reasoning, can enhance
the rigor of the reasoning process, reduce illusions, and subsequently improve performance on complex tasks.
Inspired by the most fundamental human deductive reasoning paradigm, syllogistic reasoning (Bucciarelli and
Johnson-Laird 1999; Khemlani and Johnson-Laird 2012;
Bara, Bucciarelli, and Johnson-Laird 1995), we propose a
multi-stage reasoning framework for large language models
to guide them in using syllogistic reasoning to solve specific problems. In contrast to existing works in the community (Wu et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023b; Deng et al. 2023),
we do not solely rely on simplistic processes or create targeted benchmarks to evaluate the LLMs’ capabilities in performing syllogistic reasoning. Instead, we propose a reasoning framework based on the syllogistic thinking paradigm to
handle complex knowledge-based reasoning tasks. Our SRFoT advances in guiding LLMs in performing syllogistic deductive reasoning, thereby achieving improved performance
on these tasks and enhancing the rigor and reliability of the
reasoning process.

Deductive reasoning is a crucial logical capability that assists
us in solving complex problems based on existing knowledge.
Although augmented by Chain-of-Thought prompts, Large
Language Models (LLMs) might not follow the correct reasoning paths. Enhancing the deductive reasoning abilities of
LLMs, and leveraging their extensive built-in knowledge for
various reasoning tasks, remains an open question. Attempting to mimic the human deductive reasoning paradigm, we
propose a multi-stage Syllogistic-Reasoning Framework of
Thought (SR-FoT) that enables LLMs to perform syllogistic deductive reasoning to handle complex knowledge-based
reasoning tasks. Our SR-FoT begins by interpreting the question and then uses the interpretation and the original question
to propose a suitable major premise. It proceeds by generating and answering minor premise questions in two stages
to match the minor premises. Finally, it guides LLMs to use
the previously generated major and minor premises to perform syllogistic deductive reasoning to derive the answer to
the original question. Extensive and thorough experiments on
knowledge-based reasoning tasks have demonstrated the effectiveness and advantages of our SR-FoT.

Code — https://github.com/RodeWayne/SR-FoT

Introduction
Deductive reasoning (Johnson-Laird 1999) is the process of
drawing valid inferences. Deductive reasoning is a powerful
human capability, where rigorous deductive reasoning helps
us use existing knowledge as premises to derive correct subsequent conclusions, enabling us to tackle various complex
tasks in the real world.
Automated deductive reasoning has long been a pursuit in
the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Chowdhary and Chowdhary 2020; Bharadiya 2023; Khurana
et al. 2023). Works on automated rigorous reasoning include reasoning engines and Automated Theorem Proving
(ATP) (Bibel 2013), which often provide methods for automatically checking the rigor of reasoning. However, these
engines require the use of formal languages, which limits
their applicability in knowledge-based reasoning scenarios.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15186

