The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Interactive Bimodal Hypergraph Networks
for Emotion Recognition in Conversations
Xuping Chen, Wuzhen Shi*
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Digital Creative Technology
Guangdong Province Engineering Laboratory for Digital Creative Technology
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University
2310433006@email.szu.edu.cn, wzhshi@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
The advancement in multimodal research has increased focus
on Emotion Recognition in Conversations (ERC), targeting
accurately identifying emotional changes. Methods based on
graph convolution can better capture the dynamic changes of
emotions and improve the accuracy and robustness of emotion recognition. However, existing methods do not distinguish the interaction patterns of a conversation, which results
in limiting their ability to model contextual emotional relationships. In this paper, we propose a Dynamic Interactive Bimodal HyperGraph Convolutional Networks (DIB-HGCN),
which creatively constructs two types of sub-hypergraphs,
i.e., the monologic sub-hypergraph and the dialogic subhypergraph, for modeling emotion relationships of different interaction patterns. The monologic sub-hypergraph is
used to explore the contextual consistent emotions during
the speaker’s monologue interactions, while the dialogic subhypergraph focuses on capturing the emotional transfers in
the dialogic interactions. Meanwhile, the single window partitioning mechanism fails to accommodate the distinct emotional velocity variations across the two interaction patterns.
Therefore, we set up dynamic windows in the monologic interactions to fully utilize the information of sentence nodes
with consistent emotions, and we add fragment windows to
the dialogic interactions to prevent information interference
caused by frequent emotional transfers. The experimental results show that our proposed method outperforms existing
methods on two benchmark multimodal ERC datasets.

Figure 1: Examples of emotional consistency in monologue
interaction patterns and emotional transfers in dialogic interaction patterns in conversations.

integration of emotional information from different modalities, which can significantly enhance the overall user experience of human-computer interaction and other related applications(Ghosal et al. 2019).
Compared to traditional emotion recognition of isolated
utterance, ERC is characterized by its complexity and subtlety, requiring a consideration of the distinct roles of each
participant. Consequently, recent efforts have sought to incorporate conversational participant information into the
recognition process. For example, some researchers have
integrated speaker information into conversational modeling by leveraging the time series modeling capabilities of
RNNs (Hazarika et al. 2018a,b). Furthermore, conversations
are more complex than mere time series data, which has
directed researchers’ attention to graph convolutional networks. Some researchers explore graph construction with
speaker embeddings to capture speaker information effectively (Hu et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024). CauAIN (Zhao, Zhao,
and Lu 2022), from the perspective of emotional cause detection, models the dependency relationships within and be-

Introduction
Emotional communication plays a pivotal role in human interactions, serving as both the fabric of interpersonal connections and a vital avenue for fostering deeper mutual understanding (Zhao et al. 2023). Therefore, the accurate identification of emotions within conversations has emerged as
a topic of significant concern across various sectors of society (Gao et al. 2022). The development of multimodal
technologies happens to provide an approach to overcome
the limitations of ERC, thereby enabling a more comprehensive understanding of the speaker’s emotional changes
(Kalateh et al. 2024). It allows for a more comprehensive
* Corresponding author: Wuzhen Shi
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1256

