The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Diversifying Query: Region-Guided Transformer for
Temporal Sentence Grounding
Xiaolong Sun1 * , Liushuai Shi1 * , Le Wang1†
Sanping Zhou1 , Kun Xia1 , Yabing Wang1 , Gang Hua2
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Multimodal Experiences Research Lab, Dolby Laboratories
{sunxiaolong,shiliushuai,xiakun}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {lewang,spzhou}@xjtu.edu.cn, {wyb7wyb7,ganghua}@gmail.com

Abstract

moment spans from a set of learnable queries, they streamline the complicated grounding pipeline.
Although DETR-based approaches have achieved notable
performance in TSG task, we still observe some unique
limitations of the DETR structure compared to other fields
(e.g., object detection). Specifically, they suffer from limited
query distribution and overlapped proposals, leading to inaccurate predictions. As shown in Fig. 1, we present the centerlength distribution of moment queries in three DETR-based
methods, each query learns to predict different temporal regions (e.g., the lower left area represents a short moment
near the video’s start and the higher middle area represents
a long moment). In previous methods, each query includes
numerous overlapped and redundant proposals for the same
region (e.g., the short moments in the lower part), resulting
in ineffective predictions. We attribute this limitation to the
lack of task-related guidance (e.g., category constraints, spatial distribution prior, etc.) for the learnable queries to serve
a specific mode. Although task-related guidance is crucial
to reducing the overlapped proposals, it has been scarcely
explored in TSG task. Furthermore, the complex solution
space generated by variable and open-vocabulary language
descriptions exacerbates the optimization difficulty, making
it harder for learnable queries to distinguish each other adaptively and resulting in more severe overlapped proposals.
Another limitation is that the proposal scoring in previous
methods is purely based on the classification confidence, ignoring the quality of the predicted boundary. Instead, we
argue that correctly classified proposals that better overlap
with the ground-truth should be assigned higher scores. The
above limitations significantly restrict the accurate localization of the DETR structure in TSG task.
In this paper, we introduce an effective Region-Guided
TRansformer (RGTR) framework to cope with the aforementioned limitations in TSG task. To address the issue of
overlapped proposals, we introduce regional priors based
on the distribution of ground-truth moment spans as taskrelated guidance. This regional guidance can eliminate overlapped proposals by increasing query diversity. Specifically,
we design a region-guided decoder with a new concept of
anchor pairs as moment queries to provide regional guidance. Each moment query consists of a static anchor and a

Temporal sentence grounding is a challenging task that aims
to localize the moment spans relevant to a language description. Although recent DETR-based models have achieved
notable progress by leveraging multiple learnable moment
queries, they suffer from overlapped and redundant proposals,
leading to inaccurate predictions. We attribute this limitation
to the lack of task-related guidance for the learnable queries
to serve a specific mode. Furthermore, the complex solution
space generated by variable and open-vocabulary language
descriptions complicates optimization, making it harder for
learnable queries to adaptively distinguish each other, leading to more severe overlapped proposals. To address this limitation, we present the Region-Guided TRansformer (RGTR)
for temporal sentence grounding, which introduces regional
guidance to increase query diversity and eliminate overlapped
proposals. Instead of using learnable queries, RGTR adopts a
set of anchor pairs as moment queries to introduce explicit
regional guidance. Each moment query takes charge of moment prediction for a specific temporal region, which reduces
the optimization difficulty and ensures the diversity of the
proposals. In addition, we design an IoU-aware scoring head
to improve proposal quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of RGTR, outperforming state-of-theart methods on three public benchmarks and exhibiting good
generalization and robustness on out-of-distribution splits.

Code — https://github.com/TensorsSun/RGTR

1

Introduction

Temporal sentence grounding (TSG) aims at localizing the
moment spans semantically aligned with the given language
description in an untrimmed video. Early methods address
the TSG task by designing predefined dense proposals (Gao
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2022b) or directly learning sentenceframe interactions (Liu et al. 2022a; Yang and Wu 2022).
The recent success of detection transformer (DETR) has inspired the integration of transformers into the TSG framework (Moon et al. 2023b; Xiao et al. 2024). By decoding
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7131

