The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards S2 -Challenges Underlying LLM-Based Augmentation for Personalized
News Recommendation
Shicheng Wang1,2 , Hengzhu Tang3 , Li Gao3 * , Shu Guo4∗ , Suqi Cheng3 , Junfeng Wang3 , Dawei
Yin3 , Tingwen Liu1,2 , Lihong Wang4
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Baidu Inc.
4
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team/Coordination Center
{wangshicheng, liutingwen}@iie.ac.cn , {hengzhutang, gaoli.sinh, chengsuqi}@gmail.com, guoshu@cert.org.cn,
wangjunfeng@baidu.com, yindawei@acm.org, wlh@isc.org.cn
2

Abstract

Prompt:
Given user U8125
and his clicked news
[history], please help
me generate several
news articles.
Output:
: The Rise of ……
: Discovering ……

Personalized news recommendation aims to recommend candidate news to the target user. Since the data and knowledge
involved in traditional recommender systems are restricted,
recent studies utilize large language models (LLMs) to generate news articles and augment the original dataset. However,
despite the superiority of LLM-based augmentation in news
recommendation, previous studies still suffer from two serious problems, i.e., structure-level deficiency and semanticlevel noise. Since the LLM-based augmentation is mainly
implemented at the semantic level, collaborative signals, the
critical structure information in recommender systems, is neglected during the generation process. Thus, it is inappropriate to perform recommendation based on the augmented usernews bipartite, which manifests as multiple isolated cliques.
Moreover, utilizing the open-world knowledge of LLMs to
extend the closed systems will inevitably introduce noise information, leading to difficulties in mining users’ real preferences. In this paper, we propose a novel Structure-aware
and Semantic-aware approach for LLM-Empowered personalized News Recommendation, named S2 LENR, to tackle
the mentioned problems. Specifically, we propose a structureaware refinement module to inject collaborative information
in a parametric way, in order to construct a valid augmented
bipartite. Besides, we devise a semantic-aware denoising
module utilizing contrastive learning paradigm to overcome
the negative effects of noise information. Finally, we calculate the relevance score between target user and candidate
news representations. We conduct experiments on two realworld news recommendation datasets MIND-Large, MINDSmall and empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach from multiple perspectives.

Augmented Bipartite

Original Bipartite

U8125

U8125

VS
U38

U38

…… U38 ……

Figure 1: Illustration of structure-level deficiency: Each generated news only interacted with the specific user and thus
generated bipartite lacks of collaborative information.

news recommendation techniques aim to recommend candidate news that the target user may be interested in.
Since the data and knowledge involved are confined to
specific application domains, traditional recommender systems are usually considered to be closed forms (Koren, Bell,
and Volinsky 2009; Zhou et al. 2018). As a result, the characteristic of significant isolation from the external world tends
to exert negative effects on exploring implicit relevant clues
as well as mining users’ preferences. Although recent studies have attempted to incorporate external knowledge graphs
to break the restrictions of the closed forms (Liu et al. 2020;
Wu et al. 2021), their performance is usually constrained
due to the limited generalization ability of the structural
data. Fortunately, the recent emergence of large language
models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al. 2023) or
LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023), has revolutionized the learning paradigm of various research fields, due to their multifarious exceptional abilities. To this end, with respect to the
characteristics of the news recommendation task, a common
solution is to generate synthetic news articles and augment
the original dataset through fully exploiting the various capabilities of LLMs. For example, GERNE (Liu et al. 2023)
constructs user-specific prompts and leverages pretrained semantic knowledge from LLMs to enrich news data.
However, despite the superiority of LLM-based augmentation in news recommendation, previous studies still suffer
from two serious problems, i.e., structure-level deficiency

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet and online news
services, a large amount of news is published on numerous news platforms all the time, which makes users overwhelmed. Therefore, personalized news recommendation is
necessary for news platforms to help users alleviate information overload and improve their reading experience. Briefly,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12739

