The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

NLGT: Neighborhood-based and Label-enhanced Graph Transformer
Framework for Node Classification
Xiaolong Xu1,2,3,4 , Yibo Zhou1 , Haolong Xiang1,3 * , Xiaoyong Li5 * ,
Xuyun Zhang6 , Lianyong Qi7 , Wanchun Dou8
1
School of Software, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
Yunnan Key Laboratory of Service Computing, Yunan University of Finance and Economics, China
3
Jiangsu Province Engineering Research Center of Advanced Computing and Intelligent Services, China
4
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Atmospheric Environment and Equipment Technology, China
5
College of Meteorology and Oceanography, National University of Defense Technology, China
6
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
7
College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China), China
8
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
njuxlxu@gmail.com, {ybzhou, hlxiang}@nuist.edu.cn, xuyun.zhang@mq.edu.au, lianyongqi@gmail.com
2

Abstract

GNNs, such as Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) (Kipf
and Welling 2017), Graph Sample and Aggregate (GraphSAGE) (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017), and Graph
Attention Networks (GAT) (Veličković et al. 2018), which
can effectively capture information through diverse feature
aggregation mechanisms. However, these traditional methods are based on message-passing mechanism, which aggregates the node information from its neighborhood nodes.
This process will lead to oversmoothing, i.e., node information converges to a similar state, resulting in a reduction of the node diversity (Oono and Suzuki 2020). In
real-world scenarios, graphs are often sparse, which affects
the efficiency of information aggregation and increases the
difficulty of convergence for these message-passing networks (Yun et al. 2020). Furthermore, message-passing
based GNNs apply an iterative mechanism, which is timeconsuming and poses challenges for parallel training of the
model. Some methods have been proposed to tackle the
above problems, but it is still challenging to provide an effective learning framework in the graph domain.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely applied on graphlevel tasks, such as node classification, link prediction and
graph generation. Existing GNNs mostly adopt a messagepassing mechanism to aggregate node information with their
neighbors, which often makes node information similar after rounds of aggregations and leads to oversmoothing. Although recent works have made improvements by combining
different message aggregation methods or introducing semantic encodings as priors, these message-passing based GNNs
still fail to combat oversmoothing after multiple iterations of
node aggregation. Besides, the feature extraction ability of
these methods is restricted because of the graph sparsity that
hinders the aggregation of node information. To deal with
the above two issues, we propose Neighborhood-based and
Label-enhanced Graph Transformer (NLGT), a novel and effective framework for graph learning. Specifically, we present
a label-enhanced feature fusion mechanism that integrate the
shallow node features and label embeddings as enhanced features. Moreover, we design a neighborhood-based mask attention mechanism to alleviate the negative effects caused by
the sparsity of the graph. In the predicting stage, we aggregate the prediction results from multiple sampled sub-graphs
and apply voting mechanisms to enhance the accuracy and robustness of our framework. Finally, extensive experiments are
conducted on four open benchmark datasets, which demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed framework compared with existing state-of-the-art methods.

There have been many works that attempted to leverage
transformers into the graph domain to mitigate the problems existing in traditional GNNs, which are called Graph
Transformers (GTs). For instance, Graphormer (Ying et al.
2021) implements a dense attention mechanism supplemented by centrality and spatial encodings to capture the
structural information in graphs. Exphormer (Shirzad et al.
2023) adopts a sparse attention mechanism to make graph
transformers more scalable. Polynomial-Expressive Graph
Transformer (Polynormer) (Deng, Yue, and Zhang 2024)
presents a local-to-global attention mechanism to balance
the trade-off between expressivity and scalability of models.
These transformer-based graph classification methods utilize self-attention mechanisms to capture long-range dependencies among nodes, which enables a global understanding of the graph structures. Additionally, the parallelization
feature of transformers allows for efficient processing and
training on large-scale graphs. However, the performance of
classification is restricted by only considering shallow node

Introduction
Graph structures play a crucial role in various real-life scenarios, such as citation networks, social networks, and biological gene networks (Liu et al. 2024). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), as dominant techniques for modeling graph
structures, have achieved remarkable success on graph-level
tasks such as node classification, link prediction and graph
generation (Wang et al. 2023). There are a wide range of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding authors.

12954

