The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SAFIRE: Segment Any Forged Image Region
Myung-Joon Kwon1* , Wonjun Lee1* , Seung-Hun Nam2 , Minji Son1 , Changick Kim1
1

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
NAVER WEBTOON AI, Seongnam, South Korea
mjkwon2021@gmail.com, dpenguin@kaist.ac.kr, shnam1520@gmail.com, mjson0103@gmail.com, changick@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Most techniques approach the problem of image forgery localization as a binary segmentation task, training neural networks to label original areas as 0 and forged areas as 1. In
contrast, we tackle this issue from a more fundamental perspective by partitioning images according to their originating
sources. To this end, we propose Segment Any Forged Image
Region (SAFIRE), which solves forgery localization using
point prompting. Each point on an image is used to segment
the source region containing itself. This allows us to partition
images into multiple source regions, a capability achieved for
the first time. Additionally, rather than memorizing certain
forgery traces, SAFIRE naturally focuses on uniform characteristics within each source region. This approach leads to
more stable and effective learning, achieving superior performance in both the new task and the traditional binary forgery
localization.

Forged Image
(Input)

Source Images

IF-OSN

MVSS-Net

TruFor

SAFIRE
(Binary)

SAFIRE
(Multi-source)

Figure 1: The forged image is composed of three source regions. Previous methods are limited to binary prediction —
segmenting forged regions. In contrast, our SAFIRE is also
capable of multi-source prediction — distinguishing regions
that originate from the same source images.

Code & Data — https://github.com/mjkwon2021/SAFIRE
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08197

from the camera capture are labeled as 0, and regions that
have been manipulated are labeled as 1, to train deep neural
networks.
Instead, we view the IFL from a more fundamental perspective of partitioning an image into distinct regions based
on their origins. In this context, we define these distinct regions as source regions, which are distinct segments of an
image that have been independently captured, AI-generated,
or manipulated (Fig. 1).
From this perspective, we propose Segment Any Forged
Image Region (SAFIRE), a novel point prompt-based IFL
method designed to precisely partition images into regions
based on their original sources. SAFIRE employs point
prompting, where each point on an image segments the area
that shares the same source (Fig. 2).
To achieve this, we capitalize on the Segment Anything
Model (SAM)’s (Kirillov et al. 2023) point prompting capability with several differences compared to the original
SAM. First, SAFIRE segments a source region containing
the given point whereas SAM segments any meaningful
chunk around the point. Second, while SAM deals with ambiguous ground truths, SAFIRE has a clear ground truth,
where all points on one source region share the same answer.
Third, SAFIRE generates and uses point prompts internally,

Introduction
In the era of artificial intelligence (AI), the proliferation of
image editing software (Fu et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023) and
sophisticated generative models (Rombach et al. 2022; Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020) has made image forgery more accessible and more challenging to detect than ever before (Lin
et al. 2024). The ease of image manipulation critically affects areas where the integrity of visual information is crucial, including the spread of fake news in journalism, the
use of counterfeit evidence in law enforcement, and the
presence of fabricated microscopy images in biomedical research (Verdoliva 2020; Sabir et al. 2021). Therefore, detecting and precisely localizing forgeries within an image is
crucial for maintaining trust in digital media.
Currently, most image forensics methods address the
problem of image forgery localization (IFL) through binary segmentation (Guillaro et al. 2023; Kwon et al. 2022;
Liu et al. 2022; Dong et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2020; Wu et al.
2022; Zhou et al. 2023a; Ji et al. 2023a; Sun et al. 2023).
That is, within an image, regions that remain unchanged
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4437

