The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

In-Dataset Trajectory Return Regularization for Offline Preference-based
Reinforcement Learning
Songjun Tu1,2,3 , Jingbo Sun1,2,3 , Qichao Zhang1,3 * , Yaocheng Zhang1,3 ,
Jia Liu4 , Ke Chen2 , Dongbin Zhao1,2,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{tusongjun2023,zhangqichao2014}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

Despite significant advancements in offline PbRL, learning an accurate step-wise reward model from trajectory-wise
preference feedback remains inherently challenging due to
limited feedback data (Zhang et al. 2023), credit assignment
(Kim et al. 2023) and neural network approximation errors
(Zhu, Jordan, and Jiao 2023). The introduced reward bias
adds potential brittleness to the pipeline, leading to suboptimal performance (Yu et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023). To mitigate this issue, some studies have aimed to enhance the
robustness of the reward model (Shin, Dragan, and Brown
2023; Gao et al. 2024), yet ignoring the potential influence
of reward bias in offline RL. Alternatively, approaches that
bypass reward modeling and directly optimize policy using
preference (An et al. 2023; Hejna et al. 2024) struggle to
achieve out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization, limiting
their ability to outperform the dataset (Xu et al. 2024).

Offline preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL) typically operates in two phases: first, use human preferences
to learn a reward model and annotate rewards for a rewardfree offline dataset; second, learn a policy by optimizing the
learned reward via offline RL. However, accurately modeling step-wise rewards from trajectory-level preference feedback presents inherent challenges. The reward bias introduced, particularly the overestimation of predicted rewards,
leads to optimistic trajectory stitching, which undermines the
pessimism mechanism critical to the offline RL phase. To address this challenge, we propose In-Dataset Trajectory Return Regularization (DTR) for offline PbRL, which leverages
conditional sequence modeling to mitigate the risk of learning inaccurate trajectory stitching under reward bias. Specifically, DTR employs Decision Transformer and TD-Learning
to strike a balance between maintaining fidelity to the behavior policy with high in-dataset trajectory returns and selecting optimal actions based on high reward labels. Additionally,
we introduce an ensemble normalization technique that effectively integrates multiple reward models, balancing the tradeoff between reward differentiation and accuracy. Empirical
evaluations on various benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of DTR over other state-of-the-art baselines.

For the policy learning, most of offline PbRL methods
(Christiano et al. 2017; Yuan et al. 2024; Gao et al. 2024) apply the learned reward function directly to downstream TDLearning (TDL) based offline RL algorithms, such as CQL
(Kumar et al. 2020) and IQL (Kostrikov, Nair, and Levine
2022). However, these TDL-based methods do not account
for potential bias in the predicted rewards. The introduced
reward bias, especially overestimated rewards, can lead to
optimistic trajectory stitching and undermine the pessimism
towards OOD state-action pairs in offline TDL algorithms
(Yu et al. 2022). To minimize the impact of reward bias, it is
necessary to consider being pessimistic about overestimated
rewards during the offline policy learning phase (Zhan et al.
2024). Apart from TDL-based offline algorithms, another
methodology, conditional sequence modeling (CSM) (Emmons et al. 2022) such as Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen
et al. 2021), has not yet been investigated in offline PbRL.
This type of imitation-based approach learns a maximum return policy with in-dataset trajectories by assigning appropriate trajectory reweighting. Compared to TDL, which extracts policy based on value functions, CSM extracts policy conditioned on in-dataset trajectory returns, thereby potentially constraints its trajectory stitching capability (Yamagata, Khalil, and Santos-Rodriguez 2023). Although a limited trajectory stitching ability may not be anticipated for
offline RL with ground-truth (GT) rewards, this limitation
can be considered as a pessimistic safeguard to alleviate the

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/html/2412.09104

Introduction
Designing complex artificial rewards in reinforcement learning (RL) is challenging and time-consuming (Skalse et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2024a). Preference-based reinforcement
learning (PbRL) addresses this by leveraging human feedback to guide policies, demonstrating success in aligning
large language models (Ouyang et al. 2022) and robot control (Liang et al. 2022). Recently, considering the growing
utilization of offline data in aiding policy optimization via
offline RL (Fang et al. 2022; Chen, Li, and Zhao 2024), offline PbRL (Shin, Dragan, and Brown 2023) has gained attention. This approach involves training a reward model with
limited human feedback, annotating rewards for a rewardfree offline dataset, and applying offline RL to learn policies.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20929

