The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Accuracy: On the Effects of Fine-tuning
Towards Vision-Language Model’s Prediction Rationality
Qitong Wang, Tang Li, Kien X. Nguyen, Xi Peng
DeepREAL Lab, Department of Computer & Information Sciences, University of Delaware
{wqtwjt, tangli, kxnguyen, xipeng}@udel.edu

Abstract

widely accepts that “clearly explaining a rationale for a classification decision to an end-user can be as important as the
decision itself.” (Hendricks et al. 2016) One significant reason is that neglecting the model’s prediction rationality will
cause severe consequences in safety-critical domains. For
example, doctors employ a fine-tuned VLM which can accurately predict the presence of cancer tumors from X-ray images, to help decision-making. If its predictions are based on
erroneous reasons: the input’s background instead of tumor
region, doctors will lack trust in fine-tuned VLM, leading
them to disregard the usage of the model. Therefore, in this
paper, we study a crucial yet seldom investigated question:
how do mainstream fine-tuning methods affect the rationality of VLM predictions?

Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP, have
already seen widespread applications. Researchers actively engage in further fine-tuning VLMs in safetycritical domains. In these domains, prediction rationality is crucial: the prediction should be correct and
based on valid evidence. Yet, for VLMs, the impact of
fine-tuning on prediction rationality is seldomly investigated. To study this problem, we proposed two new
metrics called Prediction Trustworthiness and Inference Reliability. We conducted extensive experiments
on various settings and observed some interesting phenomena. On the one hand, we found that the welladopted fine-tuning methods led to more correct predictions based on invalid evidence. This potentially undermines the trustworthiness of correct predictions from
fine-tuned VLMs. On the other hand, having identified
valid evidence of target objects, fine-tuned VLMs were
more likely to make correct predictions. Moreover, the
findings are also consistent under distributional shifts
and across various experimental settings. We hope our
research offer fresh insights to VLM fine-tuning.

To systematically study this question, we propose two
new metrics to evaluate the rationality of VLM predictions
after fine-tuning: (1) Prediction Trustworthiness (PT): the
ratio of correct predictions with valid evidence overall correct predictions. (2) Inference Reliability (IR): the percentage of correct predictions given that the model has identified valid evidence of target objects. To assess whether the
model focuses on valid evidence for the image classification
task, we measure if the generated explanation heatmap from
VLMs focuses on the target objects, based on the “Relevant
Mass Accuracy (RMA)” score (Brandt, Raatjens, and Gaydadjiev 2023). We study the mainstream methods including
“Zero-Shot” (ZS), “Linear-Probing” (LP), “Finetune Like
CLIP Pretrain” (FLCP), and standard “Fine-tuning” (FT).
We conducted extensive experiments and have obtained
novel and consistent findings. Our results reveal that widely
used fine-tuning methods exhibit significant limitations, yet
they also possess certain advantages. Our key findings are
summarized as follows:

Code — https://github.com/deep-real/vlm-pred-rationality
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.13333

Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021), have recently begun to see widespread adoption
in high-stakes applications, such as healthcare (Wang et al.
2022b) and autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2023). A common practice in utilizing VLMs involves undertaking further
fine-tuning (Goyal et al. 2023; Wortsman et al. 2022a; Wang
et al. 2022b) in these models to their specific tasks rather
than training deep models from scratch. While existing studies have evaluated mainstream fine-tuning methods, they
have primarily focused on prediction accuracy (Kumar et al.
2022; Wortsman et al. 2022b; Goyal et al. 2023), overlooking an essential aspect: prediction rationality, where model
predictions should not only be accurate but also grounded
in valid evidence. Besides, the current academic community

Will mainstream fine-tuning methods hurt the rationality of VLM predictions? Surprisingly yes! With our
proposed “Prediction Trustworthiness” metric, fine-tuning
results in more appearance of samples with correct predictions based on invalid evidence than zero-shot, making
the correct predictions untrustworthy. For instance, with the
ALBEF-ViT-B/16 model, compared with ZS, the PT scores
of LP, FLCP, and FT drop 17.2%, 13.85% and 27.31% respectively, on CalTech-101 (Li et al. 2022b) dataset, despite improving prediction accuracies. And with the CLIP-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21225

