The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

One Node One Model: Featuring the Missing-Half for Graph Clustering
Xuanting Xie1 , Bingheng Li2 , Erlin Pan3 , Zhaochen Guo1 , Zhao Kang1 * , Wenyu Chen1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, China
2
Michigan State University, East Lansing, US
3
Alibaba Group
x624361380@outlook.com, libinghe@msu.edu, panerlin.pel@alibaba-inc.com, {zkang, cwy}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing graph clustering methods primarily focus on
exploiting topological structure, often neglecting the “missinghalf” node feature information, especially how these features
can enhance clustering performance. This issue is further compounded by the challenges associated with high-dimensional
features. Feature selection in graph clustering is particularly
difficult because it requires simultaneously discovering clusters and identifying the relevant features for these clusters.
To address this gap, we introduce a novel paradigm called
“one node one model”, which builds an exclusive model for
each node and defines the node label as a combination of predictions for node groups. Specifically, the proposed “Feature
Personalized Graph Clustering (FPGC)” method identifies
cluster-relevant features for each node using a squeeze-andexcitation block, integrating these features into each model
to form the final representations. Additionally, the concept of
feature cross is developed as a data augmentation technique to
learn low-order feature interactions. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that FPGC outperforms state-of-the-art
clustering methods. Moreover, the plug-and-play nature of our
method provides a versatile solution to enhance GNN-based
models from a feature perspective.

Introduction
As a fundamental task in graph data mining, attributed graph
clustering aims to partition nodes into different clusters without labeled data. It is receiving increasing research attention due to the success of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
(Welling and Kipf 2017; Li, Pan, and Kang 2024; Qian, Li,
and Kang 2024). Typically, GNNs use many graph convolutional layers to learn node representations by aggregating
neighbor node features into the node. In recent years, many
graph clustering techniques have achieved promising performance (Pan and Kang 2023; Liu et al. 2023; Kang et al. 2024;
Shen, Wang, and Kang 2024).
Most of these methods apply a self-supervised learning
framework to fully explore the graph structure (Zhu et al.
2024; Yang et al. 2024), often neglecting the “missing-half”
of node feature information, i.e., how node features can enhance clustering quality. Consequently, their performance
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21688

heavily depends on the quality of the input graph. If the original graph is of poor quality, such as having many nodes from
different classes connected together and missing important
links, the representations learned through multilayer aggregation become nondiscrimination. This issue is known as
representation collapse (Chen, Wang, and Li 2024).
For the attributed graph, the node feature and the topological structure should play an equal role in the unsupervised
graph embedding and downstream clustering. We argue that
a node’s personalized features should be crucial for identifying its cluster label. For example, the Cora dataset contains
2,708 papers, each described by a 1,433-dimensional binary
feature indicating the presence of keywords. We visualize
the feature distributions for each cluster in Fig. 1(a). It can
be seen that each cluster exhibits its own dominant features,
while other features may be irrelevant or less important. The
cluster-relevant features are the collection of all personalized features. To distinguish between clusters, we consider
features that are 20 times greater than the mean value in
each cluster and apply the dynamic time warping (DTW)
technique (Müller 2007) to each cluster. DTW is a similarity
measure for sequences of different lengths, and we set the
maximum distance to 5,000 for better visualization. From Fig.
1(b), we can see that there are significant differences in the
cluster-relevant features. Thus, these personalized features
are representative of different clusters.
Furthermore, most GNN-based methods capture only
higher-order feature interactions and tend to overlook loworder interactions (Kim, Choi, and Kim 2024). The graph filtering process transforms input features into higher-level hidden representations. Recent studies on GNNs focus mainly on
designing node aggregation mechanisms that emphasize various connection properties, such as local similarity (Welling
and Kipf 2017), structural similarity (Donnat et al. 2018), and
multi-hop connectivity (Li et al. 2022). However, the cross
feature information is always ignored, despite its importance
for model expressiveness (Feng et al. 2021). For example,
by crossing a paper’s keywords in the Cora dataset, such
as {title = autonomous & approach = Q − learning &
experiment = simulation}, the model can achieve a better
paper representation and produce more accurate clustering
results (e.g., this paper is categorized under Reinforcement
Learning). Until recently, most existing clustering models
have struggled to capture such low-order feature interactions.

