The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fast Contiguous Somatic Hypermutations for Single-Objective Optimisation and
Multi-Objective Optimisation Via Decomposition
Dogan Corus1 * , Pietro S. Oliveto2 * , Donya Yazdani3 *
1

Istanbul Bilgi University
Southern University of Science and Technology
3
British Antarctic Survey
dogan.corus@bilgi.edu.tr, olivetop@sustech.edu.cn, dny.yazdani@gmail.com
2

Abstract

most popular. Several successes have been reported regarding such AISs for both single and multi-objective optimisation (Shang, Jiao, and Liu 2011; Yao et al. 2011; Alizadeh,
Meskin, and Khorasani 2017; Dudek 2017; Lin et al. 2016;
Xu et al. 2018).
Different hypermutation operators have been designed inspired by the various types of immune cells found in the
immune system. The Contiguous Somatic Mutation (CHM)
operator was originally designed by Kelsey and Timmis taking inspiration from the mutation mechanism used by BCell receptors and was introduced in an AIS they called
B-Cell Algorithm (Kelsey and Timmis 2003). The operator has been studied widely in the context of single objective optimisation. A survey of such results is contained in
(Zarges 2019). It has been shown several times how it can
make a difference between polynomial and exponential expected optimisation time compared to the SBM operator on
problems where large areas of the genotype need to be mutated to make further progress. This has been shown both for
benchmark functions such as ’Concatenated Leading Ones
Blocks’ (CLOBb,k ) and on instances of classical combinatorial optimisation problems including vertex cover (Jansen,
Oliveto, and Zarges 2011), longest common subsequence
(Jansen and Zarges 2012) and max-cut and min-s-t-cut (Xia
and Zhou 2018).
However, these speed-ups at escaping from local optima
come with the disadvantage that the CHM operator is slow
during the hillclimbing phases of the optimisation process
because the probability of flipping few bits is the same as
that of flipping many contiguous ones. This means that algorithms using the operator are particularly slow at optimising
easy functions such as O NE M AX requiring an O(n2 log n)
expected runtime which is a linear factor slower than if SBM
is used. Indeed (Corus et al. 2017) showed an expected runtime of Ω(n2 ) for CHM’s easiest possible function called
MINBLOCKS implying a required quadratic time in expectation to solve any optimisation problem. An interesting byproduct of the analysis is that SBM requires exponential expected time to solve MINBLOCKS, highlighting how the
two operators have somewhat very different strengths. In
fact in the original B-Cell algorithm, where CHM was first
introduced, both SBM and CHM are employed to circumvent the problem.
Recently a theoretical analsyis of the CHM operator has

Somatic Contiguous Hypermutations (CHM) are a popular
variation operator used in artificial immune systems for optimisation tasks. Theoretical studies have shown that CHM operators can lead to considerable speed-ups in the expected optimisation time compared to the traditional standard bit mutation (SBM) operators used in evolutionary computation for
both single-objective and multi-objective problems where it
is advantageous to mutate large contiguous areas of the genotype representing the candidate solutions. These speed-ups
can make the difference between polynomial and exponential
runtimes, but come at the expense of the CHM operator being
considerably slower than the SBM operator in easy hillclimbing phases of the optimisation process, when small areas of
the genotype have to be mutated for progress to be made. In
this paper we present a Fast CHM operator that is asymptotically just as fast as traditional SBM for hillclimbing yet
maintains the efficacy of the standard CHM operator when
large jumps in the search space are required to make progress
efficiently. We demonstrate such efficacy on all applications
where CHM has been previously studied in the literature.

Introduction
Artificial Immune Systems (AISs) are a class of bio-inspired
algorithms based on the immune system of vertebrates
(de Castro and Timmis 2002; Dasgupta and Nino 2008).
Apart for the natural tasks of anomaly detection and classification, several AIS algorithms for optimisation problems
have been devised, typically inspired by the clonal selection principle immunological theory (Burnet 1959; de Castro and Zuben 2002). Broadly, these algorithms have in common that the candidate solutions to the problem (antibodies)
undergo a hypermutation process which implies high mutation rates. Such high mutation rates are the main distinguishing feature of AISs from more traditional evolutionary algorithms (EAs) which, inspired by Darwinian evolution, naturally use lower rates in their standard bit mutation
(SBM) operator. Most commonly studied combinatorial optimisation problems have a natural straightforward bit string
representation, so pseudo-Boolean optimisation is the most
studied domain and bit flipping mutation operators are the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26922

