The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GAS: Generative Activation-Aided Asynchronous Split Federated Learning
Jiarong Yang, Yuan Liu
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
eejryang@mail.scut.edu.cn, eeyliu@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

Traditional SFL always assumes synchronous model exchange, where the server waits to receive all client-side models for aggregation. However, since clients have different
communication and computational capabilities, client-side
models are uploaded at the server asynchronously. The slow
clients are referred to as stragglers, delaying the overall
training process. Previous works in FL such as FedAsync
(Xie, Koyejo, and Gupta 2019) and FedBuff (Nguyen et al.
2022) are proposed to tackle the stragglers issue by allowing clients to update the global model asynchronously. Additionally, CA2 FL (Wang et al. 2024) addresses convergence
degradation by caching and reusing previous updates for
global calibration, ensuring more consistent model updates
despite asynchronous conditions.
However, the existing works on stragglers issue in SFL
still have limitations. On one hand, the adaptive model splitting methods (Yan et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2023) for addressing this issue in SFL are constrained by the model structure.
Specifically, these methods attempt to balance the arrival
time of activations by selecting appropriate split layers of
the model. Nevertheless, when the sizes of activations output
by different model layers are similar or the computational
and communication capabilities of clients are highly different, it is impossible to ensure simultaneous arrival of activations, regardless of the chosen split layers. On the other
hand, the stragglers issue is more serious in SFL. Specifically, recent SFL methods (Huang, Tian, and Tang 2023;
Yang and Liu 2024) assume synchronous activation transmissions with heterogeneous client data, where the uploaded
activations are concatenated to update the server-side model
centrally, reducing the bias in the deep layers of the model
(Luo et al. 2021). However, these methods require the server
to wait for stragglers to send their activations at the end of
each local iteration, and the frequent transmissions of activations exacerbate the stragglers issue.
To address the above issues, we propose the asynchronous
learning framework for SFL, where an activation buffer
and a model buffer are embedded on the server to handle asynchronous updates. Specifically, the activation buffer
stores the activations uploaded asynchronously. When the
buffer is full, the server concatenates these activations and
uses them to update the server-side model. Similarly, the
model buffer stores the client-side models uploaded asynchronously. When the buffer is full, the server aggregates the

Split Federated Learning (SFL) splits and collaboratively
trains a shared model between clients and server, where
clients transmit activations and client-side models to server
for updates. Recent SFL studies assume synchronous transmission of activations and client-side models from clients
to server. However, due to significant variations in computational and communication capabilities among clients, activations and client-side models arrive at server asynchronously.
The delay caused by asynchrony significantly degrades the
performance of SFL. To address this issue, we consider an
asynchronous SFL framework, where an activation buffer
and a model buffer are embedded on the server to manage the asynchronously transmitted activations and clientside models, respectively. Furthermore, as asynchronous activation transmissions cause the buffer to frequently receive activations from resource-rich clients, leading to biased updates
of the server-side model, we propose Generative activationsaided Asynchronous SFL (GAS). In GAS, the server maintains an activation distribution for each label based on received activations and generates activations from these distributions according to the degree of bias. These generative
activations are then used to assist in updating the server-side
model, ensuring more accurate updates. We derive a tighter
convergence bound, and our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Code — https://github.com/eejiarong/GAS

Introduction
Split Federated Learning (SFL) (Jeon and Kim 2020; Thapa
et al. 2022) emerges as a promising solution for efficient
resource-constrained distributed learning by combining the
benefits of both Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al.
2017; Singh et al. 2022) and Split Learning (SL) (Gupta
and Raskar 2018). Specifically, in SFL, the model is split
into two parts: the initial layers are processed in parallel by
the participating clients, and the intermediate activations are
sent to the server, which completes the remaining layers. The
server then sends the backpropagated gradients back to the
clients, who use these gradients to update their client-side
models. After several iterations, the server aggregates the
client-side models to form the globally updated model.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21956

