The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Collaborative Similarity Fusion and Consistency Recovery for Incomplete
Multi-view Clustering
Bingbing Jiang1 , Chenglong Zhang1* , Xinyan Liang2 * , Peng Zhou3 , Jie Yang4 , Xingyu Wu5 ,
Junyi Guan1 , Weiping Ding6 , Weiguo Sheng1
1

Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, China
2
Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China
3
Anhui University, Hefei, China
4
University of Technology Sydney, NSW, Australia
5
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
6
Nantong University, Nantong, China
jiangbb@hznu.edu.cn, clzhang123@163.com, liangxinyan48@163.com, zhoupeng@ahu.edu.cn, jie.yang-1@uts.edu.au,
xingy.wu@polyu.edu.hk, jonnyguan73@163.com, dwp9988@163.com, w.sheng@ieee.org.
Abstract

previous multi-view clustering methods fully use the complementary and consistent information across views and
achieve promising performance (Xue et al. 2019; Li et al.
2022; Gan et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024a). However, in practical scenarios, multi-view data often encounter incompleteness (i.e., partial samples are absent in some views) due to
the instability of external environments and collection processes, affecting the consistent structure among views and
causing information loss (Xue et al. 2021). Therefore, incomplete multi-view clustering has become a fundamental
yet challenging task (Jiang, Luo, and Liang 2024).
To apply traditional solutions to incomplete multi-view
data, the direct way is to fill missing data with the means of
available samples or the zeroes. However, this manner fails
to consider the potential similarity relations between available samples and missing samples, and the recovered samples might be noises, impairing the truth relations among
samples. Therefore, several researchers have made efforts to
deal with incomplete multi-view data. For example, (Trivedi
et al. 2010) presented a kernel canonical correlation analysis method to recover the kernel matrix with missing views;
(Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014) exploited the non-negative matrix factorization to learn a latent representation that divides
samples into complete parts and view-specific missing parts.
However, these methods are specially designed for two-view
incomplete data, constraining their applicability as the number of views increases (Wen et al. 2019).
To directly tackle the incomplete data with multiple
views, many methods have been developed, which can be
grouped into two ways according to how to handle missing samples. The first way directly discards missing samples
and concentrates on exploring the view-specific information
among available samples. Representative methods include
adaptive weighted graph fusion (Zhang et al. 2020) and projective incomplete multi-view clustering (Deng et al. 2024),
which typically involve the following steps: learning latent
representations for available samples on each view, aligning them based on the known missing index, and integrating
the view-specific representations to learn a unified one. Al-

As partial samples are often absent in certain views, incomplete multi-view clustering has become a challenging task.
To tackle data with missing views, current methods either
utilize the data similarity relations to recover missing samples or primarily consider the available information of existing samples, typically facing some inherent limitations.
Firstly, traditional solutions cannot fully explore the potential information contained in missing samples due to their
omission strategy, leading to sub-optimal graphs. Moreover,
most methods mainly focus on data recovery from the view
level, ignoring the differences among available/missing samples in various views. To this end, we propose a collaborative Similarity Fusion and Consistency Recovery (SFCR)
method, which resolves the incomplete multi-view clustering
problem by learning a unified similarity graph and recovering missing samples with consistent structures. Specifically,
to learn a reliable graph compatible across views, a novel
view-to-sample fusion model is designed to adaptively coalesce the view-wise similarities among available samples, not
only preserving the complementarity and consistency among
views but also properly balancing different samples. Furthermore, the missing samples are effectively recovered under the
guidance of the fused similarity graph, so as to maintain the
consistent structure of recovered data across views. In this
way, the similarity learning and the missing data recovery
benefit from each other in a collaborative reinforcement manner. Meanwhile, SFCR can directly obtain the final clustering
labels without additional post-processing. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of SFCR.

Introduction
With the advance of information technology, data generated from multiple sources becomes more accessible in various applications, referred to as multi-view data (Jiang et al.
2023; Fu et al. 2024; Liang et al. 2024; Cao and Xie 2024).
By assuming that the information of all views is complete,
* The corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17617

