The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Behavior Importance-Aware Graph Neural Architecture Search for Cross-Domain
Recommendation
Chendi Ge1 * , Xin Wang1,2† , Ziwei Zhang1 , Yijian Qin1 , Hong Chen1 , Haiyang Wu3 , Yang Zhang3 ,
Yuekui Yang1,3 , Wenwu Zhu1,2†
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
Machine Learning Platform Department, Tencent TEG
{gcd23, qinyj19, h-chen20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xin wang, wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn, zw-zhang16@tsinghua.org.cn,
{gavinwu, yizhizhang, yuekuiyang}@tencent.com
2

Abstract

2017) and cold-start problems (Zhang et al. 2019), primarily due to insufficient data. Cross-domain recommendation
(CDR) (Hu, Zhang, and Yang 2018; Ouyang et al. 2020; Cui
et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2022; Ning et al.
2023) has emerged as a promising solution by aggregating
user preferences across multiple domains, alleviating these
issues.
Most existing CDR algorithms integrate user-item interaction structures (Hu, Zhang, and Yang 2018; Ouyang et al.
2020) to facilitate information transfer between domains, resembling the ”cross-stitch” interaction models (Misra et al.
2016) used in multi-task learning. These methods often
employ separate neural networks for each domain, limiting their ability to learn global user preferences effectively
across domains. Recently, GNN-based CDR methods (Cui
et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2022; Ning et al. 2023) have gained
attention by connecting interaction graphs from source and
target domains, enabling more effective information transfer and capturing higher-order interaction patterns between
users and items across domains.
However, existing GNN-based cross-domain recommendation algorithms still suffer from two key challenges:

Cross-domain recommendation (CDR) mitigates data sparsity and cold-start issues in recommendation systems. While
recent CDR approaches using graph neural networks (GNNs)
capture complex user-item interactions, they rely on manually
designed architectures that are often suboptimal and laborintensive. Additionally, extracting valuable behavioral information from source domains to improve target domain recommendations remains challenging. To address these challenges, we propose Behavior importance-aware Graph Neural
Architecture Search (BiGNAS), a framework that jointly optimizes GNN architecture and data importance for CDR. BiGNAS introduces two key components: a Cross-Domain Customized Supernetwork and a Graph-Based Behavior Importance Perceptron. The supernetwork, as a one-shot, retrainfree module, automatically searches the optimal GNN architecture for each domain without the need for retraining. The
perceptron uses auxiliary learning to dynamically assess the
importance of source domain behaviors, thereby improving
target domain recommendations. Extensive experiments on
benchmark CDR datasets and a large-scale industry advertising dataset demonstrate that BiGNAS consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work to jointly optimize GNN architecture and
behavior data importance for cross-domain recommendation.

• Model adaptability: Current approaches rely on fixed
architectures designed with domain-specific expert
knowledge, which is labor-intensive and limits adaptability across different datasets and tasks.
• Negative transfer: In sparse source domains, methods
like attention mechanisms often overemphasize noisy
features, resulting in ineffective transfer and suboptimal
recommendations in the target domain.

Code — https://github.com/gcd19/BiGNAS

Introduction
In recent years, the rapid growth of the Internet has led
to significant information overload in online environments.
To help users efficiently access content that matches their
interests and improve retention and conversion rates, recommendation systems have become crucial to web platforms such as e-commerce and content delivery (Zhang et al.
2019, 2023a; Wang et al. 2024). However, traditional recommendation systems continue to face challenges like data
sparsity (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016; Guo et al.

To address the challenges of model adaptability and
negative transfer in cross-domain recommendation (CDR),
we propose Behavior importance-aware Graph Neural
Architecture Search (BiGNAS). BiGNAS is a novel framework that jointly optimizes graph neural network (GNN)
architecture and data importance for CDR. It introduces
two key components: a Cross-Domain Customized Supernetwork and a Graph-Based Behavior Importance Perceptron. The supernetwork, designed as a one-shot, retrain-free
module, automatically searches for the optimal GNN architecture tailored to each domain by capturing domain-specific

* This work was done during the author’s internship at Tencent
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11708

