The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Query Efficient Data Generation Towards Data-Free Model Stealing in
Hard Label Setting
∗

Gaozheng Pei1 , Shaojie Lyu3 , Ke Ma1* , Pinci Yang1 , Qianqian Xu2 , Yingfei Sun1
2

1
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, UCAS, Beijing, China
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
3
Tencent Corporate
peigaozheng23@mails.ucas.ac.cn, shaojielv@tencent.com, make@ucas.ac.cn, yangpinci23@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, yfsun@ucas.ac.cn

security concern regarding MLaaS for classification been
effectively mitigated?
The answer is negative. One severe security threat is
model stealing, also known as model extraction (Liang et al.
2022b; Tramèr et al. 2016; Truong et al. 2021; Sanyal, Addepalli, and Babu 2022). In this process, an unauthorized
party aims to replicate the decision of a target model by creating a substitute model. Attackers generate samples using
a generative model, then acquire the target model’s predictions for these samples and use them as supervisory information to iteratively refine the substitute model, until either the query budget is exhausted or the behavior of the
substitute model closely matches that of the target model.
Once the substitute model emulates the behavior of the target model, attackers can utilize it for malicious purposes, including adversarial attacks. The current methods within cooperative game frameworks for stealing models still have a
significant issue (Zhang et al. 2022; Zhang, Chen, and Lyu
2022). This can be understood by examining the entire process of model stealing. The attacker synthesizes features using pseudo labels via generator (Goodfellow et al. 2020). As
shown in the upper panel of Figure 1, the generator mainly
produces synthetic features by minimizing the classification
loss function of the substitute model. This strategy confers
excessive confidence in the substitute model. The target and
substitute models would have the same prediction of these
synthetic features. Correspondingly, the synthetic features
with target model predictions could not guide the update
of the substitute model effectively. As a result, simulating
the target model’s decision-making requires a large number of synthetic features. Blindly increasing the number of
queries to receive more feedback is unrealistic in real confrontation scenarios due to the risk of malicious behavior being detected (Juuti et al. 2019). Therefore, attackers should
aim to generate the minimum number of synthetic features
necessary, using these limited features to identify discrepancies between the target and substitute models. Ideally, these
synthetic features should mainly occupy the disputed area,
where the target and substitute models have different predictions of the same synthetic features.
To this end, we dissect the generation process of synthetic features and introduce a novel data-free model stealing
method named Query Efficient Data Generation (QEDG).
Firstly, we implement a harmony loss to ensure the gener-

Abstract
Data-free model stealing involves replicating the functionality of a target model into a substitute model without accessing
the target model’s structure, parameters, or training data. The
adversary can only access the target model’s predictions for
generated samples. Once the substitute model closely approximates the behavior of the target model, attackers can exploit
its white-box characteristics for subsequent malicious activities, such as adversarial attacks. Existing methods within
cooperative game frameworks often produce samples with
high confidence for the prediction of the substitute model,
which makes it difficult for the substitute model to replicate the behavior of the target model. This paper presents
a new data-free model stealing approach called Query Efficient Data Generation (QEDG). We introduce two distinct
loss functions to ensure the generation of sufficient samples
that closely and uniformly align with the target model’s decision boundary across multiple classes. Building on the limitation of current methods, which typically yield only one piece
of supervised information per query, we propose the queryfree sample augmentation that enables the acquisition of additional supervised information without increasing the number of queries. Motivated by theoretical analysis, we adopt
the consistency rate metric, which more accurately evaluates
the similarity between the substitute and target models. We
conducted extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness
of our proposed method, which achieved better performance
with fewer queries compared to the state-of-the-art methods
on the real MLaaS scenario and five datasets.

Introduction
The widespread adoption of cloud services by Microsoft
(Kang et al. 2024), Google (Borra 2024), and Amazon (Wittig and Wittig 2023) suggest that machine learning as a service (MLaaS) (Ribeiro, Grolinger, and Capretz 2015) may
become the predominant mode of interaction between human and models in the future. From the user’s perspective,
these models operate as black boxes, providing feedback
based exclusively on user inputs. This interaction method
safeguards the privacy of MLaaS training data and ensures
the security of the model. This prompts the inquiry: has the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

667

