The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Symbolic Functional Decomposition: A Reconfiguration Approach
Mateus de Oliveira Oliveira1,2 , Wim Van den Broeck2
1

Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Sweden
2
Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
oliveira@dsv.su.se, wim.broeck@uib.no

be simpler than the target function f . For instance, F may
be a class of functions whose preimage is closed under some
algebraic operation, or a class of functions of bounded complexity with respect to some suitable complexity measure.
Functional decomposition is a fundamental concept
within the realm of artificial intelligence because it promotes modularity, interpretability and explainability. First,
functional decomposition enables the reuse of well-defined
components across distinct AI systems (Sun, Nguyen, and
Mamitsuka 2019; Izza et al. 2020; Srivastava 2023). In
this context one could hope to implement a system with
a given functionality f by combining pre-existing systems
with functionality f1 , f2 , . . . , fk . Second, decomposing a
complex function into sub-functions makes the model more
interpretable. Each sub-function can be understood as performing a specific task, or transformation, which provides
insights on how the model arrives at its final computations.
Finally, it helps in explaining the decision-making process
of computational models by breaking down the decision into
simpler, easier to understand steps (Molnar, Casalicchio, and
Bischl 2020; Zupan et al. 1999; Hashemi and Vikalo 2018;
Hiabu, Meyer, and Wright 2023; Laberge et al. 2024).
As a closely related concept, in this work we also consider the notion of functional reconfiguration. In this setting, not only the factor functions f1 , . . . , fk are required
to satisfy some property, but also the sub-functions arising
during the composition process. Intuitively, functional reconfiguration maintains consistency throughout the decomposition process. This consistency contributes even further
to interpretability and explainability because it ensures that
each part of the model adheres to a uniform structure or set
of principles.
We analyze both functional decomposition and functional
reconfiguration through the lenses of parameterized complexity theory. In our framework, functions are represented
symbolically, using ordered binary decision diagrams (OBDDs), a prominent formalism for the symbolic representation of Boolean functions (Bryant 1992). The reconfiguration process is described using a Boolean circuit C. Finally,
the function class F is specified using a second-order finite
automaton A, an automata-theoretic formalism for the representation of classes of functions. Our main results state
that functional reconfiguration, and functional decomposition can be solved in fixed-parameter linear time when pa-

Abstract
Functional decomposition is the process of breaking down a
function f into a composition f = g(f1 , . . . , fk ) of simpler
functions f1 , . . . , fk belonging to some class F . This fundamental notion can be used to model applications arising in a
wide variety of contexts, ranging from machine learning to
formal language theory. In this work, we study functional decomposition by leveraging on the notion of functional reconfiguration. In this setting, constraints are imposed not only on
the factor functions f1 , . . . , fk but also on the intermediate
functions arising during the composition process.
We introduce a symbolic framework to address functional
reconfiguration and decomposition problems. In our framework, functions arising during the reconfiguration process are
represented symbolically, using ordered binary decision diagrams (OBDDs). The function g used to specify the reconfiguration process is represented by a Boolean circuit C. Finally,
the function class F is represented by a second-order finite
automaton A. Our main result states that functional reconfiguration, and hence functional decomposition, can be solved in
fixed-parameter linear time when parameterized by the width
of the input OBDD, by structural parameters associated with
the reconfiguration circuit C, and by the size of the secondorder finite automaton A.

1

Introduction

Cognition and learning are processes that often occur in a
hierarchical manner, where complex concepts are broken
down into simpler, more manageable ones (Goel and Chandrasekaran 1989; Correa et al. 2023; Atzmon et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2023). In contexts where concepts can be represented by functions, this hierarchical approach to processing
and understanding information can often be formalized using an appropriate notion of functional decomposition (Zupan et al. 1997; Bohanec and Zupan 2004; Vykhovanets
2006; Deniziak and Wiśniewski 2021).
In this work, we view functional decomposition as the
process of breaking down a Boolean function f into a composition g(f1 , . . . , fk ), where f1 , . . . , fk are functions from
a pre-defined class F . The function g specifies how the component functions f1 , . . . , fk combine to form the target function f , while F is a class of functions that are considered to
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1283

