The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Partial Identifiability in Inverse Reinforcement Learning
for Agents with Non-Exponential Discounting
Joar Max Viktor Skalse, Alessandro Abate
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
joar.skalse@cs.ox.ac.uk, aabate@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

reward function captures the preferences of the observed
agent as closely as possible. In this paper, we are primarily
concerned with IRL in the context of preference elicitation,
namely in settings where IRL is used to learn a representation of the preferences of an actual human subject, based on
information about how that human behaves in some environment, and where we wish for the learnt reward function to
capture these preferences as faithfully as possible.
One of the central challenges in IRL is that a given sequence of actions typically can be explained by many different goals. That is, there may be multiple reward functions that would produce the same policy under a given
behavioural model. This means that the goals of an agent
are ambiguous, or partially identifiable, even in the limit of
infinite data. To clearly understand the impact of this partial identifiability, it is important that this ambiguity can be
quantified and characterised. The ambiguity of the reward
function in turn depends on the behavioural model. For some
behavioural models, the partial identifiability has been studied (Ng and Russell 2000; Dvijotham and Todorov 2010;
Cao, Cohen, and Szpruch 2021; Kim et al. 2021; Skalse
et al. 2022; Schlaginhaufen and Kamgarpour 2023; Metelli,
Lazzati, and Restelli 2023). However, this existing work has
focused on a small number of behavioural models that are
prevalent in the current IRL literature, whereas for other
plausible or more general behavioural models, the issue of
partial identifiability has largely not been studied.
One of the most important parts of a behavioural model
is the choice of the discount function. In a sequential decision problem, different actions may lead the agent to receive more or less reward at different points in time. In these
cases, it is common to let the agent discount future reward,
so that reward which will be received sooner is given greater
weight than reward which will be received later. Discounting can be done in many ways, but the two most prominent
forms of discounting are exponential discounting, according
to which reward received at time t is given weight γ t ; and
hyperbolic discounting, according to which reward received
at time t is given weight 1/(1 + kt). Here γ ∈ (0, 1] and
k ∈ (0, ∞) are two parameters.1 At the moment, most work
on IRL assumes that the observed agent discounts exponen-

The aim of inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is to infer an agent’s preferences from observing their behaviour.
Usually, preferences are modelled as a reward function, R,
and behaviour is modelled as a policy, π. One of the central difficulties in IRL is that multiple preferences may lead
to the same observed behaviour. That is, R is typically underdetermined by π, which means that R is only partially
identifiable. Recent work has characterised the extent of this
partial identifiability for different types of agents, including
optimal and Boltzmann-rational agents. However, work so
far has only considered agents that discount future reward
exponentially: this is a serious limitation, especially given
that extensive work in the behavioural sciences suggests that
humans are better modelled as discounting hyperbolically.
In this work, we newly characterise partial identifiability in
IRL for agents with non-exponential discounting: our results
are in particular relevant for hyperbolical discounting, but
they also more generally apply to agents that use other types
of (non-exponential) discounting. We significantly show that
generally IRL is unable to infer enough information about R
to identify the correct optimal policy, which entails that IRL
alone can be insufficient to adequately characterise the preferences of such agents.

Introduction
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is a subfield of machine learning that aims to develop techniques for inferring an agent’s preferences based on their actions. Preferences are typically modelled as a reward function, R, and
behaviour is typically modelled as a policy, π. An IRL algorithm must additionally employ a behavioural model that describes how π is computed from R: by inverting this model,
an IRL algorithm can then deduce R from π.
There are many motivations and applications underpinning IRL. For example, it can be used in imitation learning
(e.g. Hussein et al. 2017) or as a tool for preference elicitation (e.g. Hadfield-Menell et al. 2016). In the former case it
is not fundamentally important that the learnt reward function corresponds to the actual preferences of the observed
agent, as long as it aids the imitation learning process. However, in the latter, it is instead fundamental that the learnt

1
For a more in-depth overview of discounting, see for example
Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’Donoghue (2002).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27636

