The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation with Reinforcement Learning for Visual
Recognition
Chuanguang Yang1 , Xinqiang Yu1,2 , Han Yang1,2 , Zhulin An1 * , Chengqing Yu1,2 , Libo Huang1 ,
Yongjun Xu1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yangchuanguang,yuxinqiang21s,yanghan22s,anzhulin,yuchengqing22b,huanglibo,xyj}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

Although multi-teacher KD could lead to more significant improvements, it is more challenging since balancing distillation strengths among various teachers is a nontrivial problem. The vanilla multi-teacher KD assigns equal
weights to distill a student (You et al. 2017). However, the
equal distillation strength ignores two critical aspects: (1)
teacher performance: various teachers may perform differently on the same data sample; (2) teacher-student gaps: a
more powerful teacher may not result in a better student,
because a simple student may not have enough capacity to
mimic a large teacher, as discussed by Cho et al. (Cho and
Hariharan 2019). Previous multi-teacher KD methods often explore weight generation from an individual perspective of the aspect (1) teacher performance (e.g. information
entropy (Kwon et al. 2020; Zhang, Chen, and Wang 2022)
and logits (Zhang, Chen, and Wang 2023)) or the aspect (2)
teacher-student gaps, reflecting in gradient space (Du et al.
2020) and similarity matrix (Liu, Zhang, and Wang 2020).
However, these methods only consider a single aspect to
generate multi-teacher weights but neglect a comprehensive
interaction among the teacher, student, and data samples.
This paper proposes Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation with Reinforcement Learning (MTKD-RL) to optimize
the multi-teacher weight generation problem. The overview
of MTKD-RL is illustrated in Fig.1. We formulate multiteacher KD training as a Reinforcement Learning (RL) optimization process. We introduce an agent to output the action
of multi-teacher weights according to the state information.
The state, including teacher information (feature, logit, and
cross-entropy loss) and teacher-student gaps (feature similarity and logit KL-divergence), encodes evidence of both
the aspect (1) and (2), respectively. We use the student performance and teacher-student gaps as rewards to update the
agent by policy gradient algorithm. The framework alternatively performs multi-teacher KD and agent optimization
until the student is converged.
Compared to previous multi-teacher KD works, our
method constructs teacher performance and teacher-student
gaps as prompts, covering the aspect (1) and (2). MTKDRL reinforces the interaction between the student and
teacher using an agent in an RL-based decision mechanism,
achieving better matching capability with more meaningful
weights. Experimental results on image classification tasks
demonstrate that MTKD-RL performs better than previous

Multi-teacher Knowledge Distillation (KD) transfers diverse
knowledge from a teacher pool to a student network. The
core problem of multi-teacher KD is how to balance distillation strengths among various teachers. Most existing methods often develop weighting strategies from an individual
perspective of teacher performance or teacher-student gaps,
lacking comprehensive information for guidance. This paper
proposes Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation with Reinforcement Learning (MTKD-RL) to optimize multi-teacher
weights. In this framework, we construct both teacher performance and teacher-student gaps as state information to an
agent. The agent outputs the teacher weight and can be updated by the return reward from the student. MTKD-RL reinforces the interaction between the student and teacher using
an agent in an RL-based decision mechanism, achieving better matching capability with more meaningful weights. Experimental results on visual recognition tasks, including image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation tasks, demonstrate that MTKD-RL achieves state-of-theart performance compared to the existing multi-teacher KD
works.

Code — https://github.com/winycg/MTKD-RL

Introduction
Deep neural networks (Yang et al. 2020; Touvron et al.
2021b; Liang et al. 2024b,a) have achieved excellent performance for visual recognition tasks, but accompanied by
the growth of computation complexity and memory footprint. Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015; Zhang et al. 2023) becomes an effective way
to improve a low-complexity student network, and has been
widely applied to image classification (Yang et al. 2022b,
2023a), object detection (Li et al. 2024), segmentation (Yang
et al. 2022c) and generation (Feng et al. 2024). The conventional KD often investigates a single teacher to transfer
knowledge to a student. Compared to the single-teacher KD,
multi-teacher KD (Zhang, Chen, and Wang 2022, 2023) provides more comprehensive and diverse knowledge, increasing the upper bound of student performance.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9148

