The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Every Component Counts: Rethinking the Measure of Success for Medical
Semantic Segmentation in Multi-Instance Segmentation Tasks
Alexander Jaus 1 , Constantin Marc Seibold 2 , Simon Reiß 1 , Zdravko Marinov 1 , Keyi Li1 ,
Zeling Ye1 , Stefan Krieg 1 , Jens Kleesiek 2 , Rainer Stiefelhagen 1
1

Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics (IAR), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
2
Institute for AI in Medicine, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany
{alexander.jaus, simon.reiss, zdravko.marinov, rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu {keyi.li, zeling.ye, stefan.krieg}@student.kit.edu
{constantin.seibold, jens.kleesiek}@uk-essen.de
Abstract
We present Connected-Component (CC)-Metrics, a novel semantic segmentation evaluation protocol, targeted to align existing semantic segmentation metrics to a multi-instance detection scenario in which each connected component matters. We motivate this setup in the common medical scenario
of semantic metastases segmentation in a full-body PET/CT.
We show how existing semantic segmentation metrics suffer from a bias towards larger connected components contradicting the clinical assessment of scans in which tumor size
and clinical relevance are uncorrelated. To rebalance existing segmentation metrics, we propose to evaluate them on a
per-component basis thus giving each tumor the same weight
irrespective of its size. To match predictions to ground-truth
segments, we employ a proximity-based matching criterion,
evaluating common metrics locally at the component of interest. Using this approach, we break free of biases introduced
by large metastasis for overlap-based metrics such as Dice
or Surface Dice. CC-Metrics also improves distance-based
metrics such as Hausdorff Distances which are uninformative
for small changes that do not influence the maximum or 95th
percentile, and avoids pitfalls introduced by directly combining counting-based metrics with overlap-based metrics as it
is done in Panoptic Quality.

Ground Truth

Model Prediction
Dice: 98%
CC-Dice: 66%

Figure 1: Reporting a Dice of 98% in the shown example,
highly overestimates the capability of the trained semantic
segmentation model. This might leave radiologists with a
false impression of how reliably the model can be used to
predict tumors in body scans. With CC-Metrics, we partition
an image into distinct regions and evaluate standard semantic segmentation metrics on a per-component basis which
gives each tumor the same importance.

plan (Haque et al. 2024; de Bourbon et al. 2024). The question thus becomes, how could such issues be identified in the
development process before stress testing on patients?
In a typical cancer patient setup, we aim to identify models that can predict both large and small structures while also
maximizing the overlap between the predicted tumor regions
and the actual tumors. This is non-trivial, as the selection of
appropriate metrics for medical tasks depends on the specific scenario, the data at hand, the structure of outputs of the
models and the type of questions the researcher tries to answer. Recent publications highlight the pitfalls of using suboptimal metrics (Reinke et al. 2024) and developed extensive
recommendation frameworks (Maier-Hein et al. 2024).
Despite the potential advantages of instance segmentation
in distinguishing between overlapping objects, there seems
to be less emphasis within the medical community on exploring and developing instance segmentation models for
the purpose of volumetric multi-instance segmentation scenarios such as metastasis segmentation (Gatidis et al. 2023;
Oreiller et al. 2022).
We believe the main reason for this is: Semantic Segmentation is sufficiently general. Assume you have a per-

Code — https://github.com/alexanderjaus/CC-Metrics
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.18684

Introduction
Semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2015) is a cornerstone of medical image analysis as the
automatic identification of critical areas such as organsat-risk (Lambert et al. 2020) or metastases (Gatidis et al.
2023) might save valuable time in clinical care. With
the ever-increasing performance of recent methods from
the 3D-UNet (Çiçek et al. 2016), transformer-based models (Hatamizadeh et al. 2022, 2021) to the nnUNet (Isensee
et al. 2021), segmentation seems to be on the cusp of clinical
use. When trying to translate these algorithms to actual clinical use, however, these models with high dice scores tend
to produce irresponsible errors such as the missing of novel
smaller lesions which can significantly alter the treatment
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3904

