The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Distances Between Top-Truncated Elections of Different Sizes
Piotr Faliszewski1 , Jitka Mertlová2 , Pierre Nunn3 , Stanisław Szufa4 , Tomasz W ˛
as5
1

AGH University
Czech Technical University in Prague
3
Université de Rennes
4
CNRS, LAMSADE, Université Paris Dauphine-PSL
5
University of Oxford
faliszew@agh.edu.pl, mertlova.jita@gmail.com, pierre.nunn@ens-rennes.fr, s.szufa@gmail.com, tomasz.was@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

Schaar 2023), or check which statistical cultures yield similar elections (Boehmer et al. 2021, 2022a). Yet, real-life data
poses some issues, as seen in the next two datasets from Preflib (Mattei and Walsh 2013):

The map of elections framework is a methodology for visualizing and analyzing election datasets. So far, the framework
was restricted to elections that have equal numbers of candidates, equal numbers of voters, and where all the (ordinal)
votes rank all the candidates. We extend it to the case of elections of different sizes, where the votes can be top-truncated.
We use our results to present a visualization of a large fragment of the Preflib database.

Irish General Elections. Preflib includes the ordinal votes
cast in several constituencies in Ireland during the 2002
general election. Naturally, each of them had a different
number of candidates (between 9 and 14) and a different
number of voters (between around 30 000 and 64 000),
most of whom ranked some top candidates only.
Formula 1. Here, each election is a Formula 1 season,
where each vote is a race ranking the drivers (i.e., the
candidates) in the order in which they finished. There are
around 20 races and 20 drivers in each season, but these
numbers vary, and not all drivers complete each race.

Code — https://github.com/Project-PRAGMA/MapDifferent-Sizes-AAAI-2025

1

Introduction

The map of elections framework is a methodology for analyzing and visualizing sets of elections, introduced by Szufa
et al. (2020) and Boehmer et al. (2021). The basic idea is
to depict (ordinal) elections as points on a plane, so that the
closer two given points are, the more similar are their corresponding elections (see Figures 1a and 1b for examples, and
Section 2 for definitions). To measure this similarity, one can
either use the accurate but computationally challenging isomorphic swap distance (Faliszewski et al. 2019), or the less
precise but efficiently computable positionwise distance (Szufa et al. 2020), or whatever other distance that is invariant
to renaming the candidates and voters. Indeed, the elections
may be unrelated to each other and we only care about their
structural similarities. Unfortunately, the distances used so
far are restricted to elections with the same numbers of candidates and voters, and require the votes to be complete, i.e.,
to rank all the candidates. We aim to rectify these two issues.
The original motivation behind the map framework was to
better understand relations between various statistical cultures (i.e., models of generating random elections) and to
present experimental results in a nonaggregate way (Szufa
et al. 2020). For this, the restriction to particular election
sizes and complete votes is natural, as we have full control over the data. However, maps are also useful for studying real-life elections. For example, we can get better insight into the nature of real-life elections by analyzing their
positions on the map (Boehmer et al. 2021; Boehmer and

So far, to put such elections on a map, one had to fill in the
missing parts of the preference orders, restrict the number
of candidates to some common value (e.g., by deleting the
worst-performing ones), and sample a fixed-size set of votes.
We propose distances that can deal with different-sized/toptruncated elections natively, without preprocessing.
Ideally, we would like to extend the isomorphic swap and
positionwise distances so that different-sized elections with
“obviously identical” structure would be at distance zero.
Unfortunately, this turns out to be impossible even for a
rather minimal definition of an “obviously identical” structure (even without thinking of top-truncated votes). However, we do find two intuitively appealing distances that fulfill some of our requirements: One is an extension of the
positionwise distance and one, which we call DAP, is based
on analyzing diversity, agreement, and polarization within
votes. In the spirit of our desiderata, DAP turns out to be
strongly correlated with the isomorphic swap distance and,
so, can serve as its replacement. We first describe our distances and then analyze their properties, both theoretically
and experimentally. In the experiments, we largely focus
on synthetic elections, as such data is easier to control, but
our main motivation is to visualize real-life data. Hence, in
Section 5 we form a map of a large fragment of Preflib, a
database of real-life elections (see Figure 4). The overarching goal of the paper is to explain how we obtained this map,
why the choices made on the way are justified, and what we
can learn from it.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13823

