The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Accurate Binary Spiking Neural Networks: Learning with Adaptive
Gradient Modulation Mechanism
Yu Liang1 , Wenjie Wei1 , Ammar Belatreche2 ,
Honglin Cao1 , Zijian Zhou1 , Shuai Wang1 , Malu Zhang1 * , Yang Yang1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Northumbria University

Abstract

struggle to achieve satisfactory performance when dealing
with complex tasks (Guo, Huang, and Ma 2023).
To ensure the competitive performance of SNNs on complex tasks, the SNN community is committed to developing effective training strategies and large-scale architectures (Wu et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2024; Guo et al. 2022b), often neglecting the inherent energy efficiency trait of SNNs.
This negligence increases the difficulty of deploying SNNs
on resource-constrained edge computing environments (Liu
et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2022a). Therefore, a deeper understanding of the energy efficiency advantage of SNNs is
crucial to enable their widespread deployment, especially
in resource-limited scenarios (Wei et al. 2024b). In recent
years, some studies have conducted preliminary exploration
on compressing SNNs, including techniques such as pruning (Li et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2023), neural architecture
search (Liu et al. 2024a; Yan et al. 2024), and quantization (Hu, Zheng, and Pan 2024).
Among these compression techniques, quantization is
a promising solution, which reduces computational and
storage demands by representing weights with low bit
width (Gong et al. 2014; Li, Dong, and Wang 2019). The
most extreme method within this domain is binarization,
which compresses networks by reducing the parameter bit
width to a mere 1-bit (Rastegari et al. 2016; Qin et al.
2022; Gholami et al. 2022). Incorporating this binarization into SNNs allows computationally intensive convolutional operations to be replaced with efficient bitwise operations. This transformation significantly reduces both computation and storage requirements, making networks more
hardware-friendly and energy-efficient. However, despite
the significant advantages in binarizing SNNs, these approaches struggle to scale to complex tasks when compared
to full-precision SNNs (FP-SNNs) (Yin et al. 2024). There
is no extensive research on the underlying reason behind this
critical challenge.
In this paper, we reveal that due to the two possible values of their weights (-1 and +1), binary SNNs (BSNNs)
face a more severe challenge of weight sign flipping during
the learning process. This issue causes the performance of
BSNNs to lag behind that of FP-SNNs equivalents, limiting
their application in complex scenarios. To address this issue, we propose an adaptive gradient modulation mechanism
(AGMM) to adaptively regulate the gradient magnitude dur-

Binary Spiking Neural Networks (BSNNs) inherit the eventdriven paradigm of SNNs, while also adopting the reduced
storage burden of binarization techniques. These distinct advantages grant BSNNs lightweight and energy-efficient characteristics, rendering them ideal for deployment on resourceconstrained edge devices. However, due to the binary synaptic weights and non-differentiable spike function, effectively
training BSNNs remains an open question. In this paper,
we conduct an in-depth analysis of the challenge for BSNN
learning, namely the frequent weight sign flipping problem.
To mitigate this issue, we propose an Adaptive Gradient Modulation Mechanism (AGMM), which is designed to reduce
the frequency of weight sign flipping by adaptively adjusting the gradients during the learning process. The proposed
AGMM can enable BSNNs to achieve faster convergence
speed and higher accuracy, effectively narrowing the gap between BSNNs and their full-precision equivalents. We validate AGMM on both static and neuromorphic datasets, and
results indicate that it achieves state-of-the-art results among
BSNNs. This work substantially reduces storage demands
and enhances SNNs’ inherent energy efficiency, making them
highly feasible for resource-constrained environments.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved significant
breakthroughs in various fields, such as computer vision (He
et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2024b), natural language processing (Vaswani et al. 2017; Achiam et al. 2023), and speech
processing (Wu et al. 2018a; Pan et al. 2021). However, these successes rely on complex model architectures and large model parameters, making their deployment
on resource-limited devices highly challenging (Qin et al.
2024). In contrast, brain-inspired spiking neural networks
(SNNs) emulate the spike generation mechanism of biological neurons, utilizing sparse binary spikes as the basic unit for information transmission (Ghosh-Dastidar and
Adeli 2009). Due to their sparse and spike-driven computational paradigm, SNNs have been regarded as the energyefficient alternative to traditional DNNs (Davies et al. 2018).
Nonetheless, despite their energy efficiency, SNNs often
* Corresponding author: maluzhang@uestc.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1402

