The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Frozen Language Models are Gradient Coherence Rectifiers in Vision
Transformers
Lichen Bai1 * , Zixuan Xiong1,3 * , Hai Lin1,2 , Guangwei Xu3 , Xiangjin Xie3 , Ruijie Guo3 , Zhanhui
Kang4 , Hai-Tao Zheng1,2† , Hong-Gee Kim5
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Pengcheng Laboratory
3
Alibaba Cloud Computing
4
Machine Learning Platform Department, Tencent
5
Seoul National University
1
{blc22, xzx22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, 3 {kunka.xgw, xiexiangjin.xxj, ruijie.guo}@alibaba-inc.com
†zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

the core processor for image (Li et al. 2023), video (Zhang,
Li, and Bing 2023), point cloud data (Yu et al. 2022) and
beyond. To some extent, they have been shown to possess
general representations (Huh et al. 2024).
Specifically, Pang et al. (2023) experimentally demonstrated that stacking frozen LLM blocks on top of a visual encoder can significantly enhance the performance of
purely vision tasks, such as image classification (Touvron
et al. 2021) and video understanding (Tong et al. 2022).
They attribute this phenomenon to the “information filtering hypothesis,” which posits that pre-trained LLM transformer blocks enhance the impact of informative visual tokens. However, this does not empirically reveal the role of
LLM Blocks during training.
In this work, from the perspective of gradient dynamics,
we analyze the optimization process of gradient descent and
find that frozen LLM blocks act as gradient rectifiers, aligning gradients of different samples more closely during training, see Fig. 1. Chatterjee and Zielinski (2022) argue that the
greater gradient similarity between different samples makes
the optimization process focus on learning common patterns
while minimizing the impact of those outliers. In order to
better observe the gradient changes during training, we introduce the Gradient Signal-to-Noise Ratio (GSNR) to represent gradient coherency (Sun et al. 2023), measuring the
generalization performance of the model.
Our experiments verify that the frozen LLM block has a
certain gradient coherence rectification effect. After it is inserted into the ViT model, the average GSNR of the ViT
model increased significantly. Furthermore, our layer-wise
analysis reveals that the gradients of those layers closer to
the LLM blocks exhibits higher coherence. This suggests
that the gradient rectification effect of LLM blocks primarily
influences the nearby parameters.
Moreover, we observe that inserting different LLaMA
Blocks at various positions within the ViT significantly
influences the performance gains. Inspired by Huh et al.
(2024), we employ Mutual-KNN to analyze the representation similarity between different layers of ViT and LLaMA.
Our experiments indicate that when the inserted LLaMA

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in multimodal tasks even with frozen LLM
Block and only a few trainable parameters. However, the underlying mechanisms of how LLMs enhance multimodal performance remains unclear. In this work, we focus on the phenomenon that “Merely concatenating a frozen LLM block to
the Vision Transformer (ViT) encoder can yield significant
performance enhancements. Moreover, the choice of LLM
block and insertion position can have a substantial impact,
leading to varying degrees of improvement”. We analyze the
optimization of the training process from the perspective of
gradient dynamics and find that frozen LLM blocks act as
gradient coherence rectifiers, aligning the gradients of different samples more closely during training. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the representation similarity between the inserted LLM block and the adjacent ViT block influences performance, with greater similarity tending to yield larger positive gains. Through these findings, we can justify the selection of suitable LLM blocks to be inserted at appropriate positions, and introduce additional gradient backpropagation paths by incorporating LLM blocks, could improve the
performance of vanilla ViT through the rectification effect
of gradient consistency during the training process, without
the need to add LLM blocks during inference. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of this strategy, making
the practical application of the gradient rectification effect
feasible.

Introduction
Recently, with the continuous increase in computational
power and data volume, modern large language models
(LLMs) have demonstrated a trend towards unified processing in natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Touvron
et al. 2023; Workshop et al. 2022). Furthermore, even when
trained on pure text, LLMs possess strong multimodal capabilities. Through minimal-cost fine-tuning, they can serve as
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1817

