The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Counterfactual Debiasing for Physical Audiovisual Commonsense Reasoning
Daoming Zong1 * , Chaoyue Ding2 * , Kaitao Chen2 , Yinsheng Li2† , Shuaiyu Wang2
1

SenseTime Research
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{ecnuzdm,cydingcs}@gmail.com, chenkaitao@pjlab.org.cn, liys@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

cross-modal task, as physical attributes can manifest across
various modalities including, but not limited to, visual and
auditory cues. In scenarios where an object appears visually
ambiguous or rare, auditory information may provide essential cues for identifying its physical characteristics.
However, existing physical audiovisual commonsense
reasoning (PACR) methods heavily rely on the correlation
between visual features and class labels for prediction. This
dependency appears particularly fragile when dealing with
unknown or rare testing samples (Sun et al. 2021, 2022).
Specifically, when objects in test samples are presented in
ways unseen or rare to models, they tend to infer based
on the distribution of visual clues in prior learned experience, leading to prediction errors. For instance, in the test
datapoint depicted in Fig. 1, the ground truth labels of the
involved objects (Object1, Object2) are [foam] and
[ceramic], respectively. In the training set, the number of samples with the same object combination (i.e.
[foam]+[ceramic]) is only 2, while those annotated
with ([foam]+[wood]) and ([foam]+[plastic]) are
22 and 62, respectively. Due to the shortcut effect (Ye
and Kovashka 2021), the model is prone to misidentifying
Object2 as wood, as it fails to adapt to this rare pattern of
visual object combination, thereby diminishing the model’s
generalization ability in long-tail scenarios. This correlation
between visual features and predictive outcomes is also referred to as the spurious effect in causal inference (Niu et al.
2021; Ma et al. 2022), highlighting the adverse effects of
over-reliance on the visual modality for PACR.
To address the issue of spurious correlations, one intuitive approach is the collection of unbiased datasets. However, the prevalence of the long-tail distribution of the visual
world (Kang et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019)
limits our ability to offer a sufficient number of matched
training samples for all test samples. An alternative is to develop advanced cross-modal fusion methods (Lu et al. 2019;
Xiao et al. 2020; Zellers et al. 2021), such as those based
on attention mechanisms (Nagrani et al. 2021) or pretraining surrogate tasks (Georgescu et al. 2023). These sophisticated fusion strategies enable models to transcend reliance
on solitary visual features by leveraging auditory information to enhance visual perception and improve the interpretation of complex scenes. Nonetheless, these methods do not
adequately eliminate the inherent risk of visual biases.

Physical commonsense is an essential aspect of human cognition, involving an intuitive understanding of the physical
properties and interactions of everyday objects and materials. Though physical commonsense reasoning should inherently be a multisensory task, integrating both video and
audio signals, existing physical audiovisual commonsense
reasoning (PACR) models predominantly rely on visual information. This reliance leads to spurious correlations and
undermines the models’ reasoning and generalization abilities. To counteract this, we introduce a model-agnostic
Counterfactual Physical Audiovisual Commonsense Reasoning (CF-PACR) framework aimed at mitigating visual biasinduced spurious effects. Specifically, we construct a traditional PACR model using both audio and visual information
as the factual reasoning model. Subsequently, in the counterfactual reasoning model, we isolate visual information to
estimate direct effects. Finally, we subtract the direct effects
from the total effects across modalities to derive indirect effects, thereby mitigating visual biases. Extensive experiments
validate the effectiveness and generalizability of CF-PACR in
alleviating the spurious correlations between visual modality
and model predictions.

Introduction
To facilitate the safe deployment of artificial intelligence
(AI) systems across a myriad of real-world scenarios, it is
imperative that these systems acquire an understanding of
the physical properties, affordances, and interactions of everyday objects, as well as how to manipulate them (Krishna
et al. 2017; Yatskar et al. 2017; Hessel, Mimno, and Lee
2018; Forbes, Holtzman, and Choi 2019; Yu et al. 2022).
This general understanding of physical attributes and interactions of objects is crucial for the development of secure and trustworthy AI systems (Bisk et al. 2020). For instance, “in the absence of a brush for makeup application,
the expectation would be for a robot to proffer a cotton
swab rather than a toothpick”. Previous research has delved
into harnessing visual and textual data to explore physical
commonsense (Jimenez 2020; Storks et al. 2021). Nonetheless, reasoning about physical commonsense is inherently a
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15265

