The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Concept Prerequisite Relation via Global Knowledge Relation
Optimization
Miao Zhang1,2 , Jiawei Wang1,3 , Kui Xiao1,3 * ,
Shihui Wang1,3 , Yan Zhang1,3 * , Hao Chen1,3 , Zhifei Li1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hubei University, China
2
Hubei Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Analysis and Application, China
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Sensing System and Security, Ministry of Education, China
zhangmiao@hubu.edu.cn, wangjw@stu.hubu.edu.cn, {xiaokui, wsh, zhangyan, ch, zhifei1993}@hubu.edu.cn
Traditional Prerequisite Relation Learning

Abstract
Concept-Concept

Learning concept prerequisite relations helps better master
and build a logically coherent knowledge structure. Many
studies use graph neural networks to create heterogeneous
knowledge networks that enhance concept representations.
However, different types of relations in these networks can
influence each other. Existing research often focuses solely
on concept relations, neglecting other types of knowledge
connections. To address this issue, this paper proposes a
novel concept prerequisite relation learning model, named the
Global Knowledge Relation Optimization Model(GKROM).
Specifically, we capture the impact of different knowledge
relation types on document and concept semantic representations separately, integrating the document and concept semantic representations. Then, we introduce multiobjective learning to optimize the knowledge relation network from a global perspective. Through the above optimization, GKROM learns richer semantic representations for
concepts and documents, improving the accuracy of concept
prerequisite relation learning. Extensive experiments on public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our GKROM,
achieving state-of-the-art performance in concept prerequisite relation learning.

Documnet-Concept
Global Knowledge Relation Optimization

Documnet-Document

Document

Concept

Prerequisite

Containment

Dependency

Figure 1: Comparison between our proposed Global Knowledge Relation Optimization and traditional prerequisite relation learning.

2018; Wang et al. 2024; Shen et al. 2024). Therefore, advancing more automated and precise methods for identifying
these relations is crucial for enhancing personalized education and improving teaching outcomes.
Over the past decade, researchers have developed various methods to uncover concept prerequisite relations. Initially, these approaches rely on manually designed features
and traditional machine learning techniques. With the advent of deep learning, attention shifted toward deep neural
networks, which can automatically extract features, eliminating the need for manual design (Sun, Li, and Zhang
2022). More recently, the emergence of graph neural networks has allowed researchers to explore concept relations
through graph-based structures (Zhang et al. 2022). However, current graph neural network-based methods still face
challenges, particularly in addressing other types of relations
within these heterogeneous networks.
In heterogeneous knowledge networks, documents and
concepts are the two primary node types, both of which play
critical roles (Jia et al. 2021). Similarly, the various types of
relations—whether between concepts, between documents
and concepts, or between documents—are all equally im-

Code — https://github.com/wisejw/GKROM

Introduction
In the age of information overload, the rapid pace of knowledge updating demands more from learners. To ensure effective learning and mastery of new knowledge, the fundamental concepts within educational resources must be thoughtfully structured and sequenced based on their interrelationships (Yu et al. 2024). One crucial type of relation is the
concept prerequisite, which dictates that the understanding
or learning of one concept must come before another related concept. For instance, in mathematics, students need
to grasp “the basic properties of fraction” before tackling
“fraction operations”, as these properties serve as the foundational prerequisites. Clearly identifying these prerequisite
relations is essential for developing intelligent tutoring systems, and diagnosing students’ knowledge states (Chen et al.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1638

