The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Stochastic Online Instrumental Variable Regression:
Regrets for Endogeneity and Bandit Feedback
Riccardo Della Vecchia, Debabrota Basu
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
ric.della-vecchia@gmail.com, debabrota.basu@inria.fr

Abstract
Endogeneity, i.e. the dependence of noise and covariates, is
a common phenomenon in real data due to omitted variables,
strategic behaviours, measurement errors etc. In contrast, the
existing analyses of stochastic online linear regression with
unbounded noise and linear bandits depend heavily on exogeneity, i.e. the independence of noise and covariates. Motivated by this gap, we study the over- and just-identified Instrumental Variable (IV) regression, specifically Two-Stage Least
Squares, for stochastic online learning, and propose to use an
online variant of Two-Stage Least Squares, namely O2SLS.
We show that O2SLS achieves O(dx dz log2 T ) identification
√
and e
O(γ dz T ) oracle regret after T interactions, where dx
and dz are the dimensions of covariates and IVs, and γ is the
bias due to endogeneity. For γ = 0, i.e. under exogeneity,
O2SLS exhibits O(d2x log2 T ) oracle regret, which is of the
same order as that of the stochastic online ridge. Then, we
leverage O2SLS as an oracle to design OFUL-IV, a stochastic
linear bandit algorithm to tackle endogeneity. OFUL-IV yields
√
e dx dz T ) regret that matches the regret lower bound unO(
der exogeneity. For different datasets with endogeneity, we
experimentally show efficiencies of O2SLS and OFUL-IV.

1

(a) Graphical Model of Example 1.1

(b) DAG of 2SLS at t

Figure 1: Relations of IVs (orange), Covariates (blue), and
Outcome (blue) in Online Two-stage Regression. Unobserved
and Observed variables are in dotted and solid circles.

Introduction

Online regression is a founding component of online learning (Kivinen, Smola, and Williamson 2004), sequential testing (Kazerouni and Wein 2021), contextual bandits (Foster
and Rakhlin 2020), and reinforcement learning (Ouhamma,
Basu, and Maillard 2022). Especially, online linear regression
is widely used and analysed to design efficient algorithms
with theoretical guarantees (Greene 2003; Abbasi-Yadkori,
Pál, and Szepesvári 2011b; Hazan and Koren 2012). In linear
regression, the outcome (or output variable) Y ∈ R, and the
input features (or covariates, or treatments) X ∈ Rd are related by a structural equation: Y = β T X + η, where β is the
true parameter and η is the observational noise with variance
σ 2 . The goal is to estimate β from an observational dataset.
Two common assumptions in the analysis of linear regression are (i) bounded observations and covariates (Vovk 1997;
Bartlett et al. 2015; Gaillard et al. 2019), and (ii) exogeneity,
i.e. conditional mean independence of the noise η and the
input features X (E[η|X] = 0) (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16190

Szepesvári 2011b; Ouhamma, Maillard, and Perchet 2021).
Under exogeneity, researchers have studied scenarios where
the observational noise is unbounded and has only bounded
variance σ 2 . But this setting asks for a different technical
analysis than the bounded adversarial setting popular in online regression literature. For example, (Ouhamma, Maillard,
and Perchet 2021) analyse online forward and online ridge
regressions in the unbounded stochastic setting.
Example 1.1 (Learning Price-Sales Dynamics). A market
analyst wants to learn how price of a food item at a given
day t affects the sales of the item, given a daily stream of
data of food prices and sales. The analyst decides to run
online linear regression to learn the relation Price → Sales
(Fig. 1a). The analyst finds the β to be positive. But now
if a big festival happens in a city, a restaurant owner can
increase price of the food knowing still the sales will increase.
This event contradicts the analyst’s learnt parameter. Thus,
as she incorporates the price-sales data of this city, the estimated β changes to negative. Because her algorithm assumes
exogeneity of noise and covariates, while in reality the omitted variable Eventt affects both price and sales (Fig. 1a).
Hence, the covariate Pricet , gets correlated with the noise,
ηt = ρs Eventt + ηS,t . Pricet is an endogeneous variable.
Similar to this example, in real-life, endogeneity, i.e. dependence between noise and covariates (E[ηX] ̸= 0) (Greene
2003; Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996) is often observed
due to omitted explanatory variables, strategic behaviours
during data generation, measurement errors, the dependence
of the output and the covariates on unobserved confounding
variables etc. (Wald 1940; Mogstad, Torgovitsky, and Wal-

