The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MUCD: Unsupervised Point Cloud Change Detection via Masked Consistency
Yue Wu1,2 , Zhipeng Wang1,2 , Yongzhe Yuan1,2 , Maoguo Gong1,3 * , Hao Li1,4 , Mingyang Zhang1,4 ,
Wenping Ma5 , Qiguang Miao1,2
1

MoE Key Lab of Collaborative Intelligence Systems, Xidian University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
3
Academy of Artificial Intelligence, College of Mathematics Science, Inner Mongolia Normal University
4
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University
{ywu@, zpwang01@stu., yyz@stu., haoli@, myzhang@, wpma@mail., qgmiao@}xidian.edu.cn, gong@ieee.org
Abstract

cock 2014), urban study, environmental monitoring (Khan
et al. 2017), and disaster assessment (Sakurada, Okatani, and
Deguchi 2013).
In 2D image change detection, nuisance changes such as
viewpoint and lighting differences are critical obstacles that
have received widespread attention (Wang et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2020). Due to the rapid development of 3D acquisition
devices such as LiDAR (Guo et al. 2020), a large amount
of 3D data can be collected and recorded with a lower cost
(Yuan et al. 2024a). Point cloud data, as a basic data representation for many 3D task applications, can capture rich geometric and appearance information of objects and scenes,
and has the advantages of not being affected by perspective
distortion and lighting changes. The above advantages avoid
some tricky problems in 2D image CD and provide a more
intuitive description of the positional relationship between
objects and the surrounding environment. This fact has attracted more attention to point cloud data in 3DCD task, and
the analysis of multi-temporal point clouds changes have become more urgent (Stilla and Xu 2023). In recent years,
some researchers have successfully applied deep learning
networks to 3DCD task and collect some available realworld scene datasets.
However, the success of all existing methods is based
on fully supervised or weakly-supervised learning, requiring extensive point-level labels. Specifically, these methods
use labels or clustering pseudo labels to train a siamese point
cloud segmentation network to complete point cloud change
detection task. In addition, due to the supervised training on
specific datasets with labels, these networks exhibit limited
generalization ability and are unable to effectively detect
scenes involving semantic information changes.
In this paper, we attempt to abandon the method of training change segmentor with labels and use the feature consistency of unchanged regions as self-supervised signals to
learn their shared shape information. Our assumption is that
the shape information and contextual relationships of the
unchanged regions in point cloud scenes at different times
exhibit consistency, while the change regions have significant differences, which can guide a better change segmentation method. Based on this assumption, we design a bidirectional optimization of segmentor and feature extractor,
where the feature extractor learns the shared shape information of unchanged regions to guide the segmentor, and

3D Change Detection (3DCD) has gradually become another research hotspot after image change detection. Recent works focus on using artificial labels for supervised or
weakly-supervised training of siamese networks to segment
changed points. However, labeling every points of multitemporal point clouds is very expensive and time-consuming.
In addition, these works lack effective self-supervised signals, and existing self-supervised signals often fail to capture sufficiently rich change information. To solve this problem, we assume that the powerful representation of 3D objects should model the consistency information of unchanged
regions and distinguish different objects. Based on this assumption, we propose a new unsupervised framework called
MUCD to learn change information of multi-temporal point
clouds through bidirectional optimization of change segmentor and feature extractor. The training of network is divided
into two stages. We first design a foreknowledge point contrastive loss based on the characteristics of the 3DCD task
to initialize the feature extractor, and then propose a masked
consistency loss to further learn the shared geometric information of unchanged regions in the multi-temporal point
clouds, utilizing it as a free and powerful supervised signal
to train a change segmentor. In the inference stage, only the
segmentor is used to take multi-temporal point clouds as input and produce change segmentation result. Extensive experiments are conducted on SLPCCD and Urb3DCD, two
real-world datasets of streets and urban buildings, to verify
that our proposed unsupervised method is highly competitive
and even outperforms supervised methods in scenes where
semantic information changes occur, exhibiting better performance in generalization ability and robustness.

Introduction
Change detection (CD) is one of the earliest and most widely
used technologies in the field of remote sensing (Hussain
et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2021a; Benedek, Descombes, and
Zerubia 2011; Wu, Du, and Zhang 2023; Wu et al. 2021b).
The purpose of CD is to discover landscape changes from
multi-temporal images observed at same location and different times. CD task has been widely applied in land-use/landcover change analysis (Jin et al. 2017; Zhu and Wood* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8505

