The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Long-and Short-Term Representations for Next POI
Recommendations via Frequency and Hierarchical Contrastive Learning
Jiajie Chen1 * , Yu Sang2 * , Peng-Fei Zhang3 , Jiaan Wang1 , Jianfeng Qu1, 6† , Zhixu Li4, 5
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Jiangnan University
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Queensland
4
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
5
International College (Suzhou Research Institute), Renmin University of China, Suzhou, China
6
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University
{jjchen.ada, mima.zpf, jawang.nlp}@gmail.com, 7213107001@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn, jfqu@suda.edu.cn, zhixuli@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

Low
Spectrum

Next POI recommendation aids users in predicting their destinations of interest and plays an increasingly vital role in
location-based social services. Recent works focus on analyzing both long-term and short-term interests in POI recommendation to gain a deeper understanding of user profiles. However, these methods for modeling long-term user’s
sequences primarily rely on the Transformer model, which
functions as a low-pass filter, often leading to the loss of highfrequency information. Additionally, long-term and shortterm sequences are typically modeled independently, with
short-term sequences often defined solely by the most recent
check-ins, overlooking their interactions and dependencies.
Therefore, we propose Enhancing Long-and Short-Term Representations for Next POI Recommendations via Frequency
and Hierarchical Contrastive Learning (FHCRec). FHCRec
captures both high-frequency and low-frequency information
in long-term sequences to model richer long-term user’s preference representations. Moreover, it harnesses the characteristics of the short-term subsequences embedded within longterm sequences to enhance short-term preference characterization via local and global hierarchical contrastive learning,
resulting in more personalized short-term preferences. The
enhanced long-term and short-term preferences are integrated
to improve model recommendation performance. Extensive
experiments on three real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Stable POIs, low-frequency signal

…。

High

…

…

…

?

𝑡

prediction
Emerging POIs, high-frequency signal

Figure 1: Frequency signal characterization of long-term
POI sequence

sequence modeling, utilizing techniques such as Markov
chain-based stochastic models (Ye, Zhu, and Cheng 2013),
matrix factorization models (Lian et al. 2014), and RNN
models (Liu et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2020). These approaches
have been extensively explored and yielded notable results.
Recent studies have transitioned from single-sequence
modeling to a paradigm that incorporates both long-term and
short-term sequence modeling. Long-term sequence modeling captures a user’s overall historical travel preferences,
while short-term sequence modeling reflects they recent behavioral habits. By considering both aspects, the impact of
recent noise and outdated preferences is mitigated, thereby
enhancing recommendation accuracy (Zhao et al. 2018).
For long-term sequence modeling, SLi-Rec (Yu et al.
2019) enhances traditional RNNs with time-aware and
content-aware controllers to incorporate contextual information from long-term sequences. STGN (Zhao et al. 2020) introduces spatiotemporal gates in RNNs to update long-term
interests. Compared to RNNs, Transformer models possess
stronger long-range modeling capabilities and better comprehension of the global context, making them popular for
modeling long-term user sequence. PLSPL and CLSR (Wu
et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2022) both employ self-attention
mechanisms to capture user preferences in long-term modules. Additionally, CFPRec and CLSPRec (Zhang et al.
2022a; Duan et al. 2023a) use bidirectional Transformer
to incorporate sequence contextual relationships, offering
a more accurate model of past long-term sequences. However, Transformer-based methods suffer from inherent over-

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of location-based social media services, vast amounts of data on people’s interactions
with nearby places have been recorded (Li et al. 2022). This
valuable information has significantly advanced the research
on POI recommendations, providing convenience to both
users and businesses. Typically, POI recommendation methods aim to model a user’s historical check-in records and
preferences to make accurate predictions about they current check-in behavior. Early methods focused on single* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11472

