The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attention-Imperceptible Backdoor Attacks on Vision Transformers
Zhishen Wang1,2 , Rui Wang1,2 , Lihua Jing1,2 *
1
2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
wangzhishen@iie.ac.cn, wangrui@iie.ac.cn, jinglihua@iie.ac.cn

Abstract

Original

DBIA

BadViT

TrojViT

AIBA(ours)
Image

With the successful transition of Transformers from natural language processing (NLP) to computer vision (CV) domains, Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved state-ofthe-art performance in many CV tasks. However, backdoor
attacks, a significant threat in deep learning, also pose a risk
to the security of ViT models. Recently, several backdoor attack methods targeting the patch-level self-attention mechanism in ViTs have been proposed, but they are relatively naive
in terms of stealthiness and robustness against defensive measures, lacking in-depth investigation. In this paper, we explore
the crucial role of attention-level imperceptibility in backdoor attacks for ViTs and propose an Attention-Imperceptible
Backdoor Attacks on Vision Transformers (AIBA). In AIBA,
a constrained adversarial perturbation is used as the trigger
to achieve visual imperceptibility. Additionally, the trigger is
designed to seamlessly implant into the focal areas of the image, ensuring that the trigger receives enough attention from
the model without causing anomalies at the attention level.
During the backdoor learning process, we designed an efficient constrained bi-level optimization training strategy at the
mini-batch level to implant an effective backdoor in the victim model using the imperceptible trigger. We evaluated the
effectiveness of the proposed AIBA across multiple datasets
and ViT benchmarks and explored the robustness of AIBA
against current ViT-specific defense methods. The experimental results demonstrate that our backdoor attack method
can successfully implant a powerful and stealthy backdoor
into ViTs.

Residual
Attention

Figure 1: Visualization of backdoor images, residual maps
and attention maps of the victim ViT models after different
ViT-sepcefic attacks.
et al. 2022; Nguyen and Tran 2021; Zhong, Qian, and Zhang
2022; Wenger et al. 2021) being one of the most dangerous.
In a backdoor attack, an attacker poisons the trainng data
and implants a backdoor during the model’s training phase.
The backdoor is triggered by specific inputs, allowing the
victim model to perform normally on benign samples while
performing predefined malicious behavior on backdoor samples. Due to the extensive parameters and complex training
process of ViTs, users often rely on “outsourced” training or
exploit pre-trained models from open-source communities
to fine-tune the downstream tasks. These approaches provide attackers with more opportunities to implant backdoors,
motivating a growing number of researchers to explore the
security of ViTs under backdoor attacks.
Recently, several backdoor attack methods designed
specifically for ViT models have been proposed (Lv et al.
2021; Subramanya et al. 2022, 2024; Zheng, Lou, and Jiang
2023; Yuan et al. 2023). As is known, for a backdoor to be
effective, it must maintain a high attack success rate while
enhancing its stealthiness to better circumvent adversarial
defenses. However, the previous attack methods designed
for Vision Transformers are relatively naive, both in terms
of the stealth and the robustness against defenses. Firstly,
most existing backdoor attack methods targeting ViTs depend on visually conspicuous and distinct triggers. Without
these triggers, the victim model either experiences a sig-

1 Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2021; Mehta and Rastegari 2021; Liu et al. 2021;
Yuan et al. 2021; Carion et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2021), by
utilizing their advanced self-attention mechanisms to interpret images, have demonstrated performance that matches
or even exceeds that of CNN architectures in a variety of
computer vision tasks. Unfortunately, similar to CNNs, ViTs
are also vulnerable to a variety of threats in deep learning,
with backdoor attacks (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017;
Liu et al. 2018; Nguyen and Tran 2020; Saha, Subramanya,
and Pirsiavash 2020; Liu et al. 2020; Doan et al. 2021; Zhao
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8241

