The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Novel Diffusion Model for Pairwise Geoscience Data Generation
with Unbalanced Training Dataset
Junhuan Yang1 , Yuzhou Zhang2 , Yi Sheng1 , Youzuo Lin3 , Lei Yang1
1

George Mason University
Northeastern University
3
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
jyang71@gmu.com, zhang.yuzho@northeastern.edu, ysheng2@gmu.edu, yzlin@unc.edu, lyang29@gmu.edu
2

Abstract

of these advancements is somewhat limited when it comes
to scientific data generation. Unlike natural images, generating standalone scientific data presents unique challenges,
as such data typically serve specialized purposes and rely
heavily on specific scientific contexts and applications.
Some scientific data types, such as seismic waveform
data, are challenging for humans to interpret through direct observation (Alcalde et al. 2019). These data require
complementary information, like velocity maps, to become
meaningful and useful in geophysical research. In geophysics, Full-waveform Inversion (FWI) is a state-of-theart approach in seismic data processing, designed to construct detailed subsurface models by leveraging the comprehensive information within seismic waveforms (Virieux and
Operto 2009). Its ability to deliver high-resolution insights
has made FWI invaluable across various subsurface applications, including subsurface energy exploration, earthquake
early warning, and carbon capture and sequestration. Currently, widely used data-driven approaches employ machine
learning to associate seismic data with subsurface structures,
relying on comprehensive training datasets for accurate predictions (Zeng et al. 2022; Zhang and Lin 2020). The literature shows that data-driven methods typically achieve higher
spatial resolutions than conventional physics-driven FWI approaches (Lin, Theiler, and Wohlberg 2023).
While data-driven models offer great potential for
portable, real-time, and detailed subsurface imaging, they
have significant limitations. Unlike computer vision, the
subsurface geophysics field is challenged by data scarcity,
mainly due to a prevalent culture of non-sharing data.
What’s worse, in practical applications, data imbalance
presents a significant challenge. Velocity maps, which are
more intuitive and understandable for humans, can be more
easily simulated through various physical methods. In contrast, seismic data—critical for understanding subsurface
structures—is often more difficult and expensive to acquire.
This imbalance results in an abundance of velocity maps,
while the corresponding seismic data needed to create paired
datasets remains limited. Therefore, efficiently generating
paired multi-modal data is crucial for achieving accurate and
comprehensive subsurface modeling, as it addresses the realworld scarcity of balanced, high-quality datasets.
Recent work has started exploring the simultaneous generation of multi-modal data (Chen et al. 2024). However,

Recently, the advent of generative AI technologies has made
transformational impacts on our daily lives, yet its application in scientific applications remains in its early stages. Data
scarcity is a major, well-known barrier in data-driven scientific computing, so physics-guided generative AI holds significant promise. In scientific computing, most tasks study
the conversion of multiple data modalities to describe physical phenomena, for example, spatial and waveform in seismic imaging, time and frequency in signal processing, and
temporal and spectral in climate modeling; as such, multimodal pairwise data generation is highly required instead of
single-modal data generation, which is usually used in natural
images (e.g., faces, scenery). Moreover, in real-world applications, the unbalance of available data in terms of modalities
commonly exists; for example, the spatial data (i.e., velocity
maps) in seismic imaging can be easily simulated, but realworld seismic waveform is largely lacking. While the most
recent efforts enable the powerful diffusion model to generate multi-modal data, how to leverage the unbalanced available data is still unclear. In this work, we use seismic imaging in subsurface geophysics as a vehicle to present “UBDiff”, a novel diffusion model for multi-modal paired scientific data generation. One major innovation is a one-intwo-out encoder-decoder network structure, which can ensure pairwise data is obtained from a co-latent representation.
Then, the co-latent representation will be used by the diffusion process for pairwise data generation. Experimental results on the OpenFWI dataset show that UB-Diff significantly
outperforms existing techniques in terms of Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID) score and pairwise evaluation, indicating the
generation of reliable and useful multi-modal pairwise data.

Introduction
The breakthroughs in generative AI technology have dramatically transformed everyday life, exemplified by the
emergence of ChatGPT (OpenAI 2023). In the realm of images, the advent of diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.
2015; Song and Ermon 2019; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)
has made high-quality image generation a reality. This has
significant implications for the real world, as it allows for
creating images in various styles tailored to human needs,
with applications in production, education, work, and artistic creation (Zhou and Lee 2024). However, the significance
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21965

