The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RaCMC: Residual-Aware Compensation Network with Multi-Granularity
Constraints for Fake News Detection
Xinquan Yu1 , Ziqi Sheng1 , Wei Lu1∗ , Xiangyang Luo2∗ , Jiantao Zhou3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Information Technology,
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Computing, Zhengzhou 450002, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City and the Department of Computer and Information Science, Faculty
of Science and Technology, University of Macau, Macau 999078, China
yuxq28@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, shengzq@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, luwei3@mail.sysu.edu.cn, luoxy ieu@sina.com,
jtzhou@um.edu.mo
Abstract

Text
Image

Concatenate

Multimodal fake news detection aims to automatically identify real or fake news, thereby mitigating the adverse effects caused by such misinformation. Although prevailing approaches have demonstrated their effectiveness, challenges persist in cross-modal feature fusion and refinement
for classification. To address this, we present a residualaware compensation network with multi-granularity constraints (RaCMC) for fake news detection, that aims to sufficiently interact and fuse cross-modal features while amplifying the differences between real and fake news. First, a multiscale residual-aware compensation module is designed to interact and fuse features at different scales, and ensure both
the consistency and exclusivity of feature interaction, thus
acquiring high-quality features. Second, a multi-granularity
constraints module is implemented to limit the distribution
of both the news overall and the image-text pairs within
the news, thus amplifying the differences between real and
fake news at the news and feature levels. Finally, a dominant feature fusion reasoning module is developed to comprehensively evaluate news authenticity from the perspectives
of both consistency and inconsistency. Experiments on three
public datasets, including Weibo17, Politifact and GossipCop, reveal the superiority of the proposed method.

Add
Paired

Real news

and is mismat
-ched due to high
similarity.

……

Similarity
Attention

Misjudged

(a) Previous methods
Global
information

+
Paired

Attention
+

+

Fake news
Decision
boundary
Pull closer
Pull away
Add

Residual
compensation
Local
information

(b) Our method

Figure 1: Comparison of the fusion and reasoning processes.
(a) Previous methods exhibit inadequate cross-modal feature fusion and may misjudge real news with high similarity. (b) Our method refines cross-modal fusion with residual
compensation and multi-scale information mining. Besides,
it amplifies the differences between real and fake news in
terms of news and feature levels.

Introduction
Early methods were designed for pure text news, aiming
to fully explore all information within the text. For example, DSTS (Ma et al. 2015) designed a dynamic series-time
structure, aimed at capturing features related to temporal
variations during news dissemination. HiMaP (Mishra 2020)
designed a high-order mutual-attention progression method
to capture real and fake news propagation patterns.
With the development of Internet, news evolved from pure
text to image-text pairs, leading to the emergence of multimodal fake news detection. Such methods aim to fully explore the cross-modal feature alignment, interaction and fusion, thus identifying fake news. For example, att-RNN (Jin
et al. 2017) was the first to utilize image information to aid in
detection. Although it was recognized early on that mining
the correlation information between text and image could
improve detection accuracy, it did not consider the complementary information of different modalities and the differences in representation space (Zhang et al. 2019; Guan

The rapid development of social networks accelerates selfmedia, enabling ordinary individuals to become publishers
of daily news. This accelerates the speed at which people
receive information. However, it also causes the widespread
dissemination of misinformation due to out-of-context interpretations, exaggerations and malicious falsifications by
publishers, which seriously endangers social security and
stability (Lazer et al. 2018; Fleming 2020). Although national authorities and social platforms establishing news verification departments12 to distinguish between real and fake
news, the massive amount of news places a significant burden on news verifiers. Consequently, automatic fake news
detection becomes a research hotspot.
∗
Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.piyao.org.cn/index.htm
2
https://www.politifact.com/

986

