The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KernelMatmul: Scaling Gaussian Processes to Large Time Series
Tilman Hoffbauer1 , Holger Hoos1,2,3 , Jakob Bossek4
1

2

Chair for AI Methodology, RWTH Aachen University, Germany
Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, The Netherlands
3
University of British Columbia, Canada
4
Chair for Machine Learning and Optimisation, Paderborn University, Germany
tilman.hoffbauer@rwth-aachen.de
Abstract

estimate. As such, the application of GPs to time series
seems beneficial, but there is one important restriction: For
inference of the posterior distribution, we need to perform
costly linear algebra operations on the kernel matrix, which
incur a computational complexity of Θ(N 3 ) and a memory
requirement of Θ(N 2 ) for N samples when using the traditional approach to inference with the Cholesky decomposition (Rasmussen and Williams 2006). This quickly becomes
infeasible for large N .
Thus, other inference schemes are required for analysing
large time series using GPs. Often, this includes approximations: We can approximate the posterior of the GP, e.g., using variational inference (Hensman, Matthews, and Ghahramani 2015), or the prior kernel matrix, e.g., using structured
kernel interpolation (Wilson and Nickisch 2015). In this
work, we will focus on accelerating inference using conjugate gradients (CG) (Gardner et al. 2018), which replaces the
Cholesky decomposition by an iterative solver and mainly
requires one central operation: The multiplication of the kernel matrix by an arbitrary right-hand side (RHS). Thus we
can avoid storing the kernel matrix in memory and instead
compute it on-the-fly. Further, we add a sparsity assumption,
assuming that the covariance of distant samples is zero.
Our core contribution is KernelMatmul, an implementation of the kernel matrix multiplication operator with key
benefits:

Time series forecasting requires reliable uncertainty estimates. Gaussian process regression provides a powerful
framework for modelling this in a probabilistic fashion. However, its application to large time series is challenging, due
to its cubic time complexity and quadratic memory requirement. In this work, we present KernelMatmul, a novel method
that accelerates Gaussian process inference and thus facilitates scaling of Gaussian process regression to large, irregularly sampled and multi-output time series. Leveraging conjugate gradients in combination with sparsity approximation,
KernelMatmul achieves time and memory complexity linear
in the number of samples. We thoroughly benchmark our new
method against multiple baselines to demonstrate its benefits
and limitations, both in efficiency and accuracy.

Implementation —
https://github.com/Turakar/kernel-matmul
Experiments —
https://github.com/Turakar/kernel-matmul-benchmark

1

Introduction

Time series data is common in our modern society. Examples include environmental sensors, medical monitoring
data, machine operation, and traffic measurements (Chandola and Vatsavai 2010; Dürichen et al. 2015; Chandola and
Vatsavai 2011; Godahewa et al. 2021). These time series
contain a wealth of information about the underlying processes. When performing predictions on these time series,
we require not only an estimate of the expected value but
also of the prediction confidence. Many predictions become
uncertain the further away we move from our initial data due
to unforeseen influences (e.g., weather changes).
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide us with a mathematically rigorous way to model these uncertainties (Rasmussen
and Williams 2006). To this end, a probabilistic method is
employed. GPs model the covariance between samples to
obtain a prior distribution. The covariance matrix over all
samples is called the kernel matrix. Given this prior, a predictive posterior distribution can be obtained from existing
observations by Bayesian principles; this distribution is multivariate normal and provides both a mean and a confidence

• on-the-fly computation of the kernel matrix to reduce the
Θ(N 2 ) memory requirement to Θ(N );
• an (optional) sparsity assumption suitable for large time
series, reducing the computational complexity of kernel
matrix multiplication from Θ(N 2 ) to Θ(N );
• GPU acceleration using CUDA (NVIDIA 2023b), which
partially hides the latency of on-the-fly computation behind the global memory latency.
These benefits are implemented by a single CUDA kernel
with accompanying Python bindings that performs the kernel matrix multiplication and is easily integrated into existing frameworks, such as GPyTorch (Gardner et al. 2018).
After the introduction of the background (Section 2) and
a discussion of related work (Section 3), we introduce KernelMatmul (Section 4). Our work includes a benchmark of
multiple approaches to kernel matrix multiplication performance (including KeOps (Charlier et al. 2021)). This bench-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17223

