The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RemDet: Rethinking Efficient Model Design for UAV Object Detection
Chen Li1,2 , Rui Zhao1,2 , Zeyu Wang1,2 , Huiying Xu1,2 * , Xinzhong Zhu1,2∗
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, Zhejiang, 321004, China
Research Institute of Hangzhou Artificial Intelligence, Zhejiang Normal University, Zhejiang, 311231, China
{lilsodachen,zhaorui,14797857499,xhy,zxz}@zjnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection in Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) images
has emerged as a focal area of research, which presents two
significant challenges: i) objects are typically small and dense
within vast images; ii) computational resource constraints render most models unsuitable for real-time deployment. Current
real-time object detectors are not optimized for UAV images,
and complex methods designed for small object detection often lack real-time capabilities. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel detector, RemDet (Reparameter efficient
multiplication Detector). Our contributions are as follows:
1) Rethinking the challenges of existing detectors for small
and dense UAV images, and proposing information loss as
a design guideline for efficient models. 2) We introduce the
ChannelC2f module to enhance small object detection performance, demonstrating that high-dimensional representations
can effectively mitigate information loss. 3) We design the
GatedFFN module to provide not only strong performance
but also low latency, effectively addressing the challenges
of real-time detection. Our research reveals that GatedFFN,
through the use of multiplication, is more cost-effective than
feed-forward networks for high-dimensional representation.
4) We propose the CED module, which combines the advantages of ViT and CNN downsampling to effectively reduce
information loss. It specifically enhances context information
for small and dense objects. Extensive experiments on large
UAV datasets, Visdrone and UAVDT, validate the real-time
efficiency and superior performance of our methods. On the
challenging UAV dataset VisDrone, our methods not only provided state-of-the-art results, improving detection by more
than 3.4%, but also achieve 110 FPS on a single 4090.

Figure 1: (a) Visualization of real-time detector results on
VisDrone, white characters below the image represent mAP,
model size, and FPS. (b) Kernel density analysis of detection
object width on UAV and COCO datasets.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in object detection techniques, including the success of general detectors
like Faster R-CNN (Girshick 2015), YOLO (Redmon et al.
2016; Redmon and Farhadi 2017), and DETR (Carion et al.
2020). Additionally, researchers have explored lightweight
and efficient architectures tailored specifically for object detection. Despite these advancements, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) images present unique challenges due to small
and dense objects. Object detection in UAV images is a critical research area with applications in surveillance, disaster

management, and environmental monitoring. Captured from
an aerial perspective, UAV datasets exhibit a higher prevalence and density of small objects compared to traditional
datasets (as illustrated in Figure 1 (b)). For instance, while
the MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014) dataset contains an average of
7 objects per image, the VisDrone (Zhu et al. 2021) dataset
contains an average of 53 objects.
To address the detection challenges posed by small and
dense objects, Region of Interest (RoI) methods are widely
adopted. (Ding et al. 2018) and (Ashraf, Sultani, and Shah
2021) can amplify or prioritize the selection of regions of
interest to enhance object visibility and distinguishability. Besides, current mainstream UAV detectors tend to employ

* Corresponding Author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4643

