The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evaluating Image Hallucination in Text-to-Image Generation
with Question-Answering
Youngsun Lim* , Hojun Choi* , Hyunjung Shim
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
{youngsun ai, hchoi256, kateshim}@kaist.ac.kr

(a) A molecule of methane

Abstract

Hallucinated

Factual

Despite the impressive success of text-to-image (TTI) models, existing studies overlook the issue of whether these models accurately convey factual information. In this paper, we
focus on the problem of image hallucination, where images
created by TTI models fail to faithfully depict factual content. To address this, we introduce I-HallA (Image Hallucination evaluation with Question Answering), a novel automated
evaluation metric that measures the factuality of generated
images through visual question answering (VQA). We also
introduce I-HallA v1.0, a curated benchmark dataset for this
purpose. As part of this process, we develop a pipeline that
generates high-quality question-answer pairs using multiple
GPT-4 Omni-based agents, with human judgments to ensure
accuracy. Our evaluation protocols measure image hallucination by testing if images from existing TTI models can correctly respond to these questions. The I-HallA v1.0 dataset
comprises 1.2K diverse image-text pairs across nine categories with 1,000 rigorously curated questions covering various compositional challenges. We evaluate five TTI models using I-HallA and reveal that these state-of-the-art models often fail to accurately convey factual information. Moreover, we validate the reliability of our metric by demonstrating a strong Spearman correlation (ρ=0.95) with human judgments. Our benchmark dataset and metric can serve as a foundation for developing factually accurate TTI models.

Q: How many hydrogen atoms are connected to the central atom
in the image?
Choices: {"Two", "Three", "Four", "Five", "None of the above"}
VQA for Factual image: "Four"
VQA for Hallucinated image: "None of the above"

Q: Is there a molecule in the image?
Choices: {"Yes", "No"}
VQA for Factual image: "Yes"
VQA for Hallucinated image: "Yes"

(b) Comb-pattern pottery BCE 8000
Factual

Q: What features mostly depicted from the object in the image?

Hallucinated

Choices: {"Scratches", "Tiny holes", "Smooth Surface", "Circular
Motifs", "None of the above"}
VQA for Factual image: "Scratches"
VQA for Hallucinated image: "Circular Motifs"
Q: What is the pattern on the pottery in the image?
Choices: {"Comb", "Wavy", "Spiral", "Floral", "None of the above"}
VQA for Factual image: "Comb"
VQA for Hallucinated image: "Comb"
I-HallA
(Ours)

TIFA

Alignment

Visual
Semantic

External
Knowledge

Figure 1: Examples of the image hallucination and how IHallA operates to evaluate it, along with a comparison to
the existing metric, TIFA. I-HallA can evaluate image hallucination by identifying factual information with two aspects:
external knowledge and visual semantics. In contrast, TIFA
hardly evaluates image hallucination as it relies solely on
text prompts. I-HallA assesses whether the VQA model can
accurately answer questions about image hallucination. We
use DallE-3 for the hallucinated images in this figure.

Introduction
As generative models (Reimers and Gurevych 2019; Rombach et al. 2022) continue to evolve, the demand for generating factual content alongside imaginary content has grown
(Saharia et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022). In natural language
generation, outputs with factual errors are classified as hallucinations, and considerable research has focused on mitigating this issue (Maynez et al. 2020; Min et al. 2023).
Current text-to-image (TTI) models also struggle to accurately reflect factual information, generating incorrect images for given prompts, as illustrated in Figure 1. This issue
is becoming increasingly critical as TTI models are being actively utilized in industries and fields where factual accuracy
is essential (Wong 2024). For instance, if images against factual information are used in educational materials or the me-

dia, misinformation and misconceptions can spread rapidly,
causing serious social side effects (Robertson 2024).
While hallucinations have been primarily discussed in the
language domain, relatively little research has addressed this
issue in the context of image generation. This paper focuses
on the unexplored issue of “image hallucination,” where
generated images fail to reflect factual information (Lim and
Shim 2024). To understand image hallucination in TTI models and guide future research directions, well-defined evaluation protocols and benchmark datasets are essential. Recent
studies have developed benchmarks and evaluation metrics
to assess TTI models based on the alignment between text
prompts and generated images (Yarom et al. 2024). These
evaluation protocols, such as TIFA (Hu et al. 2023), fo-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26290

