The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging Molecular Graphs and Large Language Models
Runze Wang1 , Mingqi Yang2 , Yanming Shen1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
runze wang@mail.dlut.edu.cn, mqyang@nus.edu.sg, shen@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
While Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown exceptional generalization capabilities, their ability to process
graph data, such as molecular structures, remains limited. To
bridge this gap, this paper proposes Graph2Token, an efficient
solution that aligns graph tokens to LLM tokens. The key idea
is to represent a graph token with the LLM token vocabulary,
without fine-tuning the LLM backbone. To achieve this goal,
we first construct a molecule-text paired dataset from multisources, including CHEBI and HMDB, to train a graph structure encoder, which reduces the distance between graphs and
texts representations in the feature space. Then, we propose
a novel alignment strategy that associates a graph token with
LLM tokens. To further unleash the potential of LLMs, we
collect molecular IUPAC name identifiers, which are incorporated into the LLM prompts. By aligning molecular graphs
as special tokens, we can activate LLMs’ generalization ability to molecular few-shot learning. Extensive experiments on
molecular classification and regression tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed Graph2Token.

Code — https://github.com/GraphMoLab/Graph2Token

Introduction

Answer

Answer

Large Language Model

Large Language Model

Tokenizer

Tokenizer

• Molecule: CC(C=C1)C=O
• What's the homo-lumo gap
of this molecule?

• (i,j) means node i connects j.
Molecular graph (0,1)…(1,3).
• What's the homo-lumo gap
of this molecule?

(a) SMILES as input

(b) Textualized graph as input

Answer

Answer

Large Language Model

Large Language Model

Tokenizer

Projector

Tokenizer

What's the
homo-lumo
gap of this
molecule?

Encoding

(c) Graph-language tuning

Recent studies have shown promising results in applying
large language models (LLMs) to graph machine learning, particularly demonstrating the potential in few-shot or
zero-shot learning on knowledge graphs and text-attributed
graphs (Fan et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024a).
However, their capability to handle graph-structured data
such as molecules is still not well investigated. The intrinsic properties of molecules demand a deeper understanding
of their structures beyond node attributes, posing a challenge
that requires a distinct approach compared to handling text
attribute graphs. Extending the functionality of LLMs to effectively process and analyze molecules will open up opportunities for molecular related tasks.
To apply LLMs for molecular tasks, existing solutions
often involve converting molecular structures into a format
that can be processed by LLMs. One common approach is
to use the Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System

Graph
Tokenizer

Tokenizer

Learn a new token
…molecule <|graph|>…graph…
What is the homo-lumo gap…

(d) Graph2Token (ours)

Figure 1: Different approaches of applying LLMs to
molecules.

(SMILES) or SELF-referencIng Embedded Strings (SELFIES), which represent molecules as text strings (Fig. 1.(a)).
For instance, Guo et al. (2023b) use SMILES as molecular representations and employ in-context learning to guide
ChatGPT in understanding molecular structures. However, a
significant limitation is that LLMs often lack a proper understanding of molecular representations in SMILES strings,
which in many cases leads to inaccurate or inconsistent
results (Guo et al. 2023b). Therefore, parameter-efficient
fine-tuning is applied to enhance LLMs’ comprehension
of molecular text representations (Fang et al. 2023). However, this method tends to overlook molecular structure and
inevitably weakens the generalization ability of LLMs by
altering their semantic space during fine-tuning. This underscores the limitations of using text data to represent

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21234

