The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On Action Theories with Iterable First-Order Progression
Daxin Liu1 * , Jens Claßen2
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Institute for People and Technology, Roskilde University, Denmark
daxin.liu@nju.edu.cn, classen@ruc.dk

Abstract

its own challenge: Lin and Reiter (1997) showed that for a
first-order (FO) knowledge base (KB), the progression may
in general require second-order (SO) logic.
Since Lin and Reiter’s seminal work, efforts have been
made to identify restricted classes of action theories where
the existence of a FO progression can be guaranteed:
In local-effect theories (Vassos, Lakemeyer, and Levesque
2008; Liu and Lakemeyer 2009), actions are required to
name all objects they affect explicitly in their arguments. An
action move(x, z, y) for moving block x from y onto z is
thus local-effect, as only the truth values of on(x, y) and
on(x, z) change due it. A classical example for an action
that is not local-effect is that of exploding a bomb, which
destroys all (unmentioned) objects in its vicinity. The class
of normal actions due to Liu and Lakemeyer (2009) supports
such global effects, as long as the affected fluent predicates
only depend on ones that are only subject to local effects,
and under additional restrictions on the initial KB. Liu and
Claßen (2024) generalize this class to acyclic actions, where
more complex interactions between non-local-effect fluents
are allowed, as long as they do not contain cycles.
Unfortunately, as we will show in this paper, normal action theories (and hence also acyclic ones) suffer from the
problem that progression is in general not iterable. The reason, roughly, is that a fluent predicate F subject to non-local
effects is required to only occur in expressions of the form
ψ(⃗x) ⊃ F (⃗x) or F (⃗x) ⊃ ϕ(⃗x) in the initial theory. However, the outcome of progression then might not satisfy this
requirement, so the result itself cannot be progressed anymore! The aforementioned works only consider progression
through a single action, but arguably, for progression to be
useful, it should work for all actions and all action sequences
admitted by the theory. Therefore, in this paper, we study
the iterability of FO progression. In particular, after presenting formal preliminaries (Section 2), we lift Liu and Lakemeyer’s first-order result on normal actions by allowing disjunctions in the knowledge base, thus obtaining a class of action theories called the disjunctive normal ones that are iteratively first-order progressable (Section 3). Furthermore, we
present a new class of action theories, called PANACK, that
strictly subsumes the disjunctive normal ones and allows for
more complex dependencies between fluents (including cycles), which we also prove to be iteratively FO progressable
(Section 4). Finally, we discuss related work and conclude.

We study the first-order definability of progression for situation calculus action theories with a focus on the iterability
of progression. Progression, the task of updating a knowledge base according to actions’ effects so that proper information is retained, is notoriously challenging as it in general requires second-order logic. Exceptions where progression is first-order like local-effect actions and normal actions
impose certain syntax constraints on action theories to eliminate second-order quantifiers in the progressed knowledge
base. Unfortunately, the progressed result might not satisfy
the constraints again, making it impossible to apply first-order
progression iteratively. In this paper, we first lift the existing result on first-order progression for normal actions by allowing disjunctions in the knowledge base. As a result, we
obtain an action theory whose type is called disjunctive normal, which is iteratively first-order progressable. Second, we
propose a new class of action theories, called PANACK, that
strictly subsumes the disjunctive normal ones, and we show
that it remains iteratively first-order progressable as well.

1

Introduction

Intelligent agents acting in real-world scenarios need to be
able to handle incomplete information, where in particular the number of objects they have to interact with is unbounded. Ideally, a representation of an agent’s world model
is hence given in terms of first-order logic. The Situation
Calculus (McCarthy and Hayes 1969; Reiter 2001) is perhaps the most widely studied first-order formalism for reasoning about action and change. A central problem in this
context is projection, where the task is to determine whether
a given formula comes to hold after a given action sequence.
Here, the specifics of the domain are encoded in terms of
an action theory, which consists of axioms describing the
initial situation as well as the pre- and postconditions of actions. Whereas regression solves projection by transforming
the query formula to an equivalent one about the initial situation, progression updates the knowledge base to reflect the
changes brought about by the action sequence. The latter is
often preferable, in particular for longer sequences where regression can cause a significant blow-up, rendering it practically infeasible. Progression, on the other hand, comes with
* Daxin Liu was also affiliated with the University of Edinburgh
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15041

