The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AnyTalk: Multi-modal Driven Multi-domain Talking Head Generation
Yu Wang, Yunfei Liu, Fa-Ting Hong, Meng Cao, Lijian Lin, Yu Li*
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)

D

D

Abstract

S

S

Cross-domain talking head generation, such as animating a
static cartoon animal photo with real human video, is crucial
for personalized content creation. However, prior works typically rely on domain-specific frameworks and paired videos,
limiting its utility and complicating its architecture with additional motion alignment modules. Addressing these shortcomings, we propose AnyTalk, a unified framework that
eliminates the need for paired data and learns a shared motion representation across different domains. The motion is
represented by canonical 3D keypoints extracted using an unsupervised 3D keypoint detector. Further, we propose an expression consistency loss to improve the accuracy of facial
dynamics in video generation. Additionally, we present AniTalk, a comprehensive dataset designed for advanced multimodal cross-domain generation. Our experiments demonstrate that AnyTalk excels at generating high-quality, multimodal talking head videos, showcasing remarkable generalization capabilities across diverse domains.

(a)

Video Driven

(b)

/i/

/o/

Audio Driven

Figure 1: Cross-domain reenactment examples generated by
our AnyTalk. Given a cartoon human or animal face as the
source image, AnyTalk enables driving the source image
with a video of a real person or an arbitrary audio speech.

talking head generation. Although effective, these methods
fail to generate pleasing talking heads for new domains, e.g.,
Disney animals, cartoon characters, etc.. Only a few methods (Bansal et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2022; Gong et al. 2023;
Kim et al. 2022) perform visually-driven cross-domain talking head generation. However, these methods only support
videos from two different domains and usually require further model designs for different domains.
In this paper, we introduce AnyTalk, a system designed
to generate talking head videos across multiple domains. It
does not require paired data or additional network modules
for different domains. AnyTalk reveals two key insights: i) a
unified end-to-end cross-domain talking head generation
framework is needed. Recent works like ToonTalker (Gong
et al. 2023) employ domain-specific motion estimators and
cross-domain motion alignment modules to transfer motion across domains and perform cross-domain face reenactment (see Fig. 2.a). However, using separate networks
for each domain leads to a cumbersome framework. Such
a design requires more computational resources and limits
their applications. Additionally, the absence of paired data
poses significant challenges in optimizing cross-domain motion alignment, leading to inaccurate expression transfer and
poor generated quality. Different from previous methods, we
present a simple and unified framework, termed by AnyTalk,
for cross-domain talking head generation (see Fig. 2.b). Every component in AnyTalk is shared across multiple domains. ii) A large-scale and diverse cross-domain dataset

Introduction
With the advancement of mobile internet and the proliferation of short video platforms, individuals are increasingly
appearing in videos. Speakers sometimes hope to present
themselves by driving rich and vivid characters (e.g., photorealistic person, Disney roles, cartoon animals, etc.) for entertainment consideration. However, animating these characters involves a complex 3D pipeline that requires extensive
labor and significant time. Consequently, there is a burgeoning field of research focused on simplifying this animation
process (Gong et al. 2023).
One-shot talking head generation aims to drive/animate
a portrait image based on the motion provided by a driving video or an audio sequence. Previous methods mainly
focus on one-shot talking head generation within the same
domain, i.e., driving a portrait with a video of a real person. These methods are usually trained with a large amount
of real human talking videos and learn warping-based motion representations (Siarohin et al. 2019; Zhao and Zhang
2022), facial keypoints (Liu et al. 2023) or 3D Morphable
Models (3DMMs) (Wu et al. 2021) to perform real person
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8105

