The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Data with High and Consistent Preference Difference Are Better for Reward
Model
Qi Lin1 , Hengtong Lu1 , Caixia Yuan1 , Xiaojie Wang,1* , Huixing Jiang,2 * , Wei Chen2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Beijing, China
2
Li Auto Inc. Beijing, China
{07 2018, luhengtong, yuancx, xjwang}@bupt.edu.cn
{jianghuixing, chenwei10}@lixiang.com

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is a
commonly used alignment method for Large Language Models (LLMs). This method relies on a reward model trained
on a preference dataset to provide scalar rewards. However,
the human-annotated preference data is often sparse, noisy,
and costly to obtain, necessitating more efficient utilization.
This paper proposes a new metric for better preference data
utilization from both theoretical and empirical perspectives.
Starting with the Bradley-Terry model, we compute the Mean
Square Error (MSE) between the expected loss and empirical
loss of the reward model. Our findings reveal that data with
higher and more consistent difference result in lower MSE.
We therefore propose the Preference Difference (PD), the reward difference between two samples, as a filter for preference data. Experimental results on three open-source models show that reward models trained by filtered data with PD
achieve higher calibrated accuracy, as well as better RLHF
alignment performance. The conclusion remains consistent
when we extend the experiments and theoretical derivations
to implicit reward alignment algorithms, such as Direct Preference Optimization (DPO).

Figure 1: Due to the labeling method of preference data,
there is a gap between the empirical loss and the expected
loss in reward model training. Using the PD metric to filter
the data can effectively narrow the gap between empirical
loss and expected loss.

Code, dataset and extended version —
github.com/07v2018/Data-with-High-and-ConsistentPreference-Difference-Are-Better-for-Reward-Model

preference labels. Lots of attention has been paid to building
better reward models. Some previous works design elaborate loss functions to make better use of the preference data,
such as adding a margin in the original loss function or a difficulty decay coefficient to the ranking loss in the loss function(Cai et al. 2024; Touvron et al. 2023a). However these
works only try to improve the performance of reward models
by utilizing the loss function, without delving into the preference data itself. The way in which reward models depend
on the characteristics of preference data remains unclear.
This paper tries to address the problem from both theoretical and experimental aspects. We demonstrated that preference data with higher differences is more effective than that
with lower differences, and data with more consistent differences is superior to those with diverse differences for training reward models. We point out that due to the low consistency found in human annotators in previous work (Bai
et al. 2022a; Dubois et al. 2024), the binary labels used in
most preference datasets (Bai et al. 2022a; Stiennon et al.

Introduction
Large language models (LLM) have achieved unprecedented
success in a broad range of natural language processing
(NLP) tasks, such as question-answering, summarization,
and dialogue (Brown et al. 2020). However, they may not
align well with human values such as harmlessness, helpfulness, and honesty (HHH). Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al. 2017; Stiennon
et al. 2020) was proposed to handle the problem to achieve
value alignments between human and LLM outputs. While
RLHF has been shown to be effective, but many problems
are still to be addressed for a more stable and efficient RLHF
process.
The existing RLHF pipeline heavily depends on reward
models which are trained on a set of paired samples with
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27482

