The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LLMs in the Classroom: Outcomes and Perceptions of Questions Written with the
Aid of AI
Gavin Witsken, Igor Crk, Eren Gultepe
Dept. of Computer Science, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Edwardsville, USA
gwitske@siue.edu, icrk@siue.edu, egultep@siue.edu

Abstract

be used to assess not only recall of facts, but also understanding, application, and analysis. Grading MCQs is objective, reduces the potential for bias, and ensures consistency
in evaluation. However, creating well-designed MCQs is a
highly specialized task, requiring expertise not only in the
knowledge or skill being assessed, but also in the methods
used to derive an answer as well as plausible failures of those
methods when they are not learned well.
Haladyna provides an empirically validated set of guidelines for writing MCQs (Haladyna, Downing, and Rodriguez
2002), emphasizing clarity, relevance, and fairness in assessment. In summary: an MCQ consists of a stem (the part that
poses the problem) and a set of possible answers; the stem
should be clear and focused, avoiding unnecessary complexity and negative phrasing, while the choices should include
distractors (incorrect options) that are plausible and which
reflect common misconceptions that meaningfully challenge
students; the choices should also ensure that the correct answer is unambiguous and that the options are similar in
length and complexity to prevent clues. MCQs which follow
Haladyna’s guidelines may be considered well-designed.
This study is an investigation of using well-designed
MCQs in a classroom, as written by the human instructor
alone and through the use of a method proposed herein,
for generating questions using AI with an expert human in
the loop, validating AI output. We do not evaluate the efficiency of using AI to generate questions, or the quality of
the generated output of LLMs, but instead focus on the assessment outcomes of validated, well-designed MCQs used
in an actual classroom. We also evaluate student perceptions
of the MCQs used in the course, asking them to predict each
MCQ’s authorship.

This study evaluates the usage of OpenAI’s ChatGPT Large
Language Model (LLM) as a tool for constructing multiple
choice questions for assessing student academic performance
through quizzes and exams. We randomly deploy questions
constructed with and without use of the LLM tool and gauge
the ability of the students to correctly answer, as well as
their ability to correctly perceive the difference between
human-authored and LLM-authored questions. In determining whether the questions written with the aid of ChatGPT
were consistent with the instructor’s questions and source
text, we computed representative vectors of both the human
and ChatGPT questions using SBERT and compared cosine
similarity to the course textbook. A non-significant MannWhitney U test (z = 1.018, p = .309) suggests that students
were unable to perceive whether questions were written with
or without the aid of ChatGPT. However, student scores on
LLM-authored questions were almost 9% lower (z = 2.702, p
< .01). This result may indicate that either the AI questions
were more difficult or that the students were more familiar
with the instructor’s style of questions. Overall, the study suggests that while there is potential for using LLM tools to aid
in the construction of assessments, care must be taken to ensure that the questions are fair, well-composed, and relevant
to the course material.

1

Introduction

The workload of faculty at institutions of higher education in
the United States is multifaceted, including requirements for
teaching, research, service, and administrative duties. The
workload varies depending on institution type, faculty rank,
and discipline, but is generally considered demanding and
includes responsibilities often extending beyond traditional
working hours. Writing assessment items can be especially
time-consuming, since even with closely guarded materials, new questions must be constructed each term to ensure
that students are being assessed on what they’ve learned this
term, rather than what they’ve gleaned from those familiar
with past iterations of a course.
Multiple-choice questions (MCQs) can be a time-saving
and effective tool for quick turnaround and prompt feedback to large groups of students. Well-designed MCQs can

2

Related Work

In recent years, standardized exams comprised of MCQs
(LSAT, SAT, GRE, MedQA, MMLU, etc.), have been used
to advertise the effectiveness of the current generation of AI
tools (Achiam et al. 2023; OpenAI 2024). These datasets
have become de facto standards for comparative evaluations
of LLM performance. However, the history of the use of artificial intelligence in education, including the construction of
well-formed MCQs, predates the recent ubiquity of LLMs.
Foundational approaches to the automatic generation of
MCQs include work by Mitkov, et al., (Mitkov, Le An, and

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27698

