The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-fingered Hand Grasps with Visuo-Tactile Fusion via Multi-Agent Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Peida Jia, Xuanheng Li* , Tianqiang Zhu, Rina Wu, Xiangbo Lin, Yi Sun
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
{jiapd201883113, zhutq, hswrn}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {xhli, linxbo, lslwf}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

ing (Chen et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2023). However, these methods exhibit limited adaptability to environmental changes
or novel tasks, especially in scenarios requiring the integration of visual and tactile data. Deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) shows promise by employing trial and error to eliminate reliance on precise dynamic models, demonstrating
strong adaptability across various objects. Given the huge
dimensionality introduced by dexterous hands, some recent
work has incorporated human demonstrations into DRL to
facilitate stable grasping. However, acquiring these demonstrations is laborious, as they are collected either in Virtual Reality (VR) using the expensive CyberGlove III (Rajeswaran et al. 2018) or by a complex video tracking system (Mandikal and Grauman 2022). Additionally, due to
the control complexity arising from the combination of visual and tactile, current DRL-based methods are mostly
limited to two-fingered hands (Calandra et al. 2018; Gao
et al. 2023), rather than five-fingered dexterous hands. Thus,
leveraging DRL to guide dexterous grasping with visuotactile fusion remains a challenging issue.

Humans achieve contact-rich dexterous grasping through the
synergy of visual and tactile information. However, the highdimensional action space of high DoF multi-fingered hands
poses significant challenges to this operation. In this study,
we address this complexity by controlling the robotic hand at
the reduced dimensional level of individual fingers instead
of the entire hand, and develop a finger-based multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning strategy by regarding the wrist,
arm, and each finger of the hand as intelligent agents. We
commence by applying a single-agent reinforcement learning
algorithm to guide the whole hand to reach the feasible approaching direction and distance to the object. Then, we develop neuroscience-inspired visuo-tactile fusion networks to
train multiple agents to control their assigned fingers by effectively leveraging visual and tactile feedback. This enables
dynamic and collaborative adjustments of finger-object interactions, ultimately achieving precise contact with specific areas of the objects. The grasping results on 8 objects show that
our approach can achieve stable and compliant grasps. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work that employs a
finger-based multi-agent reinforcement learning approach to
control the dexterous grasping process under the guidance of
both visual and tactile feedback.

In this paper, we introduce the Visuo-Tactile based
Multi-Agent Grasp with Intra-Collaboration (VT-MAGIC)
scheme, conceptualizing the grasping process of dexterous
hands as a Multi-Agent DRL (MADRL) task guided by both
visual and tactile information. Instead of relying on sequential demonstration data, we employ only a single static reference grasp, which is easier to obtain. The VT-MAGIC
scheme is designed as a hierarchical framework to facilitate
the exploration of grasping trajectories, segmented into an
approaching phase and a grasping phase. The approaching
phase aims to guide the hand to a pre-grasp position without object collision. Since this phase does not require close
collaboration among different fingers, we treat the dexterous hand as a whole and guide it by single-agent reinforcement learning. While, for the grasping phase, inspired by the
anatomical mechanisms of the human hand (Liu et al. 2016),
we regard the five fingers, wrist, and arm as seven distinct
agents, each of which undertakes a sub-task of the original
hand. We employ MADRL methods to enhance inter-agent
cooperation and reduce exploration in the high-dimensional
space. By decomposing the grasping task into finger-based
sub-tasks, each finger agent can learn more compliant behaviors towards various objects, achieving more natural
grasps.

Introduction
Humans naturally combine visual and tactile feedback to effortlessly grasp objects. Visual cues facilitate the identification and precise positioning of objects, while tactile feedback enables rapid grip adjustments to maintain stability.
However, replicating the seamless coordination of sensory
information for dynamic manipulation in dexterous robotic
hands, especially those with over 20 joints, is significantly
challenging. On one hand, the complexity of hand-object interactions escalates exponentially with the increase in joints
and contact points, complicating motion planning. On the
other hand, integrating different senses presents considerable obstacles because tactile feedback from finger sensors
is sparse, whereas visual information regarding object size,
shape, and hand-object distance is dense.
Numerous model-based methods have been developed to
optimize effective grasping trajectories for dexterous grasp* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14594

