The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hierarchical Classification Auxiliary Network for Time Series Forecasting
Yanru Sun1 , Zongxia Xie1 * , Dongyue Chen1 , Emadeldeen Eldele2,3 , Qinghua Hu1
1

Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
Institute for InfoComm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
yanrusun@tju.edu.cn, caddiexie@hotmail.com, dyuechen@tju.edu.cn, emad0002@ntu.edu.sg, huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning has significantly advanced time series forecasting through its powerful capacity to capture sequence relationships. However, training these models with the Mean Square
Error (MSE) loss often results in over-smooth predictions,
making it challenging to handle the complexity and learn highentropy features from time series data with high variability
and unpredictability. In this work, we introduce a novel approach by tokenizing time series values to train forecasting
models via cross-entropy loss, while considering the continuous nature of time series data. Specifically, we propose a
Hierarchical Classification Auxiliary Network, HCAN, a general model-agnostic component that can be integrated with any
forecasting model. HCAN is based on a Hierarchy-Aware Attention module that integrates multi-granularity high-entropy
features at different hierarchy levels. At each level, we assign
a class label for timesteps to train an Uncertainty-Aware Classifier. This classifier mitigates the over-confidence in softmax
loss via evidence theory. We also implement a Hierarchical
Consistency Loss to maintain prediction consistency across hierarchy levels. Extensive experiments integrating HCAN with
state-of-the-art forecasting models demonstrate substantial
improvements over baselines on several real-world datasets.

Figure 1: Comparison between Conventional and Discretized
Settings for time series forecasting. (a) Conventional setting
keeps features close together, producing over-smooth predictions; (b) Discretized setting spreads the features, resulting in
a higher entropy feature space, but can misclassify inter-class
boundary timesteps.

Code — https://github.com/syrGitHub/HCAN

Introduction
Time series forecasting has received significant attention
due to its wide-ranging social impact. Among existing approaches for time series forecasting, deep learning methods
have emerged as significant contributors to this field (Zhou
et al. 2021, 2022; Zeng et al. 2023; Ni et al. 2024). These
methods showed a powerful capacity to capture sequence
continuity features (Wen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024) and
enhance forecasting performance in practical applications
such as finance (Hou et al. 2022), weather forecasting (Lam
et al. 2022), resource planning (Chen et al. 2021), and other
domains (Shao et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024).
Nevertheless, current time series forecasting methods relying on the Mean Square Error (MSE) loss for feature extraction can suffer inaccurate predictions. The main downside
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20743

of the MSE loss is compressing the feature representation
into a narrow space, limiting its ability to learn complexity
and high-entropy feature representations, especially for those
features that exhibit significant variability and unpredictability (Zhang et al. 2023; Pintea et al. 2023). Therefore, current
methods often produce over-smooth predictions, leading to
inaccuracies such as inflating wind speed estimates on sunny
days when the actual wind speed is low, and underestimating wind speed on windy days when the actual wind speed
is high. This weakness diminishes the utility of forecasting
results for downstream applications, as shown in Figure 1a.
Recently, several studies have demonstrated the superiority
of cross-entropy loss in capturing high-entropy feature representation from a mutual information perspective (Pintea et al.
2023; Zhang et al. 2023). Therefore, it has been successfully
applied in various domains, such as depth estimation (Cao,
Wu, and Shen 2017; Fu et al. 2018), age estimation (Rothe,
Timofte, and Van Gool 2015; Shah et al. 2024), and crowd
counting (Xiong and Yao 2022; Guo et al. 2024).
In this work, we reformulate time series forecasting as a
classification problem. Specifically, we tokenize time series
values into different categories based on their magnitude and
leverage the cross-entropy loss to train a classifier on these

