The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SQLFixAgent: Towards Semantic-Accurate Text-to-SQL Parsing
via Consistency-Enhanced Multi-Agent Collaboration
Jipeng Cen1 , Jiaxin Liu4 , Zhixu Li2,3 , Jingjing Wang1 *
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
2
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
International College (Suzhou Research Institute), Renmin University of China, Suzhou, China
4
iFLYTEK Research (Suzhou), China
jpcen@stu.suda.edu.cn, jxliu6@iflytek.com, zhixuli@ruc.edu.cn, djingwang@suda.edu.cn
Abstract

User Question:
Please list the patient's ID whose
creatinine level is normal and
whose anti Cardiolipin antibody
concentration level is the highest.

While fine-tuned large language models (LLMs) excel in
generating grammatically valid SQL in Text-to-SQL parsing,
they often struggle to ensure semantic accuracy in queries,
leading to user confusion and diminished system usability. To tackle this challenge, we introduce SQLFixAgent, a
new consistency-enhanced multi-agent collaborative framework designed for detecting and repairing erroneous SQL.
Our framework comprises a core agent, SQLRefiner, alongside two auxiliary agents: SQLReviewer and QueryCrafter.
The SQLReviewer agent employs the rubber duck debugging
method to identify potential semantic mismatches between
SQL and user query. If the error is detected, the QueryCrafter
agent generates multiple SQL as candidate repairs using a
fine-tuned SQLTool. Subsequently, leveraging similar repair
retrieval and failure memory reflection, the SQLRefiner agent
selects the most fitting SQL statement from the candidates
as the final repair. We evaluated our proposed framework on
five Text-to-SQL benchmarks. The experimental results show
that our method consistently enhances the performance of the
baseline model, specifically achieving an execution accuracy
improvement of over 3% on the Bird benchmark. Our framework also has a higher token efficiency compared to other
advanced methods, making it more competitive.

Evidence:
creatinine level is normal refers
to cre < 1.5; anti Cardiolipin
antibody concentration level is
the highest refers to MAX(acl iga);

Database schema
examination
• id
• `acl iga`
• `acl igg`
FK • …
patient
• id
• diagnosis

laboratory
• id
• iga
• cre
• …
FK

• sex
• …

SQL with syntax error
SELECT examination.id FROM examination INNER JOIN laboratory ON
examination.id = laboratory.id WHERE laboratory.cre < 1.5 ORDER BY
laboratory.`acl iga` DESC LIMIT 1 (`acl iga` is not a column of laboratory.)

SQL with semantic error
SELECT patient.id, examination.`acl iga` FROM laboratory INNER JOIN
patient ON laboratory.id = patient.id INNER JOIN examination ON
patient.id = examination.id WHERE laboratory.cre < 1.5 ORDER BY
examination.`acl iga` DESC LIMIT 1 (Some queries are redundant.)

Gold SQL
SELECT T2.id FROM laboratory AS T1 INNER JOIN examination AS T2 ON
T1.id = T2.id WHERE T1.cre < 1.5 ORDER BY T2.`acl Iga` DESC LIMIT 1

Figure 1: A complex example of Text-to-SQL from Bird. We
demonstrate two common types of errors happened in LLMbased parsing: SQL with syntax errors, where missing table names are easily detected, while SQL with semantic
errors is often executed, leading to user confusion.

Introduction
Traditional data querying methods require users to have expertise in Structured Query Language (SQL), posing a significant barrier for non-technical users. Text-to-SQL parsing aims to overcome this obstacle by automatically converting natural language questions into SQL queries (Qin
et al. 2022; Deng, Chen, and Zhang 2022).
Previous Text-to-SQL methods mainly rely on pretrained
models to encode the input sequence (Wang et al. 2020;
Hui et al. 2022), then decode the SQL query using abstract
syntax trees (AST) (Guo et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020;
Cao et al. 2023). However, recent advancements in decoderbased LLMs have transformed the field of NLP. The researchers are actively exploring the potential of LLMs in
Text-to-SQL parsing. These methods can be divided into
two categories: Fine-tuning LLMs and Prompting LLMs.
The former fine-tunes the LLMs on Text-to-SQL down-

stream tasks, aiming to enhance their capabilities by highquality data (Li et al. 2024a; Sun et al. 2024). The latter
prompts the proprietary LLMs with hundreds of billions parameters, such as GPT-4 (OpenAI et al. 2024), to push the
boundaries of Text-to-SQL by leveraging their superior InContext-Learning capabilities (Gao et al. 2024; Wang et al.
2024a; Xie et al. 2024). However, it is worth noting that
due to the concerns of inference overheads and data privacy,
Fine-tuning LLMs remains the preferred choice for most
practical applications. With the improvement of open source
LLMs (Touvron et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023c), these methods
achieved commendable performance on some simpler Textto-SQL benchmarks (Yu et al. 2018, 2019), comparable to
those state-of-the-art prompting-based methods.

* Jingjing Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

49

