The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LLM4GEN: Leveraging Semantic Representation of LLMs
for Text-to-Image Generation
Mushui Liu1,2 * † , Yuhang Ma2 * , Zhen Yang3 , Jun Dan1 , Yunlong Yu1‡ ,
Zeng Zhao2‡ , Zhipeng Hu2 , Bai Liu2 , Changjie Fan2
1

College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Fuxi AI Lab, Netease Inc.
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
lms@zju.edu.cn, mayuhang@corp.netease.com, zhen.yang@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, jundan@zju.edu.cn,
yuyunlong@zju.edu.cn, {hzzhaozeng, zphu, hzliubai, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com

Abstract

(a)

Diffusion models have exhibited substantial success in textto-image generation. However, they often encounter challenges when dealing with complex and dense prompts involving multiple objects, attribute binding, and long descriptions. In this paper, we propose a novel framework called
LLM4GEN, which enhances the semantic understanding of
text-to-image diffusion models by leveraging the representation of Large Language Models (LLMs). It can be seamlessly
incorporated into various diffusion models as a plug-andplay component. A specially designed Cross-Adapter Module (CAM) integrates the original text features of text-toimage models with LLM features, thereby enhancing textto-image generation. Additionally, to facilitate and correct
entity-attribute relationships in text prompts, we develop an
entity-guided regularization loss to further improve generation performance. We also introduce DensePrompts, which
contains 7,000 dense prompts to provide a comprehensive
evaluation for the text-to-image generation task. Experiments
indicate that LLM4GEN significantly improves the semantic
alignment of SD1.5 and SDXL, demonstrating increases of
9.69% and 12.90% in color on T2I-CompBench, respectively.
Moreover, it surpasses existing models in terms of sample
quality, image-text alignment, and human evaluation.

Decode

Text

Long text

LLMs

(b)

Text

LLMs

LLMs Text Emedding
Align

Layout
Prompt Engineer
External Model

500 M+ data
300+ GPU days

Diffusion Model

(c)

Text

LLMs

Diffusion Model

LLMs Text Emedding
Fusion

CLIP Text Emedding

10 M data
50 GPU days
LLM4GEN (ours)

Diffusion Model

Figure 1: Architecture comparison between (a) LLMguidance models (b) LLM-alignment models and (c) our
proposed LLM4GEN.
With the emergence of powerful linguistic representations
from Large Language Models (LLMs), there has been an increasing trend in leveraging LLMs to aid in T2I generation.
Current methods mainly consist of two categories: LLMguidance models (Yang et al. 2024a; Feng et al. 2022) and
LLM-alignment models (Wu et al. 2023a; Hu et al. 2024;
Esser et al. 2024; Zhao et al. 2024). LLM-guidance models harness the reasoning capability of LLMs and the Layout model to generate controllable images, as illustrated in
Fig. 1 (a). However, these methods require separating LLMs
from external models, resulting in redundancy in both inference time and the overall framework. While LLM-alignment
models utilize LLMs to exploit the representational capacity,
they demand substantial training data to align LLM representations with the diffusion model, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
To address aforementioned challenges, we propose a
novel framework named LLM4GEN that implicitly leverages the powerful semantic representations of LLMs to enhance the original text encoder for T2I GENeration, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (c). Specifically, we design an efficient Cross-

Introduction
Recently, diffusion models (Song et al. 2020; Rombach et al.
2022; Huang et al. 2024; Shen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024;
Yang et al. 2024b; He et al. 2024b; Tang et al. 2022b; Liu
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2025) have made significant progress
in text-to-image (T2I) generation models, such as Imagen
(Saharia et al. 2022), DALL-E (Betker et al. 2023), and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al. 2022; Podell et al. 2023).
However, they often encounter challenges in generating images given complex and dense prompt descriptions, such as
attribute binding and multiple objects (Huang et al. 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

This work was done during his internship at Fuxi Al Lab.
Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

5523

