The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Pioneering Neural Network Method for Efficient and Robust Fuel Sloshing
Simulation in Aircraft
Yu Chen, Shuai Zheng* , Nianyi Wang, Menglong Jin, Yan Chang
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
xjtu chenyu@163.com, shuaizheng@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

and has been widely applied in engineering. However, it requires significant computation time and storage, often taking
weeks or even months to complete, and it struggles with handling complex boundaries. In recent years, fluid simulation
methods based on SPH (Solenthaler and Pajarola 2009; Bender and Koschier 2015; Ye et al. 2019; Li, Liu, and Zheng
2018; Koschier et al. 2020) have gained traction in fuel
sloshing simulation (Zheng et al. 2021; Calderon Sanchez
et al. 2019), such as DualSPHysics (Alshaer, Rogers, and
Li 2017; Pourabdian, Omidvar, and Morad 2017), due to
their relatively higher efficiency and better handling of free
surface flows. However, despite these advantages over gridbased methods, the inherently high computational cost of
solving Navier-Stokes equations remains, which is highly
inconvenient for practical applications.
Neural network-based approaches for learning physics
have brought new vitality to this field (Ling, Kurzawski,
and Templeton 2016; Tompson et al. 2017; Morton et al.
2018; Saha, Dash, and Mukhopadhyay 2021). By adopting
the particle-based perspective of SPH and integrating methods from 3D computer vision, we treat fluids as point clouds
with velocity vectors. This allows us to model complex fluid
dynamics using neural networks, thereby avoiding the computationally intensive Navier-Stokes equations and significantly improving computational efficiency.
However, existing neural network methods (Ummenhofer
et al. 2019; Shao, Loy, and Dai 2022; Prantl et al. 2022; Li
et al. 2018) are not sufficiently robust, which is suitable only
for simple scenarios, such as the freefall of fluid blocks or
dam-break flows. In contrast, the internal structure of a fuel
tank is much more complex, with ribs and holes that allow
fuel flow between compartments. Current neural network
methods lack sufficient learning capacity and the necessary
constraints to guide the modeling of fluid dynamics in such
intricate scenarios, making them prone to breakdown under
such challenging conditions.
In general, the main contributions of this paper include:
• We propose a neural network that is the first to be robust enough to simulate fuel sloshing in complex fuel
tanks, achieving a speed improvement of over 300 times
compared to traditional fluid simulation software such
as Flow3D, and nearly 10 times compared to traditional
SPH methods.
• We introduce three key capabilities for fluid simulation

Simulating fuel sloshing within aircraft tanks during flight is
crucial for aircraft safety research. Traditional methods based
on Navier-Stokes equations are computationally expensive.
In this paper, we treat fluid motion as point cloud transformation and propose the first neural network method specifically
designed for simulating fuel sloshing in aircraft. This model
is also the deep learning model that is the first to be capable
of stably modeling fluid particle dynamics in such complex
scenarios. Our triangle feature fusion design achieves an optimal balance among fluid dynamics modeling, momentum
conservation constraints, and global stability control. Additionally, we constructed the Fueltank dataset, the first dataset
for aircraft fuel surface sloshing. It comprises 320,000 frames
across four typical tank types and covers a wide range of
flight maneuvers, including multi-directional rotations. We
conducted comprehensive experiments on both our dataset
and the take-off scenario of the aircraft. Compared to existing neural network-based fluid simulation algorithms, we
significantly enhanced accuracy while maintaining high computational speed. Compared to traditional SPH methods, our
speed improved approximately 10 times. Furthermore, compared to traditional fluid simulation software such as Flow3D,
our computation speed increased by more than 300 times.

Introduction
Aircraft fuel sloshing simulation intersects multiple disciplines, including computer graphics, 3D computer vision,
fluid dynamics, etc. The fuel tank is a key component of
an aircraft fuel system. During large-angle maneuvers, fuel
sloshing can cause violent fluid deformation and shifts in the
center of gravity, both of which can endanger flight safety.
Consequently, the simulation of fuel sloshing during flight
is a critical research topic in aviation applications.
There are two typical representations of fluid in the area
of Computational Fluid Dynamics: grid-based methods and
particle-based (also known as SPH). Traditional fuel sloshing simulations typically use grid-based fluid simulation
software such as Ansys Fluent and Flow3D. The grid-based
approach segments the fluid region into a grid of cells or
voxels. This approach can maintain high numerical stability
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15957

