The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MEATRD: Multimodal Anomalous Tissue Region Detection
Enhanced with Spatial Transcriptomics
Kaichen Xu1 * , Qilong Wu 1 * , Yan Lu 1 , Yinan Zheng 1 , Wenlin Li 1 , Xingjie Tang 1 , Jun Wang 2 ,
Xiaobo Sun 1†
1

School of Statistics and Mathematics, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law
2
iWudao Tech
{kaichenxu, qilongwu, yanlu, yinanzheng, wenlinli, xingjietang}@stu.zuel.edu.cn, xsun28@gmail.com, jwang@iwudao.tech
Abstract

and Martel 2021). Traditionally, automated ATR detection,
which typically applies computer vision techniques to histology images, e.g., whole-slide images (WSI) stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (Zingman et al. 2023), is a
specialized task of image anomaly detection (AD). However,
histology images, unlike natural images (e.g., those in ImageNet dataset) (Bergmann et al. 2019), present unique challenges for AD due to their inherent high complexity (Zehnder
et al. 2022), subtle differences between ATRs and normal tissues (Shenkar and Wolf 2022), the diverse manifestations of
ATRs (Komura and Ishikawa 2018), and variability in staining quality (Zingman et al. 2023). The complexities demand
supplementary information to visual cues for accurate ATR
detection.

The detection of anomalous tissue regions (ATRs) within affected tissues is crucial in clinical diagnosis and pathological studies. Conventional automated ATR detection methods,
primarily based on histology images alone, falter in cases
where ATRs and normal tissues have subtle visual differences.
The recent spatial transcriptomics (ST) technology profiles
gene expressions across tissue regions, offering a molecular
perspective for detecting ATRs. However, there is a dearth
of ATR detection methods that effectively harness complementary information from both histology images and ST. To
address this gap, we propose MEATRD, a novel ATR detection method that integrates histology image and ST data.
MEATRD is trained to reconstruct image patches and gene
expression profiles of normal tissue spots (inliers) from their
multimodal embeddings, followed by learning a one-class
classification AD model based on latent multimodal reconstruction errors. This strategy harmonizes the strengths of
reconstruction-based and one-class classification approaches.
At the heart of MEATRD is an innovative masked graph dualattention transformer (MGDAT) network, which not only facilitates cross-modality and cross-node information sharing but
also addresses the model over-generalization issue commonly
seen in reconstruction-based AD methods. Additionally, we
demonstrate that modality-specific, task-relevant information
is collated and condensed in multimodal bottleneck encoding
generated in MGDAT, marking the first theoretical analysis
of the informational properties of multimodal bottleneck encoding. Extensive evaluations across eight real ST datasets
reveal MEATRD’s superior performance in ATR detection,
surpassing various state-of-the-art AD methods. Remarkably,
MEATRD also proves adept at discerning ATRs that only show
slight visual deviations from normal tissues.

Code — https://github.com/wqlzuel/MEATRD
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10659

Introduction
Detecting anomalous tissue regions (ATR) within tissues
from affected individuals is essential in clinical diagnostics,
pathological studies, and targeted therapies (Srinidhi, Ciga,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12918

Spatial transcriptomics (ST) meets this need by providing
spatial gene expression data. By far, a total of 1033 publicly
available human ST datasets that span 56 diseases and 35
tissues, providing a rich resource for investigating ATRs at
the molecular level (Wang et al. 2024). A typical ST dataset
is structured as a matrix X ∈ RN ×G , where Xi,j denotes
the expression read counts of the j-th gene mapped to i-th
tissue spot. As illustrated in Figure 1, these spots, ranging in
size from 10 to 200 µm as per sequencing technology, are
spatially arranged in arrays to cover the entire tissue slice
(Hu et al. 2023), thereby characterizing gene expression profile across the tissue. This molecular-level data, especially
in cases where ATRs are visually similar to normal tissues,
can significantly aid in their detection (Hu et al. 2021). However, due to limitations inherent to sequencing technology,
ST data suffer from severe noise and substantial missing values in gene expression measurements (Wang et al. 2022),
leading to compromised precision in demarcating tissue regions (Wang, Maletic-Savatic, and Liu 2022). Integration of
histology images with ST data presents a promising solution
to these challenges. As illustrated in our toy example in Figure 1, the blank spots in the ST dataset’s spatial map, which
represent tumor core locations with missing gene expression
data, are visually identifiable in the accompanying histology
image. Conversely, the tumor edge region, which may not
be easily distinguishable from normal tissues visually, is detectable in the ST data. Therefore, the information from the
two modalities can complement each other, greatly enhancing
the precision of ATR detection. Fortunately, ST technologies
like 10x Visium (Moses and Pachter 2022) provide accom-

