The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unified Coding for Both Human Perception and Generalized Machine Analytics
with CLIP Supervision
Kangsheng Yin13 * , Quan Liu13 * , Xuelin Shen1† , Yulin He1 , Wenhan Yang2† , Shiqi Wang4
1

Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Shenzhen University
4
City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
The image compression model has long struggled with adaptability and generalization, as the decoded bitstream typically
serves only human or machine needs and fails to preserve
information for unseen visual tasks. Therefore, this paper innovatively introduces supervision obtained from multimodal
pre-training models and incorporates adaptive multi-objective
optimization tailored to support both human visual perception
and machine vision simultaneously with a single bitstream,
denoted as Unified and Generalized Image Coding for Machine (UG-ICM). Specifically, to get rid of the reliance between compression models with downstream task supervision, we introduce Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
(CLIP) models into the training constraint for improved generalization. Global-to-instance-wise CLIP supervision is applied to help obtain hierarchical semantics that make models
more generalizable for the tasks relying on the information
of different granularity. Furthermore, for supporting both human and machine visions with only a unifying bitstream, we
incorporate a conditional decoding strategy that takes as conditions human or machine preferences, enabling the bitstream
to be decoded into different versions for corresponding preferences. As such, our proposed UG-ICM is fully trained in a
self-supervised manner, i.e., without awareness of any specific downstream models and tasks. The extensive experiments have shown that the proposed UG-ICM is capable of
achieving remarkable improvements in various unseen machine analytics tasks, while simultaneously providing perceptually satisfying images.

Figure 1: (a) Most existing ICM models rely on task-specific
supervision and fall short of generalization capacity in unseen scenarios. (b) z and ẑ denote the latent representations
satisfying downstream tasks from the original image x and
compressed image x̂, respectively.

which satisfies only the machine vision needs by totally discarding low-level information.
To make up this issue for obtaining both human and
machine-friendly images, Image Coding for Machine (ICM)
is taken as a more promising direction with significant attention (Yang et al. 2024). Preliminary ICM explorations
focus on conventional block-based codecs (Sullivan et al.
2012; Bross et al. 2021), making them aware of machine vision preferences by identifying semantic-related side information during preprocessing (Huang et al. 2021; Choi and
Han 2020). This information contributes to deriving appropriate block-wise coding parameters for analytics-friendly
bit allocation. In recent years, notable progress has been
made on Learned Image Compression (LIC), providing the
flexibility to integrate entire codec modules specifically tailored for machines. Such codecs are jointly optimized under
the supervision of downstream machine analytics models
with respect to rate-perception-analytics criteria (Chamain

Code — https://github.com/YinKangSheng/UG-ICM

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rise of machine-visionoriented application scenarios, e.g. autonomous driving,
smart cities, and the Internet of Things. Existing technologies need to shift towards meeting the demands of machine vision. Therefore, on the coding side, the demand for
machine-oriented coding also emerges. Some preliminary
attempts, e.g., feature coding (Chen et al. 2020, 2019), are
implemented to compress the intermediate deep features,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9517

