The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DIDiffGes: Decoupled Semi-Implicit Diffusion Models for Real-time Gesture
Generation from Speech
Yongkang Cheng1, 3 , Shaoli Huang1 * , Xuelin Chen1 , Jifeng Ning3 , Mingming Gong2,4
1

Tencent AI Lab
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne
3
College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
cyk19990422@gmail.com, shaol.huang@gmail.com, xuelin.chen.3d@gmail.com, njf@nwsuaf.edu.cn,
mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au
2

Abstract

struggle with motion representation and training complexities. VAE-based approaches, as seen in (Yoon et al. 2020),
often result in less fluid arm poses, diminishing the realism
of the generated gestures. Diffusion model-based methods,
highlighted in studies such as (Ao, Zhang, and Liu 2023;
Yang et al. 2023b,a), have emerged as promising alternatives due to their comprehensive gesture movement capture.
However, their slow generation speed is a substantial barrier,
especially for real-time interactions with virtual agents.
Recent advancements like the MLD approach from (Chen
et al. 2023), which introduces a latent space structure for encoding body movements (Kingma and Welling 2013) and
adapts the latent diffusion model (Rombach et al. 2022),
along with the DDIM sampling strategy (Song, Meng, and
Ermon 2020), attempt to address these challenges. Nevertheless, these methods often prioritize increased computation
speed at the expense of generating overly smooth motions,
thereby lacking the nuanced complexity observed in natural human movement. In this paper, we propose DIDiffGes,
a Decoupled Semi-Implicit Diffusion model framework that
aims to resolve the speed and fidelity issues in gesture generation. Our model is inspired by the recent Semi-Implicit Denoising Diffusion model (SIDDM) (Xu et al. 2023), which
demonstrates unconditional high-fidelity image generation
in a few steps. “Semi-implicit” denotes the training of the
large-step denoiser using adversarial learning as the implicit
objective, complemented by L2 loss as an explicit objective for better convergence. DIDiffGes generalizes SIDDM
to human gesture generation by further decoupling the denoiser’s output into distinct representations for hand and
body noise, ensuring high-quality gesture generation at a
few diffusion steps.
To be more specific, DIDiffGes’s innovation lies in adversarially training separate noise components for body and
hand movements at each diffusion step, better capturing their
varying complexities and dynamics. This ensures a balanced
and accurate representation of both movement types, crucial
for generating realistic, expressive, and diverse gestures. The
introduction of semi-implicit objectives into the diffusion
framework is transformative, facilitating significant data distribution changes at each step and producing outputs closely
resembling real gesture data. This capability is particularly

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable synthesis
quality and diversity in generating co-speech gestures. However, the computationally intensive sampling steps associated
with diffusion models hinder their practicality in real-world
applications. Hence, we present DIDiffGes, for a Decoupled
Semi-Implicit Diffusion model-based framework, that can
synthesize high-quality, expressive gestures from speech using only a few sampling steps. Our approach leverages Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to enable large-step
sampling for diffusion model. We decouple gesture data into
body and hands distributions and further decompose them
into marginal and conditional distributions. GANs model the
marginal distribution implicitly, while L2 reconstruction loss
learns the conditional distributions exciplictly. This strategy
enhances GAN training stability and ensures expressiveness
of generated full-body gestures. Our framework also learns
to denoise root noise conditioned on local body representation, guaranteeing stability and realism. DIDiffGes can generate gestures from speech with just 10 sampling steps, without compromising quality and expressiveness, reducing the
number of sampling steps by a factor of 100 compared to existing methods. Our user study reveals that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in human likeness, appropriateness, and style correctness.

Introduction
The integration of large language models like ChatGPT (Schulman et al. 2022) into our digital lives has heralded a significant evolution in human-computer interaction.
These models facilitate more natural and engaging conversations. However, to fully exploit the potential of these interactions, integrating real-time, realistic non-verbal elements,
such as gestures, in harmony with the advanced verbal capabilities of these models, is crucial.
The realm of gesture synthesis faces the challenge of precisely and swiftly generating complex human gestures, encompassing hand and body movements. GAN-based methods, like those in (Liu et al. 2022a), although promising,
* Corresponding author: Shaoli Huang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2464

