The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CiTrus: Squeezing Extra Performance out of Low-data Bio-signal Transfer
Learning
Eloy Geenjaar1 * , Lie Lu2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology
2
Dolby Laboratories
egeenjaar@gatech.edu, llu@dolby.com

Abstract

electroencephalography (EEG) non-invasively records the
brain’s electrical activity from outside the skull and can
be used to predict attention levels (Li et al. 2011). On the
other hand, photoplethysmography (PPG) records volumetric blood changes and can be used to predict stress levels (Charlton et al. 2018) from non-invasive recordings on
the skin. Many more bio-signals exist, each with unique information about a potential patient.
However, bio-signals also come with three important
drawbacks. First, bio-signals are noisy; with EEG, for example, the electrical activity from the brain is recorded through
the skull and must thus travel through a dense bone before
it arrives at the electrodes, which leads to noise. Moreover,
it is harder to record activity deeper in the brain because the
further away electrical current is generated from the electrode, the harder it is to reliably capture it. Additionally, normal activities while wearing wearables, such as walking, can
induce movement-related noise in non-invasive bio-signals.
Secondly, bio-signals suffer from a lot of subject-variability,
i.e., it can be hard to generalize predictions from one person’s bio-signal to the same bio-signal recorded from another person. Lastly, making predictions about a person’s
internal state from bio-signals is often non-trivial. These predictions require complex and non-linear transformations of
the original bio-signal. This has led to the wide-scale adoption of neural networks in bio-signal research. However,
neural networks require substantial amounts of labeled data
to train on, and labeling bio-signals is expensive because it
requires (medical) experts to go through the data and label
the individual time windows of each bio-signal. It is thus
imperative to develop neural network models that do not require many labeled examples to train on.
Transfer learning mitigates the need for many examples
by first pre-training a neural network on a large unlabeled
dataset. Transfer learning has shown to be effective for
bio-signals with models pre-trained using a self-supervised
task (Zhang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023; Dong et al. 2024). In
this work, we develop a comprehensive evaluation strategy
for bio-signal transfer learning and find that convolutionbased architectures often outperform transformer-only models. We thus propose a new convolution transformer hybrid
model that we call CiTrus, and new pre-training and finetuning strategies. Our model systematically improves performance over previous methods and strong baselines we

Transfer learning for bio-signals has recently become an
important technique to improve prediction performance on
downstream tasks with small bio-signal datasets. Recent
works have shown that pre-training a neural network model
on a large dataset (e.g. EEG) with a self-supervised task, replacing the self-supervised head with a linear classification
head, and fine-tuning the model on different downstream biosignal datasets (e.g., EMG or ECG) can dramatically improve
the performance on those datasets. In this paper, we propose a
new convolution-transformer hybrid model architecture with
masked auto-encoding for low-data bio-signal transfer learning, introduce a frequency-based masked auto-encoding task,
employ a more comprehensive evaluation framework, and
evaluate how much and when (multimodal) pre-training improves fine-tuning performance. We also introduce a dramatically more performant method of aligning a downstream
dataset with a different temporal length and sampling rate to
the original pre-training dataset. Our findings indicate that the
convolution-only part of our hybrid model can achieve stateof-the-art performance on some low-data downstream tasks.
The performance often improves even further with our full
model. In the case of transformer-based models, we find that
pre-training especially improves performance on downstream
datasets, multimodal pre-training often increases those gains
further, and our frequency-based pre-training performs the
best on average for the lowest and highest data regimes.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11695

1

Introduction

The wearable market is growing quickly around the
world (Casselman, Onopa, and Khansa 2017). This increase
in wearable usage means there is an increasing amount of
bio-signal data available that can be used in the field of preventative medicine. By combining subjective assessments
of experiences with objective signals extracted from biosignals related to someone’s well-being, stress level, cognitive state, etc., doctors can make more informed treatment decisions. There are many types of bio-signals, each
recording a different type of information, for example,
* Work completed during an internship at Dolby Laboratories
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16781

