The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improved Approximation Algorithms for Clustered TSP and Subgroup Planning
Jingyang Zhao, Mingyu Xiao* , Junqiang Peng, Ziliang Xiong
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
jingyangzhao1020@gmail.com, myxiao@gmail.com, jqpeng0@foxmail.com, forgottencosecant@outlook.com

Abstract
In the Clustered TSP (CTSP), we are given an edge-weighted
graph satisfying the triangle inequality property, and a family of pairwise disjoint vertex groups. The goal is to find a
minimum weight tour that includes all vertices, ensuring that
the vertices within each group appear consecutively on the
tour. The subgroup planning problem (SGPP) is an extension
of CTSP by relaxing some triangle inequality requirements
on edge weights. CTSP and SGPP have plentiful applications
in AI and robotics. In this paper, we design three improved
approximation algorithms for SGPP and CTSP. First, we
propose a polynomial-time 2.167-approximation algorithm
for SGPP, improving the previous ratio of 3 (IJCAI 2017).
Second, we give an FPT 2.072-approximation algorithm for
SGPP parameterized by the maximum group size, improving
the previous ratio of 2.5 (IJCAI 2017). Third, we prove an
FPT (β < 1.5)-approximation algorithm for SGPP parameterized by the number of groups, which even improves the
previous ratio 1.667 for CTSP (ORL 1999). We also conduct
experiments to evaluate the performance of our algorithms.

(a) An instance

(b) A solution

Figure 1: An example of SGPP and CTSP, where (a) represents three subgroups of vertices, and (b) represents a feasible tour

is still to find a minimum weight tour visiting all vertices
(locations) such that the vertices in the same subgroup are
visited consecutively, as in CTSP. An illustration of SGPP,
along with CTSP is shown in Figure 1. However, the edge
weight function in SGPP is more general. In CTSP, the distances among any three locations always satisfy the triangle
inequality relationship. However, in SGPP, the edge weight
function w partially satisfies the triangle inequality. Specifically, it requires that w(a, b) + w(b, c) ≥ w(a, c) holds
only if a, b, c belong to the same subgroup or a, c do not
belong to the same subgroup. This property is called the
partial metric, which was defined to meet the needs of AI
applications (Sumita et al. 2017). Note that the targets in
different subgroups may be different and then the routing
cost (edge weight) in each subgroup may be different. We
may even add other expenses caused when executing tasks
in each subgroup to the edge weights in the subgroup. Thus,
in most application scenarios, the weight of edges within
each subgroup may be much higher than that of other edges,
which may lead to the partial metric. Although many applications of SGPP and CTSP have been mentioned in the literature (Sumita et al. 2017; Laporte and Palekar 2002), we
introduce one more application for SGPP below.
In electronic printing, a robotic arm needs to process various types of holes, such as through-holes, blind vias, and
buried vias, which can be considered as distinct subgroups
of vertices. To reduce switching costs and minimize error accumulation, the robotic arm must process holes of the same
type consecutively. Moreover, different types of holes require varying levels of precision, resulting in higher routing
costs within groups containing more complex or precision-

Introduction
The famous traveling salesman problem (TSP) as well as
some other path planning problems, are going to find a route
of a vehicle to visit a group of locations under some requirements. These problems play an important role in operations research and have also attracted certain attention in
AI and robotics (Nash, Koenig, and Likhachev 2009; Jaillet
and Porta 2013; Ninomiya et al. 2015; Surynek 2015).
One application scenario for these path planning problems
is that the group of locations can be divided into smaller subgroups based on different properties, and each subgroup has
its own rules and requirements for the route. Motivated by
warehouse routing and production planning, the Clustered
TSP (CTSP) was proposed (Chisman 1975; Lokin 1979).
In CTSP, the group of locations is divided into several subgroups, and locations within the same subgroup must be visited consecutively (in any order).
To answer more application scenarios, CTSP was further
generalized to the subgroup path planning problem (SGPP)
in the literature (Sumita et al. 2017). The goal of SGPP
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26742

