The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Every Bit Helps: Achieving the Optimal Distortion with a Few Queries
Soroush Ebadian and Nisarg Shah
University of Toronto
{soroush,nisarg}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

case approximation of the maximum social welfare, a concept known as distortion in social choice theory.
The concept of distortion, introduced by Procaccia and
Rosenschein (2006), quantifies the loss in social welfare (or
other cardinal objectives) due to the lack of exact numerical preferences. Traditionally, distortion has been studied
in settings where only ordinal information is available, and
the challenge is to approximate the maximum social welfare
as closely as possible (see the survey by Anshelevich et al.
(2021)). For instance, in one-sided matching problems (Hylland and Zeckhauser 1979), where n agents are matched to
n items based on their preferences,
the best achievable dis√
tortion is known to be Θ( n), though this requires randomization and normalized values (Filos-Ratsikas, Frederiksen,
and Zhang 2014).
Recent work has expanded this framework by considering the trade-offs between the amount of cardinal information gathered and the efficiency of the resulting allocation.
Amanatidis et al. (2021, 2022) demonstrated that by allowing mechanisms to ask λ · log n cardinal queries per agent,
O(n1/(λ+1) ) distortion can be achieved, even without relying on randomization or normalization. Building on √
this,
Amanatidis et al. (2024) showed that a distortion of Θ( n)
can be achieved by asking only two queries per agent (instead of log n), matching the performance of the best (abovementioned) randomized mechanism that assumes normalized values.
Despite these advancements, our understanding of the
trade-offs between using two cardinal queries per agent and
a logarithmic number of queries remains limited. This raises
an important question:

A fundamental task in multi-agent systems is to match n
agents to n alternatives (e.g., resources or tasks). This is often done by eliciting agents’ ordinal rankings over the alternatives rather than their exact numerical utilities. While
this simplifies elicitation, the incomplete information leads
to inefficiency, captured by a worst-case measure called distortion. Recent work shows that making just a few cardinal
utility queries per agent can significantly improve√the distortion, with Amanatidis et al. (2024) achieving O( n) distortion with two queries per agent. We generalize their result by
achieving O(n1/λ ) distortion with λ queries per agent, for
any constant λ, which is optimal up to a constant factor given
a previous lower bound by Amanatidis et al. (2022).
We extend this finding to the general social choice problem of selecting one of m alternatives based on n agents’
preferences, achieving O((min{n, m})1/λ ) distortion with
λ queries per agent, for any constant λ, which is also optimal
given prior results. Thus, our work settles open questions regarding the optimal distortion achievable with a fixed number
of cardinal value queries in both settings.

1

Introduction

Imagine you are tasked with allocating office spaces in a
medical building to a group of doctors. Each doctor provides
a ranked list of their preferred offices, and your goal as the
manager is to find a matching that maximizes the overall
satisfaction, or social welfare, of all doctors. While rankings
give you a general sense of their preferences, they lack information about intensity of preferences, indicating precisely
how much a doctor may value one office over another. If
you could ask a few targeted questions to obtain their exact
numerical utilities, known as cardinal queries, you may be
able to improve the allocation significantly. However, these
queries are cognitively burdensome for the doctors to answer, so they must be designed carefully in order to maximize their benefit while minimizing burden on the doctors.
This work addresses the challenge of maximizing social
welfare in such settings by leveraging a combination of ordinal rankings and a limited number of cardinal queries.
Specifically, we develop algorithms that select a small number of queries to achieve an asymptotically optimal worst-

As we go from just two to three or more (but a constant number of) queries per agent, how well can we
approximate the optimal social welfare of any onesided matching?
Shifting from matching to voting, consider another important decision in the medical building: selecting the location
for a new specialized clinic. The doctors must vote on several potential locations, each offering distinct advantages,
such as proximity to the emergency room, patient accessibility, or the available space. Each doctor has their own underlying utilities for these locations, influenced by their specialty and the needs of their patients. While rankings provide

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13788

