The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Accurate and Regret-Aware Numerical Problem Solver for Tabular Question
Answering
Yuxiang Wang, Jianzhong Qi* , Junhao Gan
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
yuxiang.wang8@student.unimelb.edu.au, {jianzhong.qi, junhao.gan}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

Recent studies (Cheng et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023b; Liu,
Wang, and Chen 2024; Patnaik et al. 2024) use Large Language Models (LLMs), exploiting their semantic capabilities
to analyze textual questions as well as tabular data, where
many fields are often in text. Unfortunately, these studies
have overlooked a notorious issue of the LLMs – their limited capability in handling numerical data (Frieder et al.
2024). As Figure 1b shows, prompting an LLM (GPT-3.5
Turbo) directly with a table and a question for numerical
calculation could lead to an inaccurate answer.
To address this issue, we study how to strengthen the
capability of LLMs to handle numerical questions. A crucial observation behind our proposed solution is that while
LLMs struggle with carrying out numerical calculations,
they are capable of producing plans to execute such calculations. As Figure 1c shows, using the same LLM but prompting it to generate a calculation plan in Python, the generated
Python script can be executed and yield the correct answer.
Based on this observation, we propose a TableQA model
with an LLM as a planner, TabLaP. We call the planner
LLM NumSolver and design a prompt to guide it to generate a plan that decomposes a complex numerical question
into sequential steps (in Python script) based on Chain-OfThought (Wei et al. 2022). The script is then executed by a
Python interpreter to produce an answer to the question.
Moreover, to largely retain the strong capability of LLMs
to process non-numerical questions, TabLaP takes a dualbranch structure, where NumSolver forms a branch and a
state-of-the-art (SOTA) TableQA model forms the other.
As each of the two branches produces an answer, to integrate the answers from them, we exploit a third LLM (named
AnsSelector) – an open-source one (LlaMa 3-8B-Instruct)
which allows for fine-tuning – to take the question and answers from both model branches (including the reasoning
texts) as input and selects a branch to trust. The answer from
the selected branch is then returned as the final answer.
Recognizing the inaccurate nature of LLMs, we further
quantify the trustworthiness of the answers generated by
TabLaP. We propose a module named TwEvaluator based on
yet another LLM and Multi-Arm Bandit (MAB) (Vermorel
and Mohri 2005). TwEvaluator tracks the answer correctness
of both TabLaP branches over time and yields a trustworthiness label of the final answer accordingly. This label enables
users to consume the answer in a regret-aware manner.

Question answering on free-form tables (a.k.a. TableQA) is a
challenging task because of the flexible structure and complex
schema of tables. Recent studies use Large Language Models (LLMs) for this task, exploiting their capability in understanding the questions and tabular data, which are typically
given in natural language and contain many textual fields,
respectively. While this approach has shown promising results, it overlooks the challenges brought by numerical values which are common in tabular data, and LLMs are known
to struggle with such values. We aim to address this issue,
and we propose a model named TabLaP that uses LLMs as
a planner rather than an answer generator. This approach exploits LLMs’ capability in multi-step reasoning while leaving the actual numerical calculations to a Python interpreter
for accurate calculation. Recognizing the inaccurate nature of
LLMs, we further make a first attempt to quantify the trustworthiness of the answers produced by TabLaP, such that
users can use TabLaP in a regret-aware manner. Experimental results on two benchmark datasets show that TabLaP is
substantially more accurate than the state-of-the-art models,
improving the answer accuracy by 5.7% and 5.8% on the two
datasets, respectively.

Code — https://github.com/yxw-11/TabLaP

Introduction
Tables are a commonly used data format to organize and
present information. Table Question Answering (TableQA)
aims to answer questio ns based on data in tables. It arises
as an important problem to automatically extract information from free-form tables for non-experts (Ye et al. 2023a).
In a typical TableQA task, questions are given in natural language. The input tables are in free-form and may not have a
well-defined schema, i.e., they are not necessarily relational
tables, such as web tables (Cafarella et al. 2008). In other
words, these tables may have mixed data types in columns
and non-predefined logical forms (Jin et al. 2022). In this
case, structural query language-based solutions (Pasupat and
Liang 2015; Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2017; Pourreza and
Rafiei 2023; Gao et al. 2024) are not always applicable. See
Figure 1a for an example of the TableQA task.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12775

