The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HeMeNet: Heterogeneous Multichannel Equivariant Network for Protein
Multi-task Learning
Rong Han1 , Wenbing Huang2 * , Lingxiao Luo1 , Xinyan Han1 , Jiaming Shen1 ,
Zhiqiang Zhang3 , Jun Zhou3 , Ting Chen1 *
1

BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
3
Ant Group CO., Ltd.
hanr21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hwenbing@126.com, tingchen@tsinghua.edu.cn
Protein-ligand

Abstract

Single-chain

Input

Understanding and leveraging the 3D structures of proteins is
central to various biological and drug discovery tasks. While
deep learning has been applied successfully for structurebased protein function prediction tasks, current methods usually employ distinct training for each task. However, each
of the tasks is of small size, and such a single-task strategy
hinders the models’ performance and generalization ability.
As some labeled 3D protein datasets are biologically related,
combining multi-source datasets for larger-scale multi-task
learning is one way to overcome this problem. In this paper, we propose a model to address multiple tasks jointly
upon the input of 3D protein structures. In particular, we
first construct a standard structure-based multi-task benchmark called Protein-MT, consisting of 6 biologically relevant tasks, including affinity prediction and property prediction, integrated from 4 public datasets. Then, we develop a novel graph neural network for multi-task learning,
dubbed Heterogeneous Multichannel Equivariant Network
(HeMeNet), which is E(3) equivariant and able to capture
heterogeneous relationships between different atoms. Besides, HeMeNet can achieve task-specific learning via the
task-aware readout mechanism. Extensive evaluations on our
benchmark verify the effectiveness of multi-task learning,
and our model surpasses state-of-the-art models.

Protein-protein

𝑰𝒑𝒑

Model

𝑰𝒑𝒍

Full-atom
Interface GNN

Alpha-Carbon
Full-atom
Heterogeneous GNN (Ours) Chain GNN

Tasks

Multi-chain tasks
LBA Prediction

Single-chain tasks
Enzyme
Commision

Code — https://github.com/hanrthu/HeMeNet
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01693

PPA Prediction

Molecule
Function

Biological
Process

Cellular
Component

Figure 1: Comparison of different models with tasks.

Introduction
Proteins consist of one or more chains of amino acids, and
they are vital in many biological systems. The 3D structure
of a protein sets the foundation of its interaction with other
molecules, which finally determines its functions. In recent
years, learning-based methods have been applied widely to
leverage the 3D structures of proteins for various tasks such
as property prediction (Wang et al. 2023a), affinity prediction (Li et al. 2021), rigid docking (Ganea et al. 2022), and
antibody generation (Kong, Huang, and Liu 2023a), owing
to their superior efficiency and lower cost compared to those
wet-lab approaches. A major part of learning-based methods

resort to Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Xu et al. 2019),
which naturally encode the 3D structures of proteins by
modeling atoms or residues as nodes and the connections in
between as edges. In addition, certain GNNs are geometryaware and designed to capture the symmetry of E(3) transformations for better predictions (Satorras, Hoogeboom, and
Welling 2021; Huang et al. 2022).
Despite significant progress in geometric-aware GNNs
for protein tasks, existing methods usually employ one
model for one task. A clear drawback of such a single-task
training strategy is that the model should be re-trained for
each new task. However, structural datasets with annotations are often limited in size due to the expensive cost of

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

237

