The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Action-Agnostic Point-Level Supervision for Temporal Action Detection
Shuhei M. Yoshida1 , Takashi Shibata1 , Makoto Terao1 , Takayuki Okatani2,3 , Masashi Sugiyama3,4
1

Visual Intelligence Research Laboratories, NEC Corporation, Kanagawa 211-8666, Japan
2
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Miyagi 980-8579, Japan
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan
4
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Chiba 277-8561, Japan
{s m yoshida, takashi-shibata, m-terao}@nec.com, okatani@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
GT
Point
AAPL

We propose action-agnostic point-level (AAPL) supervision
for temporal action detection to achieve accurate action instance detection with a lightly annotated dataset. In the proposed scheme, a small portion of video frames is sampled
in an unsupervised manner and presented to human annotators, who then label the frames with action categories. Unlike
point-level supervision, which requires annotators to search
for every action instance in an untrimmed video, frames to
annotate are selected without human intervention in AAPL
supervision. We also propose a detection model and learning
method to effectively utilize the AAPL labels. Extensive experiments on the variety of datasets (THUMOS ’14, FineAction, GTEA, BEOID, and ActivityNet 1.3) demonstrate that
the proposed approach is competitive with or outperforms
prior methods for video-level and point-level supervision in
terms of the trade-off between the annotation cost and detection performance.

Figure 1: Illustration of ground-truth (full supervision),
point-level supervision, and AAPL supervision. The red
boxes and lines represents the frames labeled as “Volleyball Spiking”, and the black lines represents those labeled
as “Background”. The images are from a video in THUMOS ’14 (Jiang et al. 2014).

cost for temporal action detection, weak supervision, such as
video-level supervision (Sun et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2017;
Baraka and Mohd Noor 2022; Li, Zhang, and Zhang 2024)
and point-level labels (Moltisanti, Fidler, and Damen 2019;
Ma et al. 2020), has been studied. However, these types of
supervision have their own difficulty in practice.
Video-level supervision only uses the action classes present in the video as labels. Various approaches have been
proposed, such as multiple instance learning-based (Wang
et al. 2017; Paul, Roy, and Roy-Chowdhury 2018), feature erasing-based (Singh and Lee 2017), and attentionbased (Nguyen et al. 2018; Lee, Uh, and Byun 2020; Liu,
Jiang, and Wang 2019), but they ultimately reduce action detection learning to video classification. Behind this strategy
is the assumption that the discriminative intervals contributing to classification are where the actions occur, which is not
always true. In addition, when a video contains multiple action classes, it becomes a multi-label classification problem,
which is extremely difficult. These limitations severely limit
the range of applications of video-level supervision.
Point-level supervision specifies for each action instance a
single arbitrary time point in the instance and the action class
and has been actively studied recently (Ju et al. 2021; Lee
and Byun 2021; Li, Cao, and Ye 2023; Li, Abu Farha, and
Gall 2021). While the point-level labels convey partial information about the location of action instances, they do not tell
where the actions are not. This is a fundamental difficulty in
point-level supervised action detection because localization
is to distinguish actions from non-actions. In addition, the
requirement that action instances must be exhaustively labeled makes the annotation process expensive.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.21205
Code — https://github.com/smy-nec/AAPL

1

Introduction

Temporal action detection is a vital research area in computer vision and machine learning, primarily focusing on
recognizing and localizing human actions and events in
untrimmed video sequences (Xia and Zhan 2020; Vahdani
and Tian 2022). With the rapid growth of video data available online, developing algorithms capable of understanding and interpreting such a wealth of information is critical for a wide range of applications, including anomalous
event detection in surveillance videos (Vishwakarma and
Agrawal 2013; Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018) and sports activity analysis (Giancola et al. 2018; Cioppa et al. 2020). The
existing literature generally tackles action detection problems through fully supervised approaches (Lin et al. 2019;
Xu et al. 2020; Zhang, Wu, and Li 2022), which require
training data with complete action labels and their precise
temporal boundaries. Despite significant progress in recent
years, these methods confront considerable challenges due
to the high annotation cost to predict actions in complex and
diverse video settings accurately. To reduce the annotation
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9571

