The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bidirectional Logits Tree:
Pursuing Granularity Reconcilement in Fine-Grained Classification
Zhiguang Lu1,2 , Qianqian Xu1* , Shilong Bao2 , Zhiyong Yang2 , Qingming Huang1,2,3*
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{luzhiguang23s, xuqianqian}@ict.ac.cn, {baoshilong, yangzhiyong21, qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract

Gandhi 2024; Wang et al. 2023). Generally, once hierarchical semantic information is incorporated, the primary goal
is to ensure that the model’s predictions consistently align
with the inherent hierarchical structure of the data. In other
words, these methods aim to make precise predictions or at
least keep the results as close as possible to semantically
similar categories even when errors occur, thereby minimizing the severity of mistake (Bertinetto et al. 2020). For example, suppose a model misclassifies a “Husky”. In that case,
it is more acceptable within the hierarchy for the output to
be another dog breed, such as a “Corgi”, rather than an unrelated category like a “Siamese Cat”.
In pursuit of this goal, one effective paradigm (Silla and
Freitas 2011; Zhang and Zhou 2013) usually adopts a common shared encoder to extract the semantic features of images, and then constructs hierarchy-aware models independently for the classification tasks at different levels. Typically, (Bertinetto et al. 2020) introduces a multi-task learning method that employs hierarchical cross-entropy loss and
a soft label technique to train these hierarchy-aware models. On top of this, (Karthik et al. 2021) develops a post hoc
approach using Conditional Risk Minimization (CRM) to
calibrate likelihoods during the test phase. Besides, borrowing the idea from neural collapse (Papyan, Han, and Donoho
2020), (Liang and Davis 2023) utilizes an Equiangular Tight
Frame to achieve feature alignment across all classes.
Despite significant progress, a critical challenge remains:
the current FGVC paradigm struggles with the issue of
Granularity competition in feature learning due to the semantic gap between multi-granularity labels (as shown in
Fig.2). Specifically, coarse labels are generally much easier to distinguish than finer ones. As a result, if we pay
equal attention to all levels, the learning process of the underlying encoder is likely to be dominated by the coarse
branches, leading to insufficient learning of detailed information at finer granularities. To address this issue, (Chang
et al. 2021) disentangles coarse-level features from finegrained ones via level-specific classification heads, and also
uses the finer-grained features to enhance the performance of
coarser-grained predictions. (Garg, Sani, and Anand 2022)
proposes a soft balance strategy to align the learning process
of multi-granularity classifications. However, these methods
primarily emphasize the negative impacts of coarse-grained
learning on finer details, while overlooking the crucial fact

This paper addresses the challenge of Granularity Competition in fine-grained classification tasks, which arises due
to the semantic gap between multi-granularity labels. Existing approaches typically develop independent hierarchyaware models based on shared features extracted from a common base encoder. However, because coarse-grained levels
are inherently easier to learn than finer ones, the base encoder
tends to prioritize coarse feature abstractions, which impedes
the learning of fine-grained features. To overcome this challenge, we propose a novel framework called the Bidirectional
Logits Tree (BiLT) for Granularity Reconcilement. The key
idea is to develop classifiers sequentially from the finest to
the coarsest granularities, rather than parallelly constructing
a set of classifiers based on the same input features. In this
setup, the outputs of finer-grained classifiers serve as inputs
for coarser-grained ones, facilitating the flow of hierarchical
semantic information across different granularities. On top
of this, we further introduce an Adaptive Intra-Granularity
Difference Learning (AIGDL) approach to uncover subtle semantic differences between classes within the same granularity. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed method.

Code — https://github.com/ZhiguangLuu/BiLT
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12782

Introduction
Fine-grained visual classification (FGVC) has been a longstanding and challenging research focus in the deep learning community (Xu et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2024; Pu et al.
2024). Unlike traditional image classification tasks, FGVC
demands models to capture subtle distinctions between categories for accurate predictions. Recently, several studies
(Zhang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2021) have
recognized that the hierarchical label structure (HLS) inherent in class names (Deng et al. 2009; Krizhevsky, Hinton
et al. 2009; Zhao, Li, and Xing 2011; Maji et al. 2013) can
significantly enhance the understanding and performance of
FGVC tasks. Consequently, substantial efforts have been
made to explore methods for effectively integrating hierarchical information into FGVC tasks (Jain, Karthik, and
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19189

