The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Predicting User Behavior in Smart Spaces with LLM-Enhanced Logs
and Personalized Prompts
Yunpeng Song, Jiawei Li, Yiheng Bian, Zhongmin Cai*
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
yunpengs@xjtu.edu.cn, zmcai@sei.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

users and smart devices to allow the devices to understand
and automatically adapt to users’ needs in various scenarios
represents an urgent yet challenging goal (Desolda, Ardito,
and Matera 2017).
This vision intersects with two main areas of research: human activity prediction and sequential recommendation. In
human activity prediction, previous works in the context of
smart space attempt to build models from historical interaction data between users and their environments, with the
goal of automating the recognition of users’ intentions and
planning the next move (Tax 2018; Maharjan et al. 2019;
Mohamed, El-Kilany, and El-Tazi 2022; Dunne, Morris, and
Harper 2023). For instance, deep learning models have been
employed to analyze various sensor data within smart homes
to forecast subsequent user activities (Krishna et al. 2018).
On the other hand, sequential recommendation focuses on
the online activity context suggesting content that users may
find engaging based on their behaviors (Hou et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2023). This includes analyzing sequences of user
online interactions, such as movie watching, web browsing, clicking, bookmarking, and purchasing, to tailor recommendations of potentially interesting content, like movies or
products.
However, in real-world smart spaces, existing methods
face challenges that differ markedly from those in recommendation systems. While recommendation systems can access extensive side information, which includes the names,
brands, and attributes of purchased items (Li et al. 2023),
and the content of movies that interest users, data logs from
devices and sensors in smart spaces are often sparse or even
incomplete. Consequently, earlier methods that employed
one-hot encoding to represent different events as unrelated
IDs frequently missed the inherent connections between related actions. For example, opening a refrigerator and preheating an oven are both linked to the intention of eating, yet
are treated as unrelated by one-hot encoding. This approach
fails to recognize the natural associations between activities,
leading to a disconnect in representations, particularly for
low-frequency actions that are poorly represented.
Additionally, due to the limited number of users in previous smart space datasets (Tax 2018; Park et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022b; Dunne, Morris, and Harper 2023), prior research in smart spaces typically employs a single model
to predict a range of user actions, neglecting the individ-

Enhancing the intelligence of smart systems, such as smart
homes, smart vehicles, and smart grids, critically depends on
developing sophisticated planning capabilities that can anticipate the next desired function based on historical interactions. While existing methods view user behaviors as sequential data and apply models like RNNs and Transformers to
predict future actions, they often fail to incorporate domain
knowledge and capture personalized user preferences. In this
paper, we propose a novel approach that incorporates LLMenhanced logs and personalized prompts. Our approach first
constructs a graph that captures individual behavior preferences derived from their interaction histories. This graph effectively transforms into a soft continuous prompt that precedes the sequence of user behaviors. Then our approach
leverages the vast general knowledge and robust reasoning
capabilities of a pretrained LLM to enrich the oversimplified and incomplete log records. By enhancing these logs semantically, our approach better understands the user’s actions
and intentions, especially for those rare events in the dataset.
We evaluate the method across four real-world datasets from
both smart vehicle and smart home settings. The findings validate the effectiveness of our LLM-enhanced description and
personalized prompt, shedding light on potential ways to advance the intelligence of smart space.

Introduction
In today’s society, smart devices have become an indispensable part of our daily lives, significantly enriching our life
experiences. However, despite the variety of functionalities
these smart devices offer, they largely operate independently
of one another, lacking deep inter-connectivity. This isolation hinders the formation of truly “smart” systems. Take
the smart vehicle scenario as an example: on a cold workday morning, a driver might open their car door, followed
by the need to adjust the seat position, turn on the heating,
set the navigation to plan a congestion-free route, and play
their favorite music. While these functions are straightforward, manually executing each one can be tedious. Enabling
a simple action, like opening a door, to automatically trigger
all related tasks would significantly enhance the user experience in smart settings. Simplifying the interaction between
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

764

