The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FreeNet: Liberating Depth-Wise Separable Operations for Building Faster Mobile
Vision Architectures
Hao Yu1 , Haoyu Chen1 , Wei Peng2 , Xu Cheng3 , Guoying Zhao1,4 *
1

Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, USA
3
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
4
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
{hao.2.yu, chen.haoyu, guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi, wepeng@stanford.edu, xcheng@nuist.edu.cn
2

Abstract

that strike a favorable balance between accuracy and computational complexity. In the original ViT (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020), images are treated as 1D sequences of visual tokens.
This approach, however, is inefficient as notable parameters
are wasted in learning the visual inductive biases (e.g., locality and translation invariance) that are inherent in convolutions (Convs). Consequently, there’s increasing interest in
blending convolutional techniques and designs (Wang et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021), like convolutional local representations, with ViTs to inject visual biases, making such hybrid
models the forefront of vision backbone innovation.
Notably, like in prior lightweight CNNs, depth-wise separable convolution (DWConv) (Chollet 2017) has also gained
prominence in recent ViTs (Vasu et al. 2023a; Shaker et al.
2023) for enhancing efficiency. The DWConv, by running on
individual channels only, achieves a lower parameter count
than vanilla Convs, which enables the expansion of network
depth and width to improve performance. However, its actual speed often falls short of expectations due to inefficient memory access (Ma et al. 2018; Lu, Zhang, and Wang
2021), a problem also encountered with the linear SA (Wang
et al. 2022). This inefficiency is largely due to its segmented
processing kernels. Thus, despite the high theoretical efficiency of DWConv, its on-device speed lags significantly behind that of vanilla Convs. For example, with similar parameters, the DWConv-based ConvNeXt-T (Liu et al. 2022) operates nearly twice slower than ResNet-50 (He et al. 2016).
This paper challenges the conventional reliance on separable operations in efficient architectures, aiming to boost
speed by eliminating such design stereotypes. To achieve
this, we propose Sparse-wise Convolution (SWConv), which
operates on a continuous subset of signals in a feature
map, balancing speed and lightweight design. By skipping
nearby pixels while preserving channel-level signal continuity, SWConv efficiently captures long-range pixel dependencies at a lower computational cost. Building on this, we
introduce the sparse-sampling mixer (S2-Mixer), a novel
token mixer that surpasses DWConv in speed while rivaling self-attention (SA) in modeling performance. Specifically, S2-Mixer employs multiple SWConvs to sample distinct feature subsets, capturing diverse spatial patterns across
varying receptive fields. As shown in Figure 1(a), S2-Mixer
processes images with dynamic receptive fields and achieves
long-range pixel modeling akin to SA, yet with reduced run-

In the pursuit of efficient vision architectures, substantial efforts have been devoted to optimizing operator efficiency.
Depth-wise separable operators, such as DWConv, are found
cheap in both FLOPs and parameters. As a result, they are
increasingly incorporated into efficient backbones, trading
for deeper and wider architectures to enhance performance.
However, separable operators are not really fast on devices
due to the discontinuous memory access requirements. In this
paper, we propose FreeNets, a family of simple and efficient
backbones that free the separable operation to further accelerate the running speed. We introduce sparse sampling mixers (S2-Mixer) to supersede existing separable token mixers.
The S2-Mixer samples multiple segments of partially continuous signals across spatial and channel dimensions for
convolutional processing, achieving extremely fast on-device
speed. The sparse sampling also enables S2-Mixer to capture long-range pixel relationships from dynamic receptive
fields. Furthermore, we introduce a Shift Feed-Forward Network (ShiftFFN) as a faster alternative to existing channel
mixers. It utilizes a shift neck architecture that aggregates
global information to shift features, enabling faster channel mixing while incorporating global pixel information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FreeNet offers a superior accuracy-efficiency tradeoff compared to the latest efficient models. On ImageNet-1k, FreeNet-S2 outperforms the
StarNet-S4 by 0.4% in top-1 accuracy, while running around
40% faster on desktop GPU and 15% faster on Mobile GPU.

Introduction
Designing efficient backbones has always been one of the
research hotspots in computer vision. Recently, the topic of
efficient backbones has been quickly offset to the mining
of efficient Vision Transformers (ViT) (Chu et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2022b; Shaker et al. 2023; Yun and Ro 2024). Owing to
the powerful self-attention (SA) mechanism, ViTs demonstrate a superior ability to capture long-range pixel dependencies and aggregate pixels across diverse receptive fields.
However, their quadratic complexity (Han et al. 2022) and
the high dimensionality of image data have spurred extensive research endeavors dedicated to devising efficient ViTs
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9607

