The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tackling Intertwined Data and Device Heterogeneities in Federated Learning with
Unlimited Staleness
Haoming Wang and Wei Gao
University of Pittsburgh
hw.wang@pitt.edu,weigao@pitt.edu

Abstract

training epoch, it will use an outdated global model to compute its model update, which will be stale when aggregated
at the server and affect model accuracy. To tackle staleness,
weighted aggregation can be used to apply reduced weights
on stale model updates (Chen and Jin. 2019; Wang 2022).
Most existing work considers data and device heterogeneities as two separate and independent aspects in FL
(Zhou 2021). This assumption, however, is unrealistic in
many FL scenarios where these two heterogeneities are intertwined: data in certain classes or with particular features
may only be available at some slow clients. For example, in
FL for hazard rescue (Ahmed et al. 2020), only devices at
hazard sites have crucial data about hazards, but they usually have limited connectivity or computing power to timely
upload model updates. Similar situations could also happen
in FL scenarios where data with high importance to model
accuracy is scarce and hard to obtain, such as disease evaluation in smart health, where only few patients have severe
symptoms but are very likely to report symptoms with long
delays due to their worsening conditions (Chen et al. 2017).
In these cases, if reduced weights are applied to stale
model updates from slow clients, important knowledge in
these updates will not be sufficiently learned and hence affects model accuracy. Instead, a better approach is to equally
aggregate all model updates and convert a stale model update into a unstale one, but existing techniques for such conversion are limited to a small amount of staleness. For example, first-order compensation can be applied on the gradient
delay (Zheng et al. 2017), by assuming staleness in FL is
smaller than one epoch to ignore all the high-order terms
in the difference between stale and unstale model updates
(Zhou and Lv. 2021). However, in the aforementioned FL
scenarios, it is common to witness excessive or even unlimited staleness, and our experiments in show that the compensation error will quickly increase with staleness.
To efficiently tackle the intertwined data and device
heterogeneities with unlimited staleness, in this paper we
present a new FL framework that uses gradient inversion at
the server to convert stale model updates, by mimicking the
local models’ gradients produced with their original training
data (Zhu and Han. 2019a). The server inversely computes
the gradients from clients’ stale model updates to obtain an
estimated distribution of clients’ training data, such that a
model trained with the estimated data distribution will ex-

Federated Learning (FL) can be affected by data and device
heterogeneities, caused by clients’ different local data distributions and latencies in uploading model updates (i.e., staleness). Traditional schemes consider these heterogeneities
as two separate and independent aspects, but this assumption is unrealistic in practical FL scenarios where these heterogeneities are intertwined. In these cases, traditional FL
schemes are ineffective, and a better approach is to convert
a stale model update into a unstale one. In this paper, we
present a new FL framework that ensures the accuracy and
computational efficiency of this conversion, hence effectively
tackling the intertwined heterogeneities that may cause unlimited staleness in model updates. Our basic idea is to estimate the distributions of clients’ local training data from their
uploaded stale model updates, and use these estimations to
compute unstale client model updates. In this way, our approach does not require any auxiliary dataset nor the clients’
local models to be fully trained, and does not incur any additional computation or communication overhead at client devices. We compared our approach with the existing FL strategies on mainstream datasets and models, and showed that our
approach can improve the accuracy by up to 25% and reduce
the number of required training epochs by up to 35%.

Code — https://github.com/pittisl/intertwined-FL
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.13536

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan 2016) could be affected
by both data and device heterogeneities. Data heterogeneity is the heterogeneity of non-i.i.d. data distributions on
different clients, which make the aggregated global model
biased and reduces model accuracy (Konečný 2016; Zhao
2018). Device heterogeneity arises from clients’ variant latencies in uploading their local model updates to the server,
due to their different local resource conditions (e.g., computing power, network link speed, etc). An intuitive solution
to device heterogeneity is asynchronous FL, which does not
wait for slow clients but updates the global model whenever
having received a client update (Xie and Gupta. 2019). In
this case, if a slow client’s excessive latency is longer than a
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21080

