The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Clustering by Mining Density Distributions and Splitting Manifold Structure
Zhichang Xu1 , Zhiguo Long1 * , Hua Meng2 *
1

School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 611756, China
2
School of Mathematics, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 611756, China
2023201798@my.swjtu.edu.cn, {zhiguolong, menghua}@swjtu.edu.cn

Jain

Abstract
Spectral clustering requires the time-consuming decomposition of the Laplacian matrix of the similarity graph, thus
limiting its applicability to large datasets. To improve the
efficiency of spectral clustering, a top-down approach was
recently proposed, which first divides the data into several micro-clusters (granular-balls), then splits these microclusters when they are not “compact”, and finally uses these
micro-clusters as nodes to construct a similarity graph for
more efficient spectral clustering. However, this top-down
approach is challenging to adapt to unevenly distributed
or structurally complex data. This is because constructing
micro-clusters as a rough ball struggles to capture the shape
and structure of data in a local range, and the simplistic
splitting rule that solely targets “compactness” is susceptible
to noise and variations in data density and leads to microclusters with varying shapes, making it challenging to accurately measure the similarity between them. To resolve these
issues and improve spectral clustering, this paper first proposes to start from local structures to obtain micro-clusters,
such that the complex structural information inside local
neighborhoods is well captured by them. Moreover, by noting
that Euclidean distance is more suitable for convex sets, this
paper further proposes a data splitting rule that couples local
density and data manifold structures, so that the similarities
of the obtained micro-clusters can be easily characterized. A
novel similarity measure between micro-clusters is then proposed for the final spectral clustering. A series of experiments
based on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that
the proposed method has better adaptability to structurally
complex data than granular-ball based methods.

Spiral

Figure 1: Illustration of errors (red circles) in granular-balls.

of data by removing some edges. It has attracted wide attention due to its exceptionally good performance in handling
non-convex shaped clusters (von Luxburg 2007; Chen et al.
2011; He et al. 2019).
Spectral clustering involves the spectral decomposition of
the Laplacian matrix of a similarity graph, which has a prohibitively high complexity of O(n3 ) (n represents the number of nodes in the graph) for large datasets. To improve the
scalability, researchers have considered performing approximate spectral decomposition (Vladymyrov and CarreiraPerpiñán 2016), representing similarity between data approximately with anchors (Cai and Chen 2015; Huang et al.
2020), and constructing more sparse similarity graphs (Wu
et al. 2018). These methods have different advantages and
disadvantages, e.g., approximate decomposition needs to
balance between efficiency and accuracy, and anchor-based
ones are very sensitive to anchor numbers and positions.
There is also research trying to fuse these directions (Yang
et al. 2023).
Recently, Xie et al. (2023) proposed a new method called
GBSC that progressively splits the data into micro-clusters
(granular-balls) in a top-down manner, to obtain a coarsegrained representation of the original data, and then performs spectral clustering on balls representing several similar data points to reduce the size of the similarity graph.
As each point is represented by a granular-ball, the overall
structural information of data would be better captured than
using the sampled anchors that is subject to missing the selection of some important anchors. This makes the granularball based approach very promising.

Introduction
Clustering is an unsupervised learning method aiming to reveal the intrinsic distribution characteristics of data by dividing the dataset into several non-overlapping clusters. It
has wide applications in various fields such as computer vision (Tron et al. 2017), language processing (Zhang, Wang,
and Shang 2023), and bioinformatics (Cheng and Ma 2022).
Spectral lustering is a representative graph partition clustering algorithm, the core idea of which is to (approximately) minimize a cut loss of partitioning a similarity graph
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21842

