The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Granularity-Adaptive Spatial Evidence Tokenization for Video
Question Answering
Hao Jiang1 , Yang Jin1 , Zhicheng Sun1 , Kun Xu2 , Kun Xu2 , Liwei Chen2 ,
Yang Song2 , Kun Gai2 , Yadong Mu1 *
1
Peking University
Kuaishou Technology
jianghao@stu.pku.edu.cn, myd@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

of visual tokenization strategies (Li et al. 2024b; Cheng et al.
2024a; Fei et al. 2024) and the enhancement of alignments
between visual tokens and the LLM semantic space (Liu
et al. 2024b; Lin et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023b). However, a
limitation of these approaches is that most models learn visual features at a fixed, lower resolution (such as 224×224).
This often results in the loss of fine-grained information
when dealing with local details in the video, thereby reducing the model’s prediction accuracy.
As shown in Figure 1, with a question like “Does the athlete in the video have long hair?”, the target area of “athlete’s
hair” only spatially occupies a small portion of the frame.
Lower resolution video frames lack the fine-grained encoding necessary for capturing detailed image content, and fixed
resolution fails to highlight specific target areas, allowing
irrelevant visual features to dominate the encoded tokens.
While some image LLMs (Li et al. 2024c; Liu et al. 2024a)
have advanced in capturing high-resolution visual details by
dividing high-resolution images into several sub-patches and
encoding them separately, these approaches suffer from two
major drawbacks. Firstly, their methods require encoding the
entire high-resolution image. Since the number of patches
increases quadratically with the resolution, these approaches
inevitably result in excessive computational overhead, particularly when applied to videos. Secondly, the separate encoding of sub-patches prevents the model from accessing
the global semantic context of the image, which impairs the
learning of comprehensive high-resolution features.
To address these challenges, in this work, we propose
a granularity-adaptive spatial evidence tokenization framework for video question answering. Specifically, our method
introduces multi-granular visual tokenization to produce
video tokens at various granularities based on the question.
It highlights spatially activated patches at low resolutions
through a granularity weighting module and then adaptively
encodes these activated patches at high resolution for detail
supplementation. To mitigate the computational overhead
associated with high-resolution frame encoding, a masking and acceleration module is developed for efficient visual tokenization. Compared to existing high-resolution image LLMs (Li et al. 2024c), our method offers the advantage of not requiring the encoding of the entire frame content. Instead, it effectively grounds compact spatial evidence
necessary to answer questions from high-resolution frames.

Video question answering plays a vital role in computer vision, and recent advances in large language models have further propelled the development of this field. However, existing video question answering techniques often face limitations in grasping fine-grained video content in spatial dimensions. It mainly stems from the fixed and low-resolution
input of video frames. While some approaches using highresolution inputs partially alleviate this problem, they introduce excessive computational burdens by encoding the
entire high-resolution image. In this work, we propose a
granularity-adaptive spatial evidence tokenization model for
video question answering. Our method introduces multigranular visual tokenization in the spatial dimension to produce video tokens at various granularities based on the question. It highlights spatially activated patches at low resolutions through a granularity weighting module and then adaptively encodes these activated patches at high resolution for
detail supplementation. To mitigate the computational overhead associated with high-resolution frame encoding, a masking and acceleration module is developed for efficient visual
tokenization. Moreover, a granularity compression module is
designed to dynamically select and compress visual tokens of
varying granularities based on questions. We conduct extensive experiments on 11 mainstream video question answering
datasets and the experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the rapid development of
video understanding technologies, which are widely applied
in various computer vision tasks, including video question
answering (Xiao et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024), video summarization (Zhu et al. 2020; Jiang and Mu 2022), video spatial
and temporal grounding (Wasim et al. 2024; Jiang, Yizhang,
and Mu 2024), etc. The advent of pretraining paradigm has
promoted the development of multimodal large language
models (LLMs), enhancing video understanding capabilities
and achieving remarkable progress in generating accurate
responses.
Existing works on LLMs-based video question answering
can be roughly divided into two categories: the improvement
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3976

