The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Knowledge-Guided Domain Adaptation Model for Transferring Drug Response
Prediction from Cell Lines to Patients
Xuan Liu1 * , Menglu Li2
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Xinyang Normal University, Xinyang 464000, China
2
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
lx666@xynu.edu.cn, mengluli@webmail.hzau.edu.cn

Abstract

cell lines (e.g., GDSC (Iorio et al. 2016)) have been considered as a viable alternative. Unfortunately, models trained on
cell lines often fail to generalize in DRP for patients, due to
the absence of an in vivo tumor micro-environment, resulting in significant discrepancies between genomic data of cell
lines and patients (Seyhan 2019). In fact, such data discrepancy can be viewed as a domain-shift or out-of-distribution
(OOD) (Liu et al. 2020a) issue, where cell lines/patients
are referred to as the source/target domain. How to bridge
the gap between the two domains holds great promise for
achieving reliable patient-oriented DRP.
Recently, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015), as a practical technique of transfer
learning, has become the model of choice to tackle the OOD
issue, with the assumption that labeled data are available
only in a source domain. The core idea of UDA is to minimize discrepancies in genomic data distribution by learning
invariant representations shared between source (cell line)
and target (patient) domain, and then transfer the DRP model
from cell lines to patients. For instance, discrepancy-based
UDA methods (Warren et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022) focused
on aligning genomic data globally within a low-dimensional
embedding space, using distance measures like maximum
mean discrepancy (Borgwardt et al. 2006) or correlation
alignment (Sun and Saenko 2017) functions. But these methods only considered domain alignment at the embedding
level, without optimizing downstream DRP tasks, thus leading to suboptimal outcomes. In contrast, adversarial-based
UDA methods (Peres da Silva et al. 2021; He et al. 2022;
Shubham et al. 2024) offered a more powerful solution
through an adversarial objective, inspired by generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2020). Technically, they worked by a genomic extractor and a domain
discriminator competing with each other, wherein the former learns invariant representations that confuse the latter,
which in turn tries to distinguish them from real domains.
This principle enforces the trained DRP model not to differentiate between inputs from cell lines or patients.
Despite the commendable progress of efforts above, they
typically treat the prediction of each drug’s response as an
individual task during the UDA process, so that the model
needs to be retrained when drug changes. Obviously, this
strategy is inefficient and lacks correlations across different
drugs. A few methods have attempted to address this prob-

Drug response prediction (DRP) is a longstanding challenge
in modern oncology that underpins personalized treatment.
Early DRP methods, trained on label-rich cell line samples,
suffer from performance degradation when applied to labelscarce patient samples due to the distribution shift. Recently,
a few transfer learning efforts have addressed this issue by
aligning cell line (source domain) and patient (target domain) data via unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). However, these efforts often treat each drug’s response prediction as an isolated task, requiring model retraining when the
drug changes; and focus only on aligning data distributions
as a whole, neglecting the category (e.g., different cancers
or tissues) confusion problem. To address these limitations,
we propose a knowledge-guided domain adaptation model to
transfer the DRP from cell lines to patients, named TransDRP.
Specifically, TransDRP operates in two phases: pre-training
and adaptation. In the first phase, we pre-train a multi-label
graph neural network using molecular knowledge, to simultaneously predict responses for various drugs and capture
their interdependencies. In the second phase, we implement a
global-local domain adversarial strategy with clinical knowledge, to encourage representation alignment within same cancer categories and separation among different cancer categories across domains. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that TransDRP outperforms state-of-the-art UDA methods in
both transfer efficiency and precision for the patient DRP.

Code — https://github.com/liuxuan666/TransDRP

Introduction
Identification of drug response in cancer patients is pivotal
for customizing therapy regimens to increase survival and
reduce expenses. Since the financial limitation of testing
multiple drugs on a patient (Adam et al. 2020), there is an urgent demand for computational models that can deliver drug
response prediction (DRP) efficiently. Although the easy
availability of genomic profiles for clinical patients (e.g.,
TCGA (Weinstein et al. 2013)), the corresponding drug response labels are insufficient to train a precise model. In this
context, large-scale labeled data derived from preclinical
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

523

