The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explore What LLM Does Not Know in Complex Question Answering
Xin Lin1,2 , Zhenya Huang1,2,3 , Zhiqiang Zhang5 , Jun Zhou4 , Enhong Chen1,2∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
4
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
5
Independent Researcher
linx@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {huangzhy, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, {zzqsmall, junzhougucas}@gmail.com
Abstract

Question: What is the birth date of the person Richard Callaghan
coached to Olympic, world, and national titles?

Complex question answering (QA) is a challenging task in artificial intelligence research which requires reasoning based
on related knowledge. The retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) based on large language models (LLMs) have become one promising solution in QA. To facilitate RAG more
effectively, the LLM needs to precisely evaluate knowledge
required in QA. That is, first, the LLM needs to examine
its knowledge boundary (what the LLM does not know)
to retrieve external knowledge as supplement. Second, the
LLM needs to evaluate the utility of the retrieved knowledge
(whether it helps in reasoning) for robust RAG. To this end,
in this paper, we propose a novel Question Answering with
Knowledge Evaluation (KEQA) framework to promote the
effectiveness and efficiency of RAG in QA. First, inspired
by quizzes in classroom, we propose a quiz-based method to
precisely examine the knowledge state of the uninterpretable
LLM for QA. We ask indicative quizzes on each required
knowledge, and inspect whether the LLM can consistently
answer the quiz to examine its knowledge boundary. Second,
we retrieve the unknown knowledge from external source,
and evaluate its utility to pick the helpful ones for reasoning.
We design a reasoning-based metric to evaluate utility, and
construct a demonstration set in training data for reference to
guide knowledge picking in inference. We conduct extensive
experiments on four widely-used QA datasets, and the results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Required Knowledge
K1: Who did Richard Callaghan coach to Olympic, world, and
national titles?
LLM: Tara Lipinski (Known)

K2: What is the birth date of Tara Lipinski?
LLM: June 1977 (Unknown)
P1: “... Tara Kristen Lipinski (born June 10, 1982) ...” (Helpful)
P2: “... Lipinski appeared on “The Today Show” on March 18,
2011 ...” (Helpless)
P3: “... Lipinski was coached by Jeff DiGregorio ...” (Helpless)
RAG: June 10, 1982
Answer: The person Richard Callaghan coached to Olympic, world,
and national titles is Tara Lipinski. She was born in June 10, 1982. So
the answer is June 10, 1982.

Figure 1: An example of one complex question requiring
knowledge K1 and K2 . The LLM has mastered K1 , while
K2 needs to be retrieved from external source.

strong reasoning abilities (Achiam et al. 2023; Zhou et al.
2023; Zheng et al. 2024). The retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), which first retrieves knowledge and then performs generation, further supplements the LLMs with external knowledge for more accurate and reliable QA (Wang
et al. 2023b; Jiang et al. 2023). To facilitate RAG more effectively, the LLM needs to accurately evaluate knowledge
required in QA. First, the LLM needs to precisely examine its knowledge boundary, i.e., what the LLM has already
known and what it does not know, and adopts different actions. For example, in Figure 1, the LLM has already known
the first knowledge K1 “who did Richard Callaghan coached
...” which could be directly used in QA, but has not mastered K2 “what is the birth date of Tara Lipinski” which
needs to be supplemented from external to answer the question. Second, the LLM needs to evaluate whether the knowledge could help to answer the question (i.e., the utility) especially for external knowledge. As shown in Figure 1, all
three knowledge (P1 , P2 and P3 ) are relevant to the question (“Tara Lipinski”), but only P1 helps in QA with the birth
date and the rest are helpless and may even mislead reason-

Introduction

Complex question answering (QA) is a key task in artificial
intelligence (AI) research (Lehnert 1978), which aims to answer questions based on related knowledge. Therefore, the
QA systems are required to master multiple knowledge, and
perform complex reasoning over these knowledge, making it
a challenging task. As shown in Figure 1, to answer the question “what is the birth date of the person Richard Callaghan
coached ...”, the QA system should know “who did Richard
Callaghan coached ...” (“Tara Lipinski”), and “what is the
birth date of Tara Lipinski” (“June 10, 1982”).
Recently, the large language models (LLMs) have become the most promising solution for QA due to numerous pre-trained knowledge stored in huge parameters and
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24585

