The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GLAM: Global-Local Variation Awareness in
Mamba-based World Model
Qian He1,2,3 * , Wenqi Liang1,2,3 * , Chunhui Hao4 , Gan Sun5 , Jiandong Tian1†
1

State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
4
Shenyang University of Chemical Technology.
5
School of Automation Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology.
{heqian0325, liangwenqi0123, sungan1412}@gmail.com, {haochunhui, tianjd}@sia.cn
Abstract

G GMamba
L LMamba
P Predictor

Mimicking the real interaction trajectory in the inference of
the world model has been shown to improve the sample efficiency of model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) algorithms. Many methods directly use known state sequences for
reasoning. However, this approach fails to enhance the quality
of reasoning by capturing the subtle variation between states.
Much like how humans infer trends in event development
from this variation, in this work, we introduce Global-Local
variation Awareness Mamba-based world model (GLAM)
that improves reasoning quality by perceiving and predicting variation between states. GLAM comprises two Mambabased parallel reasoning modules, GMamba and LMamba,
which focus on perceiving variation from global and local perspectives, respectively, during the reasoning process.
GMamba focuses on identifying patterns of variation between
states in the input sequence and leverages these patterns to
enhance the prediction of future state variation. LMamba
emphasizes reasoning about unknown information, such as
rewards, termination signals, and visual representations, by
perceiving variation in adjacent states. By integrating the
strengths of the two modules, GLAM accounts for highervalue variation in environmental changes, providing the agent
with more efficient imagination-based training. We demonstrate that our method outperforms existing methods in normalized human scores on the Atari 100k benchmark.

Known
Unknown

Variation
State Feature
Inference

G
Known States

L

P
∞

෍
𝑖=𝑡

𝑟𝑖

Unknown Information

Figure 1: A single-step demonstration of GLAM inference.
GLAM leverages GMamba and LMamba for global and local state variation, respectively. GMamba captures patterns
of variation changes within the sequence, while LMamba incorporates variation awareness when inferring unknown information, rather than relying on direct inference alone.

Code — https://github.com/GLAM2025/glam

Introduction
A key challenge in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is the
lack of sample efficiency (Schrittwieser et al. 2020; Vinyals
et al. 2019). Many model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL) (Sutton 1991) algorithms tackle this challenge by
learning models of the environment to improve the training efficiency of agents. Inspired by human cognitive processes, an MBRL approach trains a network known as a
world model to simulate the environment and subsequently
train agents using this model. The concept of world model

has achieved breakthroughs in various decision-making domains.
These algorithms utilize interaction data between the
agent and the real environment to train a parameterized world model. The agent can generate an unlimited
amount of training data through interactions with this world
model, thus enhancing its decision-making capabilities. This
method of generating data is analogous to imagination of
the human. However, this imagination-based self-supervised
learning often fails if the data provided by the world model
are not sufficiently accurate. Therefore, the lack of accuracy

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17105

