The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust Tracking via Mamba-based Context-aware Token Learning
Jinxia Xie1,2 , Bineng Zhong1,2 * , Qihua Liang1,2 , Ning Li1,2 , Zhiyi Mo3 , Shuxiang Song1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology Ministry of Education,
Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
2
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-Source Information Mining & Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
3
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Machine Vision and Intelligent Control, Wuzhou University, Wuzhou 543002, China
xie jx@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, qhliang@gxnu.edu.cn, ningli65536@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn,
zhiyim@gxuwz.edu.cn, songshuxiang@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn
Abstract
How to make a good trade-off between performance and
computational cost is crucial for a tracker. However, current
famous methods typically focus on complicated and timeconsuming learning that combining temporal and appearance
information by input more and more images (or features).
Consequently, these methods not only increase the model’s
computational source and learning burden but also introduce
much useless and potentially interfering information. To alleviate the above issues, we propose a simple yet robust tracker
that separates temporal information learning from appearance
modeling and extracts temporal relations from a set of representative tokens rather than several images (or features).
Specifically, we introduce one track token for each frame to
collect the target’s appearance information in the backbone.
Then, we design a mamba-based Temporal Module for track
tokens to be aware of context by interacting with other track
tokens within a sliding window. This module consists of a
mamba layer with autoregressive characteristic and a crossattention layer with strong global perception ability, ensuring sufficient interaction for track tokens to perceive the appearance changes and movement trends of the target. Finally,
track tokens serve as a guidance to adjust the appearance feature for the final prediction in the head. Experiments show our
method is effective and achieves competitive performance on
multiple benchmarks at a real-time speed.

Figure 1: Comparison of AUC, Params, and FlOPs of recent
SOTA trackers. The trackers that lower Params and higher
AUC is closer to top-left corner. The size of a circles represents the tracker’s FLOPs.

the above challenges. These methods can be roughly divided
into two types: trackers focused more on appearance and
trackers combined appearance with temporal information.
For the first type of trackers(Ye et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2021),
they focus on building a more robust appearance model via a
stronger backbone or a more efficient feature fusion method
for template and search image. However, it’s difficult for this
type of trackers(Bertinetto et al. 2016; Ye et al. 2022; Chen
et al. 2022; Gao, Zhou, and Zhang 2023) to recognize the
correct target when facing severe appearance changes or interference from similar objects. Recently, the visual tracking
community pay more attention to extract temporal context
to mitigate the above difficulty. Many second type of trackers(Zheng et al. 2024; Bai et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2023; Cai,
Liu, and Wang 2024; Cui et al. 2022, 2024) arise, combining
appearance and temporal information. Thanks to introducing temporal information, these trackers perceive the appearance changes and motion trends of the target, and achieve
competitive performance. However, they usually focus on
complicated and time-consuming learning, inputting more
images (or features), and leading the model more cumbersome and clumsy. Specifically, they(Yan et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2022) need to select additional im-

Code — https://github.com/GXNU-ZhongLab/TemTrack

Introduction
Visual tracking is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision, widely used in many fields, such as mobile robotics(Pereira et al. 2022), video surveillance(Cheng,
Wang, and Li 2022; Shehzed, Jalal, and Kim 2019), and autonomous driving(Premachandra, Ueda, and Suzuki 2020).
However, there are many challenges during the tracking process that affect the robustness of the trackers, such as occlusion, drastic appearance changes, and deformation.
Therefore, many methods(Li et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2022; Song et al. 2023; Xie et al.
2024; Hu et al. 2024a) are proposed and attempt to overcome
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8727

