The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Occlusion-Embedded Hybrid Transformer for Light Field Super-Resolution
Zeyu Xiao1 , Zhuoyuan Li2 , and Wei Jia3 *
1

2

National University of Singapore
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Hefei University of Technology

Abstract

Wang et al. 2022c; Yeung et al. 2018), 4D convolutions
(Meng et al. 2019), and data augmentation strategy (Xiao
et al. 2023b; Mi and Yang 2024). However, these methods
still fail to fully explore the global and local spatial-angular
correlations inherent in light fields.
Starting from natural language processing (Ashish 2017),
Transformer architectures (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) have
been applied to vision tasks such as color image restoration (Liang et al. 2021) and light field SR (Cong et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2022a; Liang et al. 2022, 2023). Leveraging multi-head self-attention, these methods excel in capturing non-local similarities and long-range dependencies,
surpassing CNN-based approaches. However, their application to light field SR remains sub-optimal due to quadratic
complexities or disruption of angular dependencies. Light
fields exhibit fixed structures, such as relative intensity correlations across views, which are often overlooked by existing transformer-based approaches. Directly applying these
methods with accounting for such structures is appropriate.
Moreover, many existing methods overlook crucial geometric information, such as occlusions in light fields, leading
to significant errors and suboptimal results (as illustrated
in Figure 1). This oversight can lead to sub-optimal performance, especially in scenarios where occlusions need accurate handling in light field SR tasks.
In this paper, we propose an Occlusion-Embedded Hybrid
Transformer (OHT) that effectively integrates the local
spatial-angular inductive bias of convolution and the longrange spatial-angular dependency modeling ability of Transformers. Unlike previous light field SR methods, OHT
explicitly utilizes occlusion maps. Specifically, we obtain
occlusion maps for each view by leveraging the photoconsistency constraint based on the coarse estimated disparity map using OACCNet (Wang et al. 2022b) from lowresolution (LR) observations (as shown in Figure 1. These
occlusion maps represent the importance of pixels from different views, helping to mitigate the impact of occluded
pixels. We incorporate this information into the SR process using the occlusion-embedded mix layer. In addition,
OHT incorporates several key designs: (1) We introduce a
spatial-angular separable convolution (SASep-Conv), which
extracts spatial-angular features more effectively than previous methods like 2D convolutions (Jin et al. 2020), 3D convolutions (Tran, Berberich, and Simon 2022), 4D convolu-

Transformer-based networks have set new benchmarks in
light field super-resolution (SR), but adapting them to capture
both global and local spatial-angular correlations efficiently
remains challenging. Moreover, many methods fail to account
for geometric details like occlusions, leading to performance
drops. To tackle these issues, we introduce OHT. This hybrid network leverages occlusion maps through an occlusionembedded mix layer. It combines the strengths of convolutional networks and Transformers via spatial-angular separable convolution (SASep-Conv) and angular self-attention
(ASA). SASep-Conv offers a lightweight alternative to 3D
convolution for capturing spatial-angular correlations, while
the ASA mechanism applies 3D self-attention across the angular dimension. These designs allow OHT to capture global
angular correlations effectively. Extensive experiments on
multiple datasets demonstrate OHT’s superior performance.

Introduction
The 4D light field, capturing both angular and spatial information, has become increasingly vital in computer vision
(Wu et al. 2017). Commercial light field cameras utilize a
micro-lens array in front of the sensor, leading to a tradeoff between angular and spatial resolutions (Ng et al. 2005;
Levin, Freeman, and Durand 2008; Sheng et al. 2022). This
limited spatial resolution constrains practical applications,
making light field super-resolution (SR) a critical research
focus. Since the advent of light field cameras, SR has garnered significant attention (Raj et al. 2016; Xiao et al. 2023b,
2021).
With the rise of deep learning, convolutional neural network (CNN) based methods have shown promising performance for light field SR, surpassing classic non-learningbased methods with notable gains (Alain and Smolic 2018;
Liang and Ramamoorthi 2015). To leverage complementary
information from different views, recent CNNs employ various mechanisms: adjacent-view combination (Yoon et al.
2017), view-stack integration (Zhang, Lin, and Sheng 2019;
Jin et al. 2020; Zhang, Chang, and Lin 2021), bidirectional
recurrent fusion (Wang et al. 2018), spatial-angular disentanglement (Cheng, Liu, and Xiong 2022; Liang et al. 2022;
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8700

