The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Sampling to Reduce Epistemic Uncertainty Using Prediction
Interval-Generation Neural Networks
Giorgio Morales, John W. Sheppard
Gianforte School of Computing
Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, USA
giorgiomorales@ieee.org; john.sheppard@montana.edu

Abstract

most to improving model accuracy and reducing uncertainty (Di Fiore, Nardelli, and Mainini 2024). This work
focuses on sampling techniques designed to reduce uncertainty in the prediction models across the entire input domain. Such techniques are essential for enhancing trust in
decision-making systems whose optimization processes rely
on accurate prediction models. For instance, in PA, determining optimal fertilizer rates depends on the shape of estimated nitrogen-yield response (N-response) curves (Bullock
and Bullock (1994), Morales and Sheppard (2023a)). These
curves represent the estimated crop yield values at specific
field sites in response to all admissible fertilizer rates. Uncertainty across the domain can severely affect the survey
shapes, leading to unreliable recommended fertilizer rates.
We note a distinction between two types of uncertainty:
epistemic and aleatoric. Epistemic uncertainty represents the
portion of total uncertainty that can be reduced by gathering
more information or improving the prediction model. On
the other hand, aleatoric uncertainty is the inherent and irreducible component of uncertainty due to the random nature of the data itself (Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021;
Nguyen, Shaker, and Hüllermeier 2022). The total uncertainty associated with a prediction (σy2 ) encapsulates both
the aleatoric (σa2 ) and epistemic (σe2 ) components; i.e., σy2 =
σa2 + σe2 . Prediction intervals (PIs) offer a comprehensive
representation of this total uncertainty by estimating the upper and lower bounds within which a prediction is expected
to fall with a given probability (Khosravi et al. 2011).
Several methods have been proposed to reduce uncertainty through iterative sampling. However, the majority of
these methods have been developed within the framework of
active learning (AL) (Nguyen, Destercke, and Hüllermeier
2019; Berry and Meger 2023) or in contexts where the primary objective is to identify the location of local or global
optima (Hennig and Schuler 2012; Nguyen et al. 2019).
It is important to note that AS and AL fields do not completely overlap (Di Fiore, Nardelli, and Mainini 2024). In
AL, the objective is to select training data within a limited
budget to maximize model performance. AL can be categorized into population-based AL, where the test input distribution is known, and pool-based AL, where a pool of unlabeled samples is provided. Our problem configuration does
not align with those categories as it is not limited to predefined data pools or known distributions. Instead, it aims

Obtaining high certainty in predictive models is crucial for
making informed and trustworthy decisions in many scientific and engineering domains. However, extensive experimentation required for model accuracy can be both costly and
time-consuming. This paper presents an adaptive sampling
approach designed to reduce epistemic uncertainty in predictive models. Our primary contribution is the development of a
metric that estimates potential epistemic uncertainty leveraging prediction interval-generation neural networks. This estimation relies on the distance between the predicted upper
and lower bounds and the observed data at the tested positions and their neighboring points. Our second contribution is
the proposal of a batch sampling strategy based on Gaussian
processes (GPs). A GP is used as a surrogate model of the
networks trained at each iteration of the adaptive sampling
process. Using this GP, we design an acquisition function
that selects a combination of sampling locations to maximize
the reduction of epistemic uncertainty across the domain. We
test our approach on three unidimensional synthetic problems
and a multi-dimensional dataset based on an agricultural field
for selecting experimental fertilizer rates. The results demonstrate that our method consistently converges faster to minimum epistemic uncertainty levels compared to Normalizing
Flows Ensembles, MC-Dropout, and simple GPs.
Code — https://github.com/NISL-MSU/AdaptiveSampling

Introduction
In various scientific and engineering fields, the development
of accurate predictive models frequently relies on experimentation. Conducting these experiments can be costly and
time-consuming, making it important to adopt strategies that
extract the most valuable information from each experiment.
One notable example is precision agriculture (PA) where experimental results may require an entire growing season to
manifest, and only a portion of the field is allocated for such
trials (Lawrence, Rew, and Maxwell 2015). This is exacerbated by the fact data can often only be collected every other
year, due to crop rotation.
Adaptive sampling (AS) techniques offer a promising
solution by selecting samples intelligently that contribute
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19546

