The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CODE: Confident Ordinary Differential Editing
Bastien van Delft, Tommaso Martorella, Alexandre Alahi
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

Abstract
Conditioning image generation facilitates seamless editing and
the creation of photorealistic images. However, conditioning
on noisy or Out-of-Distribution (OoD) images poses significant challenges, particularly in balancing fidelity to the input
and realism of the output. We introduce Confident Ordinary
Differential Editing (CODE), a novel approach for image synthesis that effectively handles OoD guidance images. Utilizing
a diffusion model as a generative prior, CODE enhances images through score-based updates along the probability-flow
Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) trajectory. This method
requires no task-specific training, no handcrafted modules,
and no assumptions regarding the corruptions affecting the
conditioning image. Our method is compatible with any diffusion model. Positioned at the intersection of conditional image
generation and blind image restoration, CODE operates in
a fully blind manner, relying solely on a pre-trained generative model. Our method introduces an alternative approach to
blind restoration: instead of targeting a specific ground truth
image based on assumptions about the underlying corruption,
CODE aims to increase the likelihood of the input image
while maintaining fidelity. This results in the most probable
in-distribution image around the input. Our contributions are
twofold. First, CODE introduces a novel editing method based
on ODE, providing enhanced control, realism, and fidelity
compared to its SDE-based counterpart. Second, we introduce
a confidence interval-based clipping method, which improves
CODE’s effectiveness by allowing it to disregard certain pixels or information, thus enhancing the restoration process in
a blind manner. Experimental results demonstrate CODE’s
effectiveness over existing methods, particularly in scenarios
involving severe degradation or OoD inputs.

Figure 1: CODE: a conditional image generation framework
for robust Out-of-Distribution image guidance.

Website — https://vita-epfl.github.io/CODE/
Code — https://github.com/vita-epfl/CODE/
Main and Appendix — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.12418

1

Introduction

Conditional image generation consists of guiding the creation of content using different sorts of conditioning, such
as text, images, or segmentation maps. Our research focuses
on scenarios where the guidance is an Out-of-Distribution
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20964

(OoD) image relative to the training data distribution. This
is especially relevant for handling corrupted images, similar
to denoising or restoration methods. The main challenge in
these scenarios is balancing fidelity to the input with realism
in the generated images. Traditional methods for restoring
corrupted images, such as Image-to-Image Translation or
Style Transfer, are limited by the need for distinct datasets per
style or per noise. Another approach models the corruption
function as an inverse problem, requiring detailed knowledge
of each possible corruption, making it impractical for most
real unknown OoD scenarios. Guided image synthesis for
OoD inputs aims to rectify corrupted images without prior
knowledge of the corruption, positioning it as Blind Image
Restoration (BIR). Despite recent advancements, achieving
human-level generalization remains challenging.
Our work aims to generate realistic and plausible images
from potentially corrupted inputs using only a pre-trained
generative model, without additional data augmentation or
finetuning on corrupted data, and without any specific assumption about the corruptions. Unlike other BIR methods
that strive to reconstruct a ground-truth image relying on specific guidance or human-based assumptions, our approach is
fully blind, seeking to maximize the input image’s likelihood
while minimizing modifications to the input image. As such,
we differ from traditional BIR approaches.
BIR is inherently ill-posed due to the loss of information

