The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

COLUMBUS: Evaluating COgnitive Lateral Understanding Through
Multiple-Choice reBUSes
Koen Kraaijveld1 , Yifan Jiang2 , Kaixin Ma3 , Filip Ilievski1
1

Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
2
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
3
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA
h.j.kraaijveld@student.vu.nl, yjiang44@usc.edu, kaixinma@global.tencent.com, f.ilievski@vu.nl
Abstract

Vertical Thinking

While visual question-answering (VQA) benchmarks have
catalyzed the development of reasoning techniques, they have
focused on vertical thinking. Effective problem-solving also
necessitates lateral thinking, which remains understudied in
AI and has not been used to test visual perception systems. To bridge this gap, we formulate visual lateral thinking
as a multiple-choice question-answering task and describe
a three-step taxonomy-driven methodology for instantiating
task examples. Then, we develop COLUMBUS, a synthetic
benchmark that applies the task pipeline to create QA sets
with text and icon rebus puzzles based on publicly available
collections of compounds and common phrases. COLUMBUS comprises over 1,000 puzzles, each with four answer
candidates. While the SotA vision-language models (VLMs)
achieve decent performance, our evaluation demonstrates a
substantial gap between humans and models. VLMs benefit
from human-curated descriptions but struggle to self-generate
such representations at the right level of abstraction.

12

8

72
13

41

?
21

MO1111ON
(A) Over the moon
(B) Once in a blue moon

16
20

(C) Once in a purple moon
(D) Blue moon

Figure 1: Left: vertical thinking puzzle from Machine Number Sense (Zhang et al. 2020). Right: lateral thinking rebus
puzzle from our COLUMBUS benchmark.
Existing benchmarks for visual question answering
(VQA) (Agrawal et al. 2016) have been instrumental in exploring and enhancing the vertical thinking skills of visionlanguage models (VLMs). Popular subtasks are visual reasoning (Johnson et al. 2017; Li and Søgaard 2022; Li et al.
2023b), abstract visual reasoning (AVR) (Chollet 2019; Malinowski and Fritz 2015; Małkiński and Mańdziuk 2023;
Zhang et al. 2019), and visual commonsense reasoning
(VCR) (Bitton-Guetta et al. 2023), all requiring both processing of visual as well as linguistic information. Meanwhile, lateral thinking benchmarks have recently been proposed as word and sentence puzzles but are limited only to
the textual modality (Jiang et al. 2023b; Huang et al. 2024).
Hence, there is a lack of lateral thinking benchmarks for
multimodal settings combining text and vision.
To this end, we study how well VLMs exhibit multimodal
lateral thinking. Our contributions are as follows:

Code — https://github.com/koen-47/COLUMBUS

1

64

44
47

Lateral Thinking

Introduction

Human problem-solving seamlessly combines vertical and
lateral thinking (De Bono 2016). Vertical thinking is an analytical search process that rewards logic, rules, and rationality. It optimizes correctness by narrowing down on quality solutions and rejecting suboptimal ones (Hernandez and
Varkey 2008). For example, resolving the question mark in
Figure 1 (left) requires systematically identifying that all examples adhere to the formula: (left - top) × right + bottom = 77. Meanwhile, lateral thinking (De Bono 1971) is
explorative, divergent, and creative (Hernandez and Varkey
2008). It expands the solution space by diverging into novel
directions. As illustrated in the right part of Figure 1, visual, spatial, verbal, and numerical cues must be interpreted
unconventionally (defying common sense; Jiang, Ilievski,
and Ma 2024), a process that lends itself to lateral thinking. In this example of a rebus puzzle, the numbers “1111”
phonetically represent the word “ONCE”, while the visualspatial relationship between the blue letters “MO” and “ON”
spell “BLUE MOON”. As “ONCE” is placed inside “BLUE
MOON” this leads to the solution B) Once in a blue moon.

1. A taxonomy-driven three-step methodology for creating lateral thinking tasks in a multiple-choice VQA format. Our taxonomy definition yields 18 rules that manipulate the visual attributes and relationships of the puzzle’s elements (text or icons). The puzzle rendering step
leverages this taxonomy to create a graph representation
for a puzzle answer and generate an image for the graph.
The distractor sampling step is based on a weighted average of orthographic and semantic similarity between a
puzzle’s correct answer and its visible elements.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4410

