The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MultiBooth:
Towards Generating All Your Concepts in an Image from Text
Chenyang Zhu1,∗ , Kai Li2,∗,† , Yue Ma3 , Chunming He4 , Xiu Li1,†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
Meta Platforms, Inc., USA
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
4
Duke University, Durham, USA
{chenyangzhu.cs, li.gml.kai, mayuefighting, chunminghe19990224}@gmail.com, li.xiu@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Recent customized generation methods either learn a concise token representation for each subject (Gal et al. 2022) or
adopt a fine-tuning strategy to adapt the T2I model specifically for the subject (Ruiz et al. 2023). While these methods
have achieved impressive results, they primarily focus on
single-concept customization and struggle when users want
to generate customized images for multiple subjects. This
motivates the study of multi-concept customization (MCC).
Existing methods (Kumari et al. 2023) for MCC commonly employ joint training approaches. However, this strategy often leads to feature confusion. Furthermore, these
methods require training distinct models for each combination of subjects and are hard to scale up as the number
of subjects grows. An alternative method (Liu et al. 2023)
addresses MCC by adjusting attention maps with residual
token embeddings during inference. While this approach
shows promise, it incurs a notable inference cost. Furthermore, the method encounters difficulties in attaining high
fidelity due to the restricted learning capacity of a single
residual embedding.
To address the aforementioned issues, we introduce
MultiBooth, a two-phase MCC solution that accurately
and efficiently generates customized multi-concept images
based on user demand. MultiBooth includes a discriminative
single-concept learning phase and a plug-and-play multiconcept integration phase. In the former phase, we learn
each concept separately, resulting in a single-concept module for every concept. In the latter phase, we effectively combine these single-concept modules to generate multi-concept
images without any extra training.
More concretely, we propose the Adaptive Concept Normalization (ACN) to enhance the representative capability of
the generated customized embedding in the single-concept
learning phase. We employ a trainable multi-model encoder
to generate customized embeddings, followed by the ACN
to adjust the L2 norm of these embeddings. Finally, by incorporating an efficient concept encoding technique, all detailed information of a new concept is extracted and stored
in a single-concept module which contains a customized embedding and the efficient concept encoding parameters.
In the plug-and-play multi-concept integration phase, we
further propose a regional customization module to guide
the inference process, allowing the correct combination of

This paper introduces MultiBooth, a method that generates
images from texts containing various concepts from users.
Despite diffusion models bringing significant advancements
for customized text-to-image generation, existing methods
often struggle with multi-concept scenarios due to low concept fidelity and high inference cost. MultiBooth addresses
these issues by dividing the multi-concept generation process into two phases: a single-concept learning phase and a
multi-concept integration phase. During the single-concept
learning phase, we employ a multi-modal image encoder and
an efficient concept encoding technique to learn a concise
and discriminative representation for each concept. In the
multi-concept integration phase, we use bounding boxes to
define the generation area for each concept within the crossattention map. This method enables the creation of individual concepts within their specified regions, thereby facilitating the formation of multi-concept images. This strategy not
only improves concept fidelity but also reduces additional inference cost. MultiBooth surpasses various baselines in both
qualitative and quantitative evaluations, showcasing its superior performance and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

The advent of diffusion models (Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia
et al. 2022; Nichol et al. 2021; He et al. 2023a, 2024c) has
ignited a new wave in the text-to-image (T2I) task, leading to
numerous novel methods (Hertz et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2023;
Gu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024d,a,b). Despite their broad
capabilities, users often desire to generate specific concepts
such as beloved pets or personal items. These personal concepts are not captured during the training of large-scale T2I
models due to their subjective nature, emphasizing the need
for customized generation (Wei et al. 2023; Gal et al. 2023;
Yan et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2024). Customized generation aims to create new variations of given
concepts, including different contexts (e.g., beaches, forests)
and styles (e.g., painting), based on just a few user-provided
images (typically fewer than 5).
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10923

