The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Ultra-High-Definition Dynamic Multi-Exposure Image Fusion
via Infinite Pixel Learning
Xingchi Chen1,2 * , Zhuoran Zheng1,2 * , Xuerui Li3 , Yuying Chen1 , Shu Wang4 , Wenqi Ren1†
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
Jimei University
3
The State University of New York at Buffalo
4
Fuzhou University
chenxch66@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhengzhr@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
xueruili@buffalo.edu, elvin.chenyuying@gmail.com,
shu@fzu.edu.cn, renwq3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract
With the continuous improvement of device imaging resolution, the popularity of Ultra-High-Definition (UHD) images is increasing. Unfortunately, existing methods for fusing multi-exposure images in dynamic scenes are designed
for low-resolution images, which makes them inefficient
for generating high-quality UHD images on a resourceconstrained device. To alleviate the limitations of extremely
long-sequence inputs, inspired by the Large Language Model
(LLM) for processing infinitely long texts, we propose a
novel learning paradigm to achieve UHD multi-exposure dynamic scene image fusion on a single consumer-grade GPU,
named Infinite Pixel Learning (IPL). The design of our approach comes from three key components: The first step is to
slice the input sequences to relieve the pressure generated by
the model processing the data stream; Second, we develop an
attention cache technique, which is similar to KV cache for
infinite data stream processing; Finally, we design a method
for attention cache compression to alleviate the storage burden of the cache on the device. In addition, we provide a new
UHD benchmark to evaluate the effectiveness of our method.
Extensive experimental results show that our method maintains high-quality visual performance while fusing UHD dynamic multi-exposure images in real-time (>40fps) on a single consumer-grade GPU.

Figure 1: Model performance and efficiency comparison between our proposed IPL and other MEF methods on our
proposed dataset. Since most methods are unable to process
UHD images directly, the calculation is performed based on
the maximum resolution (Zheng et al. 2021) that these algorithms can handle on a single GPU. Our method has approximately 46% higher PSNR and 48% higher SSIM than the
second-best method, and the inference speed reaches realtime (>40fps), achieving an optimal trade-off between performance and efficiency.

Introduction
Using multiple images with different exposures to generate a clear image is a common technique. In recent years,
due to the emergence of sophisticated imaging sensors and
displays, the popularity of Ultra-High-Definition (UHD) images is rapidly increasing. However, existing multi-exposure
image fusion (MEF) algorithms focus on generating a single
low-resolution image and cannot run multiple UHD images
with different exposures on resource-constrained devices.
To date, many methods have been developed to enable
running UHD images on consumer GPUs, such as UHD image dehazing (Zheng et al. 2021), UHD deblurring (Deng

et al. 2021), and UHD deraining (Chen et al. 2024). However, most of these methods focus on processing a single
image with 4K (3840 × 2160) resolution or higher on a
single consumer GPU, which is usually inefficient for processing multiple heterogeneous UHD images. In this research field, among existing multi-exposure fusion algorithms, such as traditional algorithms (Zhang and Cham
2010; Ma and Wang 2015; Li et al. 2020), only a few of them
can process UHD images in real time. Unfortunately, the images obtained by manually extracting features are prone to
artifacts or ghosting. In addition, among deep learning-based
methods (Yan et al. 2019; Xu, Ma, and Zhang 2020; Prabhakar et al. 2021; Zhen Liu and Liu 2022; Tel et al. 2023)
only AHDRNet (Yan et al. 2019), FSHDR (Prabhakar et al.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2248

