The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Trustworthy and Practical AI for Healthcare: A Guided Deferral System with
Large Language Models
Joshua Strong, Qianhui Men* , J. Alison Noble
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom
{joshua.strong, alison.noble}@eng.ox.ac.uk, qianhui.men@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

system, with confidence that the AI will efficiently and accurately process the majority of cases. By ensuring that AI handles routine tasks while humans manage the complex ones,
the system not only optimises the balance between benefits
and risks, but crucially can also enhance human trust in the
AI’s role.
Clinicians often make decisions using their expertise in
addition to the intelligent guidance from colleagues. The
colleagues will then respond with their interpretation and the
reasoning behind it. However, existing deferral systems lack
this guidance (Banerjee, Teso, and Passerini 2023), isolating humans in this critical decision-making. In the spirit of
HAIC, we posit that effective deferral systems should additionally offer intelligent guidance to human decision-makers
in deferred cases. In this paper, we novelly explore utilising
large language models (LLMs) for this purpose, specifically
in the task of clinical text parsing for disorder classification.
The main challenges in deploying such systems in practice include the computational cost of LLMs and compliance with strict data privacy regulations (Freyer et al.
2024). Proprietary LLMs offer advantages such as state-ofthe-art performance and easy implementation without requiring high-performance hardware, but are impractical for
data-sensitive applications such as healthcare due to lack
of internal state access and privacy concerns (Ullah et al.
2024). Open-source LLMs can perform well with relatively
large amounts of parameters, but are slow and require highperformance hardware, not readily available to all practitioners. Small-scale LLMs are faster and can be run on widely
available hardware, but are not effective. A closely-related
study (Zöller et al. 2024) that successfully applied LLM for
medical record diagnosis has ensembled multiple LLMs and
human physicians. Rather than deferring cases to humans, it
focuses on a hybrid collaborative approach which may cause
cognitive overload. In this paper, we propose methodology
for developing efficient, effective and open-source LLMs capable of guided deferral, suitable for healthcare applications
and deployable on modest computational resources.
The performance of deferral systems can be attributed, in
part, to the model’s classification performance and its calibration—the ability for the model to accurately reflect its
confidence in its predictions. Appropriate calibration improves the model’s ability to choose the optimal hierarchy
of cases to be deferred. Recent literature has highlighted the

Large language models (LLMs) offer a valuable technology
for various applications in healthcare. However, their tendency to hallucinate and the existing reliance on proprietary
systems pose challenges in environments concerning critical decision-making and strict data privacy regulations, such
as healthcare, where the trust in such systems is paramount.
Through combining the strengths and discounting the weaknesses of humans and AI, the field of Human-AI Collaboration (HAIC) presents one front for tackling these challenges and hence improving trust. This paper presents a novel
HAIC guided deferral system that can simultaneously parse
medical reports for disorder classification, and defer uncertain predictions with intelligent guidance to humans. We develop methodology which builds efficient, effective and opensource LLMs for this purpose, for the real-world deployment
in healthcare. We conduct a pilot study which showcases the
effectiveness of our proposed system in practice. Additionally, we highlight drawbacks of standard calibration metrics
in imbalanced data scenarios commonly found in healthcare,
and suggest a simple yet effective solution: the Imbalanced
Expected Calibration Error.

Code —
https://github.com/josh-strong/Guided Defer LLM

1

Introduction

The practical implementation of artificial intelligence (AI)
in decision-sensitive environments such as healthcare is often a delicate trade-off between the benefits of autonomy,
risk, and the costly consequences of errors. Human-AI Collaboration (HAIC), whereby humans and AI work in tandem to produce outcomes superior to independent efforts,
seeks to find this balance (Wang et al. 2020). One method
of achieving HAIC is through utilising deferral systems
(Madras, Pitassi, and Zemel 2018; Liu, Gallego, and Barbieri 2022), which aim to identify cases that can be rapidly and
accurately processed by the AI and then defer the remaining challenging cases to humans. This collaboration reduces
decision-makers’ time and fatigue, enabling them to focus
on a small set of uncertain cases identified by the deferral
* Work undertaken whilst employed at the University of Oxford.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28413

