The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Attribute Multi-Grained Adaptation of Pre-Trained Language Models for
Text Understanding from Bayesian Perspective
You Zhang1 , Jin Wang1 * , Liang-Chih Yu2 * , Dan Xu1 , Xuejie Zhang1
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Yunnan, P.R.China
2
Department of Information Management, Yuan Ze University, Taiwan
{yzhang0202, wangjin}@ynu.edu.cn, lcyu@saturn.yzu.edu.tw

Abstract

fine-grained view to deal with the data heterogeneity problem. Without the fine-grained view, the coarse-grained IID
assumption may impede the optimal model convergences
(uncertainty), degrading ideal performance when data are
non-IID, either explicitly or implicitly, even though carrying out sufficient data (Zhang et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2024).
One intuitive solution to address the issue is to abstract
the heterogeneities in data-sufficient while resource-diverse
tasks and guide models adapted to diverse individual scenarios. This brings two significant challenges in recent adaptations of PLMs: 1) representing the heterogeneities among
data samples and 2) making PLMs capable of recognizing them effectively and efficiently in the training and
inference phase. Recently, many efforts have been committed to introducing multi-domain-learning (Yuan, Zhao,
and Qin 2022; Katsarou, Jeney, and Stefanidis 2023), and
attribute-injecting mechanisms (Zhang et al. 2021; Amplayo
2019) for investigating data heterogeneities. Multi-domain
learning aims to learn domain-shared features and combine them with separate domain-specific features for multidomain text classifications. Attribute injecting treats concrete domain information as attribute knowledge and injects it into coarse neural networks for fine-grained performance. However, these high-performance methods do not
systematically develop the model design and optimization
approach, constraining the ability to represent robust nonIID and IID features as well as their internal relatedness.
Moreover, traditional full-model fine-tuning (FFT) and sophisticated structure modification render limited scalability
for larger PLMs (Min et al. 2024).
We argue that most text-understanding data contain multiple attributes, i.e., user, category, and platform. From a
data distribution perspective, each attribute covers coarsegrained and fine-grained views, as shown in Figure 1(a).
The coarse-grained view with one domain, which treats all
samples as IID, ignores data heterogeneities. This approach
is advantageous for accommodating large number of samples, as shown in Figure 1(b). The fine-grained view, e.g.,
the category, considers all samples divided into numerous
fine-grained domains. Within each domain, samples are IID,
whereas samples across different domains are non-IID. This
perspective allows models to manage diverse samples by
employing individual modules for each domain, as shown
in Figure 1(c).

Current neural networks often employ multi-domain-learning
or attribute-injecting mechanisms to incorporate nonindependent and identically distributed (non-IID) information
for text understanding tasks by capturing individual characteristics and the relationships among samples. However, the
extent of the impact of non-IID information and how these
methods affect pre-trained language models (PLMs) remains
unclear. This study revisits the assumption that non-IID information enhances PLMs to achieve performance improvements from a Bayesian perspective, which unearths and integrates non-IID and IID features. Furthermore, we proposed a
multi-attribute multi-grained framework for PLM adaptations
(M2A), which combines multi-attribute and multi-grained
views to mitigate uncertainty in a lightweight manner. We
evaluate M2A through prevalent text-understanding datasets
and demonstrate its superior performance, mainly when data
are implicitly non-IID, and PLMs scale larger.

Code — https://github.com/yoyo-yun/M2A.

Introduction
Modern neural networks, especially pre-trained language
models (PLMs), for specific tasks require large amounts of
data and computational resources (Kong, Wang, and Zhang
2021; Han et al. 2021); therefore, collecting as much data
as possible from diverse sources to achieve satisfactory task
performance is desirable (Yuan, Zhao, and Qin 2022; Katsarou, Jeney, and Stefanidis 2023; Liu, Zhang, and Liu 2018;
Yang and Hospedales 2015). For instance, sentiment analysis data can be gathered from different users, categories,
and platforms, where corresponding golden labels are annotated by different users and intended to build sufficient samples leveraged for robust sentiment model training (Chen
and Chao 2021; Zhang et al. 2023). These networks unanimously assume that all samples in a data pool (for a specific downstream task) are independent and identically distributed (IID) in a coarse-grained view (Pang and Lee 2006;
Zhang, Wang, and Liu 2018). However, data distributions
from different resources are not typically IID, which needs
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25967

