The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

First-Order Automata
Luca Geatti1 , Alessandro Gianola2 , Nicola Gigante3
1

Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Informatiche e Fisiche, University of Udine, Udine, Italy
2
INESC-ID/Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
3
Faculty of Engineering, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy
luca.geatti@uniud.it, alessandro.gianola@tecnico.ulisboa.pt, nicola.gigante@unibz.it

Abstract

tion of infinite-state systems is appealing and worth investigating. We are interested in tasks such as satisfiability and
model checking (Clarke et al. 2018) of FOLTL specifications, but also reactive synthesis (Pnueli and Rosner 1989),
i.e., building a strategy that fulfils a FOLTL specification
in adversarial environments, and monitoring, i.e., detecting violations of a specification during a system’s execution (Leucker and Schallhart 2009). Indeed, the MoXI intermediate language for model checking features a semantics
based on FOLTL (Johannsen et al. 2024; Rozier et al. 2024),
specifically to support infinite-state model checking.
However, to make FOLTL a really practicable specification language, we miss some ingredients. One of these is
the definition of a model of automata capable of capturing
FOLTL, and a theory of the languages (sets of models) that
FOLTL can describe. These ingredients have been crucial in
the development of the theory and practice of finite-state verification, with formal language theory being the theoretical
background (Loeckx and Sieber 1987) and automata providing the algorithmic powerhouse (Vardi 2005, 1991).
In this paper, we define and study a new kind of infinitestate, finitely representable automata on finite words, that we
call first-order automata, capable of capturing FOLTL on finite words. In particular, our contributions are the following:
1. we introduce the definition of first-order automata and
the associated notion of first-order regular languages;
2. we study the closure properties of these languages, i.e.,
that they are closed by union, intersection, concatenation,
and Kleene star, and we discuss deterministic first-order
automata (although determinization is still open);
3. we show how first-order automata can easily and directly
encode any FOLTL sentence over any first-order theory;
4. we show, similarly to what happens for propositional
LTL, that if we start with an FOLTL sentence that uses
only past operators, the corresponding automaton is deterministic; as determinism is essential to solve reactive
synthesis and monitoring for LTL specifications (Artale
et al. 2023), this result is encouraging;
5. we address the non-emptiness problem for first-order automata (i.e., the existence of any accepted word), providing some sufficient conditions for its semi-decidability;
6. we discuss some sufficient conditions for decidability
of the emptiness problem, including a class of monadic

First-order linear temporal logic (FOLTL) is a flexible and
expressive formalism capable of naturally describing complex behaviors and properties. Although the logic is in general highly undecidable, the idea of using it as a specification
language for the verification of complex infinite-state systems
is appealing. However, a missing piece, which has proved to
be an invaluable tool in dealing with other temporal logics,
is an automaton model capable of capturing the logic. In this
paper we address this issue, by defining and studying such a
model, which we call first-order automaton. We define this
very general class of automata, and the corresponding notion
of regular first-order language (of finite words), showing their
closure under most language-theoretic operations. We show
how they can capture any FOLTL formula over finite words,
over any signature and theory, and provide sufficient conditions for the semi-decidability of their non-emptiness problem. Then, to show the usefulness of the formalism, we prove
the decidability of monodic FOLTL, a classic result known in
the literature, with a simpler and direct proof.

1

Introduction

Linear temporal logic (LTL) (Pnueli 1977) is the most common specification language for the verification of reactive
systems. LTL on finite words (LTLf , (De Giacomo and Vardi
2013)) also gained traction recently in many applications
in AI and formal verification. However, LTL and LTLf are
propositional logics, and as such they are limited to the specification of finite-state systems, whereas many real-world
scenarios require modeling an infinite state space.
First-order LTL (FOLTL) is a temporal logic that mixes
LTL with classical first-order logic, resulting in an extremely
expressive and flexible formalism. The logic has been studied quite extensively in the literature (Gabbay et al. 2003;
Kontchakov et al. 2004), especially in the field of knowledge representation, where it is used as the formal underpinning of temporal description logics, temporal databases,
etc. However, reasoning about FOLTL is quite hard: in general, satisfiability of FOLTL sentences is highly undecidable, i.e., not even recursively enumerable (Gabbay et al.
2003). Nevertheless, the idea of using well-behaved fragments of FOLTL as a specification language for verificaCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14940

