The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UFO: Enhancing Diffusion-Based Video Generation with a Uniform Frame
Organizer
Delong Liu1 , Zhaohui Hou2 , Mingjie Zhan2 , Shihao Han2 , Zhicheng Zhao1,3,4, * , Fei Su1,3,4
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
SenseTime
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Network System and Network Culture, China
4
Key Laboratory of Intereactive Technology and Experience System, Ministry of Culture and Tourism, Beijing, China
{liudelong, zhaozc, sufei}@bupt.edu.cn, {houzhaohui, zhanmingjie, hanshihao}@sensetime.com
Abstract

bag in Case 3), or background inconsistencies (e.g., the boat
in Case 2 and the advertising billboard in Case 3).
Aesthetic theory (Wu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024) in visual
media emphasizes the crucial roles of the consistency and
clarity in enhancing viewer engagement and perceived quality. In video generation, where dynamic elements and transitions are essential, inconsistencies and blurring not only
reduce aesthetic appeal but also undermine the effectiveness of visual communication. To address the challenges
mentioned above, we propose the Uniform Frame Organizer
(UFO), a non-invasive plug-in designed to enhance the consistency between the foreground and background and alleviate blurring issues, thereby improving video generation
quality. Applicable to any diffusion-based video generation
model, the UFO integrates a set of non-invasive adapters into
the video generation model’s backbone network, occupying
only 0.005× the size of the original model’s trainable parameters. These adapters are capable of autonomously adjusting their intensity of use, featuring a tunable intensity
parameter, which is tuned to optimize the balance between
dynamic visual content and static precision, reflecting a direct application of aesthetic principles in video generation.
Specifically, when using a small amount of video frames
or images as training data, UFO sets the intensity to the highest value, dynamically controlling each adapter’s parameters
and release intensity to force the model’s output to approximate a static video, a scenario of extreme consistency. During this process, the UFO learns to identify and correct inconsistencies in videos. As the pre-trained model’s parameters remain unchanged, the UFO’s intensity can be adjusted
to a lower value during application. This adjustment allows
the model output to closely resemble the original while significantly enhancing the consistency between the subjects
and the background in the video frames. It also markedly
reduces issues such as sudden blurring of video frames.
To achieve the aesthetic consistency, during the training
process, the primary optimization goal for the model integrated with the UFO is set to generate static video frames.
This simplicity allows the model to learn quickly and converge after only 3000 training steps on a single GPU, using
much fewer resources than fine-tuning or retraining video
generation models. Moreover, once the parameters of the
UFO are obtained, it supports direct transferability across

Recently, diffusion-based video generation models have
achieved significant success. However, existing models often
suffer from issues like weak consistency and declining image
quality over time. To overcome these challenges, inspired by
aesthetic principles, we propose a non-invasive plug-in called
Uniform Frame Organizer (UFO), which is compatible with
any diffusion-based video generation model. The UFO comprises a series of adaptive adapters with adjustable intensities, which can significantly enhance the consistency between
the foreground and background of videos and improve image
quality without altering the original model parameters when
integrated. The training for UFO is simple, efficient, requires
minimal resources, and supports stylized training. Its modular design allows for the combination of multiple UFOs,
enabling the customization of personalized video generation
models. Furthermore, the UFO also supports direct transferability across different models of the same specification without the need for specific retraining. The experimental results
indicate that UFO effectively enhances video generation quality and demonstrates its superiority in public video generation
benchmarks.

Code — https://github.com/Delong-liu-bupt/UFO

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of artificial intelligence has transformed the field of creative content generation. Individuals
can quickly obtain personalized text (Zhao et al. 2023), images (Esser et al. 2024), sounds(Du et al. 2024), and videos
(Xing et al. 2023) through simple natural language descriptions. In visual generation, diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Song et al. 2021), which have excelled in image creation, play a crucial role. However, when applied to
video generation, these models encounter challenges such
as poor image quality, low aesthetic appeal, and weak consistency. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, even the most
advanced open-source models cannot prevent subjects from
changing shape throughout a video (e.g., the koala with the
staff in Case 1, the kitten in Case 2, and the person with the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5388

