The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semi-Supervised Multimodal Classification Through Learning from Modal and
Strategic Complementarities
Junchi Chen1 , Richong Zhang1,3 * , Junfan Chen1,2
1

CCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
chenjc@buaa.edu.cn, {zhangrc, chenjf}@act.buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Modal Complementarity

1

Food 0.88
Auto 0.01

Image
prediction

Supervised multimodal classification has been proven to
outperform unimodal classification in the image-text domain. However, this task is highly dependent on abundant labeled data. To perform multimodal classification in
data-insufficient scenarios, in this study, we explore semisupervised multimodal classification (SSMC) that only requires a small amount of labeled data and plenty of unlabeled
data. Specifically, we first design baseline SSMC models by
combining known semi-supervised pseudo-labeling methods
with the two most commonly used modal fusion strategies,
i.e. feature-level fusion and label-level aggregation. Based
on our investigation and empirical study of the baselines,
we discover two complementarities that may benefit SSMC
if properly exploited: the predictions from different modalities (modal complementarity) and modal fusion strategies
for pseudo-labeling (strategic complementarity). Therefore,
we propose a Modal and Strategic Complementarity (MSC)
framework for SSMC. Concretely, to exploit modal complementarity, we propose to learn reliability weights for the
predictions from different modalities and refine the fusion
scores. To learn from strategic complementarity, we introduce
a dual KL divergence loss to guide the balance of quantity and
quality of pseudo-labeled data selection. Extensive empirical
studies demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

Fusion
prediction
Text
prediction

Score
Fusion

Food 0.45
Auto 0.46

MSC
reliability

Time to Shift
Gears

Food 0.02
Auto 0.91

Time to Shift
Gears

Strategic Complementarity

2

Correct
pseudo-labels

Food 0.88
Auto 0.01
0.8
Food 0.71
Auto 0.19
0.2
Food 0.02
Auto 0.91

Pseudo-Label of Score Fusion

Pseudo-Label of Feature Concat

Wrong
pseudo-labels
Unselected
data
Quantity:
Pseudo-labels Quality:
selection

Quantity:
Quality:

Figure 1: Illustration of the problems in SSMC: (1) The
upper shows that existing probability level modality fusion
methods encounter modality interference problems and our
MSC solves this problem. (2) The lower shows the quality
and quantity of pseudo-labels produced by varied strategies.

methods. The most common semi-supervised learning approach, pseudo-labeling, is chosen as our backbone. Specifically, we leverage the well-known FixMatch (Sohn et al.
2020) and FreeMatch (Wang et al. 2022) as baseline semisupervised learning methods. For modality fusion, we apply
the classical label-level aggregation method (Score Fusion)
that fuses the predictions from different modalities and the
feature-level fusion method (Feature Concat) that first concatenates the features of varied modalities and then performs
classification (Liang et al. 2022; Abavisani et al. 2020).
Based on our investigation of SSMC and baseline models,
we discover the following two phenomena. First, both image and text modalities contribute to classification and they
form complementarity in SSMC. The two modalities provide uneven information (Zou et al. 2023; Monter-Aldana,
Monroy, and Vega 2023; Wang, Tran, and Feiszli 2020) and
may cause modality interference problem when applying averaged Score Fusion. Under this problem, when a prediction
from one of the modalities is incorrect, the fused prediction may also be wrong, even if the prediction from another
modality is correct. As shown in Figure 1, this problem often
arises when the classification results of different modalities

Introduction
Multimodal classification attracts intense interest in the research community. Traditional supervised models utilize a
sufficient amount of labeled data and outperform unimodal
classifiers (Abavisani et al. 2020; Agarwal et al. 2020; Kiela
et al. 2018, 2019; Zou et al. 2023). However, in real-world
scenarios, the collection and annotation of large amounts of
multimodal data is expensive. A practical solution is semisupervised learning, which can efficiently use easily accessible unlabeled data. In this paper, we explore a task called
semi-supervised multimodal classification (SSMC), which
extends semi-supervised learning to multimodal classification scenarios involving image and text modalities.
We first design baseline SSMC models by combining
existing semi-supervised approaches and modality fusion
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15812

