The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Combining Priors with Experience: Confidence Calibration Based on Binomial
Process Modeling
Jinzong Dong, Zhaohui Jiang* , Dong Pan, Haoyang Yu
School of Automation, Central South University
{dongjinzong, jzh0903, pandong, yu.haoyang}@csu.edu.cn

Abstract

increasing, leading to adoption in many safety-critical fields
such as intelligent transportation (Lu, Lin, and Hu 2024),
industrial automation (Jiang et al. 2023), and medical diagnosis (Luo et al. 2024). However, decision-making systems
in these fields not only require high accuracy but also require
signaling when they might be wrong (Munir et al. 2024). For
example, in an automatic disease diagnosis system, when
the confidence of the diagnostic model is relatively low, the
decision-making should be passed to the doctor (Jiang et al.
2012). Specifically, along with its prediction, a classification model should offer accurate confidence (matching the
true probability of event occurrence). In addition, accurate
confidence also provides more detailed information than the
no-confidence or class label (Huang et al. 2020). For example, doctors can gather more information to make more reliable decisions in “there is a 70% probability that the patient has cancer” than just a class label of “cancer”. Furthermore, accurate confidence facilitates the incorporation
of classification models into other probabilistic models. For
instance, accurate confidence allows active learning to select more representative samples (Han et al. 2024) and improves the generalization performance of knowledge distillation (Li and Caragea 2023). Therefore, pursuing more accurate confidence for classification models is a significant
work (Penso, Frenkel, and Goldberger 2024; Wang et al.
2024).
However, modern classification neural networks often
suffer from inaccurate confidence (Guo et al. 2017), which
means that their confidence does not match the true probabilities of predicted class. For example, if a deep neural
network classifies a medical image as “benign” with a confidence score of 0.99, the true probability of the medical image being “benign” could be significantly lower than 0.99,
and even its true class may be “malignant”. Therefore, in
recent years, this problem has been attracting increasing attention (Dong et al. 2024; Geng et al. 2024), and many confidence calibration methods, which aim to obtain more accurate confidence through additional processing, have been
proposed (Silva Filho et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023).
Previous works calibrate confidence mostly from three
directions: 1) Performing calibration during the classifier’s
training (train-time calibration), usually modifying the classifier’s objective function (Liu et al. 2023; Müller, Kornblith,
and Hinton 2019; Fernando and Tsokos 2021); 2) Binning

Confidence calibration of classification models is a technique to estimate the true posterior probability of the predicted class, which is critical for ensuring reliable decisionmaking in practical applications. Existing confidence calibration methods mostly use statistical techniques to estimate
the calibration curve from data or fit a user-defined calibration function, but often overlook fully mining and utilizing
the prior distribution behind the calibration curve. However,
a well-informed prior distribution can provide valuable insights beyond the empirical data under the limited data or
low-density regions of confidence scores. To fill this gap, this
paper proposes a new method that integrates the prior distribution behind the calibration curve with empirical data to
estimate a continuous calibration curve, which is realized by
modeling the sampling process of calibration data as a binomial process and maximizing the likelihood function of the
binomial process. We prove that the calibration curve estimating method is Lipschitz continuous with respect to data
distribution and requires a sample size of 3/B of that required for histogram binning, where B represents the number of bins. Also, a new calibration metric (T CEbpm ), which
leverages the estimated calibration curve to estimate the true
calibration error (TCE), is designed. T CEbpm is proven to be
a consistent calibration measure. Furthermore, realistic calibration datasets can be generated by the binomial process
modeling from a preset true calibration curve and confidence
score distribution, which can serve as a benchmark to measure and compare the discrepancy between existing calibration metrics and the true calibration error. The effectiveness
of our calibration method and metric are verified in real-world
and simulated data. We believe our exploration of integrating
prior distributions with empirical data will guide the development of better-calibrated models, contributing to trustworthy
AI.

Code — https://github.com/NeuroDong/TCEbpm
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10658

1

Introduction

The prediction accuracy of modern machine learning classification methods such as deep neural networks is steadily
* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16317

