The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Text2Data: Low-Resource Data Generation with Textual Control
Shiyu Wang, Yihao Feng, Tian Lan, Ning Yu, Yu Bai, Ran Xu, Huan Wang* , Caiming Xiong,
Silvio Savarese
Salesforce AI Research
181 Lytton Ave, Palo Alto, CA 94301

Abstract

et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2024c), audio synthesis (Liu et al.
2023; Huang et al. 2023), video generation (Li et al. 2018;
Hu, Luo, and Chen 2022), and many more (Tevet et al. 2023;
Sanghi et al. 2022; Shen and Tang 2024).

Natural language serves as a common and straightforward
signal for humans to interact seamlessly with machines. Recognizing the importance of this interface, the machine learning community is investing considerable effort in generating
data that is semantically coherent with textual instructions.
While strides have been made in text-to-data generation spanning image editing, audio synthesis, video creation, and beyond, low-resource areas characterized by expensive annotations or complex data structures, such as molecules, motion dynamics, and time series, often lack textual labels. This
deficiency impedes supervised learning, thereby constraining
the application of advanced generative models for text-to-data
tasks. In response to these challenges in the low-resource scenario, we propose Text2Data, a novel approach that utilizes
unlabeled data to understand the underlying data distribution through an unsupervised diffusion model. Subsequently,
it undergoes controllable finetuning via a novel constraint
optimization-based learning objective that ensures controllability and effectively counteracts catastrophic forgetting.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that Text2Data is
able to achieve enhanced performance regarding controllability across various modalities, including molecules, motions
and time series, when compared to existing baselines.

Recent breakthroughs in text-to-data generative models, particularly those using diffusion (Li et al. 2023; Yang et al.
2023; Kumari et al. 2023), have demonstrated remarkable
proficiency by harnessing the rich semantic insights from
vast datasets of data-text pairs. Despite the broad application of text-to-data generative models, not all modalities can
meet the substantial data-text pair requirements for achieving optimal controllability during model training. This is often due to costly annotations or intricate data structures, a
scenario we refer to as the low-resource situation. The lack
of text labels in certain areas, such as molecules (Ramakrishnan et al. 2014; Irwin et al. 2012), motions (Guo et al. 2020;
Mahmood et al. 2019), and time series (Du et al. 2020),
primarily restricts supervised learning and hinders the use
of advanced generative models for text-to-data generation
tasks. The low-resource situation when training generative
models unsurprisingly results in issues like undesirable generation quality, model overfitting, bias, and lack of diversity. However, the optimization for scarce text representations to improve the alignment between generated data and
input texts in generative models is still under-explored.

Code —
https://github.com/SalesforceAIResearch/text2data
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10941

To mitigate the issues in the low-resource scenario, strategies such as data augmentation (Hedderich et al. 2020;
Meng et al. 2021), semi-supervised learning (Thomas et al.
2013; Cheuk, Herremans, and Su 2021), and transfer learning (Tits, El Haddad, and Dutoit 2020; Yi et al. 2018) are
utilized. Yet, each comes across challenges. Data augmentation, for example, cannot always replicate genuine data
fidelity to align accurately with initial text descriptions,
and potentially leads to overfitting due to over-reliance on
augmented samples. It also exacerbates the training complexity, intensifying the already high computational demand
of diffusion models. For semi-supervised learning, text inherently carries nuances, ambiguities, and multiple meanings. Ensuring that the model infers the correct interpretation when leveraging unlabeled data is not straightforward.
Lastly, while transfer learning offers a solution for limited
datasets, it is prone to catastrophic forgetting (Iman, Arabnia, and Rasheed 2023), where previous knowledge dimin-

Introduction
Autonomy and controllability stand as twin primary pillars
of generative AI (Gozalo-Brizuela and Garrido-Merchan
2023; Wang et al. 2022). While the challenge of autonomy
has been substantially addressed through the rapid advancements of generative models, controllability is now ascending as a fervently explored arena within the machine learning community. As natural languages are one of the most
common and simplest control signal for human beings to interact with machines, the machine learning community has
increasingly focused on generating data that aligns semantically with textual descriptions, given its wide-ranging applications such as image editing (Zhang et al. 2023; Kawar
* Corresponding author: huan.wang@salesforce.com
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21252

