The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Approximate Bilevel Difference Convex Programming for
Bayesian Risk Markov Decision Processes
Yifan Lin, Enlu Zhou
Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
755 Ferst Dr
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
ylin429@gatech.edu, enlu.zhou@isye.gatech.edu
Abstract

of these limitations, Lin, Ren, and Zhou (2022) propose a
Bayesian risk MDP (BR-MDP) framework to address epistemic uncertainty in MDPs. However, the approximation algorithm proposed by Lin, Ren, and Zhou (2022) only applies to finite-horizon MDPs and does not scale well with
long horizon. It only provides an upper bound on the exact
value function, without any theoretical guarantee on the gap.
We reformulate the considered BR-MDP as a bilevel difference convex program (DCP) such that we can employ the
powerful optimization methods for DCP to solve infinitehorizon BR-MDP. Since the space of posterior distributions
(beliefs) is uncountably infinite, we approximate the bilevel
DCP by considering only a subset of posterior distributions.
Although the DCP is approximate, we show that its solution
is a lower bound on the exact optimal value function. Using
the representation of a finite state controller of the resulting
policy, we further show an upper bound on the exact optimal
value function. We develop an iterative approach to reduce
the gap between upper and lower bounds by incrementally
generating new sets of posterior distributions, and show the
convergence of the proposed algorithm.
To summarize, the contributions of this paper are twofold. First, we analyze the infinite-horizon MDP with epistemic uncertainty under BR-MDP via a Bayesian perspective and show the existence and uniqueness of stationary
optimal policy. Second, we propose an approximate difference convex programming algorithm to solve the proposed
formulation and show the convergence of the proposed algorithm. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We
conduct literature review and introduce the BR-MDP framework in Section 2. We show the existence and uniqueness of
a stationary optimal policy to the infinite-horizon BR-MDP
in Section 3.1. We provide a bilevel DCP solution to the
infinite-horizon BR-MDP in Section 3.2. A computationally
efficient approximate DCP algorithm is shown in Section
3.3. We verify the theoretical results and demonstrate the
performance of our algorithms via numerical experiments in
Section 4. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 5.

We consider infinite-horizon Markov Decision Processes
where parameters, such as transition probabilities, are unknown and estimated from data. The popular distributionally
robust approach to addressing the parameter uncertainty can
sometimes be overly conservative. In this paper, we utilize the
recently proposed formulation, Bayesian risk Markov Decision Process (BR-MDP), to address parameter (or epistemic)
uncertainty in MDPs. To solve the infinite-horizon BR-MDP
with a class of convex risk measures, we propose a computationally efficient approach called approximate bilevel difference convex programming (ABDCP). The optimization is
performed offline and produces the optimal policy that is represented as a finite state controller with desirable performance
guarantees. We also demonstrate the empirical performance
of the BR-MDP formulation and the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

In a Markov decision process (MDP), an agent must make
decisions in a sequence while facing uncertainty. In this situation, some parameters of the MDP, such as the transition
probabilities and costs, may be unknown and must be estimated from available data. The problem then becomes how
to determine the best course of action, given the limited or
possibly absent data, in order to minimize the expected total
cost and optimize the decision-making process under these
uncertain parameters.
An alternative approach to addressing the epistemic uncertainty in MDP is through the use of distributionally robust MDPs (DR-MDP, Xu and Mannor (2010)). It considers
unknown parameters as random variables and assumes that
their distributions belong to an ambiguity set determined by
the available data. The optimal policy is then found by minimizing the expected total cost using the most adversarial
distribution within this ambiguity set. However, these distributionally robust approaches may lead to overly conservative solutions that do not perform well in scenarios that
are more likely to occur than the worst case. Additionally,
the DR-MDP framework does not explicitly incorporate the
dynamics of the problem, as the distribution of the unknown
parameters does not depend on the data process, and is therefore not time-consistent, as noted by Shapiro (2021). In light

2
2.1

Background

Related Literature

If data used to estimate the true but unknown underlying
MDP are not sufficient, the estimated MDP may signifi-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26605

