The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

M2Flow: A Motion Information Fusion Framework for Enhanced
Unsupervised Optical Flow Estimation in Autonomous Driving
Xunpei Sun1 , Gang Chen1 * , Zuoxun Hou2
1

School of Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China, 510006
Beijing Institute of Space Mechanics and Electricity, China, 100094
sunxp7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, cheng83@mail.sysu.edu.cn, houzx bisme@spacechina.com
2

Abstract
I 0 , I1 ,I 2 , I 3

I1 , I 2 , I 3

Estimating optical flow in occluded regions is a crucial
challenge in unsupervised settings. In this work, we introduce M2Flow, a novel framework for unsupervised optical flow estimation that integrates motion information from
multiple frames to address occlusions. By modeling interframe motion information and employing Motion Information Propagation (MIP) module, M2Flow effectively propagates and integrates motion information across frames, while
concurrently estimating bidirectional optical flows for multiple frames. In addition, to handle occlusions across multiple
frames, we provide two augmentation modules specifically
designed for our multi-frame model to further refine optical
flow. The experiments on KITTI and Sintel datasets demonstrate that M2Flow outperforms other state-of-the-art unsupervised approaches, especially in solving occlusions.

FlowNet

1

F23

2

0

3

F12

F12
F01

1

M2Flow
2

3

F23
F12

Figure 1: Comparison between previous multi-frame optical
flow estimation methods and our approach. (Left) Previous
methods assume that the forward and backward flows are
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. (Right) We introduce M2Flow, a novel framework that abandons the constant velocity assumption and integrates multi-frame motion information to concurrently estimate bidirectional optical flows for multiple frames.

Introduction

from historical frames is utilized for current frame optical
flow estimation. Nevertheless, existing multi-frame unsupervised methods suffer from two primary issues. Firstly, in
model construction, previous multi-frame unsupervised optical flow methods mostly rely on the constant velocity assumption (Janai et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019b, 2020)(as illustrated in Fig. 1). However, this assumption often fails in
some scenarios involving moving objects, particularly in autonomous driving contexts, leading to erroneous estimation
results. Secondly, in training, most methods lack specifically
designed data augmentation techniques for multi-frame scenarios, particularly lacking occlusions with continuous motion and being unable to generate large displacement occlusions. Thus, they fail to effectively guide networks in utilizing multi-frame information for occlusion handling.
In this paper, we introduce M2Flow, as shown in Fig.
1, a novel unsupervised optical flow estimation framework
that integrates multi-frame motion information to enhance
the accuracy of optical flow estimation in occluded regions.
Regarding the first issue, rather than using uniform motion
assumption between frames, M2Flow uses a dedicated network to provide a more accurate motion modeling for the
occluded objects using four-frame inputs. It propagates nonconstant motion information between different frames, estimating the motion trends of the scene more precisely. Subsequently, it integrates the motion information from other
frames with that of the reference frame to address occlusion.

Optical flow is a crucial domain in computer vision that
provides a description of motion in images. It is widely
applied in tasks such as autonomous driving, object tracking, and video editing. In recent years, the field of optical
flow has seen rapid advancements driven by deep learning.
Deep learning-based optical flow estimation can be categorized into two types: supervised (Teed and Deng 2021) and
unsupervised. Unlike supervised optical flow networks, unsupervised optical flow networks do not require the costly
ground-truth labels for training (Yuan et al. 2022) and can
be directly trained in the target domain without pre-training
on synthetic datasets (Sun et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2023).
Unsupervised optical flow networks define their loss function based on the assumption of constant brightness (Meister, Hur, and Roth 2018), which posits that corresponding
points between frames maintain a similar local appearance.
However, this assumption will fail in occluded or significant
lighting changed regions (Marsal et al. 2023). Occlusions
are prevalent in images containing motion, making the handling of these regions crucial for unsupervised methods.
Recently, numerous studies have shown that incorporating
multi-frame data can mitigate occlusion issues (Janai et al.
2018; Liu et al. 2019b). Specifically, information extracted
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7140

