The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Replacing Paths with Connection-Biased Attention for
Knowledge Graph Completion
Sharmishtha Dutta1 , Alex Gittens1 , Mohammed J. Zaki1 , Charu C. Aggarwal2
1

Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
2
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
duttas@rpi.edu, gittea@rpi.edu, zaki@cs.rpi.edu, charu.us@ibm.com

Abstract
director

Knowledge graph (KG) completion aims to identify additional facts that can be inferred from the existing facts in the
KG. Recent developments in this field have explored this task
in the inductive setting, where at test time one sees entities
that were not present during training; the most performant
models in the inductive setting have employed path encoding
modules in addition to standard subgraph encoding modules.
This work similarly focuses on KG completion in the inductive setting, without the explicit use of path encodings, which
can be time-consuming and introduces several hyperparameters that require costly hyperparameter optimization. Our
approach uses a Transformer-based subgraph encoding module only; we introduce connection-biased attention and entity
role embeddings into the subgraph encoding module to eliminate the need for an expensive and time-consuming path encoding module. Evaluations on standard inductive KG completion benchmark datasets demonstrate that our ConnectionBiased Link Prediction (CBLiP) model has superior performance to models that do not use path information. Compared
to models that utilize path information, CBLiP shows competitive or superior performance while being faster. Additionally, to show that the effectiveness of connection-biased attention and entity role embeddings also holds in the transductive setting, we compare CBLiP’s performance on the relation
prediction task in the transductive setting.

Movie: The
Woman

Stephen
King

Frank D.
writer
writer

Movie:
The Green
Mile

Martin S.
writer

adaptedFrom
Training Graph

Nicholas P.
author

adaptedFrom
Goodfellas

adaptedFrom

Wiseguy

Inductive Test Graph

Book: The
Woman
author
author

Book: The
Green Mile

The Green
Mile

?

Frank D.

Transductive Test Query

Goodfellas

director

?

Inductive Test Query

Figure 1: Example of training graph and test queries for KG
completion in transductive and inductive settings.

researchers to use statistical relational learning to infer missing entities or relations from incomplete triples. Earlier approaches to KG completion were developed for the transductive setting, where the triples to be completed consist of
entities and relations seen during training. While this stream
of research has yielded numerous high-performing models,
these models cannot be used when the triples to be completed contain entities that were not seen at training time.
Real-world KGs grow continuously as new facts are
added, and the set of entities may grow over time, meaning that at any given point, completion models may need to
be used on entities that were not seen during training. Inductive KG Completion assumes the relations between entities remain the same in the newly added facts. To illustrate
this setting, Figure 1 depicts a training graph that reflects the
correlation between the role of a director and screenwriter.
The same artist often plays these two roles when the screenplay is adapted from an existing novel. In the transductive
KG completion setting, a relation prediction task involves
queries where both entities are present in the training graph
and the most plausible relation is to be determined. In the

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) store facts expressed in the forms
of relationships between entities. Each fact is represented
as a triple (h,r,t) or (head, relation, tail). Here, the head and
tail represent entities such as people, places, and institutions,
and the relation represents the relation between the two entities. These facts are modeled as a directed graph with labeled edges, where each entity is a vertex in the graph, the
relations are the edge labels, and edges are directed from the
head to the tail entities.
KGs are often constructed by crowdsourced data, or by
using off-the-shelf fact extraction tools. Therefore, in addition to containing spurious information, they can omit facts
that are implicit in the observed data. These omissions hinder the usefulness of KGs in various downstream tasks such
as question answering in search engines. This has motivated
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14885

