The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OGP-Net: Optical Guidance Meets Pixel-Level Contrastive Distillation for Robust
Multi-Modal and Missing Modality Segmentation
Aniruddh Sikdar1 , Jayant Teotia1 , Suresh Sundaram2
1

Robert Bosch Centre for Cyber-Physical Systems, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
2
Department of Aerospace Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
aniruddhss@iisc.ac.in, jayantteotia@iisc.ac.in, vssuresh@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

2020) has gained traction, combining RGB and IR modalities (Ha et al. 2017; Kütük and Algan 2022) to improve semantic segmentation and outperform unimodal approaches.
The primary focus is capturing shared information across
modalities while preserving each modality’s unique semantic knowledge.
Multimodal systems observe the same object through
different imaging systems, where low frequencies capture
shared information and high frequencies highlight each
modality’s distinct features (Zhao et al. 2023a). For example, RGB images reveal texture details, while IR images highlight thermal radiation. Fusion techniques for combining RGB and IR modalities fall into two main categories: (1) Multi-Modal Image Fusion (MMIF) and (2)
Multi-Modal Feature-Level Fusion (MMFF). MMIF techniques (Liu et al. 2022) focus on generating fused images
by modeling cross-modality features from different sensors.
A common pipeline using auto-encoders (Liang et al. 2022)
to fuse RGB and IR images often neglects modality-specific
high-frequency information (Sener and Koltun 2018; Liang
et al. 2021). CDDFuse (Zhao et al. 2023a) addresses this
by leveraging correlations between low and high frequencies within the image space to constrain the solution space.
Despite the superior image quality metrics of MMIF models, these correlations are not fully explored during model
training, leading to performance degradation.
To deal with the MMIF model’s challenges in handling
missing modality scenarios, MMFF techniques involving (i)
feature-level fusion, and (ii) knowledge distillation are explored to align different sensor modality distributions in the
feature space. (i) Feature-level fusion techniques have been
proposed, as shown in Fig. 1(a), using separate encoders
for each modality (Wei, Luo, and Luo 2023), followed by
attention-based modules (Yu et al. 2020) leading to a significant increase in parameters. However, they do not exhibit superior performance compared to the parameter-free
feature exchange techniques (Wang et al. 2022). Channel
Exchange Network (Wang et al. 2022) facilitates message
passing in both encoders by dynamically exchanging channels to enable the integration of information. (ii) Knowledge
distillation techniques are being developed to transfer pixellevel semantic information from RGB data to other modalities. However, for modalities with substantial domain gaps,
directly aligning modality-specific features can lead to nega-

Enhancing the performance of semantic segmentation models
with multi-spectral images (RGB-IR) is crucial, particularly
for low-light and adverse environments. While multi-modal
fusion techniques aim to learn cross-modality features for
generating fused images or engage in knowledge distillation,
they often treat multi-modal and missing modality scenarios as separate challenges, which is not an optimal approach.
To address this, a novel multi-modal fusion approach called
Optically-Guided Pixel-level contrastive learning Network
(OGP-Net) is proposed, which uses Distillation with MultiView Contrastive (DMC) and Distillation for Uni-modal Retention (DUR) to maintain the correlation between modalityshared and modality-specific features. DMC aligns the unimodal features by projecting the semantic information across
modalities into a unified latent space, ensuring that the feature
maps retain multi-modal representations. Pixel-level multiview contrastive learning is introduced to enable modalityinvariant representation learning. To retain modality-specific
information, DUR is proposed, which distills detailed textures from RGB images into the optical branch of OGP-Net.
Additionally, the Gated Spectral Unit (GSU) is integrated
into the framework to eliminate the need for manual tuning
and avoid forced feature alignment. Comprehensive experiments show that OGP-Net outperforms state-of-the-art models in multi-modal and missing modality scenarios across
three public benchmarking datasets. It achieves quicker convergence and learns efficiently from limited training samples.

Introduction
Recent advancements in scene parsing have achieved impressive segmentation results (Udupa et al. 2024), but these
improvements are largely specific to RGB data (Sikdar et al.
2023). Enhancing models’ generalization under challenging conditions like low light, or overexposure, where information contained in RGB images depreciates, remains crucial. Infrared (IR) cameras are increasingly popular in lowvisibility conditions for their unique spectral information
and ability to penetrate dust and smoke (Gade and Moeslund
2014). However, deep-learning models often struggle with
IR images alone due to their lower semantic content compared to optical images. With the rise of affordable IR sensors, deep multimodal fusion (Valada, Mohan, and Burgard
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6922

