The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ERCI: An Explainable Experience Replay Approach with Causal Inference for
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Jingwen Wang, Dehui Du* , Lili Tian, Yikang Chen, Yida Li, YiYang Li
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University, 200062, China
dhdu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

model decisions in practical applications, thereby limiting
their application scenarios. Particularly in domains such as
autonomous driving, the complex and dynamic road environment and potential accident risks demand high explainability of vehicle behavior, which is essential for gaining
user trust in these safety-critical systems.
Therefore, eXplainable Reinforcement Learning (XRL)
has become a research focus, aiming to provide explanations
for model predictions to ensure the reliability of model decisions. Due to the complexity and opacity of neural network
models in DRL, many existing studies focus on post-hoc explainability for different aspects of XRL (Arrieta et al. 2020;
Heuillet, Couthouis, and Dı́az-Rodrı́guez 2021). These include representation learning approaches based on states, actions, and policies (Raffin et al. 2019), simultaneous learning
of policies and explanations (Juozapaitis et al. 2019), multiobjective learning approaches (Beyret, Shafti, and Faisal
2019; Cideron et al. 2019) based on Hindsight Experience
Replay (Andrychowicz et al. 2017; Beyret, Shafti, and Faisal
2019; Cideron et al. 2019), global reward allocation explanation approaches based on Shapley values (Wang et al.
2020), and explanation approaches based on saliency maps
in image data (Selvaraju et al. 2017). Causal inference (Pearl
and Mackenzie 2018) is an emerging research direction in
the field of model explanation. Unlike traditional statistics,
causal inference is closely related to human cognitive psychology and analyzes events through logical chains, making
it well-suited for explaining decisions (Kuang et al. 2020;
Young et al. 2016). For example, Madumal combined decision trees with causal models to generate counterfactual
explanations (Madumal et al. 2020), and other researchers
have reshaped reward functions to add exploratory rewards,
allowing agents to intervene in behaviors to optimize causal
models (Volodin, Wichers, and Nixon 2020). However, there
is currently a lack of research on explaining the experience replay process through a causal inference lens, which
presents a significant research gap. Addressing this gap can
enhance the explainability of the model from the perspective
of data sampling, which is fundamental to DRL training.
In addition, the low sample efficiency in DRL remains a
pressing issue. In complex application domains like robotic
control and autonomous driving, DRL requires substantial
interaction experience to update models. This requirement
is often hard to fulfill due to sparse rewards and the imbal-

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has gained significant attention in autonomous systems, yet its black-box nature and
lack of explainability hinder user trust in safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving. Existing experience replay approaches enhance sample efficiency but often fail to
capture the internal causality of training data, leading to a
convoluted training process that is difficult for humans to
explain. In this work, we introduce Experience Replay with
Causal Inference (ERCI), an explainable approach that integrates time series representation and causal inference to offer human-aligned explanations for DRL. Specifically, ERCI
1) introduces a novel multivariate time series representation
to extract explainable Time Series Causal Factors (TSCF)
from experimental data and 2) leverages internal causality in
TSCFs with causal inference as a crucial standard for experience replay in DRL training. We evaluate ERCI using multiple baseline algorithms across diverse environments. Results show that ERCI provides human-aligned explanations
and further improves sample efficiency through enhanced explainability. Notably, ERCI outperforms other state-of-the-art
approaches by 15% in average performance, highlighting its
effectiveness and generalizability.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) enables agents to interact with
the environment iteratively, acquiring an optimal policy to
maximize the cumulative expected reward. However, traditional RL techniques face limitations in handling highdimensional state spaces, generalizing models, and learning
complex tasks. To address these issues, Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) (Mnih et al. 2013) introduces deep neural networks, which can more effectively manage complex
state representations and action spaces. Despite these advancements, DRL models are often considered black boxes
(Heuillet, Couthouis, and Dı́az-Rodrı́guez 2021), requiring
extensive interactions to obtain a limited number of effective
samples. Experience replay approaches (Lin 1992) can improve sample efficiency but often fail to capture the internal
causality within the experiences, leading to an inscrutable
training and decision-making process. This inscrutability
makes it difficult for humans to understand and explain DRL
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27671

