The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ReFF: Reinforcing Format Faithfulness in Language Models Across Varied Tasks
Jiashu Yao1 , Heyan Huang1 , Zeming Liu2 , Haoyu Wen1 , Wei Su1 , Boao Qian1 , Yuhang Guo1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
{yaojiashu, hhy63, haoyuwen, weisu, qianboao, guoyuhang}@bit.edu.cn, zmliu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Following formatting instructions to generate well-structured
content is a fundamental yet often unmet capability for large
language models (LLMs). To study this capability, which we
refer to as format faithfulness, we present F ORMAT B ENCH, a
comprehensive format-related benchmark. Compared to previous format-related benchmarks, F ORMAT B ENCH involves a
greater variety of tasks in terms of application scenes (traditional NLP tasks, creative works, autonomous agency tasks),
human-LLM interaction styles (single-turn instruction, multiturn chat), and format types (inclusion, wrapping, length,
coding). Moreover, each task in F ORMAT B ENCH is attached
with a format checker program. Extensive experiments on the
benchmark reveal that state-of-the-art open- and closed-source
LLMs still suffer from severe deficiency in format faithfulness.
By virtue of the decidable nature of formats, we propose to
Reinforce Format Faithfulness (R E FF) to help LLMs generate
formatted output as instructed without compromising general
quality. Without any annotated data, R E FF can substantially
improve the format faithfulness rate (e.g., from 21.6% in original LLaMA3 to 95.0% on caption segmentation task), while
keep the general quality comparable (e.g., from 47.3 to 46.4
in F1 scores). Combined with labeled training data, R E FF can
simultaneously improve both format faithfulness (e.g., from
21.6% in original LLaMA3 to 75.5%) and general quality
(e.g., from 47.3 to 61.6 in F1 scores). We further offer an
interpretability analysis to explain how R E FF improves both
format faithfulness and general quality.

Figure 1: The overall framework of this work. The queries in
F ORMAT B ENCH are forwarded to an LLM to generate corresponding responses, whose format correctness are labelled
by a format checker. The queries, generated responses, and
the format labels are utilized in R E FF process to iteratively
obtain an adapted LLM with higher format faithfulness.

Code & Datasets — https://github.com/BITHLP/ReFF

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a significant upsurge in the development and deployment of large language models (LLMs)
(Brown et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2023; Achiam et al. 2023).
With their exceptional zero-shot and few-shot capabilities,
LLMs have revolutionized the paradigm of language-related
tasks, where a question can be understood and solved to the
best without task-specific supervision (Radford et al. 2019).
The zero- and few-shot prompting paradigms have introduced a new problem in task solving procedure, namely, the
specification of the output format. To elaborate, LLMs’ task
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25660

solving paradigm mandates that users must devise an output
format and include it in the prompt as a request for LLMs to
adhere to. The format specification holds significant importance in tasks of wide concern, for example:
• Various natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such
as named entity recognition, text-to-data conversion, and
syntactic parsing, hold rigorous format requirements.
• Creative works, such as poems, intrinsically possess rigorous forms, including acrostic and numerous others.
• LLM-based autonomous agents need strict format adherence to avoid system crashes or dangerous behaviors.

