The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

List Update with Prediction
Yossi Azar* 1 , Shahar Lewkowicz* 1 , Varun Suriyanarayana* 2
1 Department of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University
2 School of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University

azar@tauex.tau.ac.il, shaharlewko22@gmail.com, vs478@cornell.edu

Abstract

called Move to Front (𝑀𝑇 𝐹). Upon receiving a request for
an element, this algorithm accesses it and then moves it to
the front of the list. They also established a simple lower
bound of 2 for the competitive ratio of deterministic online
algorithms by always requesting the last element in the online algorithm’s list. While randomization can improve the
competitive ratio, the best-known bound remains approximately 1.6 (Albers, Von Stengel, and Werchner 1995).
While the best competitive ratio bound for the list update
problem is well-studied, in practical scenarios, paying twice
(or even 50% more than) the optimal solution may not be satisfactory. This is particularly true when additional information is available. Machine learning models, for instance, can
analyze historical data to make informed predictions about
the order of elements in the list. Designing a predictor based
on machine learning can lead to predictions that, if accurate,
may only incur a slightly increased cost compared to the
optimal value. However, blindly following inaccurate predictions could result in significantly higher costs compared
to the optimal solution. Therefore, there is a need to design
algorithms whose worst-case performance does not degrade
significantly for any possible sequence. Lykouris and Vassilvitskii (Lykouris and Vassilvitskii 2021) introduced the concept of predictions—a machine learned oracle for a model
trained on input data—and explored how we can improve
the performance of the model using the oracle, measured by
smoothness versus robustness as defined later.

List Update is a fundamental problem in online algorithms,
with a well-known 2-competitive algorithm that moves every
requested element to the front. Randomization can slightly
improve the competitive ratio to 1.6, but not beyond 1.5.
However, practical inputs are not adversarial and one hopes
to do better, particularly when additional information from a
machine learning oracle is available. With access to predictions, the goal is to incur only a slight overhead compared to
the prediction’s accuracy, avoiding significant costs in case of
substantial deviation.
We propose a (1 + 𝜖)-smooth randomized algorithm, offering robustness of 𝑂 (1/𝜖 4 ). This guarantees that the algorithm
never exceeds a cost greater than 1 + 𝜖 times the prediction
cost, while maintaining a bound within 𝑂 (1/𝜖 4 ) of the optimal cost for every possible sequence. In cases where no paid
swaps are permitted for the prediction, we can improve robustness to 𝑂 (1/𝜖 2 ) while retaining 1 + 𝜖 smoothness. We
complement these findings by demonstrating a lower bound
of Ω(1/𝜖) on the robustness for deterministic algorithms and
Ω(log(1/𝜖)) for randomized ones. Finally, the experiments
we have made show that our algorithms perform better than
the standard competitive algorithms for this problem.

Introduction
The List Update problem is a fundamental problem in online algorithms. In this problem, we have an ordered list of
elements and receive requests for these elements over time.
Upon receiving a request, the algorithm must immediately
serve it by accessing the required element. The cost of accessing an element is equal to its position in the list. The
algorithm can move this element towards the front of the list
for free, and it can also swap any two consecutive elements
in the list at a cost of 1. The objective in this problem is
to devise an algorithm that minimizes the total cost of accesses and swaps. It is worth noting that this is an online algorithm, meaning it lacks knowledge of future requests and
must make decisions solely based on requests that have arrived.
Sleator and Tarjan (Sleator and Tarjan 1985) introduced
a surprising deterministic online 2-competitive algorithm

Determining the type of prediction to be used
Determining the most suitable prediction oracle is not
straightforward. A natural approach would be to obtain predictions of the entire sequence in advance. However, a prediction of this type may not be very accurate as it does not
adapt to, learn from, or take advantage of the observed sequence, potentially leading to significant degradation in prediction accuracy. Additionally, the amount of information
required for such a prediction could be unreasonably large.
It seems more sensible to obtain a prediction for each request, indicating how to handle the accessed element (i.e.,
where to move it). Moreover, the prediction algorithm may
be allowed to suggest exchanging other elements, making
the most general prediction the arrangement of the list at
any given time. In most cases, the prediction may recommend moving the accessed element towards the front (but

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15436

