The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Entire-Space Variational Information Exploitation for
Post-Click Conversion Rate Prediction
Ke Fei, Xinyue Zhang, Jingjing Li*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
q191106702@gmail.com, qzmvc1@gmail.com, lijin117@yeah.net

Abstract

hinder the generalization of click-space CVR models to entire space (Wang et al. 2022a).
To mitigate the SSB, causal inference techniques such as
inverse propensity scores (IPS) and double robust learning
(DR) have been proposed to debias the CVR estimation and
control variance (Zhang et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2021; Dai
et al. 2022). The essence of IPS and DR is to reconstruct the
entire space loss by weighting the clicked samples’ losses
with IPS.
Since causal methods are trained only on click space, exploring the entire space is a promising approach to mitigate
SSB and DS simultaneously (Su et al. 2024). Initially, to utilize unclicked samples, Ma et al. (Ma et al. 2018b) proposed
ESMM to model CVR on the entire space through learning a
click-through and conversion rate (CTCVR) task. Based on
the chain rule of probability, CTCVR = click-through rate
(CTR) * CVR. Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2022a) combine
IPS and DR with ESMM to debias the CVR estimator and
simultaneously exploit the entire space information. Xu et
al. (Xu et al. 2022) proposed UKD, which trains an adaptive CVR teacher through adversarial learning to generate
soft labels for unclicked samples. These pseudo labels allow
the CVR estimator to be trained on the entire space using
a distillation approach. In DCMT (Zhu et al. 2023), Zhu et
al. labels unclicked samples as non-conversions and apply
inverse non-click propensity to correct the bias in the nonconversion estimators. Similar to UKD and DCMT, Su et
al. (Su et al. 2024) train a naı̈ve CVR estimator to produce
pseudo labels for unclicked samples.
From a causal inference perspective (Rubin 2005), we
must measure all variables that influence clicks and conversions (also called confounders) to ensure unbiased CVR estimat. However, most existing entire-space methods ignore
click information (which contains confounders) when generating pseudo labels, thus transferring the bias to the target estimator. UKD employs adversarial learning to mitigate
the domain shift between the click and non-click spaces, but
it also results in the loss of click information. DDPO uses
the naı̈ve CVR estimator to generate pseudo CVR labels for
unclicked samples, neglecting click information when training the CVR estimator.
Since the information carried by non-click space pseudo
soft labels is easily biased and limited, it is beneficial to construct an unbiased CVR teacher and transfer information at

In recommender systems, post-click conversion rate (CVR)
estimation is an essential task to model user preferences
for items and estimate the value of recommendations. Sample selection bias (SSB) and data sparsity (DS) are two
persistent challenges for post-click conversion rate (CVR)
estimation. Currently, entire-space approaches that exploit
unclicked samples through knowledge distillation are promising to mitigate SSB and DS simultaneously. Existing methods use non-conversion, conversion, or adaptive conversion
predictors to generate pseudo labels for unclicked samples.
However, they fail to consider the unbiasedness and information limitations of these pseudo labels. Motivated by such
analysis, we propose an entire-space variational information
exploitation framework (EVI) for CVR prediction. First, EVI
uses a conditional entire-space CVR teacher to generate unbiased pseudo labels. Then, it applies variational information exploitation and logit distillation to transfer non-click
space information to the target CVR estimator. We conduct
extensive offline experiments on six large-scale datasets. EVI
demonstrated a 2.25% average improvement compared to the
state-of-the-art baselines.

Code — https://github.com/q1179897215/EVI
Extended version — https://github.com/q1179897215/EVI

1

Introduction

Modern recommender systems aim to connect users with
the items they want using efficient computation. Estimating
the post-click conversion rate (CVR) is a fundamental task
that models the interaction between users and items, such as
user preferences for specific items. (Xi et al. 2021; Ma et al.
2018b; Dai et al. 2022). The naı̈ve CVR model is trained using clicked samples from the click space, but it needs to estimate CVR for all impression items from the entire impression space, which includes unclicked samples. Since click
and conversion events are interconnected, unclicked samples are not missing at random (MNAR) (Marlin and Zemel
2009; Zhang et al. 2020). This gap between the click space
and the entire space leads to sample selection bias (SSB)
(Ma et al. 2018b; Li et al. 2023a). Moreover, the data sparsity (DS) of clicked samples and converted samples further
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11654

