The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scenario-Based Robust Optimization of Tree Structures
Spyros Angelopoulos2, 3 , Christoph Dürr1, 2 , Alex Elenter1 , Georgii Melidi1
1

Sorbonne University, LIP6, Paris, France
2
CNRS
3
International Laboratory on Learning Systems, Montreal, Canada
{spyros.angelopoulos, christoph.durr, alex.elenter, georgii.melidi}@lip6.fr

For a second example, suppose that we are given n keys to
be stored in a Binary Search Tree (BST), and that we would
like to minimize the expected number of comparisons, when
performing a search operation for a key. Once again, if the
key frequencies are known ahead of time, finding an optimal
BST is a fundamental problem in Computer Science, going
back to the seminal work of Knuth (Knuth 1971) who gave a
quadratic-time algorithm. Suppose, however, that instead of
a single frequency vector, we are provided with k different
vectors, each defining one possible scenario. How would we
construct a single BST that performs well across all scenarios, hence also against one chosen adversarially?
Motivated by the above situations, in this work we introduce the study of robust structures, in the presence of k possible scenarios. Each scenario is described by means of a
frequency vector over the keys, and we seek a single tree that
is robust with respect to any scenario (and thus with respect
to the worst-case, adversarial scenario). This approach falls
into what is known as scenario-based robust optimization;
see (Ben-Tal, El Ghaoui, and Nemirovski 2009) for a survey
of this area. While the scenario-based framework has been
studied in the context of AI-related optimization problems
in areas such as planning (McCarthy, Vayanos, and Tambe
2017), scheduling (Shabtay and Gilenson 2023) and network optimization (Kasperski and Zieliński 2015; Kasperski, Kurpisz, and Zieliński 2015), to our knowledge it has
not been applied to data structures or data coding.
We consider two main measures for evaluating the quality of our solutions. The first measure applies to BSTs, and
is the worst-case ratio, among all scenarios s, between the
cost of our solution (tree) under scenario s and the cost of
the optimal tree under s; using the canonical term from online computation, we refer to this measure as the competitive ratio. For Huffman trees, we consider even stronger
guarantees, by studying the worst-case difference, among all
scenarios s between the cost of our solution under s and
the cost of the optimal tree for s, namely the regret of the
solution. We refer to Sections 2.1 and 3.1 for the formal
definitions. Competitive analysis and regret minimization
are both well-studied approaches in optimization under uncertainty, that establish strict, worst-case guarantees under
adversarial situations (Borodin and El-Yaniv 2005), (Blum
and Mansour 2007). Competitive analysis is the predominant analysis technique for tree-based data structures, see

Abstract
We initiate the study of tree structures in the context of
scenario-based robust optimization. Specifically, we study
Binary Search Trees (BSTs) and Huffman coding, two fundamental techniques for efficiently managing and encoding data
based on a known set of frequencies of keys. Given a number
of distinct scenarios, each defined by a frequency distribution over the keys, our objective is to compute a single tree of
best-possible performance, relative to any scenario.
We consider, as performance metrics, the competitive ratio,
which compares multiplicatively the cost of the solution to
the tree of least cost among all scenarios, as well as the regret,
which induces a similar, but additive comparison. For BSTs,
we show that the problem is NP-hard across both metrics. We
also obtain an optimal competitive ratio that is logarithmic
in the number of scenarios. For Huffman Trees, we likewise
prove NP-hardness, and we present an algorithm with logarithmic regret, which we prove to be near-optimal by showing
a corresponding lower bound. Last, we give a polynomialtime algorithm for computing Pareto-optimal BSTs with respect to their regret, assuming scenarios defined by uniform
distributions over the keys. This setting captures, in particular, the first study of fairness in the context of data structures.
We provide an experimental evaluation of all algorithms. To
this end, we also provide mixed integer linear program formulation for computing optimal trees.

Code — https://gitlab.lip6.fr/gmelidi/robust-tree
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.11422

1

Introduction

Suppose that we would like to encode and transmit a text in a
given language efficiently, i.e., using the least number of bits
on expectation. If the alphabet’s frequency is known ahead
of time, i.e., if the language is pre-determined, this can be
done efficiently using the well-known technique of Huffman
coding (Huffman 1952). But what if we do not know in advance the intended language, but instead it is only known
that it can be either English, Italian, or Finnish? In this case,
one would like to design a single code that performs efficiently across all three such scenarios, and in particular
against a worst-case, adversarially chosen language.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26895

