The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Make Domain Shift a Catastrophic Forgetting Alleviator in Class-Incremental
Learning
Wei Chen1,2 , Yi Zhou1,2 *
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications, Ministry of
Education, China
weighchen@seu.edu.cn, yizhou.szcn@gmail.com
Abstract

In the realm of class-incremental learning (CIL), alleviating
the catastrophic forgetting problem is a pivotal challenge.
This paper discovers a counter-intuitive observation: by incorporating domain shift into CIL tasks, the forgetting rate
is significantly reduced. Our comprehensive studies demonstrate that incorporating domain shift leads to a clearer separation in the feature distribution across tasks and helps reduce parameter interference during the learning process. Inspired by this observation, we propose a simple yet effective
method named DisCo to deal with CIL tasks. DisCo introduces a lightweight prototype pool that utilizes contrastive
learning to promote distinct feature distributions for the current task relative to previous ones, effectively mitigating interference across tasks. DisCo can be easily integrated into
existing state-of-the-art class-incremental learning methods.
Experimental results show that incorporating our method into
various CIL methods achieves substantial performance improvements, validating the benefits of our approach in enhancing class-incremental learning by separating feature representation and reducing interference. These findings illustrate that DisCo can serve as a robust fashion for future research in class-incremental learning.

Figure 1: The key finding of our work: Incorporating domain
shift in class incremental learning contributes to a clear separation of feature space and a better resistance to forgetting.

involves learning a sequence of tasks, with each task only
introducing new classes that were not present in the previous tasks. The model should correctly classify new samples
into all classes seen so far. Unlike CIL which focuses on expanding the model’s class knowledge, DIL (Tang et al. 2021;
Tao et al. 2020; Volpi, Larlus, and Rogez 2021) requires the
model to generalize effectively across varying data distributions (Lai et al. 2024; Liu and Zhou 2024) with the same label space and fight against forgetting at the same time. There
is no doubt that combination of CIL and DIL can better simulate the real world where new knowledge and new data distribution are introduced gradually. Relatively a few studies
have been conducted to provide solutions to this combination. Many works (Kundu et al. 2020; Simon et al. 2022;
Xie, Yan, and He 2022) explore various problem settings of
combining CIL with DIL, emphasizing adaptation and generalization across known and unknown domains. However,
they did not really focus on the effect of domain shift on
CIL. Thus, we are motivated by this question: “Does domain shift really hamper CIL methods?”
In this work, we first discover that domain shift helps
reduce the interference and forgetting across tasks in CIL,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically, we start with an empirical study where we simulate the combination of CIL
and domain shift by splitting DomainNet (Peng et al. 2019)
dataset, or manually add domain shift using a style transfer GAN to the original CIFAR-100 dataset (Krizhevsky

Code — https://github.com/PixelChen24/DisCo

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks excel in static environments but falter with the dynamic nature of real-world data. Designed to
learn from static datasets, these models struggle to adapt to
new data without complete retraining. This leads to performance degradation and catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
and Cohen 1989) in real-world applications with continuously updated data (Luo et al. 2024). Continual learning,
also known as incremental or lifelong learning, addresses
this by allowing models to learn incrementally, retaining
knowledge over time, and adapting to evolving data.
Generally, continual learning can be mainly taxonomized as Class-Incremental Learning(CIL) and DomainIncremental Learning(DIL). CIL (Zhou et al. 2022; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Rusu et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2022c)
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15866

