The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Apollo-Forecast: Overcoming Aliasing and Inference Speed Challenges
in Language Models for Time Series Forecasting
Tianyi Yin1,2 , Jingwei Wang2,3 * , Yunlong Ma2 * , Han Wang2 ,
Chenze Wang2 , Yukai Zhao2 , Min Liu2 , Weiming Shen4
1

Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji University
2
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University
3
Ant Group
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{yin tianyi, jwwang, evanma, 2210126, wangchenze, zhaoyukaijake, lmin}@tongji.edu.cn,
wshen@ieee.org
Abstract
Encoding time series into tokens and using language models
for processing has been shown to substantially augment the
models’ ability to generalize to unseen tasks. However, existing language models for time series forecasting encounter
several obstacles, including aliasing distortion and prolonged
inference times, primarily due to the limitations of quantization processes and the computational demands of large models. This paper introduces Apollo-Forecast, a novel framework that tackles these challenges with two key innovations:
the Anti-Aliasing Quantization Module (AAQM) and the
Race Decoding (RD) technique. AAQM adeptly encodes sequences into tokens while mitigating high-frequency noise in
the original signals, thus enhancing both signal fidelity and
overall quantization efficiency. RD employs a draft model
to enable parallel processing and results integration, which
markedly accelerates the inference speed for long-term predictions, particularly in large-scale models. Extensive experiments on various real-world datasets show that ApolloForecast outperforms state-of-the-art methods by 35.41% and
18.99% in WQL and MASE metrics, respectively, in zeroshot scenarios. Furthermore, our method achieves an acceleration of 1.9X-2.7X in inference speed over the baseline methods.

Figure 1: (Left) Without a noise erasure mechanism, quantization causes aliasing distortion. With a noise erasure mechanism, high-frequency noise is removed, preserving lowfrequency information. X represents the frequency domain.
(Right) Performance comparison of Moirai-L, Chronos-S,
and Apollo-S on UCR dataset.

2023) and Dlinear (Zeng et al. 2023), coinciding with the
expansion of diverse time series data sources, has significantly enhanced forecasting capabilities (Tang et al. 2022).
Nonetheless, these methods typically operate under a onemodel-per-dataset framework and have yet to achieve a universally applicable forecasting model (Zhang et al. 2024).
The emergence of large language models (LLMs) with robust generalization capabilities has inspired the development
of foundation models for time-series forecasting. Those
studies can be categorized into two main fields: enhancing
pre-trained LLMs with prompts and retraining LLMs for
time series tasks (Zhang et al. 2024). These methods bridge
the gap between specialized models and general approaches,
eliminating the need for retraining from scratch for each task
(Jin et al. 2024a). Notably, the latter approach avoids errors
introduced by the generic LLM vocabulary by encoding the
time series into tokens, also known as quantization.
Despite the advantages of these foundation models, existing quantization methods may introduce high-frequency
noise into the low-frequency band during tokenization, leading to additional distortion known as aliasing errors (Ma

Code — https://github.com/Ivan-YinTY/Apollo-Forecast
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12226

Introduction
Time series forecasting plays a pivotal role in various research domains, including transportation (Afrin and Yodo
2022), energy (Cai et al. 2024), and manufacturing (Wang
et al. 2022). Early forecasting techniques predominantly relied on statistical methods such as ARIMA and machine
learning models (Li, Wu, and Liu 2023). These approaches
are often suitable for scenarios with limited observational
data, offering a balanced performance. The emergence of
deep learning techniques, such as NHITS (Challu et al.
* Corresponding authors: Yunlong Ma, Jingwei Wang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22173

