The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MSE-Adapter: A Lightweight Plugin Endowing LLMs with the Capability to
Perform Multimodal Sentiment Analysis and Emotion Recognition
Yang Yang, Xunde Dong* , Yupeng Qiang
South China University of Technology, School of Automation Science and Engineering
China, Guangzhou
audxd@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

or tones, can convey entirely different emotions. Therefore,
utilizing multimodal information to perceive human emotions can enable AI to make more accurate judgments.
In recent years, the emergence of pre-trained Large Language Model (LLM) has introduced some new paradigms to
the research community in NLP. Thanks to the powerful capabilities of LLM, they have demonstrated outstanding performance on many downstream tasks. Consequently, numerous researchers have begun to develop domain-specific LLM
(such as for healthcare, weather forecasting, etc.) (Toma
et al. 2023; Bi et al. 2023), by fine-tuning LLM with highquality data to exhibit strong capabilities in relevant fields.
This paradigm of LLM-for-specific-field is an excellent approach, but it demands high quality and quantity of data,
making its implementation somewhat challenging.
Some researchers in the field of sentiment analysis also
leveraged this paradigm to tailor models specifically for
MSA and ERC tasks. Hu et al. (2022b) introduced UniMSE,
which for the first time unifies MSA and ERC as generative
tasks. UniMSE assigns emotional category labels to samples in MSA tasks and sentiment intensity labels to samples
in ERC tasks by calculating textual similarity. Subsequently,
a model is trained based on the T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) architecture, exhibiting remarkable proficiency in both MSA
and ERC tasks. Li et al. (2023b) developed UniSA, a comprehensive framework for sentiment analysis. Built upon the
BART (Lewis et al. 2019) model and a series of pre-training
tasks, UniSA excels in a wide range of multimodal and
text-only sentiment analysis tasks, offering a more comprehensive performance compared to UniMSE. Although the
two aforementioned works exhibit remarkable performance,
they still exhibit certain limitations. 1) Significant computational overhead. Large number of trainable parameters
and multi-task training lead to considerable computational
expenses, where UniSA’s pre-training requires three days on
eight NVIDIA RTX V100 32G GPUs. 2) Losing the generalization capability inherent to the base models. UniMSE
and UniSA, trained respectively on T5 (Raffel et al. 2020)
and BART (Lewis et al. 2019), are tailored for the sentiment
analysis domain, restricting these models from performing
tasks outside of sentiment analysis.
Currently, there is a trend towards developing plugins
that freeze the backbone LLM and train them to perform
non-textual tasks while retaining their inherent capabilities

Current Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) and Emotion Recognition in Conversations (ERC) methods based on
pre-trained language models exhibit two primary limitations:
1) Once trained for MSA and ERC tasks, these pre-trained
language models lose their original generalized capabilities.
2) They demand considerable computational resources. As
the size of pre-trained language models continues to grow,
training larger multimodal sentiment analysis models using previous approaches could result in unnecessary computational cost. In response to this challenge, we propose
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis and Emotion Recognition
Adapter (MSE-Adapter), a lightweight and adaptable plugin. This plugin enables a large language model (LLM) to
carry out MSA or ERC tasks with minimal computational
overhead (only introduces approximately 2.6M to 2.8M trainable parameters upon the 6/7B models), while preserving the
intrinsic capabilities of the LLM. In the MSE-Adapter, the
Text-Guide-Mixer (TGM) module is introduced to establish
explicit connections between non-textual and textual modalities through the Hadamard product. This allows non-textual
modalities to better align with textual modalities at the feature level, promoting the generation of higher-quality pseudo
tokens. Extensive experiments were conducted on four public English and Chinese datasets using consumer-grade GPUs
and open-source LLMs (Qwen-1.8B, ChatGLM3-6B-base,
and LLaMA2-7B) as the backbone. The results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed plugin.

Code — https://github.com/AZYoung233/MSE-Adapter

Introduction
Making artificial intelligence (AI) comprehend human sentiment is a significant issue in the development of AI. Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) and Emotion Recognition in Conversations (ERC) have received widespread attention from the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community in recent years (Mai, Zeng, and Hu 2023; Wang et al.
2024). Limited by various factors, early sentiment analysis
could only be conducted through text, which is far from sufficient for the diversified information of the real world. The
same sentence, accompanied by different facial expressions
* Xunde Dong is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25642

