The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MABR: Multilayer Adversarial Bias Removal Without Prior Bias Knowledge
Maxwell J. Yin, Boyu Wang, Charles Ling*
University of Western Ontario
jyin97@uwo.ca, bwang@csd.uwo.ca, charles.ling@uwo.ca

Abstract

examples labeled with protected attributes, which presents
several challenges. First, we may not be aware of the specific biases, like gender or age bias, that require mitigation
(Orgad and Belinkov 2023). Second, obtaining protected labels can be difficult due to privacy regulations and ethical
concerns, leading to few users publicly disclosing their protected attributes (Han, Baldwin, and Cohn 2021a). Moreover, prior research has typically focused on mitigating a
single type of bias (Schuster et al. 2019; Clark, Yatskar, and
Zettlemoyer 2019; Utama, Moosavi, and Gurevych 2020).
However, in practice, corpora often contain multiple types
of biases, each with varying levels of detection difficulty.
In this paper, we address the challenge of bias removal
without prior knowledge of bias labels by proposing a Multilayer Adversarial Bias Removal (MABR) framework. We
introduce a series of auxiliary classifiers as bias detectors.
The rationale behind using multiple classifiers is to capture
different aspects and levels of bias present in the data. Each
classifier operates on different layers of the main model’s
encoder, based on the insight that different layers of the
encoder may capture different aspects of bias. Lower-level
feature maps may capture word-level biases, such as associating words like “nurse” or “secretary” predominantly
with female pronouns or contexts, and words like “engineer” or “pilot” with male pronouns. Higher-level feature
maps may capture more subtle gender biases, such as associating leadership qualities with male-associated terms or
nurturing qualities with female-associated terms, or inferring competence and ambition based on gendered names or
contexts. These biases manifest in more nuanced ways, such
as assuming managerial roles are more suited to one gender
over another, reflecting societal stereotypes in professional
settings.
Once biased samples are detected, we apply adversarial training to mitigate these biases. We introduce domain
discriminators at each layer of the main model’s encoder.
The goal of the adversarial training is to make the representations learned by the main model invariant to the biases identified by the auxiliary classifiers. To achieve this,
we employ a Reverse Gradient Layer during backpropagation, which ensures that the main model generates feature
representations that are indistinguishable with respect to the
domain discriminators. This process encourages the alignment of feature distributions between biased and unbiased

Models trained on real-world data often mirror and exacerbate existing social biases. Traditional methods for mitigating these biases typically require prior knowledge of the specific biases to be addressed, and the social groups associated
with each instance. In this paper, we introduce a novel adversarial training strategy that operates withour relying on
prior bias-type knowledge (e.g., gender or racial bias) and
protected attribute labels. Our approach dynamically identifies biases during model training by utilizing auxiliary bias
detector. These detected biases are simultaneously mitigated
through adversarial training. Crucially, we implement these
bias detectors at various levels of the feature maps of the
main model, enabling the detection of a broader and more nuanced range of bias features. Through experiments on racial
and gender biases in sentiment and occupation classification
tasks, our method effectively reduces social biases without
the need for demographic annotations. Moreover, our approach not only matches but often surpasses the efficacy of
methods that require detailed demographic insights, marking
a significant advancement in bias mitigation techniques.

Code — https://github.com/maxwellyin/MABR

Introduction
Neural natural language processing (NLP) models are
known to exhibit social biases, with protected attributes like
gender and race serving as confounding variables (Blodgett et al. 2020; Bansal 2022). These attributes can create
spurious correlations with task response variables, leading
to biased predictions. This issue manifests across various
NLP tasks, such as machine translation (Cho et al. 2019;
Stanovsky, Smith, and Zettlemoyer 2019), dialogue generation (Liu et al. 2020), and sentiment analysis (Kiritchenko
and Mohammad 2018).
Adversarial approaches are widely used to reduce bias
related to protected attributes. In these methods, the text
encoder strives to obscure protected attributes so that the
discriminator cannot identify them (Li, Baldwin, and Cohn
2018; Zhang, Lemoine, and Mitchell 2018; Han, Baldwin,
and Cohn 2021b). However, these methods require training
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25724

