The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffScene: Diffusion-Based Safety-Critical Scenario Generation for
Autonomous Vehicles
Chejian Xu1 , Aleksandr Petiushko2 , Ding Zhao3 , Bo Li1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Gatik AI
3
Carnegie Mellon University
chejian2@illinois.edu, alex.petiushko@gatik.ai, dingzhao@cmu.edu, lbo@illinois.edu
Abstract

Deviation theories such as importance sampling and crossentropy have been introduced to measure the risk of AVs
(Zhao 2016; O’Kelly et al. 2018; Bucklew and Bucklew
2004). However, due to the high dimensionality, complexity, and rareness of safety-critical driving scenarios in the
real world, it is very challenging and inefficient to test AV
safety (CDMV 2022; Arief et al. 2020).
Recently, with the successes of deep generative models,
a promising way is to directly generate such safety-critical
scenarios rather than sampling from real-world data (Yang
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Ehrhardt et al. 2020). The
advantages include improved evaluation efficiency and scenario diversity (Ding, Xu, and Zhao 2020). For example,
RELATE (Ehrhardt et al. 2020) use a GAN framework to
generate realistic traffic videos with multi-object scene synthesis. STRIVE (Rempe et al. 2022) generates adversarial
trajectory by optimizing the latent space of a VAE model.
However, most generation methods focus on only modeling
the existing data distribution or applying scenario-specific
rules. They fail to generate controllable rare events such as
safety-critical scenarios efficiently.
In this work, to solve these challenges, we propose
a diffusion-enabled generation framework DiffScene,
which is able to generate safety-critical scenarios effectively
while preserving its realism, satisfying real-world physical
constraints, and can be used to further evaluate and improve the safety and robustness of various AV algorithms.
Specifically, we first leverage the diffusion model to capture the low-density spaces in the distribution to generate
realistic safety-critical scenarios efficiently. Then we propose a guided adversarial optimization process to modify the
generation results. During each diffusion step, we optimize
and constrain the generated scenarios using 3 different objectives: safety-based objective, functionality-based objective, and constraint-based objective. Extensive experiments
on different scenario settings and AV algorithms show that
DiffScene is able to generate scenarios that are more
safety-critical, realistic, and transferable than baselines. We
also demonstrate that our scenarios achieve higher downstream utility: training AV algorithms with the generated
scenarios leads to significantly higher performance in terms
of the safety-critical metrics compared to baselines.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: 1) We
propose DiffScene, a unified safety-critical scenario gen-

The field of Autonomous Driving (AD) has witnessed significant progress in recent years. Among the various challenges
faced, the safety evaluation of autonomous vehicles (AVs)
stands out as a critical concern. Traditional evaluation methods are costly and inefficient, often requiring extensive driving miles in order to encounter rare safety-critical scenarios,
which are distributed along the long tail of the complex realworld driving landscape. In this paper, we propose a unified
framework, Diffusion-Based Safety-Critical Scenario Generation (DiffScene), to generate high-quality safety-critical
scenarios, which are realistic and safety-critical for efficient
AV evaluation. In particular, we propose a diffusion-based
generation framework, leveraging its power of approximating
the distribution of low-density spaces. We design several adversarial optimization objectives to guide the diffusion generation under predefined adversarial budgets. These objectives, such as safety-based objective, functionality-based objective, and constraint-based objective, ensure the generation
of safety-critical scenarios while adhering to specific traffic
constraints. Extensive experimentation has been conducted to
validate the efficacy of our approach. Compared with 6 SOTA
baselines, DiffScene generates scenarios that are (1) more
safety-critical under different metrics, (2) more realistic under 5 distance functions, and (3) more transferable to different
AV algorithms. In addition, we demonstrate that training AV
algorithms with scenarios generated by DiffScene leads
to significantly higher performance under safety-critical metrics. These findings highlight the potential of DiffScene
in addressing the challenges of AV safety evaluation and enhancement, paving the way for safer AV development.

1

Introduction

Innovations driven by recent progress in machine learning
(ML) have demonstrated human-competitive performance in
various fields (Silver et al. 2018; He et al. 2015; Agostinelli
et al. 2019). However, the safety evaluation of these ML
models is still challenging, especially in real-world safetycritical applications such as Autonomous Driving (AD).
To evaluate the safety and robustness of AV systems, the
prevailing approaches deploy them in the real world and test
them with various traffic scenarios. AV companies also reconstruct safety-critical scenarios collected during their onroad testing in the simulators (Webb et al. 2020) to test.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8797

