The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MagicNaming: Consistent Identity Generation by Finding a “Name Space”
in T2I Diffusion Models
Jing Zhao1 , Heliang Zheng3 , Chaoyue Wang4 , Long Lan1 , Wanrong Huang1 , Yuhua Tang2 *
1

Department of Intelligent Data Science, College of Computer ScienceNational University of Defense Technology, China
2
HPCL,College of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, 4 University of Sydney
{zhaojing,long.lan,huangwanrong12}@nudt.edu.cn,zhenghl@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
chaoyue.wang@outlook.com,yhtang62@163.com
ID -1

ID -2

ID -3

ID -4

Scene -1

Abstract

Scene -2

Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models, (e.g., DALL-E,
SDXL) are capable of generating famous persons by simply
referring to their names. Is it possible to make such models
generate generic identities as simple as the famous ones,
e.g., just use a name? In this paper, we explore the existence of a “Name Space”, where any point in the space corresponds to a specific identity. Fortunately, we find some clues
in the feature space spanned by text embedding of celebrities’ names. Specifically, we first extract the embeddings of
celebrities’ names in the Laion5B dataset with the text encoder of diffusion models. Such embeddings are used as supervision to learn an encoder that can predict the name (actually an embedding) of a given face image. We experimentally find that such name embeddings work well in promising
the generated image with good identity consistency. Note that
like the names of celebrities, our predicted name embeddings
are disentangled from the semantics of text inputs, making the
original generation capability of text-to-image models wellpreserved. Moreover, by simply plugging such name embeddings, all variants (e.g., from Civitai) derived from the same
base model (i.e., SDXL) readily become identity-aware textto-image models.

Figure 1: Identity and textual semantics are disentangled.

In this paper, we investigate the existence of a “Name
Space”(N Space), aiming to predict a “name” for each
generic identity and guide the generative model to produce consistent identity generation in a manner similar to
celebrity name formats. Specifically, we first investigate how
celebrity names enable the generative model to produce consistent IDs. Experiments reveal that name embeddings and
textual semantics in a text-to-image model are disentangled;
e.g., altering name embeddings or their positions within the
model does not disrupt the generation of the original semantics. Likewise, maintaining name embeddings while changing semantics does not affect the consistency of the generated IDs. As shown in Figure 1.
The key to extending the generative model’s capability for
consistent ID generation from celebrities to generic identities lies in finding corresponding name embeddings for the
latter. To this end, we collect a subset from the laion5B
dataset that contains celebrity name and image pairs. We
perform text encoding on the names to obtain their respective name embeddings, thereby constructing a large-scale
celebrity dataset with their name embeddings. Using this
data set, we train an image encoder capable of predicting
“name” for any reference individual. To enhance alignment
with the textual embedding space, our image encoder employs the same CLIP model as used for text embeddings.
Building upon this, we refine the output through a fully connected trilayer network to yield the final name embedding
prediction. In the inference generation process, a technique
analogous to classifier-free guidance was employed, involv-

Homepage — https://magicfusion.github.io/MagicNaming/

Introduction
Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models such as DALLE (Ramesh et al. 2022) and Stable Diffusion XL
(SDXL) (Rombach et al. 2022) have revolutionized the field
of generative models by enabling the synthesis of images
from textual descriptions (Arar et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023;
Gal et al. 2023b; Hinz, Heinrich, and Wermter 2022; Li et al.
2022; Liu and Chilton 2022; Liu et al. 2023a; Prabhudesai
et al. 2023; Shan et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2023). These models
have the impressive capability of generating consistent identity for celebrities simply based on input of textual names.
This leads to an intriguing question: Is it possible to extend
this capability to generate images of non-known or entirely
fictional identities with the same ease, using just a name?
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10439

