The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OV-DQUO: Open-Vocabulary DETR with Denoising Text Query Training and
Open-World Unknown Objects Supervision
Junjie Wang1,2 , Bin Chen2,3,4,5 * , Bin Kang3 , Yulin Li1,2 , Weizhi Xian4 , Yichi Chen3 , Yong Xu1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
International Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Chongqing Research Institute of HIT
5
National Key Laboratory of Smart Farm Technologies and Systems
{jjwanghz, yulin}@stu.hit.edu.cn, {chenbin2020, laterfall}@hit.edu.cn, {kangbin23, chenyichi21}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract

knowledge distillation, such as BARON (Wu et al. 2023a),
which aligns bag-of-regions embeddings with image features extracted by VLMs. However, the context discrepancy
limits the effectiveness of knowledge distillation (Zhu and
Chen 2023). RegionCLIP (Zhong et al. 2022) is a representative pseudo-labeling method that employs VLM and RPN
to generate region-text pairs from image-caption datasets
(Sharma et al. 2018) for training open-vocabulary detectors.
Later works (Chen et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2024, 2022; Minderer et al. 2024) have further extended the implementation
of pseudo-labeling. For instance, SAS-Det (Zhao et al. 2024)
incorporates self-training paradigms into OVD. Nevertheless, these methods suffer from pseudo-label noise.
All of the above methods employ indirect utilization of
VLMs, thus not unleashing their full potential. Current stateof-the-art methods (Wu et al. 2024a, 2023b; Kuo et al.
2023) typically employ a frozen VLM image encoder as
the backbone to extract region features associated with prediction boxes for classifying novel category objects. Intuitively, the performance ceiling of such methods depends directly on the classification ability of VLMs. Therefore, current works mainly enhance a VLM’s region recognition accuracy through fine-tuning (Wu et al. 2023b, 2024b) or selfdistillation (Wu et al. 2024a). Yet, these methods overlook
the fact that detectors trained on base category data tend
to assign higher confidence scores to trained categories
and confuse novel categories with the background.
To verify the impact of confidence bias on novel category
detection, we first analyze the confidence score assigned by
VLMs and detectors to base and novel categories, as shown
in Figure 1(a). It is evident that the detector assigns significantly lower confidence scores to novel category objects
(e.g., umbrella) than to base categories (e.g., person). Furthermore, we observed a significant performance gap when
using a VLM to classify Ground Truth (GT) boxes compared
to detector predictions. However, this gap narrows when we
manually eliminate the confidence bias by adjusting the prediction confidence of bounding boxes based on their Intersection over Union (IoU) with GT boxes. The experimental
results reveal that confidence bias constitutes one of the
factors responsible for suboptimal performance in novel
category detection.

Open-vocabulary detection aims to detect objects from novel
categories beyond the base categories on which the detector is trained. However, existing open-vocabulary detectors
trained on base category data tend to assign higher confidence to trained categories and confuse novel categories with
the background. To resolve this, we propose OV-DQUO, an
Open-Vocabulary DETR with Denoising text Query training
and open-world Unknown Objects supervision. Specifically,
we introduce a wildcard matching method. This method enables the detector to learn from pairs of unknown objects
recognized by the open-world detector and text embeddings
with general semantics, mitigating the confidence bias between base and novel categories. Additionally, we propose
a denoising text query training strategy. It synthesizes foreground and background query-box pairs from open-world unknown objects to train the detector through contrastive learning, enhancing its ability to distinguish novel objects from
the background. We conducted extensive experiments on the
OV-COCO and OV-LVIS benchmarks, achieving new stateof-the-art results of 45.6 AP50 and 39.3 mAP on novel categories, respectively.

Code — https://github.com/xiaomoguhz/OV-DQUO

Introduction
Open-Vocabulary Detection (OVD) (Zareian et al. 2021) focuses on identifying objects from novel categories not encountered during training. Recently, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (Sun et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b) pretrained on
large-scale image-text pairs, such as CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), have demonstrated impressive performance in zeroshot image classification, providing new avenues for OVD.
ViLD (Gu et al. 2021) is the first work to distill VLMs’
classification knowledge into an object detector by aligning
the detector-generated region embeddings with the corresponding features extracted from VLMs. Subsequent methods (Wu et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024b;
Zang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a) have proposed more
elaborately designed strategies to improve the efficiency of
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7762

