The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spectral Motion Alignment for Video Motion Transfer Using Diffusion Models
Geon Yeong Park* , Hyeonho Jeong* , Sang Wan Lee† , Jong Chul Ye†
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{pky3436, hyeonho.jeong, sangwan, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

tion vectors,” in line with optical flow principles, assuming frame residuals represent motion dynamics. Specifically, they finetune pretrained VDM to align the groundtruth pixel-space residuals with their predicted denoised estimates. Thus, these works leverage the pixel-space differences between input frames as a proxy of motion reference.
While these motion representations can be obtained from
off-the-shelf video diffusion models efficiently, current simple approximations have several adverse impacts. First, they
may fail to capture the global context of motion. Since frame
residuals may capture local motion patterns but are blind
to whole-frame motion dynamics, for better motion dynamics modeling, we have to understand the whole-frame global
context information during motion distillation. Furthermore,
while the pixel- or feature-space residuals contain motion information, they may also contain inevitable disruptive variations that are unrelated to motion. These variations may include abrupt changes in the background, lightning, or other
frame inconsistencies, leading to less reliable representation.
To address these challenges, we introduce Spectral Motion Alignment (SMA), a novel framework for refining
and aligning motion representations in the spectral domain,
based on intuition that the motion may be well represented
by its inherent frequency components. This framework includes two primary components: First, to capture the global
motion context, we propose a spectral alignment loss between predicted and ground-truth motion vectors within the
wavelet domain. This facilitates the learning of multi-scale
motion dynamics by leveraging rich wavelet-domain representations of video considering the global frame transitions.
Moreover, to mitigate the spatial artifacts and inconsistency
in motion vectors, we propose 2D FFT-based motion vector refinement that aligns the amplitude and phase spectrum
of ground truth and predicted motion vectors with prioritizing low-frequency components. This is because the highfrequency components in motion representations may be associated with frame-wise motion-independent artifacts (Figure 4). In summary, we encourage accurate motion transfer
via harmonized global and local levels of spectral domain
alignment. Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Diffusion models have significantly facilitated the customization of input video with target appearance while maintaining
its motion patterns. To distill the motion information from
video frames, existing works often estimate motion representations as frame difference or correlation in pixel-/featurespace. Despite its simplicity, these methods have unexplored
limitations, including lack of understanding of global motion context, and the introduction of motion-independent spatial distortions. To address this, we present Spectral Motion
Alignment (SMA), a novel framework that refines and aligns
motion representations in the spectral domain. Specifically,
SMA learns spectral motion representations, facilitating the
learning of whole-frame global motion dynamics, and effectively mitigating motion-independent artifacts. Extensive experiments demonstrate SMA’s efficacy in improving motion
transfer while maintaining computational efficiency and compatibility across various video customization frameworks.

1

Introduction

Given the multifaceted nature of the video, encompassing
motion dynamics, appearance, etc., several studies aim to
disentangle and control these signals according to user intent. Recently, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015;
Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) has played a pivotal role in video
customization, owing to their superior sampling ability.
In the context of motion customization using diffusion
models, our goal is to transfer the motion patterns from an
input video to the customized output video. This necessitates
the accurate estimation and extraction of motion information
from the input video. While fundamental techniques such as
optical flow are effective for motion estimation, integrating
these into diffusion models for customization is nontrivial.
To address these challenges, recent researches suggest
that motion patterns are inherently encoded in the underlying dependencies between frames or epsilon noises. For
example, (Zhao et al. 2023b) have observed that videos with
similar motion tend to exhibit similar connectivity between
latent frames. Additionally, (Jeong, Park, and Ye 2023) utilizes residual vectors between consecutive frames as ”mo-

• We introduce the Spectral Motion Alignment (SMA),
a frequency-domain motion alignment framework that
learns the underlying motion dynamics of input video
via frequency-based regularization. SMA is orthogonal

* : Co-first authors
†

: Co-corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6398

