The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improved Fixed-Parameter Bounds for Min-Sum-Radii and Diameters
k-Clustering and Their Fair Variants
Sandip Banerjee1 , Yair Bartal2 , Lee-Ad Gottlieb3 , Alon Hovav2
1

IDSIA USI-SUPSI, Switzerland
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
3
Ariel University, Israel
sandip.ndp@gmail.com, yair@cs.huji.ac.il, leead@ariel.ac.il, alon.hovav@mail.huji.ac.il
2

Abstract
We provide improved upper and lower bounds for the MinSum-Radii (MSR) and Min-Sum-Diameters (MSD) clustering
problems with a bounded number of clusters k. In particular,
we propose an exact MSD algorithm with running-time nO(k) .
We also provide (1 + ) approximation algorithms for both
MSR and MSD with running-times of O(kn) + (1/)O(dk)
in metrics spaces of doubling dimension d. Our algorithms
extend to k-center, improving upon previous results, and to
α-MSR, where radii are raised to the α power for α > 1.
For α-MSD we prove an exponential time ETH-based lower
bound for α > log 3. All algorithms can also be modified
to handle outliers. Moreover, we can extend the results to
variants that observe fairness constraints, as well as to the
general framework of mergeable clustering, which includes
many other popular clustering variants. We complement these
upper bounds with ETH-based lower bounds for these problems, in particular proving that nO(k) time is tight for MSR
and α-MSR even in doubling spaces, and that 2o(k) bounds
are impossible for MSD.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider two basic clustering problems,
both of which are well-studied and the subject of very recent
interest. These are the min-sum radii (MSR) and min-sum
diameters (MSD) clustering problems. For these problems,
the input is a set of points equipped with a metric distance
function along with an integral parameter k. The task is to
partition the points into k clusters, while minimizing the sum
of cluster radii or diameters, respectively.
These problems have been the subject of study for several
decades (Brucker 1978; Hansen and Jaumard 1987; Monma
and Suri 1991; Capoyleas, Rote, and Woeginger 1991), and
so it is unsurprising that several of their natural variants
have received significant attention in the literature as well.
A simple yet challenging one among these is the outliers
variant, where a solution need only cover n − g of the n input
points (Buchem et al. 2024), where g is the number of outliers. A second, more profound variant is the α version – that
is α-MSR and α-MSD – wherein the objective function is
sum of the α power of the radius or diameter (where α > 1)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15481

(Charikar and Panigrahy 2001; Bandyapadhyay and Varadarajan 2016). Additional important variants of these problems,
which incorporate various fairness constraints, have garnered
much recent interest (Arutyunova and Schmidt 2021; Drexler
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024). Many of these variants, as
well as clustering with lower bound constraints, are captures
within the framework of mergeable clustering (Arutyunova
and Schmidt 2021; Drexler et al. 2023).
In this paper, we consider the general metric setting, and
continue in a line of research which studies these problems
under the popular fixed parameter tractable (FPT) model,
wherein k is taken as fixed (see, for example, (Behsaz and
Salavatipour 2015; Bandyapadhyay, Lochet, and Saurabh
2023; Chen et al. 2024)). Algorithms under this model may
achieve superior run-time dependence on n, at the cost of
a steep (typically exponential) dependence on parameter k.
We seek both exact and approximate algorithms for MSR
and MSD and their variants, and improve upon many previous FPT results. Our algorithms provide fixed parameter
polynomial time approximation schemes (PTAS) – that is
(1 + )-approximations with run-time polynomial in n and
dependent on k and  – for all these problems.
Our results for general metric spaces and fixed k (summarized in Tables 1,2 and 3) are as follows:
Exact Algorithms. For MSR, it is easy to see that a bruteforce algorithm solves the problem in time nO(k) . This algorithm can also be used for the case of g outliers, or when the
distance is raised to the power α > 1. Our first contribution is
showing that the naive algorithm is in fact optimal: Assuming
that the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) holds, MSR
cannot be solved in time no(k) . This lower-bound holds for
α-MSR and in the presence of outliers as well.
For MSD, we improve upon the algorithm presented in
2
(Behsaz and Salavatipour 2015) with run-time nO(k ) , proving that it can be modified to create clusters in increasing
order of diameter, as the intersection at most of a constant
number of balls (rather than k in the original algorithm).
This allows us to match for metric MSD the run-time of
nO(k) previously known only for metric MSR and Euclidean
MSD (Capoyleas, Rote, and Woeginger 1991). Here too we
can handle outliers without increasing the run time. See Table 1. In terms of hardness, we show that assuming ETH,
MSD does not admit algorithms with run-time 2o(k) . For

