The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mitigating Social Bias in Large Language Models: A Multi-Objective Approach
Within a Multi-Agent Framework
Zhenjie Xu1 , Wenqing Chen1 *, Yi Tang1 , Xuanying Li2 ,
Cheng Hu1 , Zhixuan Chu3 , Kui Ren3 , Zibin Zheng1 , Zhichao Lu4
1

School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
School of Physics and Astronomy, Sun Yat-sen University
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{xuzhj33, tangg8, lixy779, huch37}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
{chenwq95, zhzibin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{zhixuanchu, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn
zhichao.lu@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Natural language processing (NLP) has seen remarkable advancements with the development of large language models
(LLMs). Despite these advancements, LLMs often produce
socially biased outputs. Recent studies have mainly addressed
this problem by prompting LLMs to behave ethically, but this
approach results in unacceptable performance degradation. In
this paper, we propose a multi-objective approach within a
multi-agent framework (MOMA) to mitigate social bias in
LLMs without significantly compromising their performance.
The key idea of MOMA involves deploying multiple agents
to perform causal interventions on bias-related contents of
the input questions, breaking the shortcut connection between
these contents and the corresponding answers. Unlike traditional debiasing techniques leading to performance degradation, MOMA substantially reduces bias while maintaining accuracy in downstream tasks. Our experiments conducted in
two datasets and two models demonstrate that MOMA reduces bias scores by up to 87.7%, with only a marginal performance degradation of up to 6.8% in the BBQ dataset. Additionally, it significantly enhances the multi-objective metric
icat in the StereoSet dataset by up to 58.1%.

Figure 1: This figure depicts a scenario from the BBQ
dataset: “A cashier and a lawyer were talking. Who did very
well in high school?” The upper LLMs respond with bias;
the middle with human values shows reversed bias or hallucinations, known as “Alignment Tax”; MOMA utilizes multiple agents to give a fair and unbiased response, controlling
the influence of human values
One kinds of existing debiasing methods often rely on
techniques for white-box LLMs like data augmentation, parameter tuning, and decoding strategies, which can be effective (Kumar et al. 2023) but not applicable for a lot of closesource LLMs. Another kinds of methods use natural language instructions to ethically guide LLMs without modifying their internal mechanics, which lack explainability and
transparency (Marchiori Manerba and Guidotti 2022; Mensah 2023; Zhao et al. 2024), crucial for building trustworthy
LLMs (Liao and Vaughan 2023). This lack of clarity, along
with their affinity for specific bias topics like gender, limits
their ability to address a broader range of biases (Gallegos
et al. 2024a).
In contrast, chain-of-thought (CoT) methods (Kojima
et al. 2022a; Dige et al. 2023) introduce explicit reasoning
steps, enhancing transparency and bias scope by leveraging LLMs’ inherent abilities. However, CoT methods can
unintentionally amplify biases (Turpin et al. 2023). Researches (Ganguli et al. 2023; Tamkin et al. 2023; Si et al.

Code — https://github.com/Cortantse/MOMA

1

Introduction

Natural language processing has advanced rapidly with the
growth of large language models (LLMs), demonstrating an
enhanced ability to generate human-like text. However, even
advanced models often encounter difficulties in producing
fair and unbiased responses (Shrawgi et al. 2024; Zack et al.
2024; Liu et al. 2024). As LLMs scale up, social bias not
only emerges but also tends to increase, highlighting the urgent need for effective debiasing methods in LLMs (Ganguli
et al. 2023).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25579

