The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Searching for Unfairness in Algorithms’ Outputs: Novel Tests and Insights
Ian Davidson1 * , S. S. Ravi 2
1 Department of Computer Science, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616
2 Biocomplexity Institute, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904

indavidson@ucdavis.edu, ssravi0@gmail.com

Abstract

diting as determining whether some subgroup (determined
by a combination of PSVs) is under-represented in any category. Although the previous work on auditing (Davidson and
Ravi 2020a; Kearns et al. 2018) is useful, it is limited to (i)
the two class setting, (ii) binary PSVs and (iii) unweighted
fairness measures. Here unweighted means the utility/benefit of belonging to each category is the same. Binary protected status is particularly limiting; of the thirteen protected
statuses in USA, only typically two (sex-at-birth,
citizenship) are actually binary. Further, we show that
though traditional fairness definitions can be satisfied, unfairness can occur when considering weights/utilities. While
presenting the following motivating examples, we also discuss relevant related work.
A Motivating Example for Intersectional Unfairness
Checking of Fair-By-Design Algorithms. The task of outlier detection (OD) (Hawkins 1980) is perhaps the most controversial application of deep learning as it is used to identify
entities which are then policed (e.g., medical claims (Zhang
and He 2017; Bauder and Khoshgoftaar 2017)), scrutinized
(e.g., financial transactions (Huang et al. 2018; Zamini and
Hasheminejad 2019)) or excluded (e.g., social media posting
and account creation) (Yu et al. 2016; Savage et al. 2014)).
Recent work (Shekhar, Shah, and Akoglu 2021; Zhang and
Davidson 2021) has made strong progress towards increasing OD algorithms’ fairness; this is achieved by including
fairness as an additional part of the loss function. Perhaps
the most compelling example of this work is the claim they
make the OD algorithm’s output fairer when applied to face
data sets (Liu et al. 2015) as shown in Figure 1.
However, in our experiments we show that while these
algorithms satisfy fairness for each group separately, they
actually increase intersectional unfairness from 39% to 48%
for two-way intersections and from 49% to 64% for threeway intersections. The number of unfairly treated subgroups for larger combinations is likely to be higher. Importantly, as this data set has 40 groups, changing the loss function to satisfy 240 + combinations of intersectional unfairness would require that many additional loss function terms.
A Motivating Example for New Weighted Forms of Fairness. Consider the following situation which existing work
cannot easily address. A credit card company divides its
customer base into K categories and offers each category a
different loyalty bonus. We would like each group (and sub-

As AI algorithms are deployed extensively, the need to ensure the fairness of their outputs is critical. Most existing
work is on “fairness by design” approaches that incorporate
limited tests for fairness into a limited number algorithms.
Here, we explore a framework that removes these limitations
and can be used with the output of any algorithm that allocates instances to one of K categories/classes such as outlier
detection (OD), clustering and classification. The framework
can encode standard and novel fairness types beyond simple
counting, and importantly, it can detect intersectional unfairness without being specifically told what to look for. Our experimental results show that both standard and novel types of
unfairness exist extensively in the outputs of fair-by-design
algorithms and the counter-intuitive observation that they can
actually increase intersectional unfairness.

1

Introduction and Motivation

The AI community has made tremendous progress towards
ensuring fairness of algorithms with respect to groups determined by protected status variables (PSVs). Fairness here
typically refers to disparate impact definitions of group-level
fairness (Feldman et al. 2015). For example, suppose 50%
of a population is female and 30% of the population is Hispanic. Then any algorithm that selects a subset of instances
for an action (whether it is for a cluster, class or outlier
group) should ensure that in the chosen subset, approximately 50% and 30% are women and Hispanic respectively.
Adding such fairness criteria to existing algorithms has been
well studied but typically does not guarantee intersectional
fairness specifications such as “15% of the instances in a
cluster should be Hispanic Women”, unless specifically instructed to do so (Cho, Crenshaw, and McCall 2013). This is
understandable: if there are m protected statuses, adding intersectional fairness requirements can generate Ω(2m ) constraints which quickly makes most ways of adding fairness by design to algorithms untenable. This is further compounded for protected statuses with k states (e.g., race) that
are typically encoded as k binary protected statuses.
In this work, we view an algorithm as partitioning people
into categories (e.g., classes, clusters, outlier/inlier) and au* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27242

