The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

J&H: Evaluating the Robustness of Large Language Models Under
Knowledge-Injection Attacks in Legal Domain
Yiran Hu12 * , Huanghai Liu1 * , Qingjing Chen1 , Ning Zheng1 , Chong Wang1 ,
Yun Liu1 , Charles L.A. Clarke2† , Weixing Shen1‡
2

1
School of Law, Tsinghua University
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo

Abstract

comprehensive domain knowledge and logical reasoning to
complete domain-specific tasks (Miao, Teh, and Rainforth
2023). However, the reliability and robustness of LLMs in
performing these domain-specific tasks have not been fully
verified, thus casting doubt on the trustworthiness of LLM
agents when they act as domain experts. In the more general domain, research on the robustness of LLMs (Zhu et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023) is based on attacks on synonyms or
symbol embeddings of the prompt, but in domain-specific
tasks, attacks at the knowledge level also need to be defended against(Zhou et al. 2024). Unlike in the general domain(Xu et al. 2023; Ni et al. 2023), in knowledge-intensive
tasks, the introduction of domain knowledge, abstract judgment of facts, and reasoning logic chains are all critical. The
model needs to progress through a series of logical reasoning
steps to make a final judgment. Unlike the existing reasoning work in math (Zhou et al. 2024) and chemistry (Ouyang
et al. 2024), our work focuses on reasoning which is both
natural language based and requires logical reasoning in natural lanuage. Understanding human language and the logic
behind it is more complex than merely learning numbers and
operation symbols.
Can we trust LLMs in the legal domain? LLMs are fragile
and small perturbations in the prompt can have a significant
impact on their performance. Especially in the knowledgeintensive domains, domain experts will automatically ignore
those small errors and changes, making judgments based on
logical reasoning. But when LLMs act as domain experts,
do they make judgments based on comprehensive domain
knowledge? When undertaking complex reasoning, do they
make judgments based on a chain of logic within the domain, or do they make judgments based on correlation instead of causal inference?(Chen et al. 2023).
Based on these considerations, this paper proposes a
knowledge attack framework J&H1 directed at knowledge-

As the scale and capabilities of Large Language Models
(LLMs) increase, their applications in knowledge-intensive
fields such as legal domain have garnered widespread attention. However, it remains doubtful whether these LLMs
make judgments based on domain knowledge for reasoning.
If LLMs base their judgments solely on specific words or patterns, rather than on the underlying logic of the language,
the “LLM-as-judges” paradigm poses substantial risks in the
real-world applications. To address this question, we propose
a method of legal knowledge injection attacks for robustness
testing, thereby inferring whether LLMs have learned legal
knowledge and reasoning logic. In this paper, we propose
J&H: an evaluation framework for detecting the robustness
of LLMs under knowledge injection attacks in the legal domain. The aim of the framework is to explore whether LLMs
perform deductive reasoning when accomplishing legal tasks.
To further this aim, we have attacked each part of the reasoning logic underlying these tasks (major premise, minor
premise, and conclusion generation). We have collected mistakes that legal experts might make in judicial decisions in
the real world, such as typos, legal synonyms, inaccurate external legal statutes retrieval. However, in real legal practice,
legal experts tend to overlook these mistakes and make judgments based on logic. However, when faced with these errors, LLMs are likely to be misled by typographical errors
and may not utilize logic in their judgments. We conducted
knowledge injection attacks on existing general and domainspecific LLMs. Current LLMs are not robust against the attacks employed in our experiments. In addition we propose
and compare several methods to enhance the knowledge robustness of LLMs.

Code — https://github.com/THUlawtech/LegalAttack

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly applied to
knowledge-intensive fields, such as law (Cui et al. 2024;
Huang et al. 2023) and medicine (Tu et al. 2023; Yang
et al. 2024). In these fields, LLM agents often act as domain experts (Mei et al. 2024), which need to rely on

1

J&H: Originally taken from an old novel: Jekyll&Hyde. The
protagonist Jekyll who, after being affected by a drug, splits into
two personalities: the kind and upright Dr. Jekyll and the demonic
Hyde. In this paper, J&H also stands for Justice & Hellion. The
LLMs could potentially be just, making judgments through domain
knowledge and logical inference; but the LLMs could also possibly
be a hellion, making judgments without conforming to the logic
of the domain. The goal of this paper is to determine whether the
LLMs represents Justice or Hellion through knowledge attacks.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author. charles.clarke@uwaterloo.ca
Corresponding Author. wxshen@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

28106

