The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Computationally Hard Problems Are Hard for QBF Proof Systems Too
Agnes Schleitzer, Olaf Beyersdorff
Institut für Informatik, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Germany
agnes.schleitzer@uni-jena.de, olaf.beyersdorff@uni-jena.de

Abstract

QBF proof systems, Q-Resolution (Kleine Büning, Karpinski, and Flögel 1995) and QU-Resolution (Van Gelder 2012)
are most notable. These systems extend propositional resolution by a universal reduction rule that allows for the elimination of specific universal variables from clauses.
Similar to SAT, QBF resolution systems are deeply intertwined with QBF solving methods (cf. Beyersdorff et al.
2021a, for a recent overview), with Q-Res and its extension long-distance Q-Resolution (LD-Q-Res Balabanov
and Jiang 2012) corresponding to quantified conflict-driven
clause learning (QCDCL, cf. Beyersdorff et al. 2021a;
Zhang and Malik 2002; Beyersdorff and Böhm 2021; Lonsing, Egly, and Gelder 2013).
However, compared to the plethora of hard formulas for
propositional resolution, there is a scarcity of interesting
QBF families suitable for proof-theoretic analysis. Only
few families (and their variations) have been utilised for
lower bounds and separations in the QBF literature. Most
notable among these are the KBKF formulas introduced
in the initial Q-Res paper (Kleine Büning, Karpinski, and
Flögel 1995), equality formulas (Beyersdorff, Blinkhorn,
and Hinde 2019), parity formulas (Beyersdorff, Chew, and
Janota 2019), and CR formulas (Janota and Marques-Silva
2015). These comprise the primary toolkit for QBF proof
complexity and are used for nearly all known separations.
We recently introduced a method to construct new hard QBF
families (Schleitzer and Beyersdorff 2023) – this method can
also be used to generate the KBKF and equality formulas –
but they are highly structured and handcrafted.
Thus there is a strong need for more interesting and especially natural QBFs that are challenging for Q-Res or QURes. Such QBFs could not only advance proof complexity
but also serve as benchmarks in solving, aiding in the comparison of different solving techniques.1
It is also not straightforward to use the large pool of hard
propositional formulas for QBF purposes. Although the existentially quantified version of any CNF hard for propositional resolution is also hard for Q-Res and QU-Res, our
focus is on ‘genuine’ QBF hardness arising from quantifier
alternations rather than the propositional base system.2

There has been tremendous progress in the past decade in the
field of quantified Boolean formulas (QBF), both in practical
solving as well as in creating a theory of corresponding proof
systems and their proof complexity analysis. Both for solving
and for proof complexity, it is important to have interesting
formula families on which we can test solvers and gauge the
strength of the proof systems. There are currently few such
formula families in the literature.
We initiate a general programme on how to transform computationally hard problems (located in the polynomial hierarchy) into QBFs hard for the main QBF resolution systems
Q-Res and QU-Res that relate to core QBF solvers. We illustrate this general approach on three problems from graph
theory and logic. This yields QBF families that are provably
hard for Q-Res and QU-Res (without any complexity assumptions).

1

Introduction

The primary goal of proof complexity is to examine the size
of proofs within various formal proof systems. Originating
from computational complexity (Cook and Reckhow 1979),
proof complexity has significant connections to other domains, especially logic (Krajı́ček 2019; Cook and Nguyen
2010) and solving techniques (Buss and Nordström 2021).
Proof complexity serves as the main theoretical framework
to evaluate the strength of modern solving methods.
A key challenge in proof complexity is to establish lower
bounds on proof size and to obtain separations between different calculi. This requires witnesses in terms of specific
formula families. In propositional proof complexity, particularly for propositional resolution – well-studied also due
to its close ties with SAT solving (Buss and Nordström
2021; Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2011; Atserias, Fichte,
and Thurley 2011; Beame, Kautz, and Sabharwal 2004) –
there is extensive literature on difficult formulas from various fields such as combinatorics (e.g., Haken 1985; Bonet
et al. 2000), graph theory (Urquhart 1987), logic (Krajı́ček
1995), random formulas (Beame and Pitassi 1996), and
many more (Krajı́ček 2019; Segerlind 2007).
In contrast, proof complexity of quantified Boolean formulas (QBF) is relatively nascent. While there are several

1

A track of crafted formulas was introduced into QBFEval
2020, and a tool to generate the mentioned QBF families was presented by Beyersdorff et al. (2021b).
2
A formal framework for ‘genuine’ QBF hardness was intro-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11336

