The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Langevin Multiplicative Weights Update
with Applications in Polynomial Portfolio Management
Yi Feng * 1 , Xiao Wang * † 1 , Tian Xie * 2
1

School of Information Management & Engineering, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
2
College of Business, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
fengyi95524@gmail.com, wangxiao@sufe.edu.cn, xietian@shufe.edu.cn

Abstract

that is commonly used in min-max optimization and multiagent systems (Lei, Panageas, and Wang 2021; Feng et al.
2024; Feng, Piliouras, and Wang 2024). Result of (Panageas,
Piliouras, and Wang 2019b) indicates that MWU almost always converges to second-order stationary points with random initialization. Besides MWU, many first-order methods
have been proven escaping saddle points or avoiding saddle points asymptotically (Ge et al. 2015; Jin et al. 2017;
Jin, Netrapalli, and Jordan 2018; Lee et al. 2016, 2019;
Panageas and Piliouras 2016; Criscitiello and Boumal 2019;
Sun, Flammarion, and Fazel 2019; Panageas, Piliouras, and
Wang 2019a; Sun et al. 2019).
However, in the nonconvex world, finding local minima
can be far away from achieving global minima. The classic
MWU together with its accelerated variant (Feng, Panageas,
and Wang 2022) can only converge to second-order stationary points or interior local minima, and this leaves finding
global optima a challenging direction. One approach in designing first-order algorithm converging to global minima is
to introduce a random noise into gradient descent, so that
the algorithm has a chance to escape local minima. In recent
years, progress has been made on this via the Langevin algorithm, an algorithm originally invented to sample from a
target distribution proportional to e f (x) where f (x) is objective function defined on the whole Euclidean space Rn .
Successfully, global convergence of Langevin gradient descent with non-asymptotic convergence rate are obtained in
(Raginsky, Rakhlin, and Telgarsky 2017; Xu et al. 2018).
More recently, projected Langevin algorithm has been investigated in (Lamperski 2021) from the perspective of constrained sampling and optimization.
Despite aforementioned progresses in local and global
convergence of gradient based algorithms, it is less understood whether there exists an algorithm that naturally
fits distributed optimization framework from game theory
and multi-agent systems. It is indicated in (Bailey and Piliouras 2019) that projected gradient descent can spend a
few steps at each corner if the constraint has lower dimension. This feature makes projected gradient descent in
multi-agent systems less effective, and in contrast, MWU
and its variants have proven prominent in learning of games,
their behaviors have been extensively studied in literatures,
e.g., (Palaiopanos, Panageas, and Piliouras 2017; Bailey
and Piliouras 2018; Cheung 2018; Cheung and Piliouras

We consider nonconvex optimization problem over simplex,
and more generally, a product of simplices. We provide an algorithm, Langevin Multiplicative Weights Update (LMWU)
for solving global optimization problems by adding a noise
scaling with the non-Euclidean geometry in the simplex.
Non-convex optimization has been extensively studied by
machine learning community due to its application in various scenarios such as neural network approximation and finding Nash equilibrium. Despite recent progresses on provable
guarantee of escaping and avoiding saddle point (convergence
to local minima) and global convergence of Langevin gradient based method without constraints, the global optimization
with constraints is less studied. We show that LMWU algorithm is provably convergent to interior global minima with
a non-asymptotic convergence analysis. We verify the efficiency of the proposed algorithm in real data set from polynomial portfolio management, where optimization of a highly
non-linear objective function plays a crucial role.

1

Introduction

In this paper we consider nonconvex optimization problem
with constraint that is a product of simplices, i.e.,
x2

where f : 1 ⇥ ... ⇥
function and
(
i =

min

1 ⇥...⇥

N

(xi1 , ..., xid ) :

(1)

f (x)
N

! R is a sufficiently smooth
d
X

xis = 1, xis

s=1

)

0 .

Problem (1) appears naturally in potential game (Monderer
and Shapley 1996), i.e., the incentive of all players to change
their strategy can be expressed using a single global function (the potential function). A natural approach is to use
projected gradient descent, but computing the projection at
every iteration might not be an easy task to accomplish. An
alternate effective algorithm in solving problem (1) is so
called Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU) (Arora, lEad
Hazan, and Kale 2012), which is a special case of FTRL
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Correspondence to Xiao Wang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11221

