The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AttackBench: Evaluating Gradient-based Attacks for Adversarial Examples
Antonio Emanuele Cinà* 1 , Jérôme Rony* 2 , Maura Pintor3 , Luca Demetrio1 , Ambra Demontis3 ,
Battista Biggio3 , Ismail Ben Ayed2 , Fabio Roli1
1

University of Genoa, Italy
École de Technologie Superieure, Montréal, Canada
3
University of Cagliari, Italy
antonio.cina@unige.it, jerome.rony.1@etsmtl.net, maura.pintor@unica.it, luca.demetrio@unige.it, ambra.demontis@unica.it,
battista.biggio@unica.it, ismail.benayed@etsmtl.ca, fabio.roli@unige.it
2

Abstract

comparisons have considered a different set of target models,
and used different metrics to evaluate the attack success, using either the success rate at a predefined perturbation budget
(e.g., ω = 8/255) (Croce and Hein 2019) or the median perturbation size required to mislead the model (Brendel et al.
2020; Pintor et al. 2021). However, these settings neither
allow a direct comparison of the performance of different
attacks across different papers nor tell anything about the
effectiveness of the attacks at different perturbation budgets.
Many attacks (ii) have been re-implemented without ensuring consistency with their original versions, and some implementations are even flawed (Carlini 2019). We will indeed
demonstrate in this paper that different implementations of
the same attack can yield significantly different results, affecting the performance of state-of-the-art methods. Attacks
(iii) are not consistently compared using the same number of
queries (i.e., the number of forward and backward passes performed on the target model), biasing the evaluation in favor
of more computationally-demanding methods. Nevertheless,
limiting the number of iterations of each attack is insufficient
to solve this issue. The reason is that some attacks require two
queries per iteration (one forward and one backward) (Pintor
et al. 2021; Rony et al. 2019), while others use additional
subroutines like restarts (Croce and Hein 2020a, 2019) or
run internal hyperparameter optimizations (Chen et al. 2018;
Carlini and Wagner 2017), resulting in multiple queries per
iteration. These factors have led to either overestimating or
underestimating the performance of certain attacks (Pintor
et al. 2022; Carlini 2019). Consequently, an in-depth investigation into the effectiveness of gradient-based attacks in a
fair and reproducible experimental setting is missing.

While novel gradient-based attacks are continuously proposed
to improve the optimization of adversarial examples, each is
shown to outperform its predecessors using different experimental setups, implementations, and computational budgets,
leading to biased and unfair comparisons. In this work, we
overcome this issue by proposing AttackBench, i.e., an attack
evaluation framework that evaluates the effectiveness of each
attack (along with its different library implementations) under
the same maximum available computational budget. To this
end, we (i) define a novel optimality metric that quantifies
how close each attack is to the optimal solution (empirically
estimated by ensembling all attacks), and (ii) limit the maximum number of forward and backward queries that each attack
can execute on the target model. Our extensive experimental
analysis compares more than 100 attack implementations over
800 different configurations, considering both CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet models, and shows that only few attack implementations outperform all the remaining approaches. These findings
suggest that novel defenses should be evaluated against different attacks than those normally used in the literature to avoid
overly-optimistic robustness evaluations. We release AttackBench as a publicly-available benchmark that will be continuously updated with new attack implementations to maintain
an up-to-date ranking of the best gradient-based attacks.

Code — https://attackbench.github.io
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.19460

1

Introduction

In recent years, we have been witnessing a proliferation of
gradient-based attacks, aiming to constantly improve efficacy
and efficiency while optimizing adversarial examples (Carlini
and Wagner 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Rony et al. 2019; Pintor
et al. 2021; Cinà et al. 2024). Despite these advancements,
the comparisons between each newly-proposed attack and its
predecessors have been systematically conducted using different experimental settings, i.e., (i) models and performance
metrics, (ii) attack implementations, and (iii) computational
budgets, hindering reproducibility and an overall fair comparison of current attack algorithms. In particular, (i) many

To address the above limitations, we propose AttackBench:
a unified benchmark that evaluates adversarial attacks under a consistent setup and imposes a maximum computational budget for the attack (i.e., the maximum number of
queries they can use). We design AttackBench as a five-stage
procedure (see Fig. 1) to discover the attacks that find the
best minimally-perturbed adversarial examples with fewer
queries to the models. AttackBench ranks the attacks based
on a novel metric, called optimality, that quantifies how close
each attack is to the empirically-optimal solution (estimated
by ensembling all the attacks tested). The optimality metric
evaluates the effectiveness of gradient-based attacks across

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2600

