The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RMath: A Logic Reasoning-Focused Datasets Toward Mathematical Multistep
Reasoning Tasks
Ziyi Hu1 , Jun Liu2 , Zhongzhi Liu1 , Yuzhong Liu1 , Zheng Xie1 , Yiping Song1 *
1

National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China

Abstract

between premises are used in a rigorous manner to infer conclusions that are entailed (or implied) by the premises and
the relations (Nunes 2012). In this context, the premises refer to known conditions, the relations refer to connective relations, and all the premises and conclusions are presented in
the form of propositions. Mathematics is a subject in heavy
reliance on multistep logical reasoning, and the ability to
solve mathematical problems objectively reflects a model’s
logical and reasoning ability.

Mathematical reasoning ability objectively reflects a language model’s understanding of implicit knowledge in contexts, with logic being a prerequisite for exploring, articulating, and establishing effective reasoning. Large language
models (LLMs) have shown great potential in complex reasoning tasks represented by mathematical reasoning. However, existing mathematical datasets either focus on common
sense reasoning, assessing the model’s knowledge application
ability, or arithmetic problems with fixed calculation rules,
evaluating the model’s rapid learning capability. There is a
lack of datasets that require solving problems solely through
logical reasoning. As a result, the performance of LLMs in
accurately understanding the implicit logical relationships in
problems and deriving conclusions based solely on given
conditions is hindered. To address this challenge, we construct a dataset specifically for multiple step reasoning tasks:
Reasoning-Math (RMath). This dataset focuses on evaluating
logical reasoning ability with mathematical reasoning problems, covering typical problem types, including direct reasoning problems, hypothetical reasoning problems, and nested
reasoning problems. Additionally, we design a standardized
annotation scheme that transforms natural language descriptions of conditions into formal propositions. Other annotation
contents include problem categories, proposition truth values,
and proposition relationship types. This not only reduces biases caused by semantic misunderstandings during problemsolving, but also facilitates the incorporation of theoretically
grounded logical reasoning methods to enhance reasoning
ability. Furthermore, we propose a normalization problemsolving framework based on propositional logic for RMath
and design the problem-solving process for prompt tuning
to guide LLMs to absorb mathematical logical theories and
improving reasoning ability. Finally, we evaluate RMath on
several popular LLMs and present the corresponding results.

Figure 1: The comparison of single step reasoning of existing logical datasets and multiple step reasoning of RMath.
In recent years, there has been a significant surge in the
development of LLMS for solving mathematical problems.
Recent LLMs such as ToRA (Gou et al. 2023), DeepSeekMath (Shao et al. 2024), and Llama3 (Meta 2024) have
demonstrated new advancements in their ability to solve
mathematical problems. However, whether these models
truly possess powerful reasoning capabilities remains to be
studied. Current datasets for measuring a model’s reasoning ability can be roughly divided into two categories: one
is based on common sense reasoning, where models tend to
directly use stored world knowledge to solve problems, like
MMLU (Hendrycks et al. 2020), StrategyQA (Geva et al.
2021), COPA (Brassard et al. 2022) and so on. They mainly
focus on the model’s ability to select and integrate relevant knowledge. MMLU is a benchmark designed to evaluate the performance of language models on multiple tasks.
Models must have extensive knowledge of the world and
problem-solving skills. The other is based on computational
reasoning, for example, for some mathematical datasets like
MATH (Hendrycks et al. 2021), GSM8K (Cobbe et al.

Introduction
With the rapid increase in parameter sizes and training data,
LLMs have gained emergent capabilities in various tasks,
among which, powerful reasoning is one of the core capabilities for “intelligent emergency” of LLMs. Logical reasoning is a form of thinking in which premises and relations
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24104

