The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ScholarGEC: Enhancing Controllability of Large Language Model for Chinese
Academic Grammatical Error Correction
Zixiao Kong1,2 , Xianquan Wang1,2 , Shuanghong Shen2 * , Keyu Zhu1,2 , Huibo Xu1 , Yu Su2,3
1

Institute of Advanced Technology & State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Normal University
{kzix, wxqcn, kyzhu3, xhbxhb}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, shshen@iai.ustc.edu.cn, yusu@hfnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Original Sentence

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional error detection capabilities and can correct sentences
with high fluency in grammatical error correction (GEC)
tasks. However, when correcting Chinese academic papers,
LLMs face significant challenges of over-correction. To delve
deeper into this issue, we explore the underlying reasons. On
one hand, each discipline has its unique vocabulary and expressions, and LLMs have insufficient and incomplete understanding of domain-specific sentences. On the other hand, the
controllability of generative LLMs in GEC tasks is inherently
poor, and the traditional sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq)
correction structure exacerbates this issue. Considering the
two aforementioned factors, we propose a new error correction framework for Chinese academic GEC tasks using
LLMs, named ScholarGEC. To improve LLMs’ understanding of domain-specific knowledge, we construct appropriate
disciplinary knowledge prefixes for sentences and use this
domain-specific knowledge data to fine-tune the LLM. To
enhance the controllability of LLMs, we replace the traditional Seq2Seq structure with a Detection-Correction separated structure. We also introduce a special token during the
process to improve the model’s error detection stability. Additionally, we incorporate iterative self-reflection to enhance
the stability of the generation, in the three parts of LLM generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
and robustness of our framework on a Chinese GEC dataset
composed of academic papers, and further analysis reveals
the capabilities of our framework in enhancing LLM performance in general GEC tasks.

请纠错下述句子：
Please correct the following sentence：

由于对气候变化敏感，湖水在沉淀过程中会产生一些列矿物组成。
Sensitive to climate change, the lake produces a some of mineral
constituents during sedimentation.
ChatGPT 4o mini

由于对气候变化敏感，湖水在沉淀过程中会形成一系列矿物。
Sensitive to climate change, the lake forms a series of minerals
during sedimentation.
Qwen 2.5
由于气候变化的影响，湖水在沉淀过程中会形成一系列的矿物组合。
Due to the impact of climate change, the lake forms a series of mineral
combinations during sedimentation.
ERNIE Bot 4.0
由于对气候变化敏感，湖水在沉淀过程中会形成一系列矿物组成的沉积物。
Sensitive to climate change, the lake forms a series of sediments composed of
minerals during sedimentation.
Appreciate Correction
由于对气候变化敏感，湖水在沉淀过程中会产生一系列矿物组成。
Sensitive to climate change, the lake produces a series of mineral constituents
during sedimentation.

Figure 1: LLMs often make unnecessary or even inappropriate changes in the Chinese Academic grammatical error
correction tasks. In the responses of LLMs1 , red text indicates unnecessary or inappropriate changes, and blue text
indicates appropriate changes. Also, “mineral constituent”
is a technical term in geology and should not be modified.

often results in missed errors, false positives, and subpar correction quality. Applying Chinese automatic error correction
technology to the academic thesis review process can enhance correction efficiency and quality, alleviate the workload of teachers and reviewers, and ensure the rigor and reliability of academic achievements.
Chinese Grammatical Error Correction (CGEC) (Zhao
et al. 2018) aims to identify and correct potential grammatical errors in a given Chinese sentence while adhering
to the principle of minimal edits (Wang et al. 2021). Recently, decoder-only LLMs, with their powerful semantic
understanding and logical reasoning capabilities (Zhao et al.
2024; Li et al. 2024), have demonstrated breakthrough performance in various Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks, showing great potential in CGEC (Fang et al. 2023;
Qu and Wu 2023). However, generative LLMs suffer from

Code — https://github.com/kzi2000/ScholarGEC

Introduction
According to reports, nearly one million master’s and doctoral students graduate annually in China, requiring academic achievements and theses to obtain their degrees. Chinese universities generally mandate that these theses be written in Chinese. Given the sheer volume of theses, relying
solely on manual error correction is highly inefficient and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Inevitably, LLMs’ responses are not always exactly the same.
However, over-correction occurs frequently.

24339

