The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Differential Private Stochastic Optimization with Heavy-tailed Data: Towards
Optimal Rates
Puning Zhao1 Jiafei Wu1 * , Zhe Liu1 , Chong Wang2 , Rongfei Fan3 , Qingming Li4
1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Ningbo University, Ningbo, China
3
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
4
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{pnzhao,wujiafei,zhe.liu}@zhejianglab.org, wangchong@nbu.edu.cn, fanrongfei@bit.edu.cn, liqm@zju.edu.cn


Abstract

tion risk is Ω

We study convex optimization problems under differential
privacy (DP). With heavy-tailed gradients, existing works
achieve suboptimal rates. The main obstacle is that existing
gradient estimators have suboptimal tail properties, resulting in a superfluous factor of d in the union bound. In this
paper, we explore algorithms achieving optimal rates of DP
optimization with heavy-tailed gradients. Our first method is
a simple clipping approach. Under bounded p-th order
p moments
of
gradients,
with
n
samples,
it
achieves
Õ(
d/n +
√ √
√
d( d/nϵ)1−1/p ) population risk with ϵ ≤ 1/ d. We then
propose an iterative updating method, which is more complex
but achieves this rate for all ϵ ≤ 1. The results significantly
improve over existing methods. Such improvement relies on
a careful treatment of the tail behavior of gradient estimators.
Our results match the minimax lower bound, indicating that
the theoretical limit of stochastic convex optimization under
DP is achievable.

1−1/p
p
√ √
d/n + d
d/ϵn


under (ϵ, δ)-

DP, which can be viewed as the theoretical limit of DP optimization. However, existing methods fail to achieve this
rate. Compared with Lipschitz loss functions, a crucial challenge in analyzing heavy-tailed gradients is the design of
an efficient mean estimator under DP. Various methods for
DP mean estimation have been proposed (Huang, Liang, and
Yi 2021; Hopkins, Kamath, and Majid 2022; Kamath, Singhal, and Ullman 2020; Liu et al. 2021). These methods have
achieved optimal mean squared error, but the high probability bounds are not optimal. To bound the risk of optimization, we need a union bound of the bias and variance of gradient estimate over the whole hypothesis space. Therefore,
a suboptimal high probability bound of mean estimation results in a suboptimal risk of optimization. To be best of our
knowledge, currently, it is unknown whether the minimax
lower bound shown in (Kamath, Liu, and Zhang 2022) is
achievable.
In this paper, we answer this question affirmatively. We
propose two methods, called the simple clipping method and
the iterative updating method, respectively. For both methods, we derive the high probability bounds of mean estimation first, and then analyze the risk of optimization.
1) Simple clipping. This method just clips all gradients to
a given radius R and calculates sample averages. R can be
tuned based on the privacy requirement ϵ, δ and the number of samples
n. Our analysis shows that the population


1−1/p
p
√ √
3
1
1
−p
1− p
2
risk is Õ
d/n + d
d/ϵn
+d
/n
,

Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006) is a prevailing
framework for privacy protection. In recent years, significant
progress has been made on deep learning under DP (Abadi
et al. 2016; Tramer and Boneh 2021; Wei et al. 2022; De
et al. 2022). While the practical performance continues to
improve, the theoretical analysis lags behind. Existing analyses focus primarily on Lipschitz loss functions, such that
the gradients are all bounded (Bassily, Smith, and Thakurta
2014; Bassily et al. 2019; Iyengar et al. 2019; Bassily and
Sun 2023). However, many empirical studies have shown
that in deep learning, gradient noise usually follows heavytailed distributions (Simsekli, Sagun, and Gurbuzbalaban
2019; Şimşekli et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020; Gurbuzbalaban, Simsekli, and Zhu 2021; Sha et al. 2024). To bridge
the gap between theory and practice, it is worth investigating the DP stochastic optimization problem with heavy tails.
It has been shown in (Kamath, Liu, and Zhang 2022) that
if the stochastic gradients have bounded p-th order moments
for some p ≥ 2, then the minimax lower bound of optimiza-

which improves over existing methods.
√ This rate matches
the minimax lower bound if ϵ ≤ 1/ d, under which the
3
1
1
third term d 2 − p /n1− p does not dominate. The key of such
improvement is that we treat the tail behavior of mean estimation more carefully. In particular, we show that the mean
estimation has a subexponential tail in all directions, which
refines the union bounds and eventually leads to the risk
bound mentioned above. The remaining drawback is that
3
1
1
this method has an additional term d√2 − p /n1− p . Therefore,
this method is suboptimal if ϵ > 1/ d.
2) Iterative updating. This method is proposed to remove
the additional term of the simple clipping method. It divides

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22795

