The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Blend the Separated: Mixture of Synergistic Experts for Data-Scarcity
Drug-Target Interaction Prediction
Xinlong Zhai1 , Chunchen Wang1 , Ruijia Wang2 , Jiazheng Kang1 , Shujie Li1 ,
Boyu Chen1 , Tengfei Ma3 , Zikai Zhou1 , Cheng Yang1 , Chuan Shi1 * ,
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
China Telecom Cloud Computing Research Institute
3
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
{zhaijojo, wangchunchen, kjz, shujielie, chenbys4, 2020211668, yangcheng, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn,
wangrj12@chinatelecom.cn, tfma@hnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Drug-target interaction prediction (DTI) is essential in various applications including drug discovery and clinical application. There are two perspectives of input data widely used
in DTI prediction: Intrinsic data represents how drugs or targets are constructed, and extrinsic data represents how drugs
or targets are related to other biological entities. However, any
of the two perspectives of input data can be scarce for some
drugs or targets, especially for those unpopular or newly discovered. Furthermore, ground-truth labels for specific interaction types can also be scarce. Therefore, we propose the
first method to tackle DTI prediction under input data and/or
label scarcity. To make our model functional when only one
perspective of input data is available, we design two separate experts to process intrinsic and extrinsic data respectively
and fuse them adaptively according to different samples. Furthermore, to make the two perspectives complement each
other and remedy label scarcity, two experts synergize with
each other in a mutually supervised way to exploit the enormous unlabeled data. Extensive experiments on 3 real-world
datasets under different extents of input data scarcity and/or
label scarcity demonstrate our model outperforms states of
the art significantly and steadily, with a maximum improvement of 53.53%. We also test our model without any data
scarcity and it still outperforms current methods.

Figure 1: Illustration of intrinsic and extrinsic data.

in Fig. 1. The first perspective of data is how molecules or
proteins are composed, like molecule structures and amino
acid residue sequences of proteins. We denote this perspective of data as intrinsic data. DeepDTA (Öztürk, Özgür,
and Ozkirimli 2018) uses two separate CNNs to encode the
SMILES representation of molecule structures and amino
acid residue sequences of proteins respectively. The second
perspective of data is the relations between various biological entities, such as diseases, side effects and symptoms,
besides the drugs and targets. We denote this perspective of
data as extrinsic data. Entities and relations can be formed as
graphs so various graph embedding methods can be applied
(Su et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2022). It is natural to consider
utilizing both perspectives of data to achieve better prediction performance, and more recently, there have emerged a
few methods to realise it. MDTips (Xia et al. 2023) uses a
ConvE to embed extrinsic data, a GAT and a transformer to
embed intrinsic data of drugs and targets, and then concatenate them to predict interaction.
However, there are two forms of data scarcity that limit
the usage of all current works: (1) Intrinsic or extrinsic input
data scarcity. With regard to intrinsic data, for example, the
acquisition of the most accurate and precise structure of proteins still relies on wet experiments with expensive equipment like cryo-electron microscopes, causing the scarcity of
precise protein structures. For extrinsic data, though there
has been massive relation data between biology entities accumulated, newly discovered or unpopular drugs or targets
could still have few connections with other entities. (2) In-

Code — https://github.com/BUPT-GAMMA/MoseDTI

1

Introduction

The task of drug-target interaction (DTI) prediction is crucial across various biological fields, particularly within the
pharmacology (Lukačišin and Bollenbach 2019; Bredel and
Jacoby 2004; Lee et al. 2019; Zhang, Zang, and Zhao 2024).
In this task, a drug (molecule) and a target (a gene or the
encoded protein of a gene) are input and output is the probability of them interacting.
There has been a surge in the development of diverse neural networks for DTI prediction, which significantly reduces
the need for domain knowledge and has demonstrated superior results. Generally, there are two perspectives of data
which can be utilized in these methods, which are illustrated
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22336

