The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MaskPrompt: Open-Vocabulary Affordance Segmentation
with Object Shape Mask Prompts
Dongpan Chen, Dehui Kong∗ , Jinghua Li, Baocai Yin
School of Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
cdp@emails.bjut.edu.cn, {kdh, lijinghua, ybc}@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Affordance refers to the interactable functional properties of
an object, and affordance segmentation aims to pixel-level
segment the object functional parts in a given image, which
is crucial for various interactive vision tasks. Existing methods address the affordance segmentation problem by utilizing only image features, they can hardly solve the problems of interference between adjacent object pixels in complex
scenes, and inability to generalize to the open-world. To tackle these problems, we propose a novel open-vocabulary affordance segmentation task and a benchmark dataset, and propose an approach with object shape mask prompts. The mask
is used as prior for different granularity visual feature enhancement and fine-grained text prompt embedding. Specifically, we first propose a mask prompt generation module,
which generates refined object shape masks, as well as text
prompts for mask-focused regions. Based on the masks, we
propose a mask prompt feature enhancement module. It uses
masks to encode instance features, and then aggregates them
with global features to enhance the visual feature representation. The enhanced visual features are combined with text
prompts of different granularity to generate class-agnostic affordance mask proposals. We finally classify these proposals
in a proposed affordance prediction module. Quantitative and
qualitative evaluations compared with state-of-the-art methods demonstrate that the proposed method achieves superior
performance on the proposed benchmark dataset and other
open-vocabulary part segmentation datasets.

Figure 1: Examples of open-vocabulary affordance segmentation results, and open-vocabulary affordance categories.

such as scene understanding (Balazevic et al. 2024), humanobject interaction (Wu et al. 2024), and especially in robotics
(Xu et al. 2024a; Ragusa et al. 2023), where it segments interactable regions for robots to perform interaction tasks.
However, open-vocabulary affordance segmentation is a
very challenging task. As shown in Fig. 1, on the one hand,
affordance segmentation is a part-level image segmentation task, affordance is the fine-grained version of an object. Different from traditional object-level semantic segmentation, object parts have complex structures and usually have more complex boundaries and appearance variations than the object as a whole. In common chaotic scenes,
the interference of background and adjacent objects’ pixels significantly affect the quality of visual feature encoding,
leading to unsatisfactory segmentation result. On the other
hand, open-vocabulary affordance segmentation introduces
an open granularity challenge. OVAS requires segmenting
the affordances did not exist in the training datasets, this is
difficult for data-driven deep learning segmentation models.
It requires a lot of additional information supplementation,
as well as effective multi-modal fusion.
Some related work has been proposed attempt to solve the
above problems. One kind of methods such as (Minh et al.
2020; Gu, Su, and Yuan 2021; Lu et al. 2022), which only encode the global features of the image in an end-to-end
manner. However, they are not effective in suppressing interference from complex background. Another kind of methods
(Nguyen et al. 2017; Do, Nguyen, and Reid 2018) training
an object detector to obtain object region features for affordance segmentation. These methods can mitigate the back-

Introduction
Affordance segmentation aims to segment the functional
parts of an object in a given image. But in real life, many
vision tasks need to segment not only the known object affordances in the training datasets, but also the unknown
affordances. To our knowledge, no studies have been conducted to address these issues. Thus we propose an novel
open-vocabulary affordance segmentation (OVAS) task. OVAS not only segments the affordances of objects in closed
datasets, but also extends to the open-world by segmenting
affordances that did not occur in the training process. OVAS plays an important role in many computer vision fields,
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2034

