The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Real-Time Recurrent Reinforcement Learning
Julian Lemmel1,2 , Radu Grosu1
1

Vienna University of Technology
2
DatenVorsprung GmbH
julian.lemmel@tuwien.ac.at, radu.grosu@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We introduce a biologically plausible RL framework for
solving tasks in partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). The proposed algorithm combines three
integral parts: (1) A Meta-RL architecture, resembling the
mammalian basal ganglia; (2) A biologically plausible reinforcement learning algorithm, exploiting temporal difference learning and eligibility traces to train the policy and the
value-function; (3) An online automatic differentiation algorithm for computing the gradients with respect to parameters
of a shared recurrent network backbone. Our experimental
results show that the method is capable of solving a diverse
set of partially observable reinforcement learning tasks. The
algorithm we call real-time recurrent reinforcement learning
(RTRRL) serves as a model of learning in biological neural
networks, mimicking reward pathways in the basal ganglia.

(one-hot)

Figure 1: RTRRL uses a Meta-RL RNN-backbone which receives observation ot , previous action at 1 and reward rt ,
computing the latent vector ht from which the action at and
the value estimate v̂t are computed via linear functions.
guarantees when using linear function approximation (Sutton and Barto 2018). However, linear functions are not able
to infer hidden state variables that are required for solving
POMDPs. RNNs, can compensate for the partial observability in POMDPs by aggregating information about the
sequence of observations. Model-free deep reinforcement
learning algorithms, leveraging recurrent neural network architectures (RNNs), serve as strong baselines for a wide
range of partially-observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) (Ni, Eysenbach, and Salakhutdinov 2022). Contemporary RL algorithms further renounce biological plausibility due to the fact that updates are computed after collecting full trajectories, when future rewards are known.
The question we asked in this paper was whether using
a biologically plausible method for computing the gradients
in RNNs, such as RFLO, in conjunction with a biologically
plausible online RL method, such as TD( ), would be able
to solve partially observable reinforcement learning tasks.
Taking advantage of previous work, we are able to answer
the above question in a positive fashion. In summary, our
proposed approach consists of three basic building blocks:
1. A Meta-RL RNN architecture, resembling the mammalian basal ganglia depicted in figure 1,
2. The TD( ) RL algorithm, exploiting backwards-oriented
eligibility traces to train the weights of the RNN.
3. Biologically-plausible RFLO or diagonal RTRL, for
computing the gradients of RNN-parameters online.
We call our novel, biologically plausible RL approach
real-time recurrent reinforcement learning (RTRRL).

Code — https://github.com/FranzKnut/RTRRL-AAAI25

Introduction
Artificial neural networks were originally inspired by biological neurons, which are in general recurrently connected,
and subject to synaptic plasticity. These long-term changes
of synaptic efficacy are mediated by locally accumulated
proteins, and a scalar-valued reward signal represented
by neurotransmitter concentrations (e.g. dopamine) (Wise
2004). The ubiquitous backpropagation through time algorithm (BPTT) (Werbos 1990), which is used for training
RNNs in practice, appears to be biologically implausible,
due to distinct forward and backward phases and the need
for weight transport (Bartunov et al. 2018). With BPTT,
RNN-based algorithms renounce their claim to biological
interpretation. Biologically plausible methods for computing gradients in RNNs do however exist. One algorithm of
particular interest is random feedback local online learning
(RFLO) (Murray 2019), an approximate version of real-time
recurrent learning (RTRL) (Williams and Zipser 1989). Similarly, Linear Recurrent Units (LRUs) (Zucchet et al. 2023)
allow for efficient computation of RTRL updates.
Gradient-based reinforcement-learning (RL) algorithms,
such as temporal-difference (TD) methods, have been shown
to be sample efficient, and come with formal convergence
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
18189

