The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Hierarchical Task Knowledge for Planning
Pat Langley
ARCAID, Information and Communications Laboratory
Georgia Tech Research Institute, Atlanta, GA 30318
Institute for the Study of Learning and Expertise
2164 Staunton Court, Palo Alto, CA 94306
http://www.isle.org/∼langley/
Abstract

by the expert system community: extracting and encoding
this knowledge is a tedious, expensive, and error-prone process. This in turn suggests that acquiring HTNs automatically, rather than constructing them by hand, would offer the
same advantages as learning in other AI areas.
In the following sections, I review the benefits of hierarchical organization and alternative ways to acquire plan
knowledge. After this, I concentrate on HTN learning, examining the inputs to this task and identifying three primary
subproblems that it must address, in each case citing relevant
work. Finally, I present seven additional hurdles that the research community must overcome before techniques for the
automated acquisition of HTNs can offer the same advantages that machine learning has provided in other settings.

In this paper, I review approaches for acquiring hierarchical
knowledge to improve the effectiveness of planning systems.
First I note some benefits of such hierarchical content and the
advantages of learning over manual construction. After this,
I consider alternative paradigms for encoding and acquiring
plan expertise before turning to hierarchical task networks.
I specify the inputs to HTN learners and three subproblems
they must address: identifying hierarchical structure, unifying method heads, and finding method conditions. Finally, I
pose seven challenges the community should pursue so that
techniques for learning HTNs can reach their full potential.

Background and Motivation
Early applications of AI revolved around expert systems,
which produced many successes but also relied on manual elicitation and entry of domain knowledge (Waterman,
1986). This made them expensive to develop, difficult to
maintain, and subject to errors. The field of machine learning, launched in 1980, aimed to automate creation of such
knowledge bases. This movement also had many successes,
initially with supervised learning from tabular data for classification (Langley and Simon, 1995) but recently with other
types of content for vision, language, and game playing.
One area that has seen comparatively slow progress on
learning has been planning. Although early examples appeared in the literature (e.g., Fikes et al., 1972; Minton,
1988), the automated acquisition of expertise has never become a central focus of planning research. One reason may
be that mainstream planning methods rely on little domain
knowledge and, despite the combinatorial character of many
tasks, there has been steady progress toward techniques that
scale to complex problems. This has led many researchers to
conclude that learning is unnecessary for effective planning.
Nevertheless, there is clear evidence, both theoretical and
empirical, that domain knowledge can offer substantial reduction in search and time required to find solutions. This
holds especially for HTNs – hierarchical task networks (Nau
et al., 2003) – and related formalisms, which specify ways
to decompose complex planning problems into subproblems
and thus eliminate many unproductive candidates from consideration. The challenge here is the same as that confronted

Benefits of Hierarchical Decomposition
We all have experience decomposing complex problems into
subproblems, as people organize everyday activities in this
manner. For example, a common morning routine involves
getting out of bed, taking a shower, and getting dressed, but
each of these is broken down further into substeps. Taking
a shower in turn requires entering the bathroom, starting the
water, getting into the shower, washing with soap, and so
forth. This decomposition continues until it reaches primitives that handle low-level movements. Our repertoires of
routine activities are organized into rich hierarchies of such
skills, each of them aimed at achieving a specific goal but
also having considerable generality. People store this knowledge in long-term memory and retrieve relevant structures as
needed to achieve their current objectives.
The benefits of activity decomposition are even greater
when one encounters novel problems that require search
to solve. Recall that, in the worst case, a problem space
with branching factor b and depth d includes bd alternative paths, which rapidly becomes intractable for complex
tasks with long solutions. Decomposing such a task into subproblems reduces the exponent b and dividing subtasks into
still smaller ones can give further savings. Breaking down a
problem recursively can lower its computational complexity
substantially. A classic example involves logistics planning,
which requires selecting materials to transport and allocating vehicles for moving them to target destinations. Such
problems have regular structures that suggest efficient ways
to partition them into sets of simpler subtasks.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28652

