The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

QCS: Feature Refining from Quadruplet Cross Similarity for Facial Expression
Recognition
Chengpeng Wang1 , Li Chen3 , Lili Wang3 , Zhaofan Li4 , Xuebin Lv2 *
1

2

Wisesoft Inc., Chengdu, China
School of Computer Science Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
3
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China
4
Medical School of Chinese PLA, Beijing, China

Abstract
Facial expression recognition faces challenges where labeled
significant features in datasets are mixed with unlabeled redundant ones. In this paper, we introduce Cross Similarity
Attention (CSA) to mine richer intrinsic information from
image pairs, overcoming a limitation when the Scaled DotProduct Attention of ViT is directly applied to calculate the
similarity between two different images. Based on CSA, we
simultaneously minimize intra-class differences and maximize inter-class differences at the fine-grained feature level
through interactions among multiple branches. Contrastive
residual distillation is utilized to transfer the information
learned in the cross module back to the base network. We
ingeniously design a four-branch centrally symmetric network, named Quadruplet Cross Similarity (QCS), which alleviates gradient conflicts arising from the cross module and
achieves balanced and stable training. It can adaptively extract discriminative features while isolating redundant ones.
The cross-attention modules exist during training, and only
one base branch is retained during inference, resulting in no
increase in inference time. Extensive experiments show that
our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on several FER datasets.

Figure 1: We often assume labeled features exhibit significant and dominant distributions within the dataset; however,
unlabeled redundant features may impact this. Feature similarity can be leveraged to distinguish target features from
redundant ones, based on whether they originate from the
same label group or different label groups.

due to assumptions of labeled feature dominance. Dividing
datasets by labels for training can result in the learning of
unlabeled redundant features if they’re non-randomly distributed, impacting classification accuracy. Fig. 1 illustrates
one such impact. In reality, interference features are diverse,
numerous, and unpredictable, exerting varying degrees of influence.
How to extract discriminative features and how to eliminate the interference of redundant features are the core issues of FER. Using self-attention, some deep learning methods (Wang et al. 2020; Xue, Wang, and Guo 2021; Xue
et al. 2022; Ma, Sun, and Li 2021) focus on key features,
enhancing model discrimination. However, model performance hinges on the high-quality of training data. Some
methods (Xie, Hu, and Wu 2019; Zhang et al. 2021; Cai
et al. 2021; Ruan et al. 2021, 2022) study separating redundant from expression features using GANs or transformers.
They extract expression information via decomposition and
reconstruction, but often need redundant feature labels, such
as age, gender, race, or rely on identity recognition modules. Additionally, interference decoupling FER (Li, Deng,
and Du 2017) relies on one or several interference feature

Code — https://github.com/birdwcp/QCS
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.01988

Introduction
Facial expression is crucial for machines to comprehend human emotions. Facial expression recognition (FER) holds
vast research potential and application worth in humancomputer interaction, emotion analysis, and intelligent
healthcare. Over decades, deep learning advancements in
computer vision have propelled significant progress in facial
expression recognition.
However, FER is still a complex task facing many difficulties such as Inter-class similarity and intra-class variances.
Faces with varying expressions retain the common features
that constitute a human face, yet same expressions can vary
widely in pose, identity, illumination, etc. Traditional object
classification methods struggle with complex face datasets
* Corresponding Author. Email: lvxb@scu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7563

