The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimizing Human Pose Estimation Through Focused Human and Joint Regions
Yingying Jiao1,2 , Zhigang Wang3 * , Zhenguang Liu4,5 * , Shaojing Fan6 ,
Sifan Wu1,2 * , Zheqi Wu3 , Zhuoyue Xu3 ,
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University
4
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
5
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
6
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
jiaoyy21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, wangzhigang2024@gmail.com, liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com, fanshaojing@gmail.com,
wusifan2021@gmail.com, chasewoo17@gmail.com, 1069516849xzyy@gmail.com
2

Abstract

movements and behaviors. Accordingly, human pose estimation spans a wide range of applications from action recognization, movement tracking, to augmented reality (Yang
et al. 2023; Tse, De Martini, and Marchegiani 2019; Su et al.
2021; Wu et al. 2024b; Liu et al. 2022b).
A plethora of research has been dedicated to the field of
pose estimation on still images, evolving from early methods employing tree-based and random forest models (Wang
and Mori 2008; Sapp, Toshev, and Taskar 2010) to current
methodologies utilizing convolutional neural networks (Sun
et al. 2019) and Transformers (Li et al. 2021). Despite their
excellent performance on still images, applying these methods directly to video pose estimation leads to significant performance degradation due to the exclusive characteristics in
videos, such as rapid movement and video defocus, which
are frequently encountered in videos but absent in static images (Zhao, Xiong, and Lin 2018).
To address this issue, substantial studies have emerged
that leverage temporal continuity to extract rich semantic visual contexts for human pose estimation in videos. Current
methods can be roughly categorized into two main branches.
One line of research (Bertasius et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021)
aggregates temporal information from neighboring frames
for video pose estimation, employing CNN-based architectures and pose calibration. Fueled by the development of
Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Vaswani et al. 2017),
another line of studies (Jin, Lee, and Lee 2022; He and
Yang 2024) strive to integrate attention mechanisms into
model construction, yielding impressive results and showcasing their immense potential. However, a limitation inherent in existing Transformer-based methods (Jin, Lee, and
Lee 2022) lies in their inability to effectively manage local
dependencies. This limitation poses a notable challenge for
visual perception tasks such as pose estimation, which require precise local positioning.
Following thorough experimentation and empirical investigation, we uncover two insights: (1) Existing methods (Liu
et al. 2022a; Feng et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024a) struggle to
handle subtle pose changes, particularly in challenging scenarios with occlusions or motion blur. This may stem from
the fact that current methods tend to capture temporal dynamics pixel-by-pixel rather than focusing solely on target

Human pose estimation has given rise to a broad spectrum of
novel and compelling applications, including action recognition, sports analysis, as well as surveillance. However, accurate video pose estimation remains an open challenge. One
aspect that has been overlooked so far is that existing methods learn motion clues from all pixels rather than focusing
on the target human body, making them easily misled and
disrupted by unimportant information such as background
changes or movements of other people. Additionally, while
the current Transformer-based pose estimation methods has
demonstrated impressive performance with global modeling,
they struggle with local context perception and precise positional identification.
In this paper, we try to tackle these challenges from three
aspects: (1) We propose a bilayer Human-Keypoint Mask
module that performs coarse-to-fine visual token refinement,
which gradually zooms in on the target human body and keypoints while masking out unimportant figure regions. (2) We
further introduce a novel deformable cross attention mechanism and a bidirectional separation strategy to adaptively aggregate spatial and temporal motion clues from constrained
surrounding contexts. (3) We mathematically formulate the
deformable cross attention, constraining that the model focuses solely on the regions centered at the target person
body. Empirically, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on three large-scale benchmark datasets. A remarkable highlight is that our method achieves an 84.8 mean Average Precision (mAP) on the challenging wrist joint, which
significantly outperforms the 81.5 mAP achieved by the current state-of-the-art method on the PoseTrack2017 dataset.

Introduction
Human pose estimation, as a fundamental problem in the
realm of computer vision and artificial intelligence (Wang
and Zhang 2022; Geng et al. 2023), involves accurately identifying the anatomical keypoints of human bodies. Precise
pose estimation is the key for the success of a machine as
it paves the way for machines to accurately interpret human
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4102

