The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-Evolutionary Large Language Models Through Uncertainty-Enhanced
Preference Optimization
Jianing Wang, Yang Zhou, Xiaocheng Zhang, Mengjiao Bao, Peng Yan*
Meituan
{wangjianing16, yanpeng04}@meituan.com

Abstract

Preference
Data

Iterative preference optimization has recently become one
of the de-facto training paradigms for large language models (LLMs), but the performance is still underwhelming
due to too much noisy preference data yielded in the loop.
To combat this issue, we present an Uncertainty-enhanced
Preference Optimization (UPO) framework to make the LLM
self-evolve with reliable feedback. The key idea is mitigating the noisy preference data derived from the current policy
and reward models by performing pair-wise uncertainty estimation and judiciously reliable feedback sampling. To reach
this goal, we thus introduce an estimator model, which incorporates Monte Carlo (MC) dropout in Bayesian neural network (BNN) to perform uncertainty estimation for the preference data derived from the LLM policy. Compared to the existing methods that directly filter generated responses based
on the reward score, the estimator focuses on the model uncertainty in a pair-wise manner and effectively bypasses the
confirmation bias problem of the reward model. Additionally, we also propose an uncertainty-enhanced self-evolution
algorithm to improve the robustness of preference optimization and encourage the LLM to generate responses with both
high reward and certainty. Extensive experiments over multiple benchmarks demonstrate that our framework substantially
alleviates the noisy problem and improves the performance of
iterative preference optimization.

Preference
Data

Reward
Model
LLM Policy

LLM Policy

Preference
Data

Estimator
Model

Reward
Model

LLM Policy

(a) Ofﬂine Preference (b) Iterative Preference (c) Uncertainty-Enhanced
Optimization
Optimization
Preference Optimization

Figure 1: Overview of three paradigms.
and directly align the policy with feedback (Rafailov et al.
2023; Ethayarajh et al. 2024).
Despite the success, these approaches relied on massive
labeled preference data which requires tons of manpower
and resources. To combat this issue, some recent researches
introduce a novel iterative preference optimization (Pang
et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024; Kim et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2023;
Rosset et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2024). As shown
in Figure 1 (b), the offline methods can be iteratively applied
similarly to the self-training procedure, where the previously
trained policy generates new preference data which are then
used to train the new policy. Generally, a reward model is
also required in the iteration to simulate feedback for selfevolve (Xu et al. 2024; Tao et al. 2024).
However, we find one of the potential pitfalls in the iteration is that the reward model may assign unsuitable scores
for the responses, leading to deriving multiple noisy preference pairs and hindering performance. This problem gets
exaggerated when the interaction number increases (Han
et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2024). Hence, the paramount challenge is meticulously selecting reliable preference data and
making the preference optimization not distorted by noise.
A simple solution is to choose one pair in which two responses ignifying a notable disparity in terms of the reward
score (Pang et al. 2024). Yet, it can not bypass the confirmation bias problem (Andersen and Maalej 2022; Rizve et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2021) in the self-training-like paradigm.
To this end, we present an Uncertainty-enhanced
Preference Optimization (UPO) framework to circumvent
the noise problem. To elaborate, we introduce an estimator

Introduction
Recently, the NLP community has witnessed the success of
preference optimization for large language models (LLMs),
which has become one of the significant ingredients of recent revolutions (Brown et al. 2020; OpenAI 2023; Tunstall
et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2023b). As a post-training process of
LLM, preference optimization aims to align the LLM policy
with the labeled human feedback or AI feedback data. Early
approaches utilize reinforcement learning (RL) to train the
LLM policy online based on the human feedback simulated
by a tuned reward model, referred to as RLHF (Christiano
et al. 2017; Lee, Smith, and Abbeel 2021; Ouyang et al.
2022). Besides, offline direct preference optimization (DPO)
and some variants view LLM-as-judge (Yuan et al. 2024)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25362

