The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An Automatic Sound and Complete Abstraction Method for Generalized Planning
with Baggable Types
Hao Dong, Zheyuan Shi, Hemeng Zeng, Yongmei Liu*
Dept. of Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
ymliu@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Abstraction methods play an important role in solving gplanning problems. The idea is to abstract a given low-level
(LL) problem to get a high-level (HL) problem, solve it and
then map the solution back to the original problem. Based
on the agent abstraction framework of Banihashemi, De Giacomo, and Lespérance (2017), Cui, Liu, and Luo (2021)
proposed a uniform abstraction framework for g-planning.
Cui, Kuang, and Liu (2023) proposed an automatic verification method for sound abstractions of g-planning problems.
Qualitative numeric planning (QNP) (Srivastava et al.
2011), an extension of classical planning with non-negative
real variables that can be increased or decreased by some
arbitrary amount, has been a popular abstract model for gplanning. A number of QNP solvers have been developed,
including FONDASP (Rodriguez et al. 2021) and DSET
(Zeng, Liang, and Liu 2022). Bonet and Geffner (2018) abstracted a class of g-planning problems into QNP problems.
In recent years, the automatic generation of abstractions for
g-planning has attracted the attention of researchers. Bonet,
Francès, and Geffner (2019) learned a QNP abstraction of a
g-planning problem from a sample set of instances, however,
the abstraction is only guaranteed to be sound for sample
instances. Bonet et al. (2019) showed how to obtain a firstorder formula that defines a set of instances on which the abstraction is sound. Illanes and McIlraith (2019) considered
a class of g-planning problems called quantified planning
problems based on the idea of quantifying over sets of similar objects, and adapted QNP techniques to produce general solutions. They also proposed to use the work by Riddle
et al. (2016) to build a quantified planning problem out of a
planning instance. However, they did not address the soundness and completeness issues of their abstraction method. A
closely related line of work is reformulation (Riddle et al.
2016; Fuentetaja and de la Rosa 2016), where to reduce the
state space, a classical planning instance is reformulated by
quantifying over indistinguishable objects.
In this paper, we propose an automatic method to abstract
a QNP problem from a classical planning instance with baggable types. We use a variant of QNP, called bounded QNP
(BQNP), where integer variables are only increased or decreased by one. The basic idea for abstraction is to introduce a counter for each bag of indistinguishable tuples of
objects. The reason we use BQNP instead of QNP as our
abstract model is that our target abstract actions are those

Generalized planning is concerned with how to find a single plan to solve multiple similar planning instances. Abstractions are widely used for solving generalized planning,
and QNP (qualitative numeric planning) is a popular abstract
model. Recently, Cui et al. showed that a plan solves a sound
and complete abstraction of a generalized planning problem
if and only if the refined plan solves the original problem.
However, existing work on automatic abstraction for generalized planning can hardly guarantee soundness let alone completeness. In this paper, we propose an automatic sound and
complete abstraction method for generalized planning with
baggable types. We use a variant of QNP, called bounded
QNP (BQNP), where integer variables are increased or decreased by only one. Since BQNP is undecidable, we propose and implement a sound but incomplete solver for BQNP.
We present an automatic method to abstract a BQNP problem
from a classical planning instance with baggable types. The
basic idea for abstraction is to introduce a counter for each
bag of indistinguishable tuples of objects. We define a class
of domains called proper baggable domains, and show that
for such domains, the BQNP problem got by our automatic
method is a sound and complete abstraction for a generalized
planning problem whose instances share the same bags with
the given instance but the sizes of the bags might be different.
Thus, the refined plan of a solution to the BQNP problem is a
solution to the generalized planning problem. Finally, we implement our abstraction method and experiments on a number
of domains demonstrate the promise of our approach.

Code — https://github.com/sysulic/ABS

Introduction
Generalized planning (g-planning in short), where a single
plan works for multiple planning instances, remains a challenging problem in the AI community (Levesque 2005; Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2008; Hu and De Giacomo 2011; Aguas, Celorrio, and Jonsson 2016; Bonet and
Geffner 2018; Illanes and McIlraith 2019; Francès, Bonet,
and Geffner 2021). Computing general solutions with correctness guarantees is a key problem in g-planning.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14875

