The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhanced Importance Sampling Through
Latent Space Exploration in Normalizing Flows
Liam Anthony Kruse, Alexandros Tzikas, Harrison Delecki, Mansur Arief, Mykel Kochenderfer
Stanford University
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
{lkruse, alextzik, hdelecki, ariefm, mykel}@stanford.edu
Abstract
Importance sampling is a rare event simulation technique
used in Monte Carlo simulations to bias the sampling distribution towards the rare event of interest. By assigning appropriate weights to sampled points, importance sampling allows for more efficient estimation of rare events or tails of
distributions. However, importance sampling can fail when
the proposal distribution does not effectively cover the target
distribution. In this work, we propose a method for more efficient sampling by updating the proposal distribution in the
latent space of a normalizing flow. Normalizing flows learn
an invertible mapping from a target distribution to a simpler
latent distribution. The latent space can be more easily explored during the search for a proposal distribution, and samples from the proposal distribution are recovered in the space
of the target distribution via the invertible mapping. We empirically validate our methodology on simulated robotics applications such as autonomous racing and aircraft ground collision avoidance.

u = T −1 (x)

Fit proposal q(x)

x̂ ∼ q(x)

Fit proposal q(u)

x̂ = T (û), û ∼ q(u)

Figure 1: Importance sampling in target space (top row) versus importance sampling in a flow’s latent space (bottom
row). The target space proposal distribution generates many
samples in the low-probability valley between the two failure modes, while the latent proposal generates samples that
more closely map to the two failure regions.

Introduction
Safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving or
aircraft controller design heavily rely on simulations to enhance safety through testing in controlled environments. Potential failures can be identified through simulation and then
addressed before real-world deployment, reducing the risk
of accidents (Corso et al. 2021). Failures are often rare and
safety thresholds are strict, so the events of interest—such
as collisions or leaving a safe dynamic envelope—might
be rarely encountered in simulation. Importance sampling
(IS) is a variance reduction technique used in Monte Carlo
simulations to bias the sampling distribution towards the
rare event of interest (Owen 2013; Corso et al. 2021). IS
uses a proposal distribution that focuses computational resources on scenarios likely to yield failure events, thus improving efficiency in failure detection. By assigning appropriate weights to sampled points, IS allows for more efficient
estimation of the probability of failure compared to direct
sampling from the target distribution.
Importance sampling can fail when the proposal distribution does not effectively cover the target distribution. If

the proposal distribution poorly matches the target distribution, the importance weights assigned to sampled points
may become highly variable or imbalanced, leading to inaccurate failure estimates and increased estimate variance
(Owen 2013). Furthermore, IS methods can miss less likely
failure outcomes when the failure domain is multimodal, resulting in a biased estimate of the failure likelihood (Geyer,
Papaioannou, and Straub 2019).
In this work we propose a technique to improve the efficiency of estimating the probability of failure by conducting importance sampling in the latent space of a normalizing flow. Normalizing flows are powerful generative models
that learn an invertible mapping between a complex target
density of interest and a simple, easy-to-evaluate latent density. We show that the distribution over simulation outcomes
is mapped to a latent distribution that closely matches the
IS prior, resulting in a balanced initial exploration over the
space of possible outcomes. Moving forward, we refer to
the space of simulation outcomes as the target space. We
posit that the latent space of a normalizing flow is more ef-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17983

