The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spatial Clustering of Citizen Science Data
Improves Downstream Species Distribution Models
Nahian Ahmed1 , Mark Roth1 , Tyler A. Hallman3 ,
W. Douglas Robinson2 , Rebecca A. Hutchinson1, 2
2

1
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
Department of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Conservation Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
3
School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor LL57 2DG, UK
ahmedna@oregonstate.edu, roth.markh@gmail.com, t.hallman@bangor.ac.uk,
{douglas.robinson, rah}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract

et al. 2014), and decision support for species translocation
programs under climate change (Barlow et al. 2021). These
models and their applications operate at a variety of spatial
scales, from global analyses of species ranges (Cole et al.
2023) to regional assessments that drive local-scale conservation action (Rugg, Jenkins, and Lesmeister 2023). This
paper is particularly motivated by science and conservation
questions at the local-to-regional scale, which often require
inference about fine-scale habitat features and the corrections for observational error that we describe below.
A pervasive challenge in species distribution modeling
stems from the inherent difficulty of observing all organisms present at a given location when completing a survey.
Many species are secretive, camouflaged, and/or ephemeral,
so species are often under-reported. This is known as the
problem of imperfect detection, which is common to both
expert- and volunteer-led surveys. A family of models and
associated sampling schemes has been developed in ecology
to address this issue. A key idea is to collect multiple observations of a location, or site, during a period when the
species status remains constant; variation in observations
across this period then speaks to the observational process
itself. A foundational member of this family of approaches
is the occupancy model, which links environmental features
(e.g., elevation, land cover) to a binary latent variable representing the species occupancy at each site. Then the multiple
observations at each site depend both on the true occupancy
status and a set of detection-related features (e.g., time of
day, ambient noise) to correct for imperfect detection. This
framework has been extended beyond static, binary representations of occupancy to species dynamics and abundance
(Bailey, MacKenzie, and Nichols 2014).
Citizen science (CS) programs engage volunteers to collect large-scale biodiversity datasets, providing exciting opportunities for machine learning where ecology meets ‘big
data’ (Beery et al. 2021; Johnston, Matechou, and Dennis
2023). The eBird project gathers checklists of birds daily
across the globe (Sullivan et al. 2014); a sample of these data
are analyzed below. Other CS Programs include eButterfly,
which collects butterfly observations with a structure similar
to eBird (Prudic et al. 2017), and iNaturalist, which relies on
photo-based observations of biodiversity (iNaturalist).
While citizen science datasets have great potential to in-

Citizen science biodiversity data present great opportunities
for ecology and conservation across vast spatial and temporal scales. However, the opportunistic nature of these data
lacks the sampling structure required by modeling methodologies that address a pervasive challenge in ecological data
collection: imperfect detection, i.e., the likelihood of underobserving species on field surveys. Occupancy modeling is
an example of an approach that accounts for imperfect detection by explicitly modeling the observation process separately from the biological process of habitat selection. This
produces species distribution models that speak to the pattern
of the species on a landscape after accounting for imperfect
detection in the data, rather than the pattern of species observations corrupted by errors. To achieve this benefit, occupancy models require multiple surveys of a site across which
the site’s status (i.e., occupied or not) is assumed constant.
Since citizen science data are not collected under the required repeated-visit protocol, observations may be grouped
into sites post hoc. Existing approaches for constructing sites
discard some observations and/or consider only geographic
distance and not environmental similarity. In this study, we
compare ten approaches for site construction in terms of their
impact on downstream species distribution models for 31 bird
species in Oregon, using observations recorded in the eBird
database. We find that occupancy models built on sites constructed by spatial clustering algorithms perform better than
existing alternatives.

Code — https://github.com/Hutchinson-Lab/SpatialClustering-for-SDM
Datasets — https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14362178
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15559

Introduction
Species distribution models (SDMs) combine species observations with environmental data to produce estimates
of species patterns across landscapes (Elith and Leathwick
2009). SDMs are important tools for ecological science and
natural resource management. Examples include analysis of
avian population declines (Betts et al. 2022; Rosenberg et al.
2019), assessments of species’ IUCN Red List status (Syfert
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27775

