The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Edge Reinforced Collaborative Data Acquisition for Continuous Video
Analytics by Prioritizing Quality over Quantity
Lei Zhang1 , Guanyu Gao1 * , Haiyan Yin2 , Huaizheng Zhang3
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
leizhang.real@gmail.com, gygao@njust.edu.cn, yin haiyan@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, huaizhen001@e.ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

Continuous learning (CL) (Bhardwaj et al. 2022) addresses the challenge of data drift by retraining stale DNN
models with newly collected drift data from changing environments. However, adopting continuous learning for video
analytics significantly increases financial costs due to the
substantial human effort required for labeling drift data,
which makes it less feasible for large-scale deployment. For
instance, continuous learning for an object tracking model
(e.g., YOLOv5) costs over $1,000/hour/video quotas for labeling and training on public clouds1 . The prevalent approach to minimize the costs of continuous learning is to
select a subset of informative data for model retraining. In
video analytics, the drift data obtained from video cameras
demonstrates considerable redundancy. Given that not every
video frame contributes equally to accuracy improvement
in model retraining, judiciously selecting the most valuable video frames can yield competitive model performance
while significantly reducing overall costs.
Previous research has studied reducing labeling costs
while preserving accuracy by designing effective data acquisition strategies to select a subset of training data. These
efforts fall into three categories: 1) Uncertainty-based sampling (e.g., (Wang and Shang 2014; Wen, Tran, and Ba 2020;
Gal and Ghahramani 2016)) focuses on identifying the most
uncertain data instances by posterior probability distribution
(Roth and Small 2006) or probabilistic modeling (Gal, Islam, and Ghahramani 2017; Choi et al. 2021); 2) Diversitybased sampling (e.g., (Sener and Savarese 2018; Agarwal
et al. 2020; Sinha, Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019)) involves the
selection of a representative subset of instances that could
effectively reflect the overall dataset distribution; 3) Hybrid
strategies (e.g., (Shen et al. 2023; Parvaneh et al. 2022; Ash
et al. 2020)) combine both uncertainty-based and diversitybased sampling methods to strike a balance between informativeness and diversity for the selected subset.
The existing data acquisition strategies are primarily
based on modeling data uncertainty and diversity. Yet, the
relationship between the uncertainty and diversity of training data and their impact on accuracy enhancement remains
intricate. Furthermore, the previous works considered data
acquisition from a single static dataset. In the context of
multi-edge video analytics, however, video frames are cap-

Edge computing-based video analytics faces data drift issues due to the occurrence of unseen objects or scenes in
ever-changing environments. To maintain accuracy, continuous learning (CL) retrains stale models periodically with
newly obtained data. However, it leads to unaffordable costs,
as we must keep labeling drift data and retraining models. Regarding this concern, we first investigate video patterns across
multiple cameras within an area and reveal significant data
redundancies. We find that many of the same objects can be
captured by multiple edge cameras or appear many times on
the same edges. Our quantitative findings suggest that selecting a subset of high-quality data for CL is preferable over
using a larger quantity. Yet, existing efforts for data acquisition have only focused on a single static dataset. These methods are not suitable for multi-edge video analytics scenarios,
where videos are captured from multiple sources with non-iid
data distribution. Hence, we propose a multi-edge collaborative active video acquisition (AVA) framework to collaboratively learn a reinforced video acquisition strategy to identify
informative video frames from multiple edge nodes that best
enhance model accuracy, avoiding redundancy across edges.
Extensive experiments on three video datasets demonstrate
that, our method achieves comparable performance to full-set
video training while utilizing only 20% of the data in classification tasks. In object detection tasks, our methods can
maintain productive accuracy with a reduction of nearly 70%
in training video frames.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated extraordinary performances in many video analytics applications,
such as traffic monitoring and video surveillance. However, the real-world deployment of DNN models faces data
drift issues, which arise when unforeseen objects or scenes
appear after model deployment in ever-changing environments, leading to a decrease in recognition accuracy. This
challenge is especially prominent in edge computing-based
video analytics, where lightweight models are deployed due
to the limited processing capacity of edge nodes, making
them more sensitive to data drift.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1084

https://cloud.google.com/ai-platform/data-labeling/pricing

