The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SCALM: Detecting Bad Practices in Smart Contracts Through LLMs
Zongwei Li, Xiaoqi Li* , Wenkai Li, Xin Wang
School of Cyberspace Security, Hainan University, Haikou, 570228, China
lizw1017@gmail.com, csxqli@ieee.org, liwenkai871@gmail.com, wxin98767@gmail.com

Abstract

Manual code review is inefficient and prone to overlook subtle security vulnerabilities. Existing automated tools primarily rely on pattern matching, which cannot accurately detect
complex security issues. Moreover, the types of vulnerabilities that these tools can detect are usually relatively limited.
To achieve a comprehensive audit, multiple tools may be required, each covering different aspects of security.
To solve these problems, we introduce SCALM (Smart
Contract Audit Language Model), a new security auditing
framework for smart contracts. It mainly consists of two
parts: first, it performs static analysis on large datasets to
identify and extract code blocks containing potential bad
practices. These are then vectorized and stored in a vector
database as a searchable knowledge base. Second, SCALM
utilizes RAG and Step-Back Prompting to abstract highlevel concepts and principles from the code, enabling the
detection of bad practices. The framework ultimately generates detailed audit reports that highlight security issues,
assess associated risks, and provide actionable remediation
recommendations.
Our contributions are as follows:

As the Ethereum platform continues to mature and gain
widespread usage, it is crucial to maintain high standards
of smart contract writing practices. While bad practices in
smart contracts may not directly lead to security issues, they
do elevate the risk of encountering problems. Therefore, to
understand and avoid these bad practices, this paper introduces the first systematic study of bad practices in smart contracts, delving into over 35 specific issues. Specifically, we
propose a large language models (LLMs)-based framework,
SCALM. It combines Step-Back Prompting and RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) to identify and address various bad practices effectively. Our extensive experiments using multiple LLMs and datasets have shown that SCALM
outperforms existing tools in detecting bad practices in smart
contracts.

1

Introduction

With the widespread use of blockchain technology, smart
contracts have become an important part of the blockchain
ecosystem (Sharma, Jindal, and Borah 2023). Smart contracts are computer programs that automatically execute
contract terms, controlling assets and operations on the
chain. However, due to their public and immutable code,
smart contracts have become a significant target for attackers. A total of 464 security incidents occurred in 2023, resulting in losses of up to $2.486 billion (Zone 2024). The
most significant attack occurred on September 23rd when
Mixin Network’s cloud service provider database was attacked, involving approximately $200 million.
Bad practices refer to poor coding habits or design decisions in the development of smart contracts. Although
bad practices may not result in immediate security threats,
they could potentially lead to future issues such as performance problems, increased security vulnerabilities, and unpredictable code behavior. Additionally, bad practices have
hidden economic dangers due to the disruption of regular
smart contract activities.
Currently, the security audit of smart contracts mainly relies on manual code review and automated tools. However,
these methods have their limitations (Chaliasos et al. 2024).

• To the best of our knowledge, we provide the first systematic study of bad practices in smart contracts and conduct
an in-depth discussion and analysis on 35 different types
of SWC covered.
• We introduce SCALM, a novel framework based on
LLMs for smart contract security audits. It mainly consists of two parts: firstly, static code analysis is used to
extract code blocks containing bad practices, which are
transformed into vectors and stored in a vector database
as a knowledge base; secondly, using RAG and StepBack Prompting to extract high-level concepts and principles from the code to detect bad practices, and ultimately generate detailed audit reports.
• We conduct an experimental evaluation on SCALM, and
the results show that the framework performs well and
outperforms existing tools in detecting bad practices in
smart contracts. At the same time, ablation experiments
reveal that the RAG component significantly improves
SCALM performance.

* Corresponding author: Xiaoqi Li
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We open source SCALM’s codes and experimental data
at https://figshare.com/s/5cc3639706e4ecd16724.
470

