The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

From Your Block to Our Block: How to Find Shared Structure Between
Stochastic Block Models over Multiple Graphs
Iiro Kumpulainen,1 Sebastian Dalleiger,2 Jilles Vreeken,3 Nikolaj Tatti1
1

HIIT, University of Helsinki
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{iiro.kumpulainen, nikolaj.tatti}@helsinki.fi, sdall@kth.se, jv@cispa.de
2

Abstract

is to partition the vertices of a graph into blocks, modeling
the edge likelihoods of nodes within a block as well as those
of nodes in different blocks using Bernoulli variables. By
optimizing likelihood, we can so obtain a partition such that
the edge densities within each block are similar, and those
between every pair of blocks are similar too.
Towards our goal of revealing shared structure, we extend
the notion of the SBM to n graphs, modeling each with its
own SBM, but, requiring these n models to share s blocks.
That is, we model the edges of a shared block using the
same distribution across all n graphs. This formulation allows the domain expert to flexibly explore what is similar
(the s shared blocks) and what is different (the other blocks)
between the n graphs. We dub this the Shared Stochastic
Block Model or SSBM for short.
We show that fitting the optimal SSBM, as well as the
sub-problem where we know the block memberships per
graph, are both NP-hard, even for n = 2 graphs. Moreover,
these problems are inapproximable unless P = NP. To fit
good models in practice, we propose two approaches. In the
first, we jointly search for the optimal blocks that should
be shared. We show how we can use a Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) approach with simulated annealing to search
for the optimal assignment.
Our second approach for fitting a good model consists of
two stages. In the first stage, we search only for the assignment of vertices into blocks. Once the vertex assignment is
fixed, we then select which blocks should be shared. We
show that this assignment can be done optimally with an
integer linear program (ILP), but also a faster greedy approach where we select that shared block that reduces the
log-likelihood the least. We consider and experiment with
several strategies for the initial assignment of vertices: fitting
a model to each graph individually, or using the assignment
given from the first approach as the starting point.
Through an extensive set of experiments, we show that
our methods work well in practice. On synthetic data we
show that 1) we obtain the best results if we use MCMC with
an agglomeration heuristic to find initial SBMs per graph,
and then an ILP to find the s-SSBM, that 2) we can use BIC
to recover the ground truth number of shared blocks, and
that 3) the runtime of our approaches scales linearly in the
number of edges. Through a case study, we show our method
reveals easily interpretable knowledge of the similarities be-

Stochastic Block Models (SBMs) are a popular approach to
modeling single real-world graphs. The key idea of SBMs is
to partition the vertices of the graph into blocks with similar edge densities within, as well as between different blocks.
However, what if we are given not one but multiple graphs
that are unaligned and of different sizes? How can we find out
if these graphs share blocks with similar connectivity structures? In this paper, we propose the shared stochastic block
modeling (SSBM) problem, in which we model n graphs using SBMs that share parameters of s blocks. We show that
fitting an SSBM is NP-hard, and consider two approaches
to fit good models in practice. In the first, we directly maximize the likelihood of the shared model using a Markov chain
Monte Carlo algorithm. In the second, we first fit an SBM for
each graph and then select which blocks to share. We propose
an integer linear program to find the optimal shared blocks
and to scale to large numbers of blocks, we propose a fast
greedy algorithm. Through extensive empirical evaluation on
synthetic and real-world data, we show that our methods work
well in practice.

Code — https://version.helsinki.fi/dacs/SharedSBM

Introduction
In many network settings, we are interested in what is similar and what is different between two or more graphs. Most
existing methods, however, focus on quantifying similarity
rather than qualifying what are the structures that are specific
to or shared between the graphs. Examples of when we need
more than just a measure of how similar graphs are, but we
are specifically interested in characterizing what makes the
graphs similar, include comparing brain scans of different
patients; protein interaction networks of different species;
social networks of different kinds; or comparing trade networks measured at different points of time. In some of these
examples, the graphs will have aligned vertices, but often the
graphs are unaligned or of different sizes. In this paper, we
propose a method for finding shared connectivity structures
between graphs that work in each of these settings.
We build our method upon the notion of the Stochastic
Block Model (SBM), which is a popular approach to modeling single graphs (Peixoto 2019). The key idea of the SBM
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11987

