The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Grimm: A Plug-and-Play Perturbation Rectifier for Graph Neural Networks
Defending Against Poisoning Attacks
Ao Liu1 , Wenshan Li2 * , Beibei Li1 , Wengang Ma1 , Tao Li1 , Pan Zhou3
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Chengdu University of Information Technology
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{aliu, libeibei, mawengang941206, litao}@scu.edu.cn, helenali@cuit.edu.cn, panzhou@hust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Graph neural networks (GNNs), benefitting from the message passing (MP) strategy, have achieved remarkable success in node classification tasks (Wu et al. 2021). However,
GNNs are easily poisoned by imperceptible adversarial perturbations (i.e., inserted/deleted edges) on graph structure
during their training phase (Li et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2021;

Wang and Gong 2019; Xi et al. 2021; Meng et al. 2023; Wu
et al. 2022). Even slight but deliberate perturbations 1 introduced to the training set can poison the target GNN, and
then rewire the MP pattern driven by the poisoned GNN,
to further misclassify nodes to the target categories (Dai
et al. 2018; Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018).
This may lead to critical issues in many application areas (Che et al. 2020; Chaturvedi and Garain 2021; Katzir
and Elovici 2021; Liu, Akhtar, and Mian 2020), including
those where perturbations undermine public trust (Kreps and
Kriner 2020), interfere with human decision making (Walt,
Jack, and Christof 2019), and affect human health and livelihoods (Samuel et al. 2019). More seriously, it’s proved that
non-robust GNNs are inevitably poisoned once adversaries
take them as the target (Liu et al. 2022).
A plethora of robustness models aim to enhance protected GNNs with add-on functions to defend against edgeperturbing attacks, which causes the unavoidable dismissal
of the original inner function of the non-robustness GNNs.
As representative examples: (1) RGCN (Zhu et al. 2019)
replaces the hidden representations of nodes in each graph
convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017) layer
to the Gaussian distributions, to further absorb the effects of
adversarial changes. (2) GCN-SVD (Entezari et al. 2020)
combines a singular value decomposition (SVD) filter prior
to GCN to eliminate adversarial edges in the training set. (3)
STABLE (Li et al. 2022) reforms the forward propagation of
GCN by adding functions that randomly recover the roughly
removed edges. (4) EGNN (Liu et al. 2021) leverages graph
smoothing techniques based on transductive model PPNP
& APPNP (Gasteiger, Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2018),
to confine the permutation setting space, effectively excluding the majority of non-smooth permutations. (5) GRN (Liu
et al. 2024) incorporates local signals into the central node’s
representation to improve resonance-based robustness.
Unfortunately, deploying these defense models requires
(partially or completely) replacing the original GNN, inevitably leading to the loss of its custom functions and features. In practical applications, diverse GNNs, such as GCN,
graph attention network (GAT) (Veličković et al. 2017), and
GraphSAGE (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017), are de-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We prioritize defense against graph structure attacks due to
their heightened destructiveness compared to feature attacks.

Recent studies have revealed the vulnerability of graph neural networks (GNNs) to adversarial poisoning attacks on node
classification tasks. Current defensive methods require substituting the original GNNs with defense models, regardless of
the original’s type. This approach, while targeting adversarial robustness, compromises the enhancements developed in
prior research to boost GNNs’ practical performance. Here
we introduce G RIMM, the first plug-and-play defense model.
With just a minimal interface requirement for extracting features from any layer of the protected GNNs, G RIMM is thus
enabled to seamlessly rectify perturbations. Specifically, we
utilize the feature trajectories (FTs) generated by GNNs, as
they evolve through epochs, to reflect the training status of
the networks. We then theoretically prove that the FTs of
victim nodes will inevitably exhibit discriminable anomalies. Consequently, inspired by the natural parallelism between the biological nervous and immune systems, we construct G RIMM, a comprehensive artificial immune system for
GNNs. G RIMM not only detects abnormal FTs and rectifies adversarial edges during training but also operates efficiently in parallel, thereby mirroring the concurrent functionalities of its biological counterparts. We experimentally
confirm that G RIMM offers four empirically validated advantages: 1) Harmlessness, as it does not actively interfere
with GNN training; 2) Parallelism, ensuring monitoring, detection, and rectification functions operate independently of
the GNN training process; 3) Generalizability, demonstrating compatibility with mainstream GNNs such as GCN, GAT,
and GraphSAGE; and 4) Transferability, as the detectors for
abnormal FTs can be efficiently transferred across different
systems for one-step rectification.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08555

1

Introduction

18754

