The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EMPLACE: Self-Supervised Urban Scene Change Detection
Tim Alpherts, Sennay Ghebreab, Nanne van Noord
University of Amsterdam
t.o.l.alpherts@uva.nl, s.ghebreab@uva.nl, n.j.e.vannoord@uva.nl

Abstract
Urban change is a constant process that influences the perception of neighbourhoods and the lives of the people within
them. The field of Urban Scene Change Detection (USCD)
aims to capture changes in street scenes using computer vision and can help raise awareness of changes that make it
possible to better understand the city and its residents. Traditionally, the field of USCD has used supervised methods
with small scale datasets. This constrains methods when applied to new cities, as it requires labour-intensive labeling
processes and forces a priori definitions of relevant change.
In this paper we introduce AC-1M the largest USCD dataset
by far of over 1.1M images, together with EMPLACE, a selfsupervising method to train a Vision Transformer using our
adaptive triplet loss. We show EMPLACE outperforms SOTA
methods both as a pre-training method for linear fine-tuning
as well as a zero-shot setting. Lastly, in a case study of Amsterdam, we show that we are able to detect both small and
large changes throughout the city and that changes uncovered by EMPLACE, depending on size, correlate with housing prices - which in turn is indicative of inequity.

Figure 1: Examples of various urban changes in Amsterdam
uncovered through EMPLACE.

by adding new neighbourhoods and buildings, whilst existing environments decay and get renovated. Many of these
changes require permits or are initiated by the municipality,
which leads to awareness of these changes. However, there
are also many changes to the urban environment that the municipality is not aware off - changes which can be predictive
of the condition of the urban environment.
In fact, recent works within VUA have shown the relationship between urban change and socio-demographic
data, by investigating how socio-economic indicators predict
neighbourhood improvement (Naik et al. 2017) or proposing methods to use computer vision to detect building construction (Huang et al. 2024). The latter of these two approaches falls within the field of Urban Scene Change Detection (USCD), a subfield of computer vision that revolves
around finding changes in sets of street view images. To further investigate the relationship between urban change and
socio-demographic data we aim to extend VUA using USCD
methods to explore visual changes in neighbourhoods. Unfortunately, current USCD methods are not well-equipped
for this. USCD has mostly been used for specific domains
such as detecting tsunami damage (Sakurada and Okatani
2015) or autonomous driving (Alcantarilla et al. 2016), lim-

Introduction
Visual Urban Analytics (VUA) approaches have over the last
decade shown potential to identify socio-economic inequity
by combining computer vision techniques with street view
imagery (Suel et al. 2019; Naik et al. 2017). It has been
shown that visual appeal affects citizen well-being through
aspects such as greenery (Li et al. 2015), perceived safety
(Naik et al. 2014; Ordonez and Berg 2014), or liveliness
(Dubey et al. 2016), as well as more direct definitions of
liveability (Joglekar et al. 2020; Muller et al. 2022; Batty
2019). Proposed approaches predict either objective socioeconomic metrics (Suel et al. 2019, 2021; Law, Paige, and
Russell 2019) or subjective perceived attributes (Naik et al.
2014; Dubey et al. 2016) and show potential to support municipalities to keep a grasp on the state of their neighbourhoods (Alpherts, van Noord, and Ghebreab 2023). However
all these approaches are static as they use a single temporal datapoint, i.e., a single image per location. As a consequence, a concept that is underexplored in VUA is the notion
of urban change. Cities are constantly changing; expanding
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1737

