The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LLM-Powered User Simulator for Recommender System
Zijian Zhang1 , Shuchang Liu2 , Ziru Liu3 , Rui Zhong2 , Qingpeng Cai2 * ,
Xiangyu Zhao3 * , Chunxu Zhang1 * , Qidong Liu3, 4 , Peng Jiang2
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University
2
Kuaishou Technology
3
City University of Hong Kong
4
Xi’an Jiaotong University
{zhangzijian,zhangchunxu}@jlu.edu.cn, {liushuchang, zhongrui}@kuaishou.com, ziruliu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk,
cqpcurry@gmail.com, xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk, liuqidong@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jp2006@139.com
Abstract

Genre

What is it?

User simulators can rapidly generate a large volume of timely
user behavior data, providing a testing platform for reinforcement learning-based recommender systems, thus accelerating
their iteration and optimization. However, prevalent user simulators generally suffer from significant limitations, including
the opacity of user preference modeling and the incapability
of evaluating simulation accuracy. In this paper, we introduce
an LLM-powered user simulator to simulate user engagement
with items in an explicit manner, thereby enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of reinforcement learning-based recommender systems training. Specifically, we identify the explicit logic of user preferences, leverage LLMs to analyze
item characteristics and distill user sentiments, and design a
logical model to imitate real human engagement. By integrating a statistical model, we further enhance the reliability of
the simulation, proposing an ensemble model that synergizes
logical and statistical insights for user interaction simulations.
Capitalizing on the extensive knowledge and semantic generation capabilities of LLMs, our user simulator faithfully emulates user behaviors and preferences, yielding high-fidelity
training data that enrich the training of recommendation algorithms. We establish quantifying and qualifying experiments
on five datasets to validate the simulator’s effectiveness and
stability across various recommendation scenarios.

Disliking reasons

Action Movie

…
Cartoon Sci-Fi Musical

Liking reasons

…

How is it?

Past preference
General comment

Historical interactions

Figure 1: The user interaction logic for recommended items
includes two problems: understanding what it is and how it
is, given the historical interactions.
et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2023, 2024c). However, due to the
difficulty in obtaining online user interaction data, high collection costs, and user privacy concerns (Wang et al. 2023a),
effectively simulating user interaction behavior has become
an urgent problem to be solved. User simulators can quickly
generate user behavior data, thus accelerating the evaluation
process, and they guarantee user privacy without collection
and use of real user data (Zhao et al. 2021b).
Despite the promising progress of user simulators for
recommender systems (Wang et al. 2023a; Ie et al. 2019;
Corecco et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024a; Huang et al. 2024),
existing research has two principal deficiencies. Firstly, current simulators fail to explicitly model user preferences,
which is a critical function for accurately predicting user
choices. VirtualTaobao (Shi et al. 2019) leverages GAN to
simulate user interaction distribution and KuaiSim (Zhao
et al. 2023a) employs an offline trained transformer to emulate user’s responses to recommendations. Secondly, there
is an absence of an efficient evaluative framework to assess
the fidelity of simulated interactions with real user behavior.
Consequently, there is an urgent need for the advancement
of user simulators that can operate with higher degrees of fidelity and transparency in replicating the complex dynamics
of user-system interactions.
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in maintaining common
knowledge and inferential capabilities across a spectrum of
fields (Jia et al. 2023; Fu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024a,b;
Liu et al. 2024a,b). This prowess positions LLMs as a

Code — https://github.com/Applied-Machine-LearningLab/LLM User Simulator

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based recommender systems
have become increasingly important due to their capability to capture user preferences (Zhao et al. 2021a, 2023b;
Liu et al. 2023b; Zhang et al. 2020) and long-term engagement (Liu et al. 2023a; Zhao et al. 2018a,b, 2019). They
require interactive training where agent learns to make decisions by interacting with an environment. Online data reflects the real-time user feedback and behavioral patterns,
which is critical for continuously refining recommender systems and solving real-world problems (Li et al. 2023; Han
* Corresponding authors: Qingpeng Cai, Xiangyu Zhao, and
Chunxu Zhang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13339

