The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DAPoinTr: Domain Adaptive Point Transformer for Point Cloud Completion
Yinghui Li 1 * , Qianyu Zhou 2 * , Jingyu Gong 3 , Ye Zhu1 , Richard Dazeley1 ,
Xinkui Zhao4† , Xuequan Lu5†
1
School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Australia;
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China;
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China;
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China;
5
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia, Australia.
s218161821@deakin.edu.au, zhouqianyu@sjtu.edu.cn, jygong@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, ye.zhu@deakin.edu.au,
richard.dazeley@deakin.edu.au, zhaoxinkui@zju.edu.cn, bruce.lu@uwa.edu.au
2

Abstract

partial and complete point clouds. Recently, PoinTr (Yu
et al. 2021) adopted a Transformer encoder-decoder architecture and has reformulated PCC as a set-to-set translation
problem, showing excellent performance within the same
domains. However, when transferring these models from
source domains to target domains, they would suffer from
substantially degraded performance on target datasets. This
is mainly due to the existing domain gaps, e.g., different occlusions, viewpoints, sensor resolutions, and light reflection,
across different domains.

Point Transformers (PoinTr) have shown great potential in
point cloud completion recently. Nevertheless, effective domain adaptation that improves transferability toward target
domains remains unexplored. In this paper, we delve into
this topic and empirically discover that direct feature alignment on point Transformer’s CNN backbone only brings
limited improvements since it cannot guarantee sequencewise domain-invariant features in the Transformer. To this
end, we propose a pioneering Domain Adaptive Point Transformer (DAPoinTr) framework for point cloud completion.
DAPoinTr consists of three key components: Domain Querybased Feature Alignment (DQFA), Point Token-wise Feature
alignment (PTFA), and Voted Prediction Consistency (VPC).
In particular, DQFA is presented to narrow the global domain
gaps from the sequence via the presented domain proxy and
domain query at the Transformer encoder and decoder, respectively. PTFA is proposed to close the local domain shifts
by aligning the tokens, i.e., point proxy and dynamic query,
at the Transformer encoder and decoder, respectively. VPC is
designed to consider different Transformer decoders as multiple of experts (MoE) for ensembled prediction voting and
pseudo-label generation. Extensive experiments with visualization on several domain adaptation benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our DAPoinTr compared with state-of-the-art methods.

To address this issue, unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) techniques are introduced into point cloud completion to enhance the transferability toward real domains.
This involves several categories: adversarial learning (Chen,
Chen, and Mitra 2019; Zhang et al. 2021), data reconstruction (Wen et al. 2021), disentangled learning (Gong et al.
2022), self-supervised learning (Hong et al. 2023). Nevertheless, a common limitation of these UDA PCC methods
is their reliance on Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs)
and suffer from limited receptive fields as layers are stacked,
which can be problematic for capturing the broader context
required for learning domain-agnostic features. With the recent surge of point Transformers, is it possible to empower
them with such a capability to perform accurate completion
in cross-domain scenarios?

Code — https://github.com/Yinghui-Li-New/DAPoinTr

1

A straightforward idea to address this issue is to directly apply adversarial alignment to features extracted by
the DGCNN (Phan et al. 2018) backbone (referred to as
DA-DGCNN) of PoinTr (Yu et al. 2021). As illustrated in
Figure 1(a), such a manner does enhance the point Transformer’s cross-domain performance, but the improvement is
very limited when transferring from CRN (Wang, Ang Jr,
and Lee 2020) to ModelNet (Wu et al. 2015). We deduce
that this limitation arises because aligning feature distributions on the DGCNN backbone does not ensure sequencewise domain-invariant features in the subsequent Transformer, which are essential for accurate completion. Thus,
the sequence features from the Transformer encoder remain
domain-separated and not well-aligned, leading to less decent performance of the point Transformers due to these
shifted sequence features. In Figure 1(a), we also provide

Introduction

3D point cloud data plays a pivotal role across diverse domains, including autonomous vehicles, robotics, augmented
and virtual reality, etc. Point cloud completion (PCC) aims
to predict the complete geometric shape given a partial input. Previous works (Yang et al. 2018; Tchapmi et al. 2019;
Huang et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021, 2023) have
significantly enhanced the performance of fully-supervised
PCC models, using training datasets composed of pairs of
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5066

