The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unlocking the Power of LSTM for Long Term Time Series Forecasting
Yaxuan Kong1 * , Zepu Wang2 5 * , Yuqi Nie3 , Tian Zhou4 , Stefan Zohren1 , Yuxuan Liang2† ,
Peng Sun5† , Qingsong Wen6
2

1
University of Oxford
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Princeton University
4
Alibaba Group
5
Duke Kunshan University
6
Squirrel AI
yaxuan.kong@eng.ox.ac.uk, zw163@duke.edu

Abstract

and Schmidhuber 1997; Gers, Schmidhuber, and Cummins
1999; Siami-Namini, Tavakoli, and Namin 2018).
However, LSTM has several limitations in TSF. Firstly, although LSTM is designed to capture longer sequential correlations compared to traditional RNNs, it fails to memorize long sequential information statistically and experimentally (Zhao et al. 2020). Additionally, LSTMs lack the ability to revise storage decisions dynamically with their historical forget gates, which restricts their flexibility to adapt to
changes in data (Oreshkin et al. 2020; Beck et al. 2024; Zhao
et al. 2020). Consequently, traditional RNNs have gradually lost their dominant position in time series tasks, with
the leaderboard for TSF now being dominated by alternative
architectures such as Transformers (Wen et al. 2023; Zhou
et al. 2021) and Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) (Wang
et al. 2023; Zeng et al. 2023).

Traditional recurrent neural network architectures, such as
long short-term memory neural networks (LSTM), have historically held a prominent role in time series forecasting
(TSF) tasks. While the recently introduced sLSTM for Natural Language Processing (NLP) introduces exponential gating
and memory mixing that are beneficial for long term sequential learning, its potential short memory issue is a barrier to
applying sLSTM directly in TSF. To address this, we propose a simple yet efficient algorithm named P-sLSTM, which
is built upon sLSTM by incorporating patching and channel independence. These modifications substantially enhance
sLSTM’s performance in TSF, achieving state-of-the-art results. Furthermore, we provide theoretical justifications for
our design, and conduct extensive comparative and analytical experiments to fully validate the efficiency and superior
performance of our model.

Method
LSTM
DLinear
Informer
Crossformer

Code — https://github.com/Eleanorkong/P-sLSTM

Introduction
Time Series Forecasting (TSF) is a prominent area of research in statistics and machine learning with diverse applications ranging from financial forecasting to traffic and
human trajectory prediction (Wang et al. 2022, 2023; Wang,
Sun, and Boukerche 2022; Nie et al. 2024; Zhao et al. 2024;
Guo et al. 2024; Ruan and Di 2024). Historically, traditional Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been the
cornerstone for modeling sequential data due to their inherent ability to capture temporal dependencies. Among different RNN architectures, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
networks are among the most popular and successful ones,
as they solve the traditional vanishing and exploding gradient problems of RNNs and exhibit better performance with
long sequences. Numerous researchers have adopted LSTM
networks to predict diverse time series data, demonstrating their effectiveness across various domains (Hochreiter

Type
RNN
MLP
Transformer
Transformer

Time Complexity
O(L)
O(L)
O(L log L)
O(L2 )

Memory Complexity
O(L)
O(L)
O(L log L)
O(L2 )

Table 1: Time and Space Complexity Comparison of TSF
Models. L is the input sequence length/look-back window. LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997); DLinear (Zeng et al. 2023); Informer (Zhou et al. 2021); Crossformer (Zhang and Yan 2023).
Despite these limitations, LSTM and, more broadly,
RNNs remain powerful tools and a promising research direction due to their advantages (Hewamalage, Bergmeir, and
Bandara 2021). Firstly, compared to most transformer-based
models, RNNs have much lower time complexity and memory complexity, making them more efficient for certain applications, as shown in Table 1. Secondly, RNNs have a clear
temporal flow, which makes it easier to interpret their decisions and understand how information flows through the sequence compared to transformer-based structures and MLPbased structures (Graves 2013; Hou and Zhou 2020). At
the same time, state-space models (SSMs) have received
wide attention in TSF and broader deep learning research

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11968

