The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

An LLM-Empowered Adaptive Evolutionary Algorithm For Multi-Component
Deep Learning Systems
Haoxiang Tian1,2 * , Xingshuo Han†3 , Guoquan Wu†1,4 , An Guo5 , Yuan Zhou6 , Jie Zhang7 , Shuo Li1 ,
Jun Wei1,4 , Tianwei Zhang2
1

Key Lab of System Software at CAS‡ , State Key Lab of Computer Science at ISCAS§ , University of CAS, Beijing
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Continental-NTU Corporate Lab, Singapore
4
Nanjing Institute of Software Technology, University of CAS, Nanjing
5
Nanjing University, Nanjing
6
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou
7
CFAR and IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore
{tianhaoxiang20, gqwu, lishuo19, wj}@otcaix.iscas.ac.cn, xingshuo001@e.ntu.edu.sg, guoan218@smail.nju.edu.cn,
yuanzhou@zstu.edu.cn, zhang jie@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, tianwei.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

real-world scenarios, MCDL systems are increasingly being deployed in domains with substantial societal impact,
such as autonomous vehicles, healthcare, and financial services. For instance, autonomous driving systems integrate
various components (e.g., object detection, path planning,
and decision-making), where even minor faults in one component can lead to catastrophic outcomes (Bojarski et al.
2016). Therefore, it is crucial to detect as many safety violations as possible in these systems to mitigate risks and
ensure reliability (Goodfellow et al. 2017).
Multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) are
widely applied to search for elite solutions to find safety violations in MCDL systems (Tian et al. 2022a; Abdukhamidov
et al. 2023b,a). They can be formulated as multi-objective
optimization problems (Zhou et al. 2011). In practical evolutionary search solutions based on genetic algorithms, these
multiple objectives correspond to various perspectives (e.g.,
maximize the quality of the solution, improve the diversity of solutions, balance the cost of solutions against benefits) (Ehrgott, Ide, and Schöbel 2014; Long 2014). However,
there are trade-offs between these objectives as they conflicts
with each other in many real-world scenarios.
The evolutionary search process generally consists of
three steps: 1) initializing the initial population, 2) evaluating each generated individual with a defined fitness function,
and 3) selecting high-fitness individuals to conduct variation
operators to generate offspring iteratively. However, existing MOEAs for detecting safety violations in MCDL systems (Tian et al. 2022a) face two challenges that have not
been well addressed.
• Challenge-1: The initialization of the population highly
affects the search efficiency for elitist solutions. However, in many MOEAs, the initial population is created by
random initialization of parameters in the entire search
space, which is highly contingent and uncertain.
• Challenge-2: The evolutionary search process is prone
to get stuck at local optima. In existing MOEAs, the in-

Multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) are widely
used for searching optimal solutions in complex multicomponent applications. Traditional MOEAs for multicomponent deep learning (MCDL) systems face challenges
in enhancing the search efficiency while maintaining the diversity. To combat these, this paper proposes the first LLMempowered adaptive evolutionary search algorithm to detect
safety violations in MCDL systems. Inspired by the contextunderstanding ability of Large Language Models (LLMs),
our approach promotes the LLM to comprehend the optimization problem and generate an initial population tailed to evolutionary objectives. Subsequently, it employs adaptive selection and variation to iteratively produce offspring, balancing
the evolutionary efficiency and diversity. During the evolutionary process, to navigate away from the local optima, our
approach integrates the evolutionary experience back into the
LLM. This utilization harnesses the LLM’s quantitative reasoning prowess to generate differential seeds, breaking away
from current optimal solutions. We evaluate our approach in
finding safety violations of MCDL systems, and compare its
performance with state-of-the-art MOEA methods. Experimental results show that our approach can significantly improve the efficiency and diversity of the evolutionary search.

Introduction
Multi-component deep learning systems (MCDL systems)
are intricate and characterized by significant uncertainty due
to their complexity. These systems often involve multiple interacting modules, each with its own set of parameters and
behaviors, leading to unpredictable emergent properties. In
* This work was done at NTU as a visiting student.
†

Xingshuo Han and Guoquan Wu are Corresponding authors.
CAS is the abbreviation of Chinese Academy of Sciences
§
ISCAS is the abbreviation of Institute of Software at CAS
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

20894

