The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PROSAC: Provably Safe Certification for Machine Learning Models under
Adversarial Attacks
Chen Feng1 , Ziquan Liu2 , Zhuo Zhi1 , Ilija Bogunovic1 , Carsten Gerner-Beuerle3 , Miguel
Rodrigues4
1
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London
3
Faculty of Laws, University College London
4
AI Centre, Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London
chen.feng@ucl.ac.uk, ziquan.liu@qmul.ac.uk, {zhuo.zhi.21, i.bogunovic, c.gerner, m.rodrigues}@ucl.ac.uk
2

Abstract

Liability Directive and an extension of the EU Product Liability Directive to AI systems and AI-enabled goods are
at advanced stages of the legislative process. Other jurisdictions, too, pursue a variety of regulatory initiatives, and
standard setters such as the National Institute of Standards
and Technology in the United States and the Supreme Audit
Institutions of Germany, the UK, and other countries have
started work on more precise standards, including standards
concerning the robustness of machine learning systems in
the presence of adversarial attacks.
Regulatory frameworks adopted so far are mostly highlevel, but those that establish more detailed requirements for
AI systems to be put in service or for ongoing compliance,
such as the EU AI Act, require an assessment of the performance of AI systems based on precise metrics. These metrics must include, among other things, an evaluation of the
accuracy and resilience of a system in case of perturbations
or unauthorised use.
It is thus important for those who deploy an AI system
to have technical capabilities that allow a precise measurement of performance. However, developing certification procedures is not trivial due to the fact that state-of-the-art machine learning models are black-boxes that are poorly understood; furthermore, the standard train/validate/test paradigm
often lacks rigorous quantifiable statistical guarantees and is
therefore a poor certification instrument. Therefore, recent
years have witnessed the introduction of various promising
procedures, building on recent advances in statistics, that
can be used to endow black-box / complex state-of-the-art
machine learning models with statistical guarantees (Bates
et al. 2021; Angelopoulos et al. 2021; Laufer-Goldshtein
et al. 2023). For example, Bates et al. (2021) have proposed a
framework to offer rigorous distribution-free error control of
machine learning models for a variety of tasks. Angelopoulos et al. (2021) have proposed a procedure, the Learn-thenTest framework, that leverages multiple hypothesis testing
techniques to calibrate machine learning models so that their
predictions satisfy explicit, finite-sample statistical guarantees. Building on the Learn-then-Test framework, LauferGoldshtein et al. (2023) introduce a procedure to identify
machine learning model risk-controlling configurations that
also satisfy a variety of other objectives. Additionally, conformal prediction techniques have been proposed to quantify

It is widely known that state-of-the-art machine learning
models, including vision and language models, can be seriously compromised by adversarial perturbations. It is therefore increasingly relevant to develop capabilities to certify
their performance in the presence of the most effective adversarial attacks. Our paper offers a new approach to certify
the performance of machine learning models in the presence
of adversarial attacks with population level risk guarantees.
In particular, we introduce the notion of (α, ζ)-safe machine
learning model. We propose a hypothesis testing procedure,
based on the availability of a calibration set, to derive statistical guarantees providing that the probability of declaring
that the adversarial (population) risk of a machine learning
model is less than α (i.e. the model is safe), while the model
is in fact unsafe (i.e. the model adversarial population risk is
higher than α), is less than ζ. We also propose Bayesian optimization algorithms to determine efficiently whether a machine learning model is (α, ζ)-safe in the presence of an adversarial attack, along with statistical guarantees. We apply
our framework to a range of machine learning models - including various sizes of vision Transformer (ViT) and ResNet
models - impaired by a variety of adversarial attacks, such
as PGDAttack, MomentumAttack, GenAttack and BanditAttack, to illustrate the operation of our approach. Importantly,
we show that ViT’s are generally more robust to adversarial
attacks than ResNets, and large models are generally more
robust than smaller models. Our approach goes beyond existing empirical adversarial risk-based certification guarantees.
It formulates rigorous (and provable) performance guarantees
that can be used to satisfy regulatory requirements mandating
the use of state-of-the-art technical tools.

Introduction
With the development of increasingly capable autonomous
machine learning systems and their use in a range of domains from healthcare to banking and finance, education,
and e-commerce, to name just a few, policy makers across
the world are in the process of formulating detailed regulatory requirements that will apply to developers and operators of AI systems. The EU is at the forefront of the drive
to regulate AI systems. Proposals for an EU AI Act, an AI
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2933

