The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Population Aware Diffusion for Time Series Generation
Yang Li1, , Han Meng1 , Zhenyu Bi2 , Ingolv T. Urnes 3 , Haipeng Chen 1
1

William & Mary
2
Virginia Tech
3
Generated Health
1
{yli102, hmeng, hchen23}@wm.edu, 2 zhenyub@vt.edu,3 ingolv.urnes@generatedhealth.com

Abstract

Density

Density

Diffusion models have shown promising ability in generating high-quality time series (TS) data. Despite the initial
success, existing works mostly focus on the authenticity of
data at the individual level, but pay less attention to preserving the population-level properties on the entire dataset.
Such population-level properties include value distributions
for each dimension and distributions of certain functional dependencies (e.g., cross-correlation, CC) between different dimensions. For instance, when generating house energy consumption TS data, the value distributions of the outside temperature and the kitchen temperature should be preserved, as
well as the distribution of CC between them. Preserving such
TS population-level properties is critical in maintaining the
statistical insights of the datasets, mitigating model bias, and
augmenting downstream tasks like TS prediction. Yet, it is often overlooked by existing models. Hence, data generated by
existing models often bear distribution shifts from the original data. We propose Population-aware Diffusion for Time
Series (PaD-TS), a new TS generation model that better preserves the population-level properties. The key novelties of
PaD-TS include 1) a new training method explicitly incorporating TS population-level property preservation, and 2) a
new dual-channel encoder model architecture that better captures the TS data structure. Empirical results in major benchmark datasets show that PaD-TS can improve the average CC
distribution shift score between real and synthetic data by
5.9x while maintaining a performance comparable to stateof-the-art models on individual-level authenticity.

CC Score

Figure 1: Histogram of CC distribution between the original
and synthetic Energy datasets. The CC values are calculated
between the outside temperature and kitchen temperature.
PaD-TS (top left) best preserves such functional dependency
distribution. Previous models tend to generate data points
with a CC score close to 1 or -1, which leads to biases for
downstream tasks.

energy. Various data augmentation techniques (e.g., jittering, scaling, permutation, time warping, and window slicing) have been developed to enhance the original datasets
with synthetically generated TS data. Synthetic data can potentially create observations that do not exist but are close
to the original dataset (Coletta et al. 2023; Esteban, Hyland,
and Rätsch 2017). With a newly augmented dataset, we can
further enhance TS models for data analysis, while protecting the privacy and confidentiality of the original data and
potentially enhancing data sharing.
How do we measure the quality of synthetic TS data?
First, it should be authentic on the individual level. Given
two samples – one from the original set and another from
the generated set – we should not be able to identify which
is fake or real. Second, it should preserve the TS population-level properties of the original data. Such populationlevel properties include distributions for each dimension of
the data and distributions of certain functional dependencies

Code — https://github.com/wmd3i/PaD-TS

1

CC Score

Introduction

Time series data exists in a broad spectrum of real-world
domains, spanning healthcare (Kaushik et al. 2020; Morid,
Sheng, and Dunbar 2023), energy (Priesmann et al. 2021;
Deb et al. 2017), finance (Zeng et al. 2023; Masini,
Medeiros, and Mendes 2023), and many more. TS models
have been used in these domains for effective data analysis and prediction tasks. Developing such models requires
rich and high-quality TS datasets, which unfortunately may
not exist in many data-scarce domains like healthcare and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18520

