The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Video Anomaly Detection with Motion and Appearance Guided
Patch Diffusion Model
Hang Zhou, Jiale Cai, Yuteng Ye, Yonghui Feng, Chenxing Gao,
Junqing Yu, Zikai Song* , Wei Yang
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{henrryzh, jaile cai, yuteng ye, yhfeng, cxg, yjqing, skyesong, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Appearance

A recent endeavor in one class of video anomaly detection is
to leverage diffusion models and posit the task as a generation problem, where the diffusion model is trained to recover
normal patterns exclusively, thus reporting abnormal patterns
as outliers. Yet, existing attempts neglect the various formations of anomaly and predict normal samples at the feature
level regardless that abnormal objects in surveillance videos
are often relatively small. To address this, a novel patch-based
diffusion model is proposed, specifically engineered to capture fine-grained local information. We further observe that
anomalies in videos manifest themselves as deviations in both
appearance and motion. Therefore, we argue that a comprehensive solution must consider both of these aspects simultaneously to achieve accurate frame prediction. To address this,
we introduce innovative motion and appearance conditions
that are seamlessly integrated into our patch diffusion model.
These conditions are designed to guide the model in generating coherent and contextually appropriate predictions for both
semantic content and motion relations. Experimental results
in four challenging video anomaly detection datasets empirically substantiate the efficacy of our proposed approach,
demonstrating that it consistently outperforms most existing
methods in detecting abnormal behaviors.

1

Motion

…
Continuous Frames

…

Random
Corp

Patch Noise
to
Frame Noise

Clean Frame
DDIM

…
…

Figure 1: We propose a patch-based diffusion model with a
motion and appearance conditions framework for VAD. The
conditional frames, which contain motion of temporal difference and appearance information, are cropped into patches
and used to estimate noise. These noises are then combined
and refined into the frame-level noise. The DDIM reverse
step is then applied to recover the clean image.

Introduction

Video anomaly detection (VAD) remains a challenging
problem within the security monitoring domain (Lu, Shi,
and Jia 2013; Zhou, Yu, and Yang 2023; Wu et al. 2020).
Due to the scarcity of anomalous data and restrictions on
data collection, training predominantly employs videos depicting normal behavior. To address this imbalance, prevailing strategies have focused on frame prediction and reconstruction methods (Luo, Liu, and Gao 2017; Zhong et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2018; Song et al. 2023). During testing,
anomalous frames are identified based on significant discrepancies between predicted and actual frames. In this paper, we adopt the frame prediction approach to generate future video frames (Lee et al. 2021).
The autoencoder (AE) model is the most widely used
technique for VAD (Gong et al. 2019; Chang et al. 2020).

However, its remarkable generalization capability can inadvertently lead to the reconstruction of anomalous behavior.
To mitigate this overgeneralization, several methods, such
as MNAD (Stephen and Menon 2020) and MPN (Lv et al.
2021), introduce learnable and dynamic memory blocks
to store various normal patterns. Nevertheless, the placement of the memory unit within the bottleneck of AE,
along with the use of skip connections, still permits the reconstruction of abnormal patterns. Alternative approaches,
such as AMMC-Net (Cai et al. 2021), aim to diminish
the capacity of the model by integrating additional motion information. This method employs a two-stream memory augmentation network, merging motion and appearance
prior knowledge to enhance multi-view features for regular
events. However, its performance in anomaly detection is re-

* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10761

