The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Does GCL Need a Large Number of Negative Samples? Enhancing Graph
Contrastive Learning with Effective and Efficient Negative Sampling
Yongqi Huang1† , Jitao Zhao1† , Dongxiao He1 * , Di Jin1 , Yuxiao Huang2 , Zhen Wang3
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Department of Data Science, George Washington University, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
3
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{yqhuang, zjtao, hedongxiao, jindi}@tju.edu.cn, yuxiaohuang@gwu.edu, w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

tion (Wang et al. 2023). Training high-quality GNNs typically requires an extensive amount of labels, which is laborintensive and costly. The scarcity of labels limits the applicability of GNNs due to label dependency.
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) has recently gained
significant attention for its ability to self-supervisedly train
GNNs, producing expressive representations. Inspired by
the success of contrastive learning in other domains, most
GCLs are based on instance discrimination (Zhu et al.
2020, 2021b). Specifically, they first mine positive and negative samples, then train the model using the InfoNCE loss
(van den Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018), which maximizes the
similarity between positive pairs while minimizing the similarity between negative pairs. For an anchor node, positive
samples are typically constructed through augmentation to
align the invariant semantics of the perturbed data, while
negative samples are often chosen from other nodes to enhance the discriminability of the representations.
The effectiveness of instance-discrimination-based GCLs
highly depends on the sampling strategy. ProGCL (Xia et al.
2022) estimates the probability of negatives being true negatives by using a Beta Mixture Model (BMM), and can further leverage this probability to weight the negatives and
synthesize new negatives. Local-GCL (Zhang et al. 2022)
removes first-order neighbors from negatives to positives
based on graph homophily assumption. HomoGCL (Li et al.
2023) estimates the probability of neighbors being true positives using graph homophily and calculates node similarity
through soft clustering, using it as a weight for positives.
B2 -Sampling (Liu et al. 2023) selects representative negatives by designing a balanced sampling strategy and corrects
the labels which can be hard to learn. Although these methods improved the sampling strategy and achieved some success, all these methods share a consensus that incorporating
more negative samples improves model performance. This
consensus has been discovered and validated by many researchers in Computer Visions (CV) (He et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020) and other domains.
However, a gap has emerged regarding this consensus between graph and other domains: This consensus is based
on the premise that instances are independent of each other.
This premise is valid within the CV. In graph data, the presence of topological connections between nodes results in instances that do not satisfy the independence premise. This

Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) aims to self-supervised
learn low-dimensional graph representations, primarily
through instance discrimination, which involves manually
mining positive and negative pairs from graphs, increasing
the similarity of positive pairs while decreasing negative
pairs. Drawing from the success of Contrastive Learning (CL)
in other domains, a consensus has been reached that the effectiveness of GCLs depends on a large number of negative
pairs. As a result, despite the significant computational overhead, GCLs typically leverage as many negative node pairs
as possible to improve model performance. However, given
that nodes within a graph are interconnected, we argue that
nodes cannot be treated as independent instances. Therefore,
we challenge this consensus: Does employing more negative
nodes lead to a more effective GCL model? To answer this,
we explore the role of negative nodes in the commonly used
InfoNCE loss for GCL and observe that: (1) Counterintuitively, a large number of negative nodes can actually hinder the model’s ability to distinguish nodes with different
semantics. (2) A smaller number of high-quality and nontopologically coupled negative nodes are sufficient to enhance the discriminability of representations. Based on these
findings, we propose a new method called GCL with Effective and Efficient Negative samples, E2Neg, which learns
discriminative representations using only a very small set of
representative negative samples. E2Neg significantly reduces
computational overhead and speeds up model training. We
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of E2Neg across
multiple datasets compared to other GCL methods.

Code — https://github.com/hedongxiao-tju/E2Neg

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) have emerged as a
powerful strategy for graph mining, aiming to encode structured high-dimensional graphs into low-dimensional embeddings. GNNs are widely applied in various scenarios
such as social recommendation (Fan et al. 2019), community detection (Jin et al. 2023, 2021), and sarcasm detec†

These authors contributed equally.

* Corresponding Author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17511

