The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Power of Convolution Augmented Transformer
Mingchen Li1 , Xuechen Zhang1 , Yixiao Huang2 , Samet Oymak1 ,
1

University of Michigan
2
UC Berkeley
milii@umich.edu, zxuechen@umich.edu, yixiaoh@berkeley.edu, oymak@umich.edu

Abstract
The transformer architecture has catalyzed revolutionary advances in language modeling. However, recent architectural
recipes, such as state-space models, have bridged the performance gap. Motivated by this, we examine the benefits of
Convolution-Augmented Transformer (CAT) for recall, copying, and length generalization tasks. CAT incorporates convolutional filters in the K/Q/V embeddings of an attention layer.
Through CAT, we show that the locality of the convolution
synergizes with the global view of the attention. Unlike comparable architectures, such as Mamba or transformer, CAT can
provably solve the associative recall (AR) and copying tasks
using a single layer while also enjoying guaranteed length generalization. We also establish computational tradeoﬀs between
convolution and attention by characterizing how convolution
can mitigate the need for full attention by summarizing the
context window and creating salient summary tokens to attend. Evaluations on real datasets corroborate our findings and
demonstrate that CAT and its variations indeed enhance the
language modeling performance.

1

Introduction

The attention mechanism is the central component of the
transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) which empowers modern large language models. Through the self-attention
layer, all pairs of tokens get to interact with each other which
equips the model with a global view of the context window.
On the other hand, without positional-encoding (PE), selfattention lacks locality. For instance, without PE or causal
masking, self-attention layer is permutation-equivariant and
does not distinguish between nearby vs distant tokens. In
contrast, convolution operator is a well-established primitive
that facilitates local feature aggregation based on relative
positions and provides a natural alternative to PE. While convolution has enjoyed major success in vision during the last
three decades, its explicit use in language modeling is relatively recent (Dauphin et al. 2017). On the other hand, there
is a growing recent interest in using convolution-based blocks
in language models: For instance, state-space models (SSM)
(Gu, Goel, and Ré 2021) and linear RNNs (Orvieto et al.
2023) are eﬃcient parameterizations of long convolutional
filters. These models have enjoyed significant success in
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
18393

long-range sequence modeling as they provide fast inference
and parallelizable training. However, purely convolutional
architectures are known to suﬀer from recall capability as
they lack the global view of the context window (Arora et al.
2024). These insights motivated a recent push toward hybrid
architectures (De et al. 2024; Arora et al. 2024; Park et al.
2024; Arora et al. 2023) that combine the strengths of both
attention and convolution-like approaches, including short
convolutional filters, SSMs, linear RNNs, or Mamba.
In this work, we explore the synergy between attention and
convolution which reveals new theoretical principles that inform hybrid architecture design. Specifically, we introduce an
intuitive hybrid architecture called Convolution-Augmented
Transformer (CAT)1 . CAT incorporates convolutional filters
to the K/Q/V embeddings of the attention layer as depicted
on the left hand side of Figure 2. We explore the capabilities of the CAT layer through mechanistic tasks including
associative recall (AR), selective copying (Gu and Dao 2023;
Jing et al. 2019), and length generalization. For instance,
AR is a fundamental task motivated from the associative
memory in cognitive science (Ba et al. 2016). This task underpins critical applications such as bigram retrieval, where
a specific sequence, such as ‘Rings’ following ‘The Lord of
the’, must be correctly retrieved. It is also a generalization
of the induction head task (Olsson et al. 2022) and recent
research has shown the ability of LLMs to solve mechanistic
tasks is highly correlated with their real performance in NLP
tasks (Olsson et al. 2022; Fu et al. 2022; Arora et al. 2024;
Nichani, Damian, and Lee 2024; Poli et al. 2024).
We theoretically and empirically show that, within the CAT
layer, attention and convolution exhibit strong synergy and
complementarity to solve these mechanistic tasks while enjoying length generalization benefits. As a concrete example,
the left side of Figure 1 displays the AR performance for various test-time sequence lengths. As the sequence length grows,
we observe two distinct failure modes: Mamba’s accuracy degrades due to its finite state dimension whereas attention-only
models degrade due to the length extension bottlenecks of
PE. In contrast, CAT maintains perfect accuracy and length
1

The transformer architecture consists of attention and MLP
layers. For theoretical analysis and synthetic experiments, we will
entirely focus on the Convolution Augmented Attention layer described in Fig. 2. For this reason, we will use the CAT acronym to
refer to both Convolution-Augmented Transformer and Attention.

