The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Text2midi: Generating Symbolic Music from Captions
Keshav Bhandari1 , Abhinaba Roy2 , Kyra Wang2 , Geeta Puri2 , Simon Colton1 , Dorien Herremans2
1

Queen Mary University of London
Singapore University of Technology and Design
k.bhandari@qmul.ac.uk, abhinaba roy@sutd.edu.sg, kyra wang@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
2

Abstract
This paper introduces text2midi, an end-to-end model
to generate MIDI files from textual descriptions. Leveraging
the growing popularity of multimodal generative approaches,
text2midi capitalizes on the extensive availability of textual data and the success of large language models (LLMs).
Our end-to-end system harnesses the power of LLMs to generate symbolic music in the form of MIDI files. Specifically,
we utilize a pretrained LLM encoder to process captions,
which then condition an autoregressive transformer decoder
to produce MIDI sequences that accurately reflect the provided descriptions. This intuitive and user-friendly method
significantly streamlines the music creation process by allowing users to generate music pieces using text prompts. We
conduct comprehensive empirical evaluations, incorporating
both automated and human studies, that show our model generates MIDI files of high quality that are indeed controllable by text captions that may include music theory terms
such as chords, keys, and tempo. We release the code and
music samples on our demo page for users to interact with
text2midi.

Figure 1: Overview of our approach. We use a pretrained
LLM encoder to encode input captions. This is passed to the
trained transformer decoder which generates encoded MIDI
tokens autoregressively.

text, the potential of large language models has not yet been
fully realized for symbolic music generation. In this paper, we introduce text2midi, a system that leverages the
power of LLMs to generate symbolic music in the form of
MIDI files from textual descriptions.
In Music Information Retrieval (MIR), MIDI is a crucial format that provides a symbolic representation of music
(Schedl et al. 2014; Herremans, Chuan, and Chew 2017). Its
symbolic nature has established it as a popular format for
music creation, which is used by music producers and composers in popular Digital Audio Workstations (DAWs).
In recent times, there is a growing emphasis on the creation of music based on unstructured text instructions (Copet
et al. 2023; Melechovsky et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2023).
These models leverage large language models to transform
textual descriptions of musical attributes into concrete audio
compositions. This process requires a precise alignment between textual content and musical features to ensure that the
resulting music accurately reflects the provided text guidelines. However, the majority of existing methodologies primarily focus on directly producing audio music. In contrast,
symbolic music representation, particularly in MIDI format,
has not received sufficient attention from researchers within
the community. The lack of text-to-midi models can largely

Code — https://github.com/AMAAI-Lab/Text2midi

Introduction
The rapid advancements in large language models (LLMs)
have revolutionized the way we interact with and leverage
various forms of media, including text, images, and audio.
Researchers have been able to build systems that demonstrate remarkable capabilities in both analyzing diverse input texts as well as generate highly precise text, image,
video, as well as audio output (Touvron et al. 2023; Ramesh
et al. 2022, 2021; Melechovsky et al. 2024) This has paved
the way for a wide array of downstream applications such
as question-answering systems (Touvron et al. 2023), image generation tools (Ramesh et al. 2021), and even music
generation platforms (suno.com 2024). These breakthroughs
have ushered in a new era of multimodal intelligence, where
the integration of multiple data sources and modalities can
be harnessed to enhance our understanding, creativity, and
problem-solving abilities across a wide range of domains.
While prior work has explored generating audio music from
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23478

