The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

What to Preserve and What to Transfer:
Faithful, Identity-Preserving Diffusion-based Hairstyle Transfer
Chaeyeon Chung, Sunghyun Park, Jeongho Kim and Jaegul Choo
KAIST AI, South Korea
cy chung@kaist.ac.kr, psh01087@gmail.com, {rlawjdghek, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

pre-trained on FFHQ dataset (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019),
they often fail to generalize to face images with various head
poses or focal lengths that lie outside the latent space of
StyleGAN2. This hinders its application to real-world scenarios (Yang et al. 2022, 2023b) (see Fig. 5). Moreover,
previous latent optimization methods have limitations in
preserving fine-grained details of reference hairstyles (e.g.,
curl), especially under extreme pose variations.
On the other hand, recent diffusion-based image editing
demonstrates superior performance in manipulating human
images compared to GANs. Thanks to the powerful generative prior of text-to-image diffusion models, there has been
success in image editing based on human poses (Hu 2024;
Kim et al. 2024b), depth (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023),
reference images (Yang et al. 2023a), and clothing (Kim
et al. 2024a; Choi et al. 2024). However, it is still underexplored to leverage diffusion models for hairstyle transfer.
To address the above-mentioned challenges, we propose a
novel hairstyle transfer diffusion model called HairFusion,
which generates a high-fidelity image with the reference
hairstyle while faithfully preserving the surrounding features such as head shape, clothing, and backgrounds. We design a one-stage diffusion hairstyle transfer model building
upon a pre-trained diffusion model (Rombach et al. 2022) to
enhance generalizability on various face images. Inspired by
recent literature on virtual try-on (Choi et al. 2021; Lee et al.
2022; Kim et al. 2024a), we posit that hairstyle transfer can
be conceptualized as a process of filling in the hair region
of a face image, conditioned on the reference hairstyle (i.e.,
exemplar-based image inpainting). Adapting the diffusionbased image inpainting for the hairstyle transfer, we introduce a hair-agnostic representation and a hair align crossattention (Align-CA). We first obtain a hair-agnostic representation by thoroughly eliminating the original hair information in the face image. Next, the Align-CA aligns the reference hairstyle with the hair region of the face image by
learning the correspondence between them. Dense pose representations (Guler, Neverova, and Kokkinos 2018) are provided to the Align-CA to encourage the model to indicate
the relative pose difference between reference hair and face.
Nevertheless, when editing the hairstyle via diffusionbased inpainting, challenges remain in effectively preserving essential original features such as identity, clothing, and
background of the source face image. To solve this issue,

Hairstyle transfer is a challenging task in the image editing
field that modifies the hairstyle of a given face image while
preserving its other appearance and background features. The
existing hairstyle transfer approaches heavily rely on StyleGAN, which is pre-trained on cropped and aligned face images. Hence, they struggle to generalize under challenging
conditions such as extreme variations of head poses or focal lengths. To address this issue, we propose a one-stage
hairstyle transfer diffusion model, HairFusion, that applies
to real-world scenarios. Specifically, we carefully design a
hair-agnostic representation as the input of the model, where
the original hair information is thoroughly eliminated. Next,
we introduce a hair align cross-attention (Align-CA) to accurately align the reference hairstyle with the face image while
considering the difference in their head poses. To enhance the
preservation of the face image’s original features, we leverage adaptive hair blending during the inference, where the
output’s hair regions are estimated by the cross-attention map
in Align-CA and blended with non-hair areas of the face image. Our experimental results show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance compared to the existing methods in preserving the integrity of both the transferred hairstyle
and the surrounding features.

Introduction
With the recent advancement of generative models (Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022), image editing technologies (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023; Yang et al.
2023a; Hertz et al. 2022) have shown impressive results.
The task of hairstyle transfer is one of the most challenging image editing tasks, focusing on modifying an input face
image’s hairstyle to the reference hairstyle. This technology can offer users a preview of how different hairstyles
would look on them, enhancing customer satisfaction. The
key challenge of hairstyle transfer is to transfer the reference
hairstyle to the face while preserving other features (e.g.,
identity, clothing, and background) in the face image.
Recent hairstyle transfer (Kim et al. 2022; Khwanmuang
et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2023; Nikolaev et al. 2024) allows
users to manipulate hairstyles using StyleGAN2 (Karras
et al. 2020), which can generate high-fidelity face images.
However, such GAN-based approaches still suffer from several challenges. First, since most of them rely on StyleGAN2
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2582

