The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Universality of Real Minimal Complexity Reservoir
Robert Simon Fong1 , Boyu Li2 , Peter Tiňo1
1

2

School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK
Department of Mathematical Sciences, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico, 88003, USA
r.s.fong@bham.ac.uk, boyuli@nmsu.edu, p.tino@bham.ac.uk.com

Abstract
Reservoir Computing (RC) models, a subclass of recurrent
neural networks, are distinguished by their fixed, non-trainable
input layer and dynamically coupled reservoir, with only
the static readout layer being trained. This design circumvents the issues associated with backpropagating error signals
through time, thereby enhancing both stability and training
efficiency. RC models have been successfully applied across a
broad range of application domains. Crucially, they have been
demonstrated to be universal approximators of time-invariant
dynamic filters with fading memory, under various settings of
approximation norms and input driving sources.
Simple Cycle Reservoirs (SCR) represent a specialized class
of RC models with a highly constrained reservoir architecture,
characterized by uniform ring connectivity and binary inputto-reservoir weights with an aperiodic sign pattern. For linear
reservoirs, given the reservoir size, the reservoir construction
has only one degree of freedom – the reservoir cycle weight.
Such architectures are particularly amenable to hardware implementations without significant performance degradation
in many practical tasks. In this study we endow these observations with solid theoretical foundations by proving that
SCRs operating in real domain are universal approximators
of time-invariant dynamic filters with fading memory. Our
results supplement recent research showing that SCRs in the
complex domain can approximate, to arbitrary precision, any
unrestricted linear reservoir with a non-linear readout. We
furthermore introduce a novel method to drastically reduce
the number of SCR units, making such highly constrained
architectures natural candidates for low-complexity hardware
implementations. Our findings are supported by empirical
studies on real-world time series datasets.

Introduction
Reservoir Computing (RC) is a subclass of Recurrent Neural
Network defined by a fixed parametric state space representation (the reservoir) and a static trained readout map. This
distinctive approach not only simplifies the training process
by focusing adjustments solely on the static readout layer
but also enhances computational efficiency. The simplest
recurrent neural network realization of RC (Jaeger 2001;
Maass, Natschlager, and Markram 2002; Tiňo and Dorffner
2001; Lukosevicius and Jaeger 2009) are known as Echo
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16622

State Networks (ESN) (Jaeger 2001, 2002a,b; Jaeger and
Haas 2004). The representation capacity of ESNs have been
demonstrated in a series of papers, showing existentially that
ESNs can approximate any time-invariant dynamic filters
with fading memory in a variety of settings (Grigoryeva and
Ortega 2018a,b,b; Gonon and Ortega 2019).
Simple Cycle Reservoirs (SCRs) (Rodan and Tiňo 2010)
are RC models characterized by a highly restricted architecture: a uniform weight ring connectivity among reservoir
neurons and binary uniformly weighted input-to-reservoir
connections. This simplicity is particularly advantageous
for hardware implementations, reducing implementation and
computational costs, as well as enhancing real-time processing capabilities without degrading performance. However,
while cyclic reservoir topology with a single connection
weight has been adopted in a variety of hardware implementations (Appeltant et al. 2011; Nakajima, Tanaka, and
Hashimoto 2021; Coarer et al. 2018; Abe et al. 2024), its
theoretical foundations have been missing. To rectify this
situation we rigorously prove that SCRs operating in real domain are universal approximators of time-invariant dynamic
filters with fading memory. Our results supplement recent
research (Li, Fong, and Tino 2024) showing that SCRs in
the complex domain can approximate, to arbitrary precision,
any unrestricted linear reservoir with a non-linear readout,
opening the door to a broad range of practical scenarios involving real-valued computations. Furthermore, based on our
constructive proof arguments, we formulate a novel method
to drastically reduce the number of SCR units, making such
highly constrained architectures natural candidates for lowcomplexity hardware implementations.
We emphasize that proving that SCR architecture retains
universality when moving from the complex to the real domain is far from straightforward. Indeed, as shown in (Li,
Fong, and Tino 2024), attempts to even partially restrict SCR
in the complex domain to the real one result in more complex
multi-reservoir structures.1
We conclude the paper with numerical experiments that
1
As we will show, to retain advantages of the single simple SCR
structure in the real domain and retain universality one needs to consider orthogonal similarity throughout the approximation pipeline,
as well as completion of the set of roots of unity in the canonical form of orthogonal matrices for cyclic dilation of orthogonally
dilated coupling matrices.

