The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Compact Implicit Neural Representation for Efficient Storage of Massive 4D
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Ruoran Li1 , Runzhao Yang1 , Wenxin Xiang2 , Yuxiao Cheng1 , Tingxiong Xiao1 , Lu Yang3 ,
Jinli Suo1 *
1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
School of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
School of Mechanical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, China
lrr24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; jlsuo@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

each file restricted by generalization issues and time cost.
Thirdly, most dynamic image compressors focus on reducing redundancies by modeling correlations between adjacent frames because of the high continuity of them. However, distinct from natural videos, the correlations in fMRI
data predominantly reside within and between temporal signals of various brain regions (McKeown et al. 1998; Van
Den Heuvel and Pol 2010), rather than adjacent frames,
making it inefficient to apply these algorithms to fMRI.
To address these issues, we attempt to employ Implicit
Neural Representation (INR) as the framework for fMRI
compression for the first time, which possesses unique advantages. Unlike encoder-decoder architectures, INR trains
a distinct network for each compression target data, which
bypasses the generalization issue and can efficiently model
the unique features in each data. This approach aligns with
the specific characteristics of fMRI and the requirement
of high modeling accuracy for medical data compression.
Furthermore, INR excels in modeling internal data correlations(Sitzmann et al. 2020), which aligns with strong
inter-regional correlations typical of fMRI(McKeown et al.
1998; Van Den Heuvel and Pol 2010). Additionally, INRbased compression algorithms are highly flexible in modeling correlations and are not limited to those between adjacent frames, allowing for better reduction of redundancies
in fMRI compared to existing algorithms.
To better leverage the advantages of INR, we designed a
novel INR architecture specifically for fMRI, which is fundamentally different from existing INR frameworks. Firstly,
from an overall perspective, unlike NeRV’s frame-indexto-frame mapping(Chen et al. 2021), our network architecture employs spatial-coordinate-to-time-series mapping,
which aligns better with the higher temporal signal correlations among adjacent voxels within brain regions in fMRI,
reducing intra-region redundancies. Moreover, our network
decomposes the data into reusable neuronal activation patterns and their corresponding spatial distributions to effectively remove inter-region redundancies. Subsequently, we
further reduce redundancies in the spatial distribution of activation patterns and introduce a feature fusion network to
simulate the integration of neuronal activation patterns in
real fMRI data, enhancing the encoding precision. Finally,
we introduce an initialization scheme for neuronal activation
patterns based on Independent Component Analysis (ICA)

Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data is a
widely used kind of four-dimensional biomedical data, which
requires effective compression. However, fMRI compressing
poses unique challenges due to its intricate temporal dynamics, low signal-to-noise ratio, and complicated underlying redundancies. This paper reports a novel compression paradigm
specifically tailored for fMRI data based on Implicit Neural
Representation (INR). The proposed approach focuses on removing the various redundancies among the time series by
employing several methods, including (i) conducting spatial
correlation modeling for intra-region dynamics, (ii) decomposing reusable neuronal activation patterns, and (iii) using
proper initialization together with nonlinear fusion to describe the inter-region similarity. This scheme appropriately
incorporates the unique features of fMRI data, and experimental results on publicly available datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method, surpassing state-of-theart algorithms in both conventional image quality evaluation
metrics and fMRI downstream tasks. This work in this paper
paves the way for sharing massive fMRI data at low bandwidth and high fidelity.

Introduction
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), as a
widely available imaging tool, has been widely used in cognitive neuroscience, clinical psychology, and psychiatry. As
large-scale fMRI datasets continue to proliferate, there is
an urgent necessity for a high-quality fMRI compression
paradigm to achieve efficient storage and transmission.
However, there are several challenges in compressing
fMRI data. Firstly, fMRI signals have a lower signal-tonoise ratio(Diedrichsen and Shadmehr 2005), and exhibit
special patterns that are completely different from natural
images. These issues pose challenges for existing algorithms
in identifying and modeling the valid information within
fMRI data. Secondly, there is significant variability in neural dynamics(Krohn et al. 2023) across different fMRI files.
Current image compression algorithms are predominantly
based on pre-trained encoder-decoder architectures, which
cannot be fine-tuned to model the specific characteristics of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4914

