The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unravelling Causal Genetic Biomarkers of Alzheimer’s Disease via Neuron to
Gene-token Backtracking in Neural Architecture: A Groundbreaking
Reverse-Gene-Finder Approach
Victor OK Li* , Yang Han, Jacqueline CK Lam*
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{vli, yhan, jcklam}@eee.hku.hk

Abstract

However, the complex etiology of AD remains not fully understood, highlighting the need to develop innovative methods to unravel the causal genetic biomarkers of AD and
deepen our understanding of the disease mechanisms. The
rest of this section provides (1) an overview of AD, and the
key known genes associated with the disease, (2) a review of
recent advances in deep learning techniques for AD genetic
biomarker identification to highlight the research gaps in existing gene-finding approaches, and (3) the significance and
objectives of this study.

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) affects over 55 million people
globally, yet the key genetic contributors remain poorly understood. Leveraging recent advancements in genomic foundation models, we present the innovative Reverse-GeneFinder technology, a ground-breaking neuron-to-gene-token
backtracking approach in a neural network architecture to
elucidate the novel causal genetic biomarkers driving AD
onset. Reverse-Gene-Finder comprises three key innovations.
Firstly, we exploit the observation that genes with the highest
probability of causing AD, defined as the most causal genes
(MCGs), must have the highest probability of activating those
neurons with the highest probability of causing AD, defined
as the most causal neurons (MCNs). Secondly, we utilize a
gene token representation at the input layer to allow each
gene (known or novel to AD) to be represented as a discrete
and unique entity in the input space. Lastly, in contrast to
the existing neural network architectures, which track neuron activations from the input layer to the output layer in a
feed-forward manner, we develop an innovative backtracking method to track backwards from the MCNs to the input
layer, identifying the Most Causal Tokens (MCTs) and the
corresponding MCGs. Reverse-Gene-Finder is highly interpretable, generalizable, and adaptable, providing a promising
avenue for application in other disease scenarios.

1.1

AD is characterized by the accumulation of amyloid-beta
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain, leading to
cognitive decline, memory loss, and, ultimately, loss of independent function. Understanding the genetic underpinnings
of AD has been a central focus of research in the field. One
of the most prominent genetic biomarkers associated with
AD is the APOE gene (Farrer et al. 1997). Individuals who
carry one or two copies of the APOE ε4 allele often (but
not necessarily) have a significantly higher risk of developing AD. In addition to APOE ε4, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified other genetic variants
that contribute to a modest increase in risk for AD, such as
those in BIN1 and CLU genes (Bertram et al. 2007). Despite
these findings, the limitations of GWAS make it challenging
to identify the causal AD biomarkers from the known ADassociated biomarkers (Neuner, Julia, and Goate 2020).

Code — https://github.com/yanghangit/RGF/

1

Brief Overview of Alzheimer’s Disease and
Key Genes Characterizing AD

Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that represents the most common cause of dementia worldwide. It affects over 55 million people globally.
The societal and economic impact of AD is profound, with
costs associated with care and treatment exceeding hundreds
of billions of dollars annually, placing an immense burden
on families and healthcare systems (Alzheimer’s Association 2024).
Genetic studies over the past decades have significantly
advanced our understanding of AD, uncovering genetic
biomarkers associated with AD and providing valuable insights into the biological pathways involved in the disease.

The pathogenesis of AD is highly complex, involving interactions across different genes, somatic mutations, epigenetic modifications, and influences on genetic expressions
due to environmental factors (Downey et al. 2022; Migliore
and Coppedè 2022). This complexity poses significant challenges in predicting and understanding the etiology and progression of AD based solely on a list of correlated genetic
biomarkers. The complexity highlights the need for a more
sophisticated approach via identifying the causal genetic
biomarkers of AD and unravelling their underlying causal
mechanisms.

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18466

