The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning Using Trajectory Classification
Ze Gong, Akshat Kumar* , Pradeep Varakantham*
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management University
{zegong, akshatkumar, pradeepv}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

policies through constrained optimization. Nonetheless, online safe RL may inevitably violate safety constraints during
training and deployment due to the need for environmental
interaction. To mitigate this issue, offline safe RL (Liu et al.
2023a) has emerged as a promising learning paradigm, enabling policy learning using pre-collected offline datasets,
thus avoiding direct interactions with the environment.
Existing offline safe RL research has explored several directions (Liu et al. 2023a), such as enforcing constrained
optimization into offline RL (Xu, Zhan, and Zhu 2022), using distribution correction-based methods (Lee et al. 2022),
and employing sequence modeling frameworks (Liu et al.
2023b). Though promising, several limitations remain. First,
most existing methods rely on local cost constraints at each
time step, which can lead to loss of sequential information
related to global cost constraints at the trajectory level (Xu,
Zhan, and Zhu 2022; Lee et al. 2022). This often results in
either overly conservative policies with low rewards or the
failure to generate a safe policy. Additionally, most existing works employ min-max optimization within the conventional RL framework (Xu, Zhan, and Zhu 2022), resulting
in an intertwined training process involving reward maximization and safety compliance resulting in stability issues. Lastly, some approaches require auxiliary models to be
learned alongside the policy (Lee et al. 2022), or depend on
complex model architectures (Liu et al. 2023b; Zheng et al.
2024a), which contribute to high computational complexity.
To address such challenges, we propose a novel approach
that solves the offline safe RL problem by utilizing a binary
trajectory classifier. This classifier allows us to directly optimize a policy by leveraging both desirable and undesirable
samples at the trajectory level, without relying on conventional min-max optimization or traditional RL techniques.
We apply a two-phase algorithm. In the first phase, we divide
the offline dataset into two subsets, one containing desirable
trajectories and the other containing undesirable ones. The
desirable set includes safe trajectories that satisfy the constraints, with each trajectory weighted according to its cumulative reward to reflect its level of desirability. The undesirable set comprises (a) all unsafe trajectories, and (b)
selection of safe trajectories with low rewards. We also develop a concrete empirical methodology to construct such
subsets. In the second phase, we optimize the policy within a
classifier designed to distinguish between desirable and un-

Offline safe reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a
promising approach for learning safe behaviors without engaging in risky online interactions with the environment.
Most existing methods in offline safe RL rely on cost constraints at each time step (derived from global cost constraints) and this can result in either overly conservative policies or violation of safety constraints. In this paper, we propose to learn a policy that generates desirable trajectories
and avoids undesirable trajectories. To be specific, we first
partition the pre-collected dataset of state-action trajectories
into desirable and undesirable subsets. Intuitively, the desirable set contains high reward and safe trajectories, and undesirable set contains unsafe trajectories and low-reward safe
trajectories. Second, we learn a policy that generates desirable trajectories and avoids undesirable trajectories, where
(un)desirability scores are provided by a classifier learnt from
the dataset of desirable and undesirable trajectories. This approach bypasses the computational complexity and stability
issues of a min-max objective that is employed in existing
methods. Theoretically, we also show our approach’s strong
connections to existing learning paradigms involving human
feedback. Finally, we extensively evaluate our method using
the DSRL benchmark for offline safe RL. Empirically, our
method outperforms competitive baselines, achieving higher
rewards and better constraint satisfaction across a wide variety of benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in autonomous decision-making tasks (Mnih et al.
2015; Ibarz et al. 2021; Kiran et al. 2021). However, ensuring safety during policy training and deployment remains a significant challenge, especially for safety-critical
tasks where unsafe behavior can lead to unexpected consequences. To address the problem, safe RL has been extensively studied to develop policies that satisfy safety constraints, typically formulated within the framework of constrained Markov Decision Processes (Altman 2021; Gu et al.
2022). Safe RL agents generally interact with the environment to gather information on rewards and costs, and learn
* Equal advising.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16880

