The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Differential Alignment for Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Xinyu He, Xinhui Li, Xiaojie Guo*
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
xy he68@tju.edu.cn, lixinhui@tju.edu.cn, xj.max.guo@gmail.com

Previous: Equal Attention Alignment

Abstract
Domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) aims to generalize an object detector trained on labeled source-domain data
to a target domain without annotations, the core principle of
which is source-target feature alignment. Typically, existing
approaches employ adversarial learning to align the distributions of the source and target domains as a whole, barely
considering the varying significance of distinct regions, say
instances under different circumstances and foreground vs
background areas, during feature alignment. To overcome the
shortcoming, we investigate a differential feature alignment
strategy. Specifically, a prediction-discrepancy feedback instance alignment module (dubbed PDFA) is designed to adaptively assign higher weights to instances of higher teacherstudent detection discrepancy, effectively handling heavier
domain-specific information. Additionally, an uncertaintybased foreground-oriented image alignment module (UFOA)
is proposed to explicitly guide the model to focus more on
regions of interest. Extensive experiments on widely-used
DAOD datasets together with ablation studies are conducted
to demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed method and reveal its superiority over other SOTA alternatives.

Image Alignment

Instance Alignment

Ours: Differential Attention Alignment

Code — https://github.com/EstrellaXyu/DifferentialAlignment-for-DAOD

Introduction
Foreground-oriented
Image Alignment

As one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision, object detection plays a vital role in a wide spectrum of applications, such as autonomous driving (Li, Chen, and Shen
2019), video surveillance (Nascimento and Marques 2006),
and person re-identification (Ye et al. 2021), to name a
few. With the significant development of deep learning and
the availability of large-scale annotated datasets, it has experienced remarkable performance improvements in recent
years (Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2017; Redmon et al. 2016;
Carion et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2024). Despite such advancements, the detection environment is not always as expected
in practice, leading to performance discrepancies between
the training and testing domains, a.k.a. the domain shift issue (Chen et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2021). This shift, driven by

Discrepancy-feedback
Instance Alignment

Figure 1: Different from previous methods adopting equal
attention feature alignment (upper part), our design manipulates features from the backbone and ROI head with differential attention (lower part). Different colors represent
different alignment weights/attentions.

variations in illumination, weather, background, and other
factors, frequently degrades the performance of detection.
To mitigate this issue, a straightforward way is to acquire
and annotate ample and diverse real-world data for training.
Nevertheless, even if this manner were possible, it would be
extremely laborious and time-consuming.
As a more appealing option, domain adaptive object de-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17150

