The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sim4Rec: Data-Free Model Extraction Attack on Sequential Recommendation
Yihao Wang1 , Jiajie Su1 , Chaochao Chen1 , Meng Han1 , Chi Zhang2 , Jun Wang3 *
1
Zhejiang University
Independent Researcher
3
OPPO Research Institute
{yihaowang, sujiajie, zjuccc, mhan}@zju.edu.cn, zhangchi900207@gmail.com, junwang.lu@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Model extraction attack shows promising performance in
revealing sequential recommendation (SeqRec) robustness,
e.g., as an upstream task of transfer-based attack to provide
optimization feedback for downstream attacks. However, existing work either heavily relies on impractical prior knowledge or has impressive attack performance. In this paper,
we focus on data-free model extraction attack on SeqRec,
which aims to efficiently train a surrogate model that closely
imitates the target model in a practical setting. Conducting
such an attack is challenging. First, imitating sequential training data for accurate model extraction is hard without prior
knowledge. Second, limited queries for the target model require the attack to be efficient. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel adversarial framework Sim4Rec which
includes two modules, i.e., controllable sequence generation
and reinforced adversarial distillation. The former allows
a sequential generator to produce synthetic data similar to
training data through pre-training with controllable generated
samples. The latter efficiently extracts the target model via
reinforced adversarial knowledge distillation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the advancement of Sim4Rec.

1

Figure 1: Compared to previous work in data-driven, the
pipeline of model extraction attack in data-free setting.

a replacement for the target (victim) model. In second step,
they perform various downstream attacks on the surrogate
model and optimize attack performance based on feedback
from the surrogate model. Therefore, downstream attack
performance heavily relies on the former model extraction
attack which is necessary to be further studied. Nevertheless,
as blue rectangle shown in Fig.1, most existing model extraction attacks on SeqRec either have impractical assumptions that the attacker has full or partial prior knowledge of
the target model, i.e., training data, parameter, and architecture, or demonstrate unimpressive attack performance.
In this paper, we focus on model extraction attack on
SeqRec, considering a more stringent and practical datafree setting, where the attacker has no access to the target
model’s prior knowledge and limited budgets to query the
target model. In such scenario, as illustrated by green rectangle in Fig.1, the attacker first generates synthetic data, querying the target model to obtain ranked lists as output. Then the
tuple ⟨Query, Output⟩ is utilized to train a surrogate model
that closely imitates the target model for attack.
Unfortunately, conducting remarkable data-free model
extraction attack on SeqRec remains non-trivial due to the
following challenges: CH1: How to imitate sequential
training data accurately in data-free setting. To achieve
accurate data-free model extraction, it is essential to generate synthetic sequences that closely approximate the distribution of training data. However, due to the tremendous discrete sample space and the lack of prior knowledge, the generation of sequences similar to training data remains a chal-

Introduction

In the contemporary age of information abundance, sequential recommendation (SeqRec) holds a crucial position in
various domains (Guy et al. 2010; Okura et al. 2017; Yue
et al. 2021a; Su et al. 2023b,a), serving as a driver in guiding
users to discover content they are interested in. However, as
concerns about user privacy grow and various data privacy
protection policies are enacted, e.g., CCPA1 , the security issues of SeqRec are increasingly in the spotlight.
Recently, adversarial and privacy attack methods on SeqRec have been widely researched (Deldjoo, Noia, and
Merra 2021). Among these attack methods, an advanced
technique named transfer-based attack achieves the promising performance (Tang, Wen, and Wang 2020; Lin et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2022; Zhu
et al. 2023b). As Fig.1 shows, transfer-based attack can be
split into two steps, i.e., model extraction attack and downstream attack. In first step, they train a surrogate model as
* Jun Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa

12766

