The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploiting Diffusion Prior for Real-World Image Dehazing with Unpaired
Training
Yunwei Lan1,2 , Zhigao Cui1 * , Chang Liu2 , Jialun Peng2 , Nian Wang1 , Xin Luo2 , Dong Liu2 *
1

Rocket Force University of Engineering
University of Science and Technology of China
yunweilan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cuizg10@126.com, lc980413@mail.ustc.edu.cn, pjl@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
nianwang04@outlook.com, xinluo@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Unpaired training has been verified as one of the most effective paradigms for real scene dehazing by learning from
unpaired real-world hazy and clear images. Although numerous studies have been proposed, current methods demonstrate
limited generalization for various real scenes due to limited
feature representation and insufficient use of real-world prior.
Inspired by the strong generative capabilities of diffusion
models in producing both hazy and clear images, we exploit
diffusion prior for real-world image dehazing, and propose
an unpaired framework named Diff-Dehazer. Specifically, we
leverage diffusion prior as bijective mapping learners within
the CycleGAN, a classic unpaired learning framework. Considering that physical priors contain pivotal statistics information of real-world data, we further excavate real-world
knowledge by integrating physical priors into our framework.
Furthermore, we introduce a new perspective for adequately
leveraging the representation ability of diffusion models by
removing degradation in image and text modalities, so as to
improve the dehazing effect. Extensive experiments on multiple real-world datasets demonstrate the superior performance
of our method.

Figure 1: (a) Previous dehazing methods with paired training. (b) Previous CycleGAN-based dehazing methods with
unpaired training. (c) Existing stable diffusion-based dehazing methods with paired training. (d) Our stable diffusionbased dehazing method with unpaired training.

to estimate A and t with hand-crafted physical priors, and
restore hazy images into clear ones by reversing the ASM.
Even so, these methods normally obtain over-saturated results, since hand-crafted physical priors are not universally
compatible with all scenes. With the advancement of deep
learning, prevailing methods (Zheng et al. 2023; Song et al.
2023; Qiu et al. 2023) aim to design neural networks to
model physical parameters, or directly restore images in an
end-to-end manner, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). These methods primarily utilize synthetic paired data for training since
obtaining real-world hazy and clear image pairs is virtually
impossible. Although improved performance is observed,
such paired training paradigm often fails to generalize to
real-world dehazing scenarios, due to the ill-presenting performance of trained networks that lack real-world information from hazy images.
To tackle the bottleneck of paired training, recent studies
(Zhao et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022) consider the paradigm of
unpaired training for image dehazing, so as to discover available information from real-world hazy images and model
the particular mapping between real-world hazy and clear
images. The key problem of unpaired training is how to impose a structure-consistent constraint between hazy and dehazed images, so that the influence of misaligned information caused by unpaired real clear images can be suppressed.
CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017) offers a classic solution by
leveraging a framework to maintain the consistency between
the mapped domain and the original one. Such paradigm, as
shown in Fig. 1 (b), is latter adopted by several studies, e.g.,
CycleDehaze (Engin, Genç, and Kemal Ekenel 2018), D4

Introduction
Under hazy conditions, the quality of images is severely degraded. Such degradation significantly affects the visual appeal of images, and causes information loss, further restricting their performance in other downstream tasks, e.g., object
detection (Huang, Le, and Jaw 2020). Therefore, image dehazing, which aims to restore clear images from hazy ones,
has been extensively studied in the past decade.
Following conventional studies, we normally formulate
the hazy image with the Atmospheric Scattering Model
(ASM), which can be written as:
I = Jt + A(1 − t),

(1)

where I represents the hazy image and J refers to its corresponding clear image. A and t denote the atmospheric light
and transmission map, where both of them are usually unknown. Following the formulation in Eq. (1), early dehazing
methods (He, Sun, and Tang 2010; Meng et al. 2013) try
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4455

