The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DREAM: Decoupled Discriminative Learning with Bigraph-aware Alignment for
Semi-supervised 2D-3D Cross-modal Retrieval
Fan Zhang1 , Changhu Wang2 , Zebang Cheng3 , Xiaojiang Peng3 ,
Dongjie Wang4 , Yijia Xiao5 , Chong Chen6 , Xian-Sheng Hua6 , Xiao Luo5 *
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
3
College of Big Data and Internet, Shenzhen Technology University, China
4
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Kansas, USA
5
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
6
Terminus Group, China
{fanzhang.karl, huaxiansheng, chenchong.cz, zebang.cheng}@gmail.com, wangch156@g.ucla.edu
pengxiaojiang@sztu.edu.cn, wangdongjie@ku.edu, {yijia.xiao, xiaoluo}@cs.ucla.edu
Abstract

multimodal data from artificial intelligence generated content
(AIGC) (Rombach et al. 2022; Peebles and Xie 2023; Zhu
et al. 2018; Achlioptas et al. 2018; Vahdat et al. 2022; Luo and
Hu 2021), 2D-3D cross-modal retrieval has captured rising
attention, which seeks to retrieve samples from one modality
using a query from another modality and thus opening up
new opportunities for seamless integration of heterogeneous
data sources (Lin et al. 2021; Nie et al. 2023). Recent 2D-3D
cross-modal retrieval approaches (Li et al. 2015; Pham et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2022; Jing et al. 2021; Feng et al. 2023; Xu
et al. 2022; Xue et al. 2023) typically involve mapping both
2D and 3D data into a shared hidden space and then calculating similarity scores for ranking and retrieval. Although they
have achieved some progress, these retrieval approaches are
generally data-hungry, requiring a large number of labeled
samples for end-to-end training. However, obtaining labels
can be prohibitively expensive and time-consuming, as it
demands extensive human labor for annotation. Moreover,
accurate annotation of 3D data becomes particularly challenging when related textual descriptions are absent (Jaritz et al.
2022; Jain et al. 2022). Note that AIGC has the capability to
produce a vast amount of unlabeled 2D and 3D data without
annotation, which is common in practice. In light of this, we
focus on the applicable problem of semi-supervised 2D-3D
cross-modal retrieval (Zhang et al. 2024b).

With the burst of big data, 2D-3D cross-modal retrieval has received increasing attention, which targets at retrieving relevant
data of one modality using the query of the other modality.
In this paper, we study an underexplored yet applicable problem of semi-supervised 2D-3D cross-modal retrieval, which
could suffer from serious label scarcity in real-world applications. Moreover, the huge heterogeneous gap could deteriorate
the process of learning from unlabeled data. In this work,
we propose a novel approach named Decoupled Discriminative Learning with Bigraph-aware Alignment (DREAM) for
semi-supervised 2D-3D cross-modal retrieval. The core of our
DREAM is to decouple the label prediction and reliability
measurement processes to reduce overconfident samples in
discriminative learning. In particular, we enhance a label prediction module with label propagation from labeled samples
and additionally introduce a reliability measurement module
to learn the scores of predicted labels. To reduce class-related
bias, we compare reliability scores with class-specific adaptive thresholds to identify samples for additional learning. In
addition, negative labels are estimated for unselected samples,
which guides soft semantic learning to make the best use of
all the information. To further minimize the heterogeneous
gap, we build a bigraph graph that connects cross-modal similar examples and then conduct learning to cluster with most
edges kept for alignment. Extensive experiments on several
benchmark datasets validate the superiority of the proposed
DREAM against many state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
3D visual understanding has demonstrated increasing significance as 3D data such as point clouds can effectively capture
internal spatial architecture (Song et al. 2023). As a crucial
challenge, 3D retrieval (Yang et al. 2019) aims to retrieve relevant 3D shape samples given a query sample. Early research
primarily focused on single-modal retrieval, which maps 3D
shapes into an embedding space while preserving the similarity structure. However, with the exponential growth of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13206

However, developing an effective framework for this problem is highly challenging, since it requires addressing two
critical questions. (1) How to effectively learn from 2D and
3D data under label scarcity? Previous works typically (Hu
et al. 2017; Sohn et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021) employ
pseudo-labeling strategies to annotate unlabeled data using
the model itself for discriminative learning. However, these
approaches often utilize the same module for label generation and selection, which carries a high risk of overfitting and
error accumulation. (2) How to reduce the discrepancy in the
embedding space across different modalities? Recent works
(Jing et al. 2021; Feng et al. 2023) commonly map 2D and 3D
data into a shared hidden space by pairwise labels or classwise anchors. However, these techniques cannot measure the
intricate semantics gap of different modalities, resulting in

