The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mixture-of-Attack-Experts with Class Regularization for Unified Physical-Digital
Face Attack Detection
Shunxin Chen1,2,3 * , Ajian Liu4,5 * , Junze Zheng5 , Jun Wan4,5,8† , Kailai Peng6 ,
Sergio Escalera7 , Zhen Lei4,5,8,9
1

Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
2
Nanjing Artificial Intelligence Research of IA, Nanjing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, China
4
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Macau University of Science and Technology (MUST), Macau, China
6
Purple Mountain Laboratory, China
7
Computer Vision Center (CVC), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
8
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
9
CAIR, HKISI, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hong Kong, China
chenshunxin23@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {ajian.liu,jun.wan}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Unified detection of digital and physical attacks in facial recognition systems has become a focal point of research in recent years. However, current multi-modal methods typically ignore the intra-class and inter-class variability across different types of attacks, leading to degraded performance.To address this limitation, we propose MoAE-CR,
a framework that effectively leverages class-aware information for improved attack detection. Our improvements manifest at two levels, i.e., the feature and loss level. At the feature level, we propose Mixture-of-Attack-Experts (MoAEs)
to capture more subtle differences among various types of
fake faces. At the loss level, we introduce Class Regularization (CR) through the Disentanglement Module (DM) and the
Cluster Distillation Module (CDM). The DM enhances class
separability by increasing the distance between the centers
of live and fake face classes. However, center-to-center constraints alone are insufficient to ensure distinctive representations for individual features. Thus, we propose the CDM to
further cluster features around their class centers while maintaining separation from other classes. Moreover, specific attacks that significantly deviate from common attack patterns
are often overlooked. To address this issue, our distance calculation prioritizes more distant features. Extensive experiments on two unified physical-digital attack datasets demonstrate the State-of-The-Art (SoTA) performance of the proposed method.

Figure 1: Comparison with existing methods. Greater overlap in histograms indicates poor class separation. (a) Previous methods focus on feature mining but overlook intraclass and inter-class variations. (b) Our method refines features and enforces constraints, achieving a more distinct and
separable feature space.

Introduction
Facial recognition systems remain susceptible to a variety
of attacks, broadly classified into physical and digital attacks. Each category comprises distinct types of attacks:
physical attacks include print attacks (Zhang et al. 2020), replay attacks, and mask attacks (Liu et al. 2022a; Fang et al.

2023), whereas digital attacks encompass methods (Rössler
et al. 2019) such as StyleGAN, FaceSwap, Deepfakes, and
NeuralTextures. Research on physical attack detection (Liu,
Jourabloo, and Liu 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2020;
Cai et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021) often involves the design
of specialized networks to automatically extract spoofing
cues and deceptive features from multiple modalities. In the
realm of deepfake detection, numerous studies (Fei et al.
2022; Qian et al. 2020) leverage the spatial rich model,

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2195

