The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking the Starting Point:
Collaborative Pre-Training for Federated Downstream Tasks
Yun-Wei Chu1 , Dong-Jun Han2 , Seyyedali Hosseinalipour3 , Christopher G. Brinton1
1

Purdue University
Yonsei University
3
University at Buffalo-SUNY
chu198@purdue.edu, djh@yonsei.ac.kr, alipour@buffalo.edu, cgb@purdue.edu
2

Abstract

when handling newly emerging and/or heterogeneous downstream FL tasks unanticipated during pre-training. These
include: (i) limited average accuracy (despite outperforming random initialization), due to unseen data and labels,
and (ii) high performance variance, leading to imbalanced
client accuracy. The histograms in Figure 1 show the performance of various pre-trained models in multiple downstream image classification tasks, illustrating these limitations. While centrally pre-trained models improve average
accuracy over random initialization, they introduce significant variance across clients, a well-cited concern in distributed AI/ML (Li et al. 2020; Cho et al. 2022). Moreover,
the achievable average accuracy of centralized pre-training
remains suboptimal, indicating difficulties in capturing data
heterogeneity and diversity in downstream FL tasks.
Goals. Motivated by these limitations, we aim to develop a robust FL pre-training methodology that achieves
two main objectives: (i) improved average accuracy, and (ii)
reduced performance variance for balanced client accuracy
in downstream tasks. This is challenging as it must work
across any arbitrary set of downstream FL tasks, including
unseen data and labels due to factors like time-varying environments or new clients joining the system. Thus, the pretrained model must handle unfamiliar classes and data heterogeneity during downstream FL tasks, a challenge overlooked by existing methods (Nguyen et al. 2023; Chen et al.
2023). We summarize our research question as follows:

A few recent studies have shown the benefits of using centrally pre-trained models to initialize federated learning (FL).
However, existing methods do not generalize well when faced
with an arbitrary set of downstream FL tasks. Specifically,
they often (i) achieve limited accuracy, especially with unseen downstream labels, and (ii) result in significant accuracy
variance, failing to provide a balanced performance across
clients. To address these challenges, we propose CoPreFL,
a collaborative/distributed pre-training approach that robustly
initializes for downstream FL tasks. CoPreFL leverages
model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) that tailors the global
model to mimic heterogeneous and unseen FL scenarios, resulting in a pre-trained model that is rapidly adaptable to any
FL task. Our MAML procedure integrates performance variance into the meta-objective function, balancing performance
across clients rather than solely optimizing for accuracy. Extensive experiments show that CoPreFL significantly enhances average accuracy and reduces variance in arbitrary
downstream FL tasks with unseen/seen labels, outperforming various pre-training baselines. Additionally, CoPreFL
proves compatible with different well-known FL algorithms
used in downstream tasks, boosting performance in each case.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has gained prominence as a distributed machine learning framework, enabling collaborative training among clients by periodic aggregations of local models on a server (McMahan et al. 2017; Konecný
et al. 2016). Recent research has extensively explored various aspects of FL, such as aggregation schemes (Ji et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2020) or local training techniques (Reddi
et al. 2021; Sahu et al. 2018). One aspect that remains understudied, however, is the impact of model initialization
in FL. While pre-training boosts performance in centralized
AI/ML (Radford et al. 2019; Devlin et al. 2019; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), most FL works still rely on random weight
initialization instead of well pre-trained models.
Motivation. Recently studies (Nguyen et al. 2023; Chen
et al. 2023) show that initializing FL with centrally pretrained models can enhance average client performance.
Yet, these methods face significant challenges, particularly

How can we design a pre-training strategy that can simultaneously (i) enhance average accuracy and (ii) reduce
performance variance across clients, for an arbitrary set
of downstream FL tasks which possess heterogeneity in
their data statistics as well as unseen labels?
Contributions. We propose CoPreFL, a Collaborative
Pre-training approach for handling an arbitrary set of downstream FL tasks, to address the above question. We make the
following key contributions:
• Distributed pre-training infused with meta-learning:
The core of CoPreFL is an FL-inspired pre-training
procedure which employs model-agnostic metalearning (MAML)-based updates on the collaborativelybulit global model. Through our developed MAML
procedure, CoPreFL ensures robust initializations,
enabling the pre-trained model to easily adapt to unseen

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16064

