The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Aspect Enhancement and Text Simplification in Multimodal Aspect-Based
Sentiment Analysis for Multi-Aspect and Multi-Sentiment Scenarios
Linlin Zhu1 , Heli Sun1 * , Qunshu Gao1 , Yuze Liu2 , Liang He1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
2
College of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
zhulinlin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, hlsun@xjtu.edu.cn, 13673559526@163.com, yuzeliu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, lhe@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

The food is delicious,
although the service is poor.

Multimodal Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis (MABSA)
plays a pivotal role in the advancement of sentiment analysis technology. Although current methods strive to integrate
multimodal information to enhance the performance of sentiment analysis, they still face two critical challenges when
dealing with multi-aspect and multi-sentiment data: i) the
importance of aspect terms within multimodal data is often overlooked, and ii) models fail to accurately associate
specific aspect terms with corresponding sentiment words in
multi-aspect and multi-sentiment sentences. To tackle these
problems, we propose a novel multimodal aspect-based sentiment analysis method that combines Aspect Enhancement
and Text Simplification (AETS). Specifically, we develop an
aspect enhancement module that boosts the ability of model
to discern relevant aspect terms. Concurrently, we employ
text simplification module to simplify and restructure multiaspect and multi-sentiment texts, accurately capturing aspects
and their corresponding sentiments while reducing irrelevant
information. Leveraging this method, we perform three tasks
including multimodal aspect term extraction, multimodal aspect sentiment classification, and joint multimodal aspectbased sentiment analysis. Experimental results indicate that
our proposed AETS model achieved state-of-the-art performance on two benchmark datasets.

service
food

(a) Aspect terms in the image.

food: The food delicious
service: the service poor
(b) An illustration of text simplification.

Figure 1: An example of multimodal data with multi-aspect
and multi-sentiment.

Previous research widely relies on the integration of visual and textual information to carry out sentiment analysis. Ju et al. (2021) are the first to define the concept of the
JMASA task and propose a joint learning approach incorporating the mechanism of image-text relations to evaluate
the contribution of visual content to the extraction of aspectsentiment pairs. Subsequently, Ling et al. (2022) propose
a task-specific Vision-Language Pre-training framework for
MABSA (VLP-MABSA), which is a unified multimodal
encoder-decoder architecture for all the pretraining and
downstream tasks. More recently, Yang et al. (2022) design
a multitask learning architecture named Cross-Modal Multitask Transformer (CMMT) for the End-to-End MABSA
task. Zhou et al. (2023) propose an Aspect-oriented Method
(AoM) to detect aspect-relevant semantic and sentiment information. Xiao et al. (2023) present Cross-modal Finegrained Alignment and Fusion Network (CoolNet) to boost
the performance of visual-language models in seamlessly integrating vision and language information. Recently, to align
images and text within the language modality across multiple granularities, Xiao et al. (2024) introduce Atlantis, an
innovative aesthetic-oriented methodology for JMASA task.
Although current methods have made impressive strides,
they still encounter several challenges: 1) How to accurately identify all aspects? Figure 1 presents a multimodal
example with multi-aspect and multi-sentiment. In MABSA,
extracting all aspect terms from multimodal data is essential but challenging. For example, the VLP-MABSA (Ling,
Yu, and Xia 2022) successfully identified the “Daniel Radcliffe” aspect in another example, yet overlooked the “Elijah

Introduction
Multimodal aspect-based sentiment analysis is a complex
and challenging research area that aims to address the problem of accurately capturing and interpreting the sentiment
responses of users from diverse sources of information
(Gandhi et al. 2023; Zhou et al. 2023). It is usually classified into three categories: Multimodal Aspect Term Extraction (MATE), Multimodal Aspect Sentiment Classification (MASC) and Joint Multimodal Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis (JMASA). MATE aims at identifying and extracting specific aspect terms from given multimodal data.
MASC aims at determining the sentiment propensities of
these aspects. JMASA is an integrative task that aims to
simultaneously extract and categorize the aspects and their
sentiments. As a hot challenge in the field of multimodal
learning, MABSA has attracted wide attention.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1683

