The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Multimodal Large Language Models Complex Reason via Similarity
Computation
Xiaofeng Zhang * †,1 , Fanshuo Zeng * ,2 , Yihao Quan 3 , Zheng Hui 4 , Jiawei Yao 5
1

2

Shanghai Jiaotong University
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Jiaotong University
4
Columbia University
5
University of Washington
framebreak@sjtu.edu.cn
Multimodal
encoder

Abstract
Multimodal large language models have experienced rapid
growth, and numerous different models have emerged. The
interpretability of LVLMs remains an under-explored area.
Especially when faced with more complex tasks such as
chain-of-thought reasoning, its internal mechanisms still resemble a black box that is difficult to decipher. By studying
the interaction and information flow between images and text,
we noticed that in models such as LLaVA1.5, image tokens
that are semantically related to text are more likely to have information flow convergence in the LLM decoding layer, and
these image tokens receive higher attention scores. However,
those image tokens that are less relevant to the text do not
have information flow convergence, and they only get very
small attention scores. To efficiently utilize the image information, we propose a new image token reduction method,
Simignore, which aims to improve the complex reasoning
ability of LVLMs by computing the similarity between image and text embeddings and ignoring image tokens that are
irrelevant and unimportant to the text. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
for complex reasoning tasks.

Cosine Similarity

Embedding
System
Token(36)

1
1
1

Visual
Encoder

Image
Token(576)

0
1
0

Text Decoder

1
0
1
0

Prompt：Q:<Image> \n
Context:Below is a
image...
Image embedding

Text embedding

1

Prompt
Token(n)
Output
Token(1)

1
1
1
1

Tokens

Figure 1: The simplified structure of our method.

extra image tokens lead to an increase in computation, and
some studies (Chu et al. 2023a; Yuan, Li, and Sun 2023)
have reduced the inference cost by using smaller LLMs with
fewer parameters, however, these approaches also lead to a
decrease in the inference power of LLMs (Chu et al. 2024).
Therefore, a better approach is to reduce the computational
cost by decreasing the length of input tokens. At the same
time, studies (Shang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024) have
shown that not all image tokens are important for model
inference and that a proper reduction of image tokens can
improve the inference ability of LLMs, leading to a significant increase in the accuracy of LLMs on visual complex
reasoning tasks.
There are some works on reducing image tokens, FastV
(Chen et al. 2024) visualized the attention scores of system tokens, image tokens, and user tokens during the LLM
inference process and found that the weight of image tokens was very small after the second layer, so he chose
to discard half of the image tokens with lower scores at
the second layer based on the ordering of their attention
scores. LLaVA-PruMerge (Shang et al. 2024) utilized the
self-attention mechanism between category tokens and visual tokens to observe the distribution of attention between

Code — https://github.com/FanshuoZeng/Simignore

Introduction
Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) have rapidly developed in recent years and become a research hotspot in the
field of computer vision as well as natural language processing. Multimodal large language models (LLMs) have shown
impressive performance on complex reasoning by leveraging chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting to generate intermediate reasoning chains as the rationale to infer the answer.
LVLMs utilizes a visual encoder such as CLIP to process
picture patches to get visual tokens, which are used as the
context of visual information to accomplish visual-textual
reasoning tasks. The visual coder processes these image
patches into hundreds of tokens, e.g., 576 for CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) and 729 for siglip (Zhai et al. 2023). These
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10203

