The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fit and Prune: Fast and Training-free Visual Token Pruning for
Multi-modal Large Language Models
Weihao Ye1,2 , Qiong Wu1,2 , Wenhao Lin1,2 , Yiyi Zhou1,2 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
{weihaoye, qiong, wenhaolin}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zhouyiyi@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent progress in Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) often use large image tokens to compensate the
visual shortcoming of MLLMs, which not only exhibits obvious redundancy but also greatly exacerbates the already
high computation. Token pruning is an effective solution for
speeding up MLLMs, but when and how to drop tokens still
remains a challenge. In this paper, we propose a novel and
training-free approach for the effective visual token pruning of MLLMs, termed FitPrune, which can quickly produce
a complete pruning recipe for MLLMs according to a predefined budget. Specifically, FitPrune considers token pruning as a statistical problem of MLLM and its objective is to
find out an optimal pruning scheme that can minimize the divergence of the attention distributions before and after pruning. In practice, FitPrune can be quickly accomplished based
on the attention statistics from a small batch of inference data,
avoiding the expensive trials of MLLMs. According to the
pruning recipe, an MLLM can directly remove the redundant
visual tokens of different examples during inference. To validate FitPrune, we apply it to a set of recent MLLMs, including LLaVA-1.5, LLaVA-HR and LLaVA-NEXT, and conduct
extensive experiments on a set of benchmarks. The experimental results show that our FitPrune can not only reduce
the computational complexity to a large extent, while retaining high performance, e.g., -54.9% FLOPs for LLaVA-NEXT
with only 0.5% accuracy drop. Notably, the pruning recipe
can be obtained in about 5 minutes.

Question: Is there a
dog in the image?

cross attention map
(Layer 11)

self attention map
(Layer 11)

Question: what is the
ship’s serial number?

cross attention
map (Layer 12)

self attention map
(Layer 12)

Figure 1: Visualization of the cross and self attention of image tokens of LLaVA-1.5 7B (Liu et al. 2023c). These tokens
become less active at the higher layer of an MLLM.

tic space of LLMs as visual tokens, thus performing multimodal sequence modeling in one Transformer architecture (Liu et al. 2023c; Luo et al. 2024). Despite effectiveness, this paradigm often suffers from excessive computation. For instance, LLaVA (Liu et al. 2023c) uses 576 image patches as the visual tokens, which requires 6.2 times
the computation compared to its text-only inference on ScienceQA (Lu et al. 2022). More recently, practitioners (Li
et al. 2023c; Luo et al. 2024) resort to increasing image resolution to alleviate the widely criticized visual shortcoming
of MLLMs (Tong et al. 2024), which also further exacerbates the already high computation of MLLMs.
In addition, the use of large visual tokens also involves
obvious redundancy in MLLMs. Compared with previous
Transformer-based VL models (Zhou et al. 2020, 2021), the
multi-head attention of MLLMs is unidirectional rather than
truly “global”. Simply put, MLLMs only propagate information from the previous tokens to the subsequent ones, and
their visual tokens are usually placed in front of the text
questions. In this case, they mainly serve to give visual semantics to the text tokens, but in fact not many of them are

Code — https://github.com/ywh187/FitPrune
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.10197

Introduction
Recently, the great success of large language models
(LLMs) (Zhang et al. 2022; OpenAI 2023; Touvron et al.
2023) also arouses an influx of interest in extending them
to more modalities, e.g., vision and language (VL) (Liu
et al. 2023c; Zhu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Lin et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2023). For VL tasks, a simple yet intuitive
solution for building multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) is to directly project the extracted image features onto the seman* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22128

