The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Segment Any 3D Gaussians
Jiazhong Cen1 , Jiemin Fang2 , Chen Yang1 , Lingxi Xie2 , Xiaopeng Zhang2 , Wei Shen1 * , Qi Tian2
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
{jiazhongcen, ycyangchen, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{jaminfong, 198808xc, zxphistory}@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract

radiance fields, the explicit 3D Gaussian structure is an ideal
carrier for 3D segmentation, as segmentation capabilities
can be integrated into 3D-GS as an intrinsic attribute, without necessitating an additional bulky segmentation module.

This paper presents SAGA (Segment Any 3D GAussians), a
highly efficient 3D promptable segmentation method based
on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS). Given 2D visual prompts
as input, SAGA can segment the corresponding 3D target represented by 3D Gaussians within 4 ms. This is achieved by attaching an scale-gated affinity feature to each 3D Gaussian to
endow it a new property towards multi-granularity segmentation. Specifically, a scale-aware contrastive training strategy
is proposed for the scale-gated affinity feature learning. It 1)
distills the segmentation capability of the Segment Anything
Model (SAM) from 2D masks into the affinity features and
2) employs a soft scale-gate mechanism to deal with multigranularity ambiguity in 3D segmentation through adjusting
the magnitude of each feature channel according to a specified 3D physical scale. Evaluations demonstrate that SAGA
achieves real-time multi-granularity segmentation with quality comparable to state-of-the-art methods. As one of the first
methods addressing promptable segmentation in 3D-GS, the
simplicity and effectiveness of SAGA pave the way for future
advancements in this field.

Accordingly, we propose SAGA (Segment Any 3D
GAussians), a 3D promptable segmentation method that integrates the segmentation capabilities of SAM into 3D-GS
seamlessly. SAGA takes 2D visual prompts as input and outputs the corresponding 3D target represented by 3D Gaussians. To achieve this purpose, two primary challenges are
faced. First, SAGA should figure out an efficient way to endow each 3D Gaussian with the ability of 3D segmentation,
so that the high efficiency of 3D-GS can be preserved. Second, as a robust promptable segmentation method, SAGA
must effectively address multi-granularity ambiguity, where
a single 3D Gaussian may belong to different parts or objects
at varying levels of granularity.
To address the two challenges, SAGA respectively introduces two solutions. First, SAGA attaches an affinity feature to each 3D Gaussian in a scene to endow it with a
new property towards segmentation. The similarity between
two affinity features indicates whether the corresponding 3D
Gaussians belong to the same 3D target. Second, inspired by
GARField (Kim et al. 2024), SAGA employs a soft scalegate mechanism to handle multi-granularity ambiguity. Depending on a specified 3D physical scale, the scale gate adjusts the magnitude of each feature channel. This mechanism
maps the Gaussian affinity features into different sub-spaces
for various scales, thereby preserving the multi-granularity
information and meanwhile mitigating the distraction in feature learning brought by multi-granularity ambiguity. To realize the two solutions, SAGA proposes a scale-aware contrastive training strategy, which distills the segmentation capability of SAM from 2D masks into scale-gated affinity
features. This strategy determines the correlations between
a pair of pixels within an image based on 3D scales. These
correlations are then used to supervise the rendered affinity
features through a correspondence distillation loss. The correlation information is transmitted to the Gaussian affinity
features via backpropagation facilitated by the differentiable
rasterization algorithm. After training, SAGA achieves realtime multi-granularity segmentation precisely.

Code — https://github.com/Jumpat/SegAnyGAussians

1

Introduction

Promptable segmentation has attracted increasing attention
and has seen significant advancements, particularly with the
development of 2D segmentation foundation models such as
the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al. 2023).
However, 3D promptable segmentation remains relatively
unexplored due to the scarcity of 3D data and the high cost of
annotation. To address these challenges, many studies (Cen
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Ying et al. 2024; Kim et al.
2024; Fan et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024) have proposed to extend SAM’s 2D segmentation capabilities to 3D using radiance fields, achieving notable success.
In this paper, we focus on promptable segmentation in 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) (Kerbl et al. 2023), which represents a significant milestone in radiance fields research due
to its superior rendering quality and efficiency compared to
its predecessors. We highlight that, in contrast to previous
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1971

