The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SemiDFL: A Semi-Supervised Paradigm for Decentralized Federated Learning
Xinyang Liu1,2 * , Pengchao Han3 * , Xuan Li4 , Bo Liu1†
2

1
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, China
Department of Aeronautical and Aviation Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China
3
School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, China
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
codex.lxy@gmail.com, hanpengchao@gdut.edu.cn, xuanli2003@seu.edu.cn, liubo@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract

Learning (DFL) (Beltrán et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024) addresses this issue by enabling direct communication between
clients and their connected neighbors for model aggregation.
By removing the central server, DFL alleviates the communication bottleneck of traditional FL and enhances model
scalability and robustness (Liu and Ding 2021a).
Existing CFL and DFL approaches are mostly designed
for supervised learning, which relies heavily on large quantities of labeled data for model training. However, collecting
and labeling extensive datasets in real-world applications is
challenging due to time constraints, high costs, and the need
for expert knowledge. Furthermore, clients often possess diverse data sources (e.g., labeled, unlabeled, or both) with
heterogeneous distributions (Yang et al. 2022). This raises
this paper’s key question: How can DFL be effective when
clients have labeled and unlabeled data sources in highly
non-iid scenarios?
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Yang et al. 2022) provides an effective approach to leverage unlabeled data for
improved model performance. The main idea is to estimate pseudo-labels for unlabeled data, enhancing model
training alongside data augmentation methods. Thus far, researchers have developed SSL methods for centralized federated learning scenarios (Liang et al. 2022; Li, Li, and
Wang 2023), where a central server facilitates the sharing
of supervised information among clients. However, applying these methods to DFL is challenging due to the lack of
central coordination. To the best of our knowledge, no SSL
method has been specifically designed for DFL with diverse
data sources and non-IID data distributions.
Designing a practical and effective semi-supervised DFL
method presents several challenges introduced by limited labels in non-IID settings. First, accurately estimating pseudolabels is crucial in SSL, but non-IID datasets make unbiased predictions challenging for a client’s local model in
DFL. Second, relying only on labeled and pseudo-labeled
data may be insufficient for model training particularly for
clients with limited labeled data, while unbiased data generation in highly non-IID DFL scenarios is challenging. In
this paper, we propose a semi-supervised learning paradigm
for DFL (SemiDFL) to deal with the above challenges, by
establishing consensus in both model and data spaces.
Specifically, we propose a neighborhood pseudo-labeling
method that introduces neighborhood classifiers for estimat-

Decentralized federated learning (DFL) realizes cooperative
model training among connected clients without relying on
a central server, thereby mitigating communication bottlenecks and eliminating the single-point failure issue present
in centralized federated learning (CFL). Most existing work
on DFL focuses on supervised learning, assuming each client
possesses sufficient labeled data for local training. However,
in real-world applications, much of the data is unlabeled. We
address this by considering a challenging yet practical semisupervised learning (SSL) scenario in DFL, where clients
may have varying data sources: some with few labeled samples, some with purely unlabeled data, and others with both.
In this work, we propose SemiDFL, the first semi-supervised
DFL method that enhances DFL performance in SSL scenarios by establishing a consensus in both data and model spaces.
Specifically, we utilize neighborhood information to improve
the quality of pseudo-labeling, which is crucial for effectively leveraging unlabeled data. We then design a consensusbased diffusion model to generate synthesized data, which is
used in combination with pseudo-labeled data to create mixed
datasets. Additionally, we develop an adaptive aggregation
method that leverages the model accuracy of synthesized data
to further enhance SemiDFL performance. Through extensive experimentation, we demonstrate the remarkable performance superiority of the proposed DFL-Semi method over
existing CFL and DFL schemes in both IID and non-IID SSL
scenarios.

Code — https://github.com/ez4lionky/SemiDFL

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Kairouz
et al. 2021) enables collaborative learning among distributed
clients while keeping their data local and preventing “data islands”. However, traditional Centralized Federated Learning
(CFL) relies on a central server to aggregate model parameters from all clients, which suffers from high communication
bottleneck and single-point-failure problems (Liu, Ding, and
Lv 2020; Liu and Ding 2021b). Decentralized Federated
* Equal Contribution.
†

Bo Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18987

