The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-shot Depth Completion via Test-time Alignment
with Affine-invariant Depth Prior
Lee Hyoseok1 , Kyeong Seon Kim2 , Kwon Byung-Ki1 , Tae-Hyun Oh1,2,3
1

Grad.School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
2
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH
3
Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University
hyos99@postech.ac.kr, ella94.ai@gmail.com, byungki.kwon@postech.ac.kr, taehyun@postech.ac.kr
Abstract

et al. 2020; Qiu et al. 2019). Previous studies (Park et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2023; Wong and Soatto 2021; Wang et al.
2023b) have focused on learning how to propagate sparse
metric depth into a dense map according to the color or texture proximity. They are trained with paired dense depth
maps and corresponding RGB images to learn depth affinity
as prior knowledge, where the depth affinity represents the
relationship between depth values in a scene based on spatial
and structural features. Since previous methods (Zhang et al.
2023; Wong and Soatto 2021) focused on learning depth affinity within in-domain settings, they exhibit poor depth affinity
in out-of-domain scenarios (see Fig. 1). To address this, Park,
Gupta, and Wong (2024) proposed a test-time adaptation
method that fine-tunes part of a pre-trained depth completion
model using sparse depth. Nevertheless, This approach is
less effective in out-of-domain scenarios due to the limited
generalizability of the base depth completion model.
With the emergence of foundation models (Caron et al.
2021; Rombach et al. 2022), which learn comprehensive
knowledge from large image data (referred to as image prior),
these models have been frequently utilized as powerful prior
to improve generalizability, enabling them to be applicable
across diverse tasks and domains (Lee et al. 2024; Yang et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2023). We bring this versatile capability to the
depth completion problem. In this regime, we propose zeroshot depth completion via a test-time alignment, which is
generalizable to any domain by leveraging the rich semantic
and structural understanding of the foundation model.
Specifically, we use pre-trained monocular depth diffusion
models (Ke et al. 2024; Gui et al. 2024) as depth prior, demonstrating generalizability and facilitating high-quality depth
estimation. Most monocular depth estimation models (Ranftl
et al. 2022; Ke et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024; Gui et al. 2024)
operate in the affine-invariant depth space, where depth values are consistent up to offset and scale. While this approach
enables training on large-scale dataset with diverse scene
contents and varying camera intrinsics (Ke et al. 2024), it
inherently introduces scale ambiguity, making fully accurate
monocular metric depth estimation to be considered infeasible (Yin et al. 2023). Meanwhile, depth completion is free
from scale ambiguity thank to sparse measurements of metric
depths, but lacks generalizability and depth quality (Park,
Gupta, and Wong 2024). Motivated by these trade-offs, we
align the affine-invariant depth prior with sparse measure-

Depth completion, predicting dense depth maps from sparse
depth measurements, is an ill-posed problem requiring prior
knowledge. Recent methods adopt learning-based approaches
to implicitly capture priors, but the priors primarily fit indomain data and do not generalize well to out-of-domain
scenarios. To address this, we propose a zero-shot depth completion method composed of an affine-invariant depth diffusion model and test-time alignment. We use pre-trained depth
diffusion models as depth prior knowledge, which implicitly
understand how to fill in depth for scenes. Our approach aligns
the affine-invariant depth prior with metric-scale sparse measurements, enforcing them as hard constraints via an optimization loop at test-time. Our zero-shot depth completion method
demonstrates generalization across various domain datasets,
achieving up to a 21% average performance improvement over
the previous state-of-the-art methods while enhancing spatial
understanding by sharpening scene details. We demonstrate
that aligning a monocular affine-invariant depth prior with
sparse metric measurements is a sufficient strategy to achieve
domain-generalizable depth completion without relying on
extensive training datasets.

1

Introduction

Metric-scale dense depth provides precise spatial structure of
a scene, crucial for physically accurate applications such as
3D scene understanding (Ji-Yeon et al. 2024), 3D reconstruction (Choe et al. 2021), and robotic grasping (Viereck et al.
2017). This depth information is essential for achieving reliable and robust performance across real-world perception and
interaction, where failures can lead to significant risks. However, acquiring dense metric depth map in practical settings
is challenging, as depth measurements captured by depth
sensing approaches – long-range sensors (e.g., LiDAR) (Ma
and Karaman 2018) and SLAM/VIO systems (Wong and
Soatto 2021) – are sparse potentially leading to safety risks.
To complement this limitation, depth completion has been
studied, which aims to complete the dense metric depth map
from sparse measurements.
However, depth completion is an ill-posed problem requiring prior knowledge and additional cues, e.g., RGB images
as guidance (Ma and Karaman 2018; Hu et al. 2021; Tang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3877

