The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RHanDS: Refining Malformed Hands for Generated Images with Decoupled
Structure and Style Guidance
Chengrui Wang* 1 , Pengfei Liu* 1, 2† , Min Zhou1 , Ming Zeng2‡ , Xubin Li1 , Tiezheng Ge1 , Bo Zheng1
1

Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba
2
Xiamen University
{wangchengrui.wcr, zhukong.lpf, yunqi.zm}@taobao.com,
zengming@xmu.edu.cn, {lxb204722, tiezheng.gtz, bozheng}@taobao.com

Irregular hand shapes

Abstract
Although diffusion models can generate high-quality human
images, their applications are limited by the instability in generating hands with correct structures. In this paper, we introduce RHanDS, a conditional diffusion-based framework
designed to refine malformed hands by utilizing decoupled
structure and style guidance. The hand mesh reconstructed
from the malformed hand offers structure guidance for correcting the structure of the hand, while the malformed hand
itself provides style guidance for preserving the style of the
hand. To alleviate the mutual interference between style and
structure guidance, we introduce a two-stage training strategy and build a series of multi-style hand datasets. In the first
stage, we use paired hand images for training to ensure stylistic consistency in hand refining. In the second stage, various
hand images generated based on human meshes are used for
training, enabling the model to gain control over the hand
structure. Experimental results demonstrate that RHanDS can
effectively refine hand structure while preserving consistency
in hand style.

Figure 1: Examples of hands refined by our RHanDS (right
in each pair) from the malformed hands (left in each pair).

Code — https://github.com/alimama-creative/RHanDS

1

Incorrect numbers of fingers

model to refine the malformed hands. During the refining
process, a 3D hand mesh is reconstructed based on the
malformed hand image and rendered into a depth image
to provide structure guidance for correcting the malformed
hand through ControlNet (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023).
However, it is difficult to maintain the hand style as the refining process requires adding noise to the hand image. This
issue becomes particularly serious when addressing specific
styles like sculptures or cartoons. To enhance style consistency, it seems intuitive to utilize the image region of the
original malformed hand. However, extracting style information from the malformed hand inevitably introduces incorrect structural information (Ye et al. 2023a).
In this paper, we propose a novel framework named
RHanDS to refine malformed Hands with Decoupled Structure and Style guidance, which is adaptable to malformed
hands of arbitrary styles. As shown in Figure 2, RHandDS
utilizes diffusion models to repaint the hand region, effectively refining malformed hand structures while preserving the original hand style. In detail, the 3D mesh reconstructed from the deformed hand is rendered into a depth

Introduction

Text-to-image diffusion models (Nichol et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022;
Podell et al. 2023) have exhibited the remarkable ability to synthesize visually stunning images based on textual prompts, representing a significant advancement in image generation. Despite their impressive capabilities, current
models still face challenges in effectively handling intricate
structures like hands (Podell et al. 2023; Rombach et al.
2022). As illustrated in Figure 1, models often produce malformed hands with irregular shapes or incorrect numbers of
fingers, deviating from the realistic 3D shape and physical
limitations of human hands.
To address the problem, Lu et al. introduces a postprocessing framework that employs an inpainting diffusion
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during the internship at Alibaba Group.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

7573

