The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Click2Mask: Local Editing with Dynamic Mask Generation
Omer Regev, Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Input

Abstract
Recent advancements in generative models have revolutionized image generation and editing, making these tasks accessible to non-experts. This paper focuses on local image editing, particularly the task of adding new content to a loosely
specified area. Existing methods often require a precise mask
or a detailed description of the location, which can be cumbersome and prone to errors. We propose Click2Mask, a
novel approach that simplifies the local editing process by
requiring only a single point of reference (in addition to the
content description). A mask is dynamically grown around
this point during a Blended Latent Diffusion (BLD) process,
guided by a masked CLIP-based semantic loss. Click2Mask
surpasses the limitations of segmentation-based and finetuning dependent methods, offering a more user-friendly and
contextually accurate solution. Our experiments demonstrate
that Click2Mask not only minimizes user effort but also enables competitive or superior local image manipulations compared to SoTA methods, according to both human judgement
and automatic metrics. Key contributions include the simplification of user input, the ability to freely add objects unconstrained by existing segments, and the integration potential of
our dynamic mask approach within other editing methods.

“Add a gorilla in the background looking at the bananas”
“A gorilla looking at the bananas”

“Add a pack of rocks to the back of the truck”
“A pack of rocks”

Figure 1: Comparisons to SoTA models. A comparison of
Emu Edit (Sheynin et al. 2023), MagicBrush (Zhang et al.
2023) and DALL·E 3 (Betker et al. 2023) with our model
Click2Mask. In each example, the top prompt was given
to the other models, while Click2Mask received the simpler
bottom prompt, in addition to the blue dot (mouse click) on
the input. Other models completely change the image, or the
background, fail to edit, or produce unrealistic results.

Project Page & Code —
https://omeregev.github.io/click2mask
Full Paper — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.08272

1

Emu Edit MagicBrush DALL·E3 Click2Mask

local editing. To accomplish such edits, some existing methods require users to provide explicit precise masks (Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried 2022; Ramesh et al. 2022; Avrahami, Fried, and Lischinski 2023; Wang et al. 2023b; Xie
et al. 2022), which is tedious and may yield unexpected results due to lack of mask precision. Other methods describe
the desired manipulations in natural language, as an edit instruction (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023; Sheynin et al.
2023), or by providing a caption and the desired change
(Bar-Tal et al. 2022; Kawar et al. 2023; Hertz et al. 2022; Tumanyan et al. 2022). These methods also require user expertise, and their results may suffer from ambiguous or imprecise prompts. Moreover, they fail to ensure that the changes
to the image are confined to a local area, or that they occur
at all, as demonstrated in Figure 1.
To overcome the aforementioned shortcomings, we introduce Click2Mask, a novel approach that simplifies user interaction by requiring only a single point of reference rather
than a detailed mask or a description of the target area.
The provided point gives rise to a mask that dynamically

Introduction

Recent advances in generative models have revolutionized
image generation and editing capabilities, enabling both
streamlined workflows and accessibility for non-experts.
The latest approaches utilize natural language to manipulate
images either globally – altering the content or style of the
entire image – or locally – adding, removing, or modifying
specific objects within a limited image region.
In this work, we focus on local editing, specifically on
the task of adding new content in a local area. Similar to
DragDiffusion (Shi et al. 2023) for movement and MagicEraser (Li et al. 2024) for removal, this focused scope
leverages specialization to tackle the unique challenges of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6713

