The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Toy-GS: Assembling Local Gaussians for Precisely Rendering Large-Scale Free
Camera Trajectories
Xiaohan Zhang, Zhenyu Sun, Yukui Qiu, Junyan Su, Qi Liu *
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
{ftxiaohanzhang, 202264690427, 202162311356, ft su.junyan}@mail.scut.edu.cn
drliuqi@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

sparse and distant input views cover the background areas.
On the other hand, large-scale scenes consist of a high quantity of images, requiring a significant amount of GPU memory. Furthermore, these datasets include a wide range of objects and intricate texture details, adding complexity to the
rendering process.
From two viewpoints, F2-NeRF (Wang et al. 2023) proposed how to perform high-quality viewpoint synthesis
along extensive free trajectories with high quality: 1) Adaptive spatial division divides the entire scene into multiple
areas, allowing cameras in each area to focus on finer texture details and enhance rendering accuracy; 2) Warping unbounded scenes to bounded ones enhances the rendering effect of distant objects.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al.
2023) has surpassed neural radiance fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) in viewpoint rendering, achieving a new
state-of-the-art result. 3DGS takes into account not just camera poses, but also a spatial sparse point cloud, providing
additional structural priors to improve rendering accuracy
beyond what NeRF offers. Nevertheless, 3DGS necessitates
additional GPU memory. This method accomplishes the projection of all Gaussian ellipsoids onto a viewpoint’s imaging plane simultaneously to compute the rendered image,
while NeRF creates a ray for each pixel to batch-train the
entire image. The larger the scene, the more GPU memory is
consumed, which is not ideal for reconstructing large-scale
scenes. To solve this problem, VastGaussian (Lin et al. 2024)
suggested partitioning the space into several regions, training a separate Gaussian model for each region, and then
combining all the local Gaussian models into one global
Gaussian model. VastGaussian excelled in processing large
aerial datasets (Turki, Ramanan, and Satyanarayanan 2022),
but the rendering accuracy decreased when rendering largescale free trajectories on the ground with imbalanced information. Several factors influence the outcome of the reconstruction. (1) In aerial datasets, the distribution of cameras
is relatively dense. The camera trajectory for each building
can be seen from various angles, resembling object-centric
trajectories of 360◦ . Nevertheless, when using free trajectory
datasets, the lack of varied viewpoints for objects means that
relying solely on a global Gaussian in VastGaussian will result in holes in the rendered images. (2) Cameras positioned
at ground level shooting upward capture expansive scenes,

Currently, 3D rendering for large-scale free camera trajectories, namely, arbitrary input camera trajectories, poses significant challenges: 1) The distribution and observation angles of
the cameras are irregular, and various types of scenes are included in the free trajectories; 2) Processing the entire point
cloud and all images at once for large-scale scenes requires
a substantial amount of GPU memory. This paper presents
a Toy-GS method for accurately rendering large-scale free
camera trajectories. Specifically, we propose an adaptive spatial division approach for free trajectories to divide cameras
and the sparse point cloud of the entire scene into various
regions according to camera poses. Training each local Gaussian in parallel for each area enables us to concentrate on texture details and minimize GPU memory usage. Next, we use
the multi-view constraint and position-aware point adaptive
control (PPAC) to improve the rendering quality of texture
details. In addition, our regional fusion approach combines
local and global Gaussians to enhance rendering quality with
an increasing number of divided areas. Extensive experiments
have been carried out to confirm the effectiveness and efficiency of Toy-GS, leading to state-of-the-art results on two
public large-scale datasets as well as our SCUTic dataset. Our
proposal demonstrates an enhancement of 1.19 dB in PSNR
and conserves 7 G of GPU memory when compared to various benchmarks.

Code — https://github.com/Xiaohan-Z/Toygs
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10078

Introduction
Large-scale free camera trajectory refers to the long and irregular camera movement during photography, which contains multiple objects of interest (Wang et al. 2023). Two
characteristics of large-scale free trajectories can result in
decreased performance when creating new viewpoints. On
the one hand, spatial representation capacity is not evenly
distributed. Specifically, when the path is long and narrow,
many parts of the scenes are left empty and cannot be seen
from any viewing angle. Foreground objects in the visible
regions are captured with dense and close input views, while
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10212

