The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual-View Interaction-Aware Lane Change Prediction for Autonomous Driving
Yuhuan Lu1,2 , Zhen Zhang1 , Rufan Bai3 , Han Liu4 , Wei Wang1,5 *
1

Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Emotional Intelligence and Pervasive Computing,
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
2
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
4
School of Software, Dalian University of Technology
5
School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
yc17462@um.edu.mo, zhangzhen19@lzu.edu.cn, rfbai@seu.edu.cn, liu.han.dut@gmail.com, ehomewang@ieee.org
Abstract
As artificial intelligence techniques evolve, we are approaching a critical moment for the widespread deployment of autonomous vehicles. Subsequently, the emergence of mixedautonomy traffic environments presents formidable challenges to autonomous vehicles, especially for the accurate
prediction of lane change intentions of their surrounding
human-driven vehicles, which is crucial for ensuring the
safety of autonomous vehicles. Existing lane change prediction models mainly focus on capturing the temporal variations in the movement dynamics of individual vehicles. However, the neglect to consider inter-vehicle interactions hinders their capability in complex lane change scenarios, resulting in suboptimal prediction performance. Moreover, current
interaction-aware approaches for autonomous driving fail to
explicitly model future interactions between vehicles, leading to unreasonable prediction results that can cause collisions between vehicles. To address the above issues, we propose to incorporate the concept of perceived safety into future interaction modeling and design a dual-view interactionaware lane change prediction model. We evaluate the proposed model on two real-world datasets and experimental
results show that the proposed model achieves average improvements of 11.7-12.4% in classification ability and 75.695.7% in forecast ability over the best-performing baselines
across the two datasets. The ablation study and investigation
into future interaction modeling demonstrate that our model
has advantages in interpreting lane change scenarios from a
driving safety perspective.

Figure 1: The advantage of modeling the future interaction
with perceived safety. Blue arrows denote the predicted intention of vehicles under different interaction settings.

paramount for the successful establishment of AVs.
Despite the flourishing of deep learning, existing studies are apt to capture the temporal interdependence in the
moving dynamics of individual vehicles to predict their lane
change intentions (Shi and Zhang 2021; Xing et al. 2020;
Liao et al. 2022). Such a philosophy neglects the interactions between vehicles, which have a direct influence on
the motion of contiguous vehicles, thereby yielding suboptimal prediction performance. As illustrated in studies such as
(Liang et al. 2020) and (Jia et al. 2023), inter-vehicle interactive activities serve as strong clues for extracting moving
patterns of vehicles, and the acquired patterns are conducive
to behavior prediction. This spurs us to model inter-vehicle
interactions (the mutual influence on the movements of adjacent vehicles) for lane change prediction.
Recent interaction-aware approaches primarily concentrate on comprehensively and appropriately embedding
complicated interactions using advanced models based on
observed trajectories and driving environments. They either
employ Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to represent the
geometric interactions between vehicles (Liang et al. 2020;
Gu, Sun, and Zhao 2021; Jia et al. 2023) or utilize the selfattention mechanism to accommodate holistic inter-vehicle

Introduction
With the burgeoning development of artificial intelligence,
we are prepared for the wide-scale deployment of autonomous vehicles (AVs). However, the new traffic landscape brought about by the mixed-autonomy traffic scenarios—where AVs and human-driven vehicles (HDVs) coexist on roads—poses a formidable challenge to driving safety
and decision-making for AVs. As an extremely frequent
driving behavior of HDVs, the lane change maneuver significantly impacts road traffic safety, resulting in over 50,000
accidents in the U.S. each year (Ding et al. 2023). Accordingly, accurate lane change intention prediction of HDVs is
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28222

