The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Speech Watermarking with Discrete Intermediate Representations
Shengpeng Ji* , Ziyue Jiang* , Jialong Zuo, Minghui Fang, Yifu Chen, Tao Jin, Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University
{shengpengji, zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Speech Watermarking in Continuous Space

Speech watermarking techniques can proactively mitigate the
potential harmful consequences of instant voice cloning techniques. These techniques involve the insertion of signals into
speech that are imperceptible to humans but can be detected by
algorithms. Previous approaches typically embed watermark
messages into continuous space. However, intuitively, embedding watermark information into robust discrete latent space
can significantly improve the robustness of watermarking systems. In this paper, we propose DiscreteWM, a novel speech
watermarking framework that injects watermarks into the discrete intermediate representations of speech. Specifically, we
map speech into discrete latent space with a vector-quantized
autoencoder and inject watermarks by changing the modular
arithmetic relation of discrete IDs. To ensure the imperceptibility of watermarks, we also propose a manipulator model
to select the candidate tokens for watermark embedding. Experimental results demonstrate that our framework achieves
state-of-the-art performance in robustness and imperceptibility,
simultaneously. Moreover, our flexible frame-wise approach
can serve as an efficient solution for both voice cloning detection and information hiding. Additionally, DiscreteWM
can encode 1 to 150 bits of watermark information within a
1-second speech clip, indicating its encoding capacity.

Watermark
Loss

Imperceptibility
Loss
Waveform

Detector

Embedder

Watermark String

Our Discrete Scheme
VQ
Encoder
Waveform

001011

Watermark
String

Reconstruction Loss
3 7 2 0 3

Decoder

Discrete Tokens

Manipulator

Decoder

001011

Watermark String

Watermarked
Waveform

001011

Clean
Waveform
Detector

Watermarked
Waveform

001011

Watermark String
Watermark Loss

Figure 1: Illustration for speech watermarking strategies. Upper: The embedder learns to encode the watermark string
into the continuous space with imperceptibility loss and watermark loss. Lower: In our discrete scheme, the vectorquantized variational autoencoder maps speech into discrete
latent space, and the manipulator conceals the watermark
string within the modulus relations of discrete token IDs.

Demo — https://DiscreteWM.github.io/discrete wm
Appendix — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13917

Introduction
In recent years, the significant breakthrough in zero-shot textto-speech (TTS) (Casanova et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023;
Shen et al. 2023; Le et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023b; Ji et al.
2024c,f,g; SpeechTeam 2024) enables instant voice cloning
with only a few seconds of speech. However, this technological advancement also brings security concerns to personal
voices (Duquenne et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023c). To avoid potential misuse of voice cloning technology, passive detection
strategies (Tak et al. 2022b; Ahmed et al. 2020; Tak et al.
2022a, 2021) are developed to classify whether a speech clip
is synthesized and adversarial-based methods (Huang et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24239

2021; Li et al. 2023; Ji et al. 2024b,d; Yu, Zhai, and Zhang
2023) are proposed to prevent voice cloning with adversarial
noise. However, these approaches still struggle with generalization issues (Liu et al. 2023b). In comparison, speech
watermarking has been developed to (Pavlović et al. 2022;
Liu et al. 2023a; Chen et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b; Ji et al.
2024e) proactively embed robust watermark information into
the target voice, which has demonstrated its generalizable
performance in practical voice cloning detection (Duquenne
et al. 2023). By utilizing this technology, users can not only
identify whether a speech clip is AI-generated but also trace
the source of the speech, thus offering reliable privacy protection in the era of large-scale voice models.
Despite recent advances in speech watermarking, current
solutions still encounter two primary challenges: 1) trade-off
among imperceptibility, robustness, and encoding capacity;
In other words, maintaining robustness against various distortions while preserving a high encoding capacity affects the

