The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Expand VSR Benchmark for VLLM to Expertize in Spatial Rules
Peijin Xie1 , Lin Sun 2 , Bingquan Liu 1 * , Dexin Wang 2 , Xiangzheng Zhang 2 , Chengjie Sun 1 , Jiajia
Zhang 3
1

Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150001, China,
2
360 Search Department, Beijing, 100020, China,
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China,
xpj@stu.hit.edu.cn, {liubq,sunchengjie,zhangjiajia}@hit.edu.cn,
{sunlin1, wangdexin, zhangxiangzheng}@360.cn
Abstract

into conversational QA scenarios. The new VSR task requires the model to not only accurately recognize visual positional information but also follow instructions to correctly
answer questions. Although models have evolved from traditional models with classification heads (ViLT, VisualBERT,
and LXMERT) to VLLMs (LLaVA, BLIP2, Qwen-VL, and
GPT-4), a unified evaluation method and effective optimization approach for VLLM toward VSR is still lacking.
VLLM is the advanced version of LLM, which is enhanced to process and interpret multi-modal data. They
leverage a powerful LLM as their cognitive engine to handle various tasks. Equipped with visual tokens, LLMs can
perceive rich visual information and perform complex reasoning like VSR. However, most VLLMs often fall into the
trap of hallucination problems. During the model’s hallucination evaluation, the spatial relationships are precisely the
type of relational hallucinations that are more challenging to
object and attribute hallucinations (Liu et al. 2024c). Therefore, filling the blank of the evaluation and optimization of
VLLM on VSR is of great significance for addressing the
issue of hallucinations on relation.
We first re-evaluated the VLLM from scratch and diagnosed issues of inconsistent performance, hypersensitiveness on text prompts, insensitivity on vision information
and answer bias. We found the absence of a unified instruction test has resulted in significant variance in model performance and the instability of instruction-following hinders
the evaluation and optimization of VLLM’s VSR capabilities. Therefore, we proposed a unified instruction test set by
expanding the VSR test set through both manual and GPT4generated templates.
Similarly, we expand the training set with the same template pool. Trained with more diverse QA formats, the model
achieves fundamentally better generalization in responding
to VSR questions regardless of the question style. Considering a VSR expert requires more of the ability to distinguish and recognize visual spatial information rather than
just correctly following instructions, we controllably augmented and repainted the visual training image to specific
spatial relation concepts (like “in”, “on” and “under”) by
diffusion model. The increased amount and diversity of
image data strengthen the model’s comprehension of visual spatial details. Furthermore, we expand the vision encoder CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) with other hot encoders

Distinguishing spatial relations is a basic part of human
cognition which requires fine-grained perception on crossinstance. Although benchmarks like MME, MMBench and
SEED comprehensively have evaluated various capabilities
which already include visual spatial reasoning(VSR). There
is still a lack of sufficient quantity and quality evaluation
and optimization datasets for Vision Large Language Models(VLLMs) specifically targeting visual positional reasoning. To handle this, we first diagnosed current VLLMs with
the VSR dataset and proposed a unified test set. We found
current VLLMs to exhibit a contradiction of over-sensitivity
to language instructions and under-sensitivity to visual positional information. By expanding the original benchmark
from two aspects of tunning data and model structure, we
mitigated this phenomenon. To our knowledge, we expanded
spatially positioned image data controllably using diffusion
models for the first time and integrated original visual encoding(CLIP) with other 3 powerful visual encoders(SigLIP,
SAM and DINO). After conducting combination experiments
on scaling data and models, we obtained a VLLM VSR Expert(VSRE) that not only generalizes better to different instructions but also accurately distinguishes differences in visual positional information. VSRE achieved over a 27% increase in accuracy on the VSR test set. It becomes a performant VLLM on the position reasoning of both the VSR
dataset and relevant subsets of other evaluation benchmarks.
We hope it will accelerate advancements in VLLM on VSR
learning.

Extended version — https://github.com/peijin360/vsre

Introduction
Reasoning on spatial relations is a basic part of human
cognition which requires fine-grained perception on crossinstance. Traditional classification benchmark VSR (Liu,
Emerson, and Collier 2023) has proposed a controlled probing dataset testing vision language models’ capabilities of
discrimination on spatial relations with natural image-text
pairs. But,as Large Language Models (LLMs) become research hotspots, traditional tasks have been incorporated
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8745

