The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Many-Objective Problem Where Crossover is Provably Indispensable
Andre Opris
Chair of Algorithms for Intelligent Systems, University of Passau, Passau, Germany
andre.opris@uni-passau.de

Abstract

are already strong differences between two and more objectives. NSGA-II (Deb et al. 2002), the most used EMOA, optimises bi-objective problems efficiently (see (Köppen and
Yoshida 2007) for empirical results or (Zheng, Liu, and Doerr 2022; Dang et al. 2023b; Doerr and Qu 2022; Dang et al.
2023a; Dang, Opris, and Sudholt 2024) for rigorous runtime
analyses) while it perform less when dealing with three or
more objectives (see (Chaudhari et al. 2022) for empirical
results or (Zheng and Doerr 2024a) for rigorous negative results). The reason is that the so-called crowding distance, the
tie breaker in NSGA-II, induces a sorting only for two objectives and therefore, Pareto-optimal search points can be
lost between generations. Hence, Deb and Jain (2014) proposed NSGA-III, a refinement of the very popular NSGA-II,
designed to handle more than two objectives, and instead
of the crowding distance, uses reference points (previously
set by the user) to guarantee that the solution set is welldistributed across the objective space. In particular, Deb and
Jain (2014) empirically showed that NSGA-III can solve
problems between 3 and 15 objectives efficiently. Due to its
versatileness, it gained significant traction (∼5500 citations)
and now has sereval applications (Tang et al. 2024; Bhesdadiya et al. 2016; Gu, Xu, and Li 2022). However, theoretical breakthroughs on its success have only occurred recently. The first rigorous runtime analyses of the state of the
art NSGA-III were only published at IJCAI 2023 (Wietheger
and Doerr 2023) and GECCO 2024 (Opris et al. 2024) and
hence, its theoretical understanding is still substantially behind its achievements in practice. For example, there are several empirical results on the usefulness of crossover in many
objectives, particularly for NSGA-III (Yi et al. 2020; Sekine
and Tatsukawa 2018), but we are not aware of any such theoretical result addressing rigorous runtime analysis in more
than two objectives. This is remarkable, because crossover
is a very useful operator in evolutionary computation. In the
bi-objective setting, particularly for NSGA-II, Doerr and Qu
(2023) proved that crossover guarantees a speedup of O(n)
on a certain class of functions or Dang et al. (2023b) showed
that this speedup is even exponential on a more artificial
benchmark. The latter is based on a R EAL ROYAL ROAD
function constructed by Jansen and Wegener (2005) for single objective optimisation, where NSGA-II can optimise this
benchmark in expected O(n3 + µ/n) generations. But particularly rigorous mathematical proofs on NSGA-III provide

This paper addresses theory in evolutionary multiobjective
optimisation (EMO) and focuses on the role of crossover operators in many-objective optimisation. The advantages of
using crossover are hardly understood and rigorous runtime
analyses with crossover are lagging far behind its use in practice, specifically in the case of more than two objectives.
We present a many-objective problem class together with a
theoretical runtime analysis of the widely used NSGA-III to
demonstrate that crossover can yield an exponential speedup
on the runtime. In particular, this algorithm can find the
Pareto set in expected polynomial time when using crossover
while without crossover it requires exponential time to even
find a single Pareto-optimal point. To our knowledge, this is
the first rigorous runtime analysis in many-objective optimisation demonstrating an exponential performance gap when
using crossover for more than two objectives.

Introduction
Evolutionary multi-objective algorithms (EMOAs) mimic
principles from natural evolution as mutation, crossover (recombination) and selection to evolve a population of solutions dealing with multiple conflicting objectives to explore
a Pareto optimal set. Those have been frequently applied
to a variety of multi-objective optimisation problems and
also have several applications in practice (Deb 2001; Coello,
Veldhuizen, and Lamont 2013) such as scheduling problems (Ishibuchi and Murata 1998), vehicle design (Xingtao
et al. 2008) or practical combinatorial optimisation problems (Li et al. 2024). They are also widely used in machine
learning, artificial intelligence, and various fields of engineering (Qu et al. 2021; Luukkonen et al. 2023; Sharma and
Chahar 2022). Particularly, in real world scenarios, there exist many problems with four or more objectives (Chikumbo,
Goodman, and Deb 2012; Coello and Lamont 2004). Thus,
it is not unexpected that the study of EMOAs became a very
important area of research in the last decades, especially for
many objectives. However, when the number of objectives
increases, the size of the Pareto front and the number of incomparable solutions can grow exponentially and therefore,
covering a high dimensional front, is a difficult task. There
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27108

