The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scalable and Trustworthy Learning in Heterogeneous Networks
Tian Li
Computer Science Department and Data Science Institute, University of Chicago
litian@uchicago.edu

Motivated by the application of federated and collaborative learning, my work aims to develop principled methods
for scalable and trustworthy data sharing in heterogeneous
networks. In the talk, I discuss how heterogeneity affects
federated optimization, and lies at the center of accuracy
and trustworthiness constraints in federated learning. To address these concerns, I present scalable federated learning
objectives and algorithms that rigorously account for and
directly model the practical constraints. I will also explore
trustworthy objectives and optimization methods for general
ML problems beyond federated settings. I will conclude the
talk by mapping out future research plans on optimization,
data sharing, and privacy-preserving ML.
Large-scale optimization in heterogeneous environments. To fit data over practical (potentially) massive and
unreliable networks, optimization methods must first and
foremost deliver reasonably accurate solutions in an efficient
manner. I developed FedProx, the first optimization framework with theoretical guarantees under realistic heterogeneity assumptions (Li et al. 2020a). The algorithmic modification we made is to add a proximal term to the local objective.
This simple change makes the algorithm more amenable to
theoretical analysis, and delivers more stable convergence.
Federated optimization has received a significant amount
of recent research attention, and FedProx (as well as another principled variant I develop named FedDANE (Li et al.
2019)) is a simple method that takes a first step towards analyzing and improving federated optimization under practical
assumptions.
Scalable and principled trustworthy learning. Heterogeneity not only affects the convergence of optimization
methods, but also poses challenges to the trustworthiness of
the final model. For example, models trained jointly across
massive clients can sometimes perform unfairly or even
catastrophically on subsets of the network. I developed the
q-Fair FL (q-FFL) objective, which minimizes an aggregate
reweighted loss parameterized by q to effectively upweight
clients with higher loss dynamically (Li et al. 2020b). This
framework allows for a scalable, principled, and tunable
fairness/utility tradeoff, and is easy to implement in a scalable fashion. Simultaneously satisfying the competing constraints of accuracy, fairness (performance uniformity), and

robustness (against poisoning attacks) is exceptionally difficult under data heterogeneity. I proposed a simple multitask learning method, Ditto, as a unified approach for satisfying the diverse constraints in federated learning (Li et al.
2021b). The Ditto work opened up many interesting questions regarding the connections between personalization and
trustworthiness constraints.
The insights from my prior works can be extended to address deficiencies of empirical risk minimization (ERM) in
broad ML problems, when there are shifts between training and test distributions. Motivated partially by exponential
tilting and q-FFL, we proposed a tilted empirical risk minimization (TERM) objective, which introduces a flexible tilting hyperparameter to control the impact of individual losses
in a principled manner (Li et al. 2021a, 2023). By tuning this
parameter, we were able to provably decrease the influence
of outliers, enable fairness or robustness, and provide better
generalization. Lastly, privacy is a critical concern in both
centralized and federated learning, but the study of differential privacy (DP) in machine learning has been largely limited to (variants) of the very basic SGD optimizer. I proposed
new algorithms that leverage some structures of gradients to
provably improve privacy-utility tradeoffs of adaptive optimization (such as AdaGrad and Adam).

References
Li, T.; Beirami, A.; Sanjabi, M.; and Smith, V. 2021a. Tilted
Empirical Risk Minimization. In ICLR.
Li, T.; Beirami, A.; Sanjabi, M.; and Smith, V. 2023. On
Tilted Losses in Machine Learning: Theory and Applications. JMLR.
Li, T.; Hu, S.; Beirami, A.; and Smith, V. 2021b. Ditto: Fair
and Robust Federated Learning Through Personalization. In
ICML.
Li, T.; Sahu, A. K.; Zaheer, M.; Sanjabi, M.; Talwalkar, A.;
and Smith, V. 2019. FedDANE: A Federated Newton-Type
Method. In Asilomar Conference.
Li, T.; Sahu, A. K.; Zaheer, M.; Sanjabi, M.; Talwalkar, A.;
and Smith, V. 2020a. Federated Optimization in heterogeneous networks. In MLSys.
Li, T.; Sanjabi, M.; Beirami, A.; and Smith, V. 2020b. Fair
Resource Allocation in Federated Learning. In ICLR.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28715

