The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-Shot Noise2Mean: Gap Minimization
for Efficient Denoising from a Single Noisy Image
Duo Liu* , Yiqi Shi* , Guoyin Zhang, Sizhao Li† , Liguo Zhang†
College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University
{liu duo, shiyiqi, zhangguoyin, sizhao.li, zhangliguo}@hrbeu.edu.cn

Abstract
Acquiring pairwise noisy-clean training data is challenging.
Consequently, some self-supervised denoising methods utilize noisy image pairs as both input and target for network
training. However, a major issue with these methods is the
gap between the clean images of the input and target. In this
paper, we achieve high-quality image denoising by reducing
or even eliminating this gap. Our method requires no training data or prior knowledge of the noise distribution. It consists of two lightweight networks that can be trained using
only a single noisy test image. Specifically, we propose a random mask-based downsampler that generates multiple pairs
of downsampled noisy images, which are similar but distinct.
These image pairs serve as the input for the first network, with
the mean image of each pair used as the target. This initially
reduces the gap between the clean images of the input and target. Particularly, in our method, the clean counterpart of the
first network’s target (i.e., the mean image) can be obtained.
We then train a second network using the mean image as input
and its clean counterpart as the target. This effectively eliminates the gap and achieves better denoising results. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms in both
denoising performance and efficiency.

Figure 1: The principle of minimizing the gap in our method.

environments and different camera models. Thus, collecting
a large dataset of paired noisy-clean images covering all possible noise types is impractical.
Self-supervised denoising methods enable model training
using only noisy images and allow adaptation to unknown
noise in the given images (Lee and Kim 2022; Lee, Son,
and Lee 2022; Wang et al. 2023; Lequyer et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022b; Chihaoui and Favaro 2024; Cheng, Liu, and Tan
2023; Neshatavar et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023;
Vaksman and Elad 2023; Fadnavis et al. 2024). Noise2Noise
(Lehtinen et al. 2018) introduces the concept of using different noisy observations of the same scene as both input
and target for the network. Assuming the noise in each image is independent and follows a zero-mean distribution, it
is equivalent to supervised network training. However, capturing multiple noisy observations of a scene remains highly
challenging, especially for dynamic scenes or medical imaging. Neighbor2Neighbor (Huang et al. 2021) and ZS-N2N
(Mansour and Heckel 2023) generate a pair of downsampled
images from a noisy image to approximate different noisy
observations of the same scene, serving as the network’s
input and target. However, a small but objective gap exists
between the clean images of the two downsampled images.
This inevitably leads to reduced network performance.
In this work, we propose Zero-Shot Noise2Mean (ZSN2M), a novel zero-shot denoising method that requires no
training data or prior knowledge of the noise distribution and
needs only a single noisy test image. We extend ZS-N2N
(Mansour and Heckel 2023) to achieve higher-quality image
denoising by reducing or even eliminating the gap between
the clean images of the network’s input and target. Specifically, we use two lightweight networks, the mean-based
denoising network (MBD-Net) and the gap refinement de-

Code — https://github.com/Doyle59217/ZS-N2M

1

Introduction

The primary goal of image denoising is to remove unwanted
noise from an input image and restore a clean, noise-free
version. The main challenge is distinguishing noise from
the original image content without prior knowledge of the
noise distribution. Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks
have significantly advanced learning-based image denoising
methods (Kim, Kim, and Baik 2024; Chen et al. 2021; Fu,
Guo, and Wen 2023; Hong et al. 2020; Jang et al. 2021; Ren
et al. 2021; Zamir et al. 2022). Most of these methods (Ma
et al. 2022; Yue et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021; Cheng et al.
2021; Liang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022a) rely heavily
on training with extensive pairs of noisy-clean images, assuming fixed and known noise distributions. However, realworld images often contain unknown noise due to varying
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5406

