The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cross-Lingual Text-Rich Visual Comprehension: An Information Theory
Perspective
Xinmiao Yu1 , Xiaocheng Feng1 * , Yun Li1 , Minghui Liao2 , Ya-Qi Yu2 , Xiachong Feng3 , Weihong
Zhong1 , Ruihan Chen1 , Mengkang Hu3 , Jihao Wu2 , Duyu Tang2 , Dandan Tu2 , Bing Qin1 *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Huawei Inc.
3
The University of Hong Kong
{xmyu, xcfeng, yunli, whzhong, rhchen}@ir.hit.edu.cn, fengxc@hku.hk, mkhu@connect.hku.hk,
{liaominghui1, yuyaqi5, wujihao, tangduyu, tudandan}@ir.hit.edu.cn
Abstract
Recent Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have shown
promising reasoning capabilities on text-rich images from
charts, tables, and documents. However, the abundant text
within such images may increase the model’s sensitivity to
language. This raises the need to evaluate LVLM performance on cross-lingual text-rich visual inputs, where the
language in the image differs from the language of the instructions. To address this, we introduce XT-VQA (CrossLingual Text-Rich Visual Question Answering), a benchmark designed to assess how LVLMs handle language inconsistency between image text and questions. XT-VQA integrates five existing text-rich VQA datasets and a newly collected dataset, XPaperQA, covering diverse scenarios that require faithful recognition and comprehension of visual information despite language inconsistency. Our evaluation of
prominent LVLMs on XT-VQA reveals a significant drop
in performance for cross-lingual scenarios, even for models
with multilingual capabilities. A mutual information analysis suggests that this performance gap stems from crosslingual questions failing to adequately activate relevant visual
information. To mitigate this issue, we propose MVCL-MI
(Maximization of Vision-Language Cross-Lingual Mutual
Information), where a visual-text cross-lingual alignment is
built by maximizing mutual information between the model’s
outputs and visual information. This is achieved by distilling knowledge from monolingual to cross-lingual settings
through KL divergence minimization, where monolingual
output logits serve as a teacher. Experimental results on the
XT-VQA demonstrate that MVCL-MI effectively reduces the
visual-text cross-lingual performance disparity while preserving the inherent capabilities of LVLMs, shedding new light on
the potential practice for improving LVLMs.

Figure 1: An example of the LVLM answering unfaithfully when questions were posed in languages different from
those in the image. The LVLM made unfaithful recognition
and comprehension of Chinese and French while answering
correctly with English questions. Reveals the challenge of
cross-lingual visual comprehension.

in handling text-rich scenarios, leading to various applications, including document processing (Luo et al. 2024), freeform web auto-manipulation (Niu et al. 2024), and scene
text understanding (Yu et al. 2024; Ye et al. 2023). These
works meticulously explore the ability of LVLMs to recognize, process, and analyze multimodal information based on
instructions, yielding notable progress.
However, current research on text-rich visual comprehension primarily focuses on monolingual settings, largely neglecting the performance of LVLMs in cross-lingual scenarios where the instruction language differs from the textual
language in the visual content, (see Fig 1.) This gap limits
many real-world applications. For example, in a foreign airport with signs in unfamiliar language, the ability to query
an LVLM in your native language for assistance would be
invaluable. As globalization accelerates, cross-lingual scenarios will become increasingly common across domains
such as healthcare (Wan et al. 2024), law (Guha et al. 2024),
and science (Lu et al. 2022). Investigating the cross-lingual
instruction-following capabilities of LVLMs (Hinck et al.

Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved
significant advancements in domains such as mathematical
reasoning (Lu et al. 2023), multimodal search (Yang et al.
2024) and embodied intelligence (Mu et al. 2024). Notably,
their robust multimodal capabilities demonstrate superiority
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9680

