The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explaining Decisions of Agents in Mixed-Motive Games
Maayan Orner1 , Oleg Maksimov1 , Akiva Kleinerman1 , Charles Ortiz2 , Sarit Kraus1
1

Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Israel
2
SRI International, USA
maayanorner@gmail.com

Abstract

In mixed-motive games and analogous real-world situations (Gnyawali and Park 2011), although agents may
possess conflicting interests (Gallo Jr and McClintock
1965), there is a competitive advantage for some cooperation (Kraus, Ephrati, and Lehmann 1994). Furthermore, in
mixed-motive games involving more than two agents, the
decision of whom to cooperate with or compete against is
crucial. In these scenarios, agents’ tendencies, the alignment
of their interests, the actions they take, and the way they
communicate shape cooperation patterns, which in turn affect the payoffs they receive (Parkhe 1993; Sally 1995).
To tackle these unique challenges, we define a framework
of three conceptual levels that explanations should address:
1. Strategic: The utility the agent obtains depends on its
decisions, but also the decisions of other agents.
2. Situational: The state of the environment and the policies of the participating agents can motivate cooperation
or competition among them.
3. Diplomatic: Agents’ actions convey information to other
agents, which can influence future outcomes.
Based on that, our (main) research question is as follows:

In recent years, agents have become capable of communicating seamlessly via natural language and navigating in environments that involve cooperation and competition, a fact that
can introduce social dilemmas. Due to the interleaving of cooperation and competition, understanding agents’ decisionmaking in such environments is challenging, and humans can
benefit from obtaining explanations. However, such environments and scenarios have rarely been explored in the context
of explainable AI. While some explanation methods for cooperative environments can be applied in mixed-motive setups,
they do not address inter-agent competition, cheap-talk, or
implicit communication by actions. In this work, we design
explanation methods to address these issues. Then, we proceed to establish generality and demonstrate the applicability
of the methods to three games with vastly different properties.
Lastly, we demonstrate the effectiveness and usefulness of the
methods for humans in two mixed-motive games. The first is
a challenging 7-player game called no-press Diplomacy. The
second is a 3-player game inspired by the prisoner’s dilemma,
featuring communication in natural language.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.15255

1

Introduction

Main Research Question: Can we design explanation methods that address the strategic, situational,
and diplomatic levels in mixed-motive games?

Many important real-world scenarios resemble mixedmotive games. In these settings, agents’ interests can be
partly aligned or opposed, resulting in varying motivations
to cooperate and compete. In recent years, the study of automated agents that act in mixed-motive games has gained
renewed attention within the community, using a 7-player
game called Diplomacy as a research testbed (Paquette et al.
2019; Peskov and Cheng 2020; Anthony et al. 2020; FAIR
et al. 2022; Wongkamjan et al. 2024).
Meanwhile, the explainability of AI systems has been extensively studied (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013;
Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017;
Schleibaum et al. 2024). Moreover, the focus on explainability has also expanded to various types of multi-agent systems (Ciatto et al. 2019; Kraus et al. 2020; Boggess, Kraus,
and Feng 2022; Qing et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2023). However, the unique aspects of explaining agents’ decisions in
mixed-motive games have not been adequately addressed.

The main contribution of this work is the development of
methods for explaining agents’ decisions in mixed-motive
games, addressing the above research question.
We apply the methods in three environments with vastly
different properties (see section 3 and appendix). To further
demonstrate the applicability of the methods, agents in each
environment employ a different type of policy: neural network in no-press Diplomacy, black-box (GPT-4) in Communicate Out of Prison (COP), and heuristic policy in Risk.
Furthermore, we show the usefulness of the methods for
humans through two user studies: the first in no-press Diplomacy and the second in COP, a 3-player game inspired by
the prisoner’s dilemma, featuring communication in natural
language.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to propose explanation methods specifically designed for mixedmotive games.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23267

