The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VerilogCoder: Autonomous Verilog Coding Agents with Graph-based Planning
and Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)-based Waveform Tracing Tool
Chia-Tung Ho, Haoxing Ren, Brucek Khailany
NVIDIA Research
chiatungh@nvidia.com, haoxingr@nvidia.com, bkhailany@nvidia.com

Abstract

Several works have focused on refining LLMs with selected
datasets for Verilog generation (Liu et al. 2023a; Thakur
et al. 2024). Pei et al. (Pei et al. 2024) proposed leveraging
instruct-tuned LLM and a generative discriminators to optimize Verilog implementation with the considerations of PPA
(Power, Performance, Area). However, these works lack of
a mechanism to fix syntactic or functional errors, thus, they
still struggle to generate functionally correct Verilog code.
Recently, Tsai et al. (Tsai, Liu, and Ren 2023) presented an
autonomous agent framework incorporating feedback from
simulators and Retrieval Augmented Generation to fix syntax errors, but it failed to improve the functional success rate.
In this work, we propose a framework leveraging multiple Artificial Intelligence (AI) agents for Verilog code generation, which autonomously writes the Verilog code and
fixes syntax and functional errors using collaborative Verilog toolkits and the ReAct (Yao et al. 2022) technique. In
the framework, we develop a novel task planner to generate
high-quality plans, and integrate a crafted Abstract Syntax
Tree (AST)-based waveform tracing tool for improving the
functional success rate. Our contributions are as follows.

Due to the growing complexity of modern Integrated Circuits (ICs), automating hardware design can prevent a significant amount of human error from the engineering process
and result in less errors. Verilog is a popular hardware description language for designing and modeling digital systems; thus, Verilog generation is one of the emerging areas of research to facilitate the design process. In this work,
we propose VerilogCoder, a system of multiple Artificial Intelligence (AI) agents for Verilog code generation, to autonomously write Verilog code and fix syntax and functional
errors using collaborative Verilog tools (i.e., syntax checker,
simulator, and waveform tracer). Firstly, we propose a task
planner that utilizes a novel Task and Circuit Relation Graph
retrieval method to construct a holistic plan based on module
descriptions. To debug and fix functional errors, we develop
a novel and efficient abstract syntax tree (AST)-based waveform tracing tool, which is integrated within the autonomous
Verilog completion flow. The proposed methodology successfully generates 94.2% syntactically and functionally correct Verilog code, surpassing the state-of-the-art methods by
33.9% on the VerilogEval-Human v2 benchmark.

• We are the first to explore the use of mult-AI agents for
autonomous Verilog code completion, including syntax
correction, and functional correction.
• We have developed a novel Task and Circuit Relation
Graph (TCRG) based task planner to create a highquality plan with step-by-step sub-tasks and related circuit information (i.e., signal, signal transition, and single
examples).
• We propose a novel Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)-based
waveform tracing tool to assist the LLM agent in fixing
functional correctness.
• We conduct extensive and holistic ablation studies of
each key component on the VerilogEval-Human v2
benchmark (Pinckney et al. 2024). We demonstrate the
proposed VerilogCoder achieve 94.2% pass rate, including syntax and functional correctness, and outperform the
one of the state-of-the-art methods by 33.9%.

Code — https://github.com/NVlabs/VerilogCoder

Introduction
Designing modern integrated circuits requires designers to
write code in hardware description languages such as Verilog and VHDL to specify hardware architectures and model
the behaviors of digital systems. Due to the growing complexity of VLSI design, writing Verilog and VHDL is timeconsuming and prone to bugs, necessitating multiple iterations for debugging functional correctness. Consequently,
reducing design costs and designer effort for completing
hardware specifications has emerged as a critical need.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable
capacity to comprehend and generate natural language at a
massive scale, leading to many potential applications and
benefits across various domains. In the field of coding, LLM
can assist developers by suggesting code snippets, offering
solutions to fix bugs, and even generating the code with explanation (Mastropaolo et al. 2023; Nijkamp et al. 2023).

The remaining sections are organized as follows. We first
review prior works on AI agents and multi-AI agent systems. Then, we introduce and describe our novel VerilogCoder in details. Lastly, we present main experimental results and conclude the paper.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

300

