The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Complexity of Gradient Descent and Conjugate Gradient Algorithms
Xianqi Jiao, Jia Liu∗ , Zhiping Chen∗
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi, China
jxq00913@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {jialiu, zchen}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

parameter, and then adds the product of the search direction and the step size to the current iteration point. There are
several well-known formulas for the conjugate parameter,
including those proposed by Hestenes and Stiefel (1952),
Fletcher and Reeves (1964), Polyak (1969), and Dai and
Yuan (1999) . While different conjugate parameters yield
varying convergence properties, it is well established that
for an n-dimensional problem, the CG method theoretically
converges in at most n iterations for quadratic programs. In
recent years, theoretical research on the CG method continues (Du, Zhang, and Ma 2016; Liu, Liu, and Dai 2020; Stanimirovi et al. 2020; Babaie-Kafaki 2023; Andrei 2020), but
most studies focus exclusively on specific iterative methods
and their convergence analyses.

Gradient Descent (GD) and Conjugate Gradient (CG) methods are among the most effective iterative algorithms for solving unconstrained optimization problems, particularly in machine learning and statistical modeling, where they are employed to minimize cost functions. In these algorithms, tunable parameters, such as step sizes or conjugate parameters,
play a crucial role in determining key performance metrics,
like runtime and solution quality. In this work, we introduce
a framework that models algorithm selection as a statistical learning problem, and thus learning complexity can be
estimated by the pseudo-dimension of the algorithm group.
We first propose a new cost measure for unconstrained optimization algorithms, inspired by the concept of primal-dual
integral in mixed-integer linear programming. Based on the
new cost measure, we derive an improved upper bound for
the pseudo-dimension of gradient descent algorithm group
by discretizing the set of step size configurations. Moreover,
we generalize our findings from gradient descent algorithm
to the conjugate gradient algorithm group for the first time,
and prove the existence a learning algorithm capable of probabilistically identifying the optimal algorithm with a sufficiently large sample size.

Both GD and CG methods are widely utilized in various machine learning and optimization tasks, particularly
in the training of models such as neural networks. Understanding the learning complexity of these algorithms is essential for evaluating their scalability in the face of increasing data sizes or model parameters. Furthermore, complexity analysis is closely related to the generalization properties of a learning algorithm, providing insights into the maximum number of samples required to effectively learn the
optimal parameters (e.g., step size) within the algorithm. By
estimating the error of a particular learning model alongside the learning complexity of the GD/CG methods employed in it, we can establish a robust theoretical guarantee regarding the model’s performance. Optimization algorithms problems often have tunable parameters that significantly impact performance metrics such as runtime, solution quality, and memory usage, particularly in models incorporating machine learning techniques. However, in most
machine learning models, parameter tuning rarely comes
with provable guarantees. Therefore, Selecting an appropriate step size or conjugate parameter is crucial for both
GD and CG methods as they significantly affect convergence speed and generalization performance. However, determining the appropriate step size and conjugate parameter for a specific type of problem remains an open question.
Researchers have approached this challenge by treating the
tuning of these parameters as a meta-optimization problem,
where the goal is to identify the optimal parameters for a
meta-optimizer. Maclaurin, Duvenaud, and Adams (2015)
initially proposed a learning-to-learn (L2L) approach, fol-

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13473

Introduction
Gradient descent (GD) and conjugate gradient (CG) methods are widely used, iterative algorithms for effectively solving unconstrained optimization problems, especially in machine learning and statistical modeling to minimize cost
functions. Typically in GD (Snyman 2005), each iteration involves calculating the gradient at the current iteration point,
multiplying it by a scaling factor (also known as step size),
and subtracting it from the current iteration point. With certain assumptions on the problem’s convexity, GD converges
to a global minimum. Similarly, in CG (Hestenes and Stiefel
1952), at each iteration step, the CG algorithm calculates the
gradient at the current iteration point, determines the new
search direction by combining the gradient of the current
step with the previous direction multiplied by the conjugate
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17671

