The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Logarithmic Regret for Linear Markov Decision Processes with Adversarial
Corruptions
Canzhe Zhao1 , Xiangcheng Zhang2 , Baoxiang Wang3 , Shuai Li 1 *
1

John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Weiyang College, Tsinghua University
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{canzhezhao,shuaili8}@sjtu.edu.cn, xc-zhang21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

pairs by embedding them into a low-dimensional space using a specified feature mapping. RL with linear function approximation, in particular, has attracted significant research
attention in recent years. Among these studies, linear mixture MDPs (Ayoub et al. 2020) and linear MDPs (Jin et al.
2020) are two of the most prominent MDP models that enable RL with linear function approximation. Notably, recent works have achieved the √
(nearly) minimax optimal regret guarantee of order e
O(dH KH) in both linear mixture
MDPs (Zhou, Gu, and Szepesvári 2021) and linear MDPs
(Hu, Chen, and Huang 2022; He et al. 2023) with stochastic reward functions, where d is the ambient dimension of
the feature mapping, H is the horizon length, and K is the
number of episodes.

In this work, we study the logarithmic regret for reinforcement learning (RL) with linear function approximation and
adversarial corruptions, in the formulation of linear Markov
decision processes (MDPs). Specifically, we consider the case
where there exist adversarial corruptions over the reward
functions, and the total amount of the corruptions of each
step h across all episodes K is bounded by a corruption level
C ≥ 0. We propose an algorithm, double-weighted leastsquares value iteration with UCB (DW-LSVI-UCB), which
leverages weighted linear regressions to learn the (corrupted)
unknown reward parameters and unknown transition parameters simultaneously. We prove that DW-LSVI-UCB attains an
2 4
log2 (1+K/δ)
e
O( d H gap
+ CdH 2 ) regret (omitting the depenmin
dence on lower order terms), where d is the ambient dimension of the feature mapping, H is the horizon length, gapmin
is the minimal sub-optimality gap, and K is the number of
episodes. Additionally, when there are no adversarial corruptions over reward functions, the regret of our algorithm improves the previous best result by an e
O(dH/ log K) factor.

1

Despite significant advances in establishing (nearly) minimax optimal regret for RL with linear function approximation, the previous algorithms are still not able to be shown
to achieve better performance in “easier” environments and
might not be able to work in the more “difficult” environments. Specifically, when the instance-dependent structure
is relatively mild to be learned, the algorithms should be expected to perform better than in environments with instancedependent structures that are hardest to learn. Indeed, for
bandit problems, the more amenable special case of RL,
and tabular MDP problems, instance-dependent regret of
O(log K) has been established (Simchowitz and Jamieson
2019; Jin and Luo 2020; Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020;
Yang, Yang, and Du 2021; Jin, Huang, and Luo 2021). One
notable exception is the work of He, Zhou, and Gu (2021a),
which establishes an instance-dependent
regret of order

e d3 H 5 log K/ gapmin for linear MDPs and an instanceO

e d2 H 5 log3 K/ gapmin for
dependent regret of order O
linear mixture MDPs, where gapmin is the minimal suboptimality gap. However, He, Zhou, and Gu (2021a) also
provide a regret lower bound of order Ω (Hd/ gapmin ) for
both problems, indicating that there still exist large gaps between the regret upper bounds and the regret lower bound.
On the other hand, when non-stationarity arises in the environment, these algorithms will fail to work in such cases,
except for the algorithms by Jin and Luo (2020); Jin, Huang,
and Luo (2021), which adapt to the stochastic environe
ment with O
√ (log K/ gapmin ) regret and also guarantee
e
O(log K + C) regret when there is a total amount of C

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL), which is typically modeled
as Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Feinberg 1996), has
garnered significant empirical success across diverse domains such as gaming, control systems, and robotics. For
tabular MDPs with small finite state space and finite action
space, nearly minimax optimal sample complexity has been
attained in discounted MDPs utilizing a generative model
(Azar, Munos, and Kappen 2013). In the absence of such
a generative model, optimal sample complexity has been
achieved in MDPs with finite and infinite horizons (Azar,
Osband, and Munos 2017; He, Zhou, and Gu 2021b; Tossou,
Basu, and Dimitrakakis 2019). Nevertheless, in practical RL
applications, the state and action spaces can be immense,
even approaching infinity, rendering tabular MDPs vulnerable to the curse of dimensionality. To address this challenge,
recent research has pivoted towards examining MDPs under the lens of function approximation. Typically, this approach involves reparameterizing the values of state-action
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22759

