The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Graph Learning with Static Relations for Credit Risk Assessment
Qi Yuan1 , Yang Liu1 * , Yateng Tang2 , Xinhuan Chen2 , Xuehao Zheng2 , Qing He1 , Xiang Ao1, 3 *
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, CAS
2
Tencent Weixin Group
3
Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS
yuanqi15@mails.ucas.ac.cn, liuyang520ict@gmail.com, heq2002@hotmail.com, aoxiang@ucas.ac.cn,
{fredyttang, holidaychen, xuehaozheng}@tencent.com
Abstract
Credit risk assessment has increasingly become a prominent
research field due to the dramatically increased incidents of
financial default. Traditional graph-based methods have been
developed to detect defaulters within user-merchant commercial payment networks. However, these methods face challenges in detecting complex risks, primarily due to their neglect of user-to-user fund transfer interactions and the underutilization of temporal information. In this paper, we propose a novel framework named Dynamic Graph Neural Network with Static Relations (DGNN-SR) for credit risk assessment, which can encode the dynamic transaction graph and
the static fund transfer graph simultaneously. To fully harness
the temporal information, DGNN-SR employs a multi-view
time encoder to explore the semantics of both relative and
absolute time. To enhance the dynamic representations with
static relations, we devise an adaptive re-weighting strategy
to incorporate the static relations into the dynamic representations of time encoder, which extracts more discriminative
features for risk assessment. Extensive experiments on two
real-world business datasets demonstrate that our proposed
method achieves a 0.85% - 2.5% improvement over existing
SOTA methods.

Figure 1: Neighbor set similarity relative to the 30-day
neighbor set over different time windows. The user-user
graph shows high stability with minor variations in similarity. In contrast, the user-merchant graph exhibits a sharp decline in similarity as the time window increases.

or the government, which is the basis for traditional methods (Crook, Edelman, and Thomas 2007; Chen, Ribeiro, and
Chen 2016). The challenge of this task lies in how to assess the credit risk via consumer records, such as purchase
payments and fund transfers, which form a hybrid transaction graph encompassing both user-merchant transaction interactions and user-user fund transfer interactions. For instance, if a user makes multiple purchases from a merchant
within a short period and subsequently receives a transfer,
it could indicate a potential cash-out behavior, resulting in a
poor credit record for this user. Therefore, considering usermerchant and user-user interactions simultaneously, credit
risk signals are more likely to be detected.
Existing works widely adopt graphs to model financial
interactions between users and merchants (Liu et al. 2018;
Sukharev et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021).
An edge is constructed between a user-merchant pair if
the user completed a payment with the merchant, along
with the timestamp of the payment. In this way, the usermerchant graph reflects commercial payment behaviors and
is a continuous-time dynamic graph. Similarly, an edge is
connected when a user transfers funds to another user. Different from commercial payment, we observe that user-user
fund transfer behaviors indicate a more static relationship
between users. As shown in Figure 1, user-user interactions
maintain a high similarity across different time windows,
suggesting stable relationships between users that are relatively unaffected by time. This implies that users usually
transfer funds with a small, fixed set of friends and the times-

Introduction
With 2.3 trillion cashless transactions worldwide forecasted
for 2027 by Capgemini1 compared to 1.3 trillion in 2023, the
future of payments is undoubtedly digital. Inclusive finance,
while facilitating digital payments, also reduces the cost of
default, leading to a substantial increase in the default rate.
Following 2023 with 38 billion dollars in losses due to online default (the forecast is 91 billion by 2028), it is evident
that assessing credit risk on online platforms becomes a crucial task to mitigate the losses resulting from defaults.
Credit risk assessment, which aims to evaluate the probability that a user will default on a payment, plays an important role for online payment platforms (Li 2019; Wang
et al. 2020; Moscato, Picariello, and Sperlı́ 2021; Zhu et al.
2021; Kanaparthi 2023). Due to privacy restrictions, online
platforms lack access to credit reporting provided by banks
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.capgemini.com/insights/researchlibrary/payments-top-trends-2024/

13133

