The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Distortion of Committee Election with 1-Euclidean Preferences
and Few Distance Queries
Dimitris Fotakis1,2 , Laurent Gourvès3 , Panagiotis Patsilinakos3,4
1

National Technical University of Athens, Greece
2
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
3
Université Paris-Dauphine, Université PSL, CNRS, LAMSADE, 75016, Paris, France
4
Athens University of Economics and Business, Greece
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr, laurent.gourves@dauphine.fr, patsilinak@mail.ntua.gr
Abstract

multiwinner voting rules (often assuming normalized cardinal utilities, see e.g., (Boutilier et al. 2015; Caragiannis and
Procaccia 2011; Caragiannis et al. 2017)).
Motivated by the frequent use of spatial preferences in
social choice (e.g., (Enelow and Hinich 1984)), Anshelevich et al. (2018) introduced the framework of metric distortion, where the voters and the candidates are associated
with locations in a metric space. The voters’ cardinal preferences over candidates correspond to their distance to the
candidate locations. The voters rank the candidates in increasing order of distance and submit this information to the
voting rule. Without knowledge of the voter and candidate
locations and distances, the voting rule aims to minimize
the sum of distances (a.k.a. the social cost) of the voters to
the candidate elected. Distortion is now defined w.r.t. the social cost. There has been significant interest in analyzing the
metric distortion of prominent voting rules (see e.g., (Anshelevich et al. 2018; Goel, Krishnaswamy, and Munagala
2017; Kempe 2020; Anagnostides, Fotakis, and Patsilinakos
2022)) and in designing voting rules with optimal metric distortion for single-winner elections (Gkatzelis, Halpern, and
Shah 2020; Kizilkaya and Kempe 2023).
There has not been much previous work on the metric distortion of multiwinner voting, where we elect a committee of
k ≥ 2 (out of m ≥ k+1) candidates based on ordinal preferences submitted by n voters. As before, the voters’ cardinal
preferences correspond to their distance to the candidate locations. However, there are different ways to define the voter
cardinal preferences over k-committees, resulting in different types and desirable properties of multiwinner elections
(see e.g., (Elkind et al. 2017; Faliszewski et al. 2017)).
Goel, Hulett, and Krishnaswamy (2018) and Chen, Li,
and Wang (2020) were the first to consider the metric distortion of committee elections with the cost of each voter for a
committee defined as the sum of her distances to all committee members. Goel, Hulett, and Krishnaswamy (2018)
proved that the best possible distortion in this setting is equal
to the best possible distortion of single-winner voting. Chen,
Li, and Wang (2020) proved that single-vote rules achieve a
best possible distortion for the case where k = m − 1.
Caragiannis, Shah, and Voudouris (2022) considered the
metric distortion of k-committee election with the cost of
each voter for a committee defined as her distance to the q-th
nearest member. They proved an interesting trichotomy: the

We consider committee election of k ≥ 3 (out of m ≥ k + 1)
candidates, where the voters and the candidates are associated
with locations on the real line. Each voter’s cardinal preferences over candidates correspond to her distance to the candidate locations, and each voter’s cardinal preferences over
committees is defined as her distance to the nearest candidate
elected in the committee. We consider a setting where the true
distances and the locations are unknown. We can nevertheless have access to degraded information which consists of
an order of candidates for each voter. We investigate the best
possible distortion (a worst-case performance criterion) w.r.t.
the social cost achieved by deterministic committee election
rules based on ordinal preferences submitted by n voters and
few additional distance queries. We show that for any k ≥ 3,
the best possible distortion of any deterministic algorithm that
uses at most k − 3 distance queries cannot be bounded by any
function of n, m and k. We present deterministic algorithms
for k-committee election with distortion of O(n) with O(k)
distance queries and O(1) with O(k log n) distance queries.

1

Introduction

Electing a set of representatives based on the preferences
submitted by voters is a central problem in social choice.
In typical applications, the voters express ordinal preferences over the set of candidates, which are consistent with
their cardinal preferences, but do not include any quantitative information about the strength of each preference. An
important reason for resorting to ordinal information has to
do with the cognitive difficulty of quantifying preferences.
However, crucial information may be lost when voters summarize cardinal to ordinal preferences.
Procaccia and Rosenschein (2006) introduced the framework of utilitarian distortion as a means to quantify the efficiency loss, due to the fact that elections are based on ordinal information only, and to investigate the sensitivity of
different voting rules to the absence of cardinal information.
The distortion of a voting rule is the worst-case approximation ratio of its social welfare to the optimal social welfare
achievable when cardinal information is available. Previous
work has quantified the best possible distortion of single and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13864

