The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Local Neighborhoods of Non-Gaussian Graphical Models
Sarah Liaw1 , Rebecca Morrison2 , Youssef Marzouk3 , Ricardo Baptista1
1

California Institute of Technology
2
University of Colorado Boulder
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{sliaw, rsb}@caltech.edu, rebeccam@colorado.edu, ymarz@mit.edu

Abstract
Identifying the Markov properties or conditional independencies of a collection of random variables is a fundamental task
in statistics for modeling and inference. Existing approaches
often learn the structure of a probabilistic graph, which encodes these dependencies, by assuming that the variables follow a distribution with a simple parametric form. Moreover,
the computational cost of many algorithms scales poorly for
high-dimensional distributions, as they need to estimate all the
edges in the graph simultaneously. In this work, we propose
a scalable algorithm to infer the conditional independence
relationships of each variable by exploiting the local Markov
property. The proposed method, named Localized Sparsity
Identification for Non-Gaussian Distributions (L-SING), estimates the graph by using flexible classes of transport maps
to represent the conditional distribution for each variable. We
show that L-SING includes existing approaches, such as neighborhood selection with Lasso, as a special case. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm in both Gaussian and
non-Gaussian settings by comparing it to existing methods.
Lastly, we show the scalability of the proposed approach by
applying it to high-dimensional non-Gaussian examples, including a biological dataset with more than 150 variables.

Introduction
Given a collection of random variables X = (X1 , . . . , Xd )
with probability measure νπ and Lebesgue density π, discovering the conditional independence relationships of X is
an important task in statistics. These dependencies are represented in a graph as edges E between vertices V , which
correspond to the variables. The resulting graph structure
G = (V, E) is known as a probabilistic graphical model or a
Markov random field.
Many real-world processes, such as gene expression levels,
generate continuous and non-Gaussian data, requiring methods that can handle such distributions. Gene expression is regulated by complex networks involving transcription factors
which exhibit nonlinear dynamics, leading to non-Gaussian
distributions (Marko and Weil 2012). Other applications include data of financial market returns and climate variables.
These datasets are high-dimensional, and existing algorithms
that assume normality may fail to correctly characterize the
relevant conditional dependencies.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18711

Structure learning algorithms estimate graphs that capture
and summarize the conditional dependencies within a dataset,
thereby performing model selection. These algorithms are
broadly categorized into global and local methods (Koller and
Friedman 2009). Global methods reconstruct the entire graph
based on global Markov properties, whereas local methods
identify the neighborhood set N b(k) for each node k in the
graph G based on local Markov properties. The neighborhood
set defines variables XN b(k) such that the conditional density
of variable Xk satisfies π(xk |x−k ) = π(xk |xN b(k) ). In other
words, Xk is conditionally independent of variables outside
the neighborhood X−N b(k) given XN b(k) . For distributions
with a positive probability density functions, global and local
Markov properties are equivalent (Pearl and Paz 1986).
In this work we focus on the following graph recovery
problem: given i.i.d. samples {xi }ni=1 from an (unspecified
and possibly non-Gaussian) probability distribution, identify
the local neighborhood structure, i.e., local Markov properties, of each variable in the graph.
Existing algorithms that do not assume Gaussianity, such
as Sparsity Identification in Non-Gaussian Distributions
(SING), rely on the iterative estimation of a transport map to
represent the underlying data distribution (Morrison, Baptista,
and Marzouk 2017; Baptista et al. 2024). To do so, SING
requires estimating the joint density of X, which is often
computationally costly for high-dimensional distributions. To
overcome this challenge, we propose Localized Sparsity Identification for Non-Gaussian Distributions (L-SING), which
learns transport maps representing the conditional distributions of each node in parallel. Our approach exploits the local
Markov property to construct a probabilistic graphical model
that encodes the conditional dependencies of the nodes. We
summarize the algorithm as follows: (1) learn a transport
map for each node from samples; (2) use the estimated maps
to define a matrix Ω ∈ Rd×d , referred to as a generalized
precision, which encodes conditional dependencies between
non-Gaussian variables; (3) determine the edge set of the
graph from the sparsity of Ω.
We show that L-SING generalizes existing methods, such
as neighborhood selection with the Lasso and the nonparanormal approach. Finally, we show L-SING’s scalability and
effectiveness by empirically evaluating it on benchmark problems and a high-dimensional dataset of gene expression levels
in ovarian cancer patients.

