The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-Shot Scene Change Detection
Kyusik Cho1 , Dong Yeop Kim2,1 , Euntai Kim1 *
1

2

Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Seoul, Republic of Korea
ks.cho@yonsei.ac.kr, sword32@keti.re.kr, etkim@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

variations. Firstly, creating a training dataset for SCD models is labor-intensive and costly. Recent research has focused on reducing these costs through semi-supervised (Lee
and Kim 2024; Sun et al. 2022) and self-supervised learning (Seo et al. 2023; Furukawa et al. 2020) methods, as well
as the use of synthetic data (Sachdeva and Zisserman 2023;
Lee and Kim 2024). While these approaches mitigate the
expense of labeling, they often overlook the cost of acquiring image pairs, which arises from the substantial temporal
intervals to capture changes. Secondly, due to the substantial temporal intervals between pre-change and post-change
images, variations in seasons, weather, and time introduce
significant differences in their visual characteristics. Consequently, SCD techniques must be robust to these style variations to be effective. However, the training dataset cannot
include all the style variations present in real-world scenarios, making the trained model vulnerable to style variations
that are not included in the training set.
To address these problems, we propose a novel trainingfree zero-shot SCD method. Our method does not require a
training dataset, thereby eliminating collection costs and allows it to be applied to any problem with arbitrary styles.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to attempt zero-shot SCD without training on SCD datasets. The
key idea of this paper is to formulate SCD as a tracking
problem, and apply a foundation tracking model to conduct
zero-shot SCD. This idea stems from the observation that the
tracking task is fundamentally similar to change detection.
Specifically, tracking models (Cheng et al. 2023a; Cheng
and Schwing 2022) maintain or build tracks by identifying
the same objects, disappeared objects, and newly appeared
objects in two consecutive images, even when the camera
and objects move. Thus, if the two consecutive images in
tracking are replaced with the two images before and after
the change in SCD, the tracking model can automatically
solve SCD without training.
However, there are some differences between tracking
and SCD tasks: (a) Unlike tracking, the two images before
and after the change in SCD might have different styles due
to a large time gap between two images. We refer to this
SCD trait as the style gap. (b) Objects change very little between two consecutive images in tracking, whereas objects
change abruptly in SCD. We refer to this SCD trait as the
content gap. To address these issues in our zero-shot SCD

We present a novel, training-free approach to scene change
detection. Our method leverages tracking models, which
inherently perform change detection between consecutive
frames of video by identifying common objects and detecting
new or missing objects. Specifically, our method takes advantage of the change detection effect of the tracking model
by inputting reference and query images instead of consecutive frames. Furthermore, we focus on the content gap and
style gap between two input images in change detection, and
address both issues by proposing adaptive content threshold
and style bridging layers, respectively. Finally, we extend our
approach to video, leveraging rich temporal information to
enhance the performance of scene change detection. We compare our approach and baseline through various experiments.
While existing train-based baseline tend to specialize only
in the trained domain, our method shows consistent performance across various domains, proving the competitiveness
of our approach.

Code — https://github.com/kyusik-cho/ZSSCD

Introduction
Scene Change Detection (SCD) is the task that aims to detect differences between two scenes separated by a temporal interval. Recently, SCD has gained significant interest
in various applications involving mobile drones and robots.
For instance, drone-based SCD has been studied for land
terrain monitoring (Lv et al. 2023; Song et al. 2019; Agarwal, Kumar, and Singh 2019), construction progress monitoring (Han et al. 2021), and urban feature monitoring (Chen
et al. 2016). Additionally, SCD using mobile robots has
also been researched for natural disaster damage assessment (Sakurada and Okatani 2015; Sakurada, Okatani, and
Deguchi 2013), urban landscape monitoring (Alcantarilla
et al. 2018; Sakurada, Shibuya, and Wang 2020), and industrial warehouse management (Park et al. 2021, 2022).
Recently, SCD has been tackled using deep learning.
Deep learning-based SCD techniques follow a procedure of
learning from a training dataset and applying the model to
a test dataset. These approaches tend to face two main challenges: dataset generation costs and susceptibility to style
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2509

