The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Domain Adaptive Unfolded Graph Neural Networks
Zepeng Zhang, Olga Fink
Intelligent Maintenance and Operations Systems (IMOS) Lab
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
zepeng.zhang@epfl.ch, olga.fink@epfl.ch

Abstract

cability in real-world applications where domain shifts occur and labels for a new target domain are often unavailable (Liu et al. 2023). To mitigate such issues, a variety of
graph domain adaptation (GDA) approaches have been developed (Shi et al. 2024; Cai et al. 2024). GDA aims to transfer knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain, which often experiences distribution shifts.
The main challenge of GDA is to address various domain
shifts in node features, structural patterns, and task labels,
which typically hinder knowledge transfer.
Inspired by the success of domain adaptation (DA) in sequence and image data (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Wang
and Deng 2018), some early attempts in GDA have employed DA techniques developed for computer vision tasks
to learn domain-invariant and label-discriminative embeddings (Zhang et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2021; Dai et al. 2022).
However, these approaches have overlooked the unique
characteristics of graph-structured data. Subsequently, researchers have begun to examine the distribution shifts that
are particularly prevalent in graph-structured data. For example, Guo et al. (2023) investigate the influence of node
degree distribution shifts, Shi et al. (2023) study the shifts
in hierarchical graph structure, Wu, He, and Ainsworth
(2023) analyze the graph subtree discrepancies, and Liu
et al. (2023) explore the effect of conditional structure shifts.
While these techniques have significantly advanced the
field of GDA, they primarily focus on aligning the distributions of node embeddings between the source and target
domains to mitigate the impact of distribution shifts (Liu
et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023). In computer vision, recent work
has begun to examine the effect of the underlying architecture, which has been shown to play a critical role in DA
(Li et al. 2023). However, the effect of the underlying architecture has been largely overlooked in the field of GDA.
Some recent works have started to investigate how different
components in message-passing GNNs affect domain generalization (DG) (Guo et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024). Their results show that both the decoupled structure and the attention
mechanism contribute positively to DG, while the transformation layers impair the generalization capability. Based on
these findings, Liu et al. (2024) propose a GNN model with
a decoupled structure, while Guo et al. (2024) further adopts
the attention mechanism in the model. However, in contrast
to the majority of GDA methods that can be applied to var-

Over the last decade, graph neural networks (GNNs) have
made significant progress in numerous graph machine learning tasks. In real-world applications, where domain shifts occur and labels are often unavailable for a new target domain,
graph domain adaptation (GDA) approaches have been proposed to facilitate knowledge transfer from the source domain
to the target domain. Previous efforts in tackling distribution
shifts across domains have mainly focused on aligning the
node embedding distributions generated by the GNNs in the
source and target domains. However, as the core part of GDA
approaches, the impact of the underlying GNN architecture
has received limited attention. In this work, we explore this
orthogonal direction, i.e., how to facilitate GDA with architectural enhancement. In particular, we consider a class
of GNNs that are designed explicitly based on optimization
problems, namely unfolded GNNs (UGNNs), whose training
process can be represented as bi-level optimization. Empirical
and theoretical analyses demonstrate that when transferring
from the source domain to the target domain, the lower-level
objective value generated by the UGNNs significantly increases, resulting in an increase in the upper-level objective as
well. Motivated by this observation, we propose a simple yet
effective strategy called cascaded propagation (CP), which is
guaranteed to decrease the lower-level objective value. The
CP strategy is widely applicable to general UGNNs, and we
evaluate its efficacy with three representative UGNN architectures. Extensive experiments on five real-world datasets
demonstrate that the UGNNs integrated with CP outperform
state-of-the-art GDA baselines.

Code — https://github.com/zepengzhang/DAUGNN
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.13137

Introduction
Over the past decade, graph neural networks (GNNs)
have become increasingly prevalent for processing graphstructured data, achieving significant advancements across a
wide range of applications, including social networks, engineering applications, molecular chemistry, recommender
systems, and more (Wu et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020; Wu
et al. 2022). Despite their achievements, the majority of
GNNs rely on supervised training, which requires a substantial amount of labeled data. This reliance limits their appliCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22714

