The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Contrastive Learning Inspired by the Philosophy of
“The Blind Men and the Elephant”
Yudong Zhang1,2 , Ruobing Xie2, * , Jiansheng Chen3, * , Xingwu Sun2,4 , Zhanhui Kang2 , Yu Wang1, *
1

Tsinghua University
2
Tencent
3
University of Science and Technology Beijing
4
University of Macau
zhangyd16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xrbsnowing@163.com, jschen@ustb.edu.cn, sunxingwu01@gmail.com,
kegokang@tencent.com, yu-wang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Contrastive learning is a prevalent technique in selfsupervised vision representation learning, typically generating positive pairs by applying two data augmentations to the
same image. Designing effective data augmentation strategies is crucial for the success of contrastive learning. Inspired
by the story of the blind men and the elephant, we introduce JointCrop and JointBlur. These methods generate more
challenging positive pairs by leveraging the joint distribution
of the two augmentation parameters, thereby enabling contrastive learning to acquire more effective feature representations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first effort to
explicitly incorporate the joint distribution of two data augmentation parameters into contrastive learning. As a plugand-play framework without additional computational overhead, JointCrop and JointBlur enhance the performance of
SimCLR, BYOL, MoCo v1, MoCo v2, MoCo v3, SimSiam,
and Dino baselines with notable improvements.

elephant

CL

CL

snake

elephant

(a) JointCrop generates chal- (b) RandomCrop generates trivlenging positive pairs.
ial positive pairs.
tree

CL

snake

fan

CL

fan

(c) RandomCrop generates in- (d) RandomCrop generates trivcomprehensive positive pairs. ial and incomprehensive pairs.

Code — https://github.com/btzyd/JointCrop
Extended version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16522

1

elephant

strong blur

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) (Caron et al. 2020; Pang
et al. 2022) has garnered significant attention in recent years
as obtaining large amounts of labeled data is expensive.
Contrastive learning, a widely-utilized SSL method, can
even outperform supervised learning on tasks such as image
classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation
(Chen, Xie, and He 2021; Caron et al. 2021).
Contrastive learning (CL) produces self-supervised signals through pretext tasks and utilizes these signals to train
the encoder. A common pretext task is instance discrimination (ID) (Wu et al. 2018), which involves a classification
problem at the instance level. A pair of positive views is
generated by applying two independently distributed data
augmentations to a single image, aiming to maximize the
similarity of their representations. ID is widely utilized in
popular CL methods such as SimCLR (Chen et al. 2020a),

weak blur

CL

CL

weak blur

weak blur

(e) JointBlur generates challeng- (f) GaussianBlur generates triving positive pairs.
ial positive pairs.

Figure 1: The motivation of our paper. We use the philosophy of the blind men and the elephant to analyze contrastive
learning between positive sample pairs.

MoCo (He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020b), BYOL (Grill et al.
2020), SimSiam (Chen and He 2021), SWAV (Caron et al.
2020), and DINO (Caron et al. 2021).
The design of positive pairs is crucial for CL. Previous
studies have employed various data augmentations to generate positive pairs, including color distortion, puzzle transformations, and adversarial attacks (Jiang et al. 2020; Kim,

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22659

