The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Self-Prompting Analogical Reasoning for UAV Object Detection
Nianxin Li1 , Mao Ye1 * , Lihua Zhou1 , Song Tang2 , Yan Gan3 , Zizhuo Liang4 , Xiatian Zhu5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
Institute of Machine Intelligence (IMI), University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, China
3
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
4
University of Sheffield
5
University of Surrey
linianxin1220@gmail.com, cvlab.uestc@gmail.com
Abstract

Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Object Detection (UAVOD)
presents unique challenges due to varying altitudes, dynamic
backgrounds, and the small size of objects. Traditional detection methods often struggle with these challenges, as
they typically rely on visual features only and fail to extract the semantic relations between the objects. To address
these limitations, we propose a novel approach named SelfPrompting Analogical Reasoning (SPAR). Our method utilizes the vision-language model (CLIP) to generate contextaware prompts based on image features, providing rich semantic information that guides analogical reasoning. SPAR
includes two main modules: self-prompting and analogical reasoning. Self-prompting module based on learnable
description and CLIP-text encoder generates context-aware
prompt by combining specific image feature; then an objectness prompt score map is produced by computing the similarity between pixel-level features and context-aware prompt.
With this score map, multi-scale image features are enhanced
and pixel-level features are chosen for graph construction.
While for analogical reasoning module, graph nodes consist
of category-level prompt nodes and pixel-level image feature
nodes. Analogical inference is based on graph convolution.
Under the guidance of category-level nodes, different-scale
object features have been enhanced, which helps achieve
more accurate detection of challenging objects. Extensive experiments illustrate that SPAR outperforms traditional methods, offering a more robust and accurate solution for UAVOD.

Visual
Feature

Instance
Graph

(a) Previous relation reasoning methods
Text Feature
Self Prompt
Visual
Feature

Class-wise
Graph
Analogical
Reasoning

Pixel-wise
Graph

(b) The Proposed SPAR (our method)

Figure 1: (a) The traditional relation reasoning methods only
use the visual similarity to construct a relation graph. (b) Our
method achieves self-prompting through the interaction of
visual and text features, and simultaneously constructs relational graph. In this way, small objects can be detected by
analogical reasoning.

for detection algorithms to accurately identify and localize
small objects.
Over the years, several methods have been proposed to
tackle this challenge, these methods can generally be categorized into three routes. The first route segments the image
into multiple regions and then selectively scales the regions
containing dense objects by a certain factor to enhance their
resolutions for object detection (Huang, Chen, and Huang
2022; Zhang et al. 2024). The second route introduces additional network modules to enhance the network’s capability to extract meaningful features, such as attention (Woo
et al. 2018), multi-scale feature fusion (Zhao et al. 2023),
etc. The final route aims to enhance data diversity through
image augmentation techniques such that a broader range of
scenarios can be exploited during training (Yan et al. 2022;
Garg, Mandal, and Narang 2021). All of the above methods
do not account for the relationships between different objects and contextual information, this oversight means that
while each object is detected individually, the interdependencies and interactions among objects and background are
not considered.

Introduction
With the rapid advancements in deep learning, significant
progress has been made in the field of object detection. For
example, single-stage models like YOLO (Redmon et al.
2016) and two-stage models like Faster-RCNN (Ren et al.
2015) have demonstrated impressive performance on popular datasets such as COCO (Lin et al. 2014) and PASCAL
VOC (Everingham et al. 2015). However, the effectiveness
of these technologies still falls short of expectations when
applied to UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) imagery. UAVs
often capture wide-area images from a high altitude, leading to objects appearing much smaller compared to those in
ground-level images. This scale variability makes it difficult
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18412

