The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unveiling the Knowledge of CLIP for Training-Free
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Yajie Liu1 2 , Guodong Wang1 2 , Jinjin Zhang1 2 , Qingjie Liu2 , Di Huang1 2 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Complex and Critical Software Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{yajie liu, wanggd, jinjin.zhang, qingjie.liu, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Training-free open-vocabulary semantic segmentation aims
to explore the potential of frozen vision-language models
(VLM) for segmentation tasks. Recent works reform the inference process of CLIP and utilize the features from the final layer to reconstruct dense representations for segmentation, demonstrating promising performance. However, the final layer tends to prioritize global components over local representations, leading to suboptimal robustness and effectiveness of existing methods. In this paper, we propose CLIPSeg,
a novel training-free framework that fully exploits the diverse
knowledge across layers in CLIP for dense predictions. Our
study unveils two key discoveries: Firstly, the features in the
middle layers exhibit high locality awareness and feature coherence compared to the final layer, based on which we propose the coherence enhanced residual attention module that
generates semantic-aware attention. Secondly, despite not being directly aligned with the text, the deep layers capture
valid local semantics that complement those in the final layer.
Leveraging this insight, we introduce the deep semantic integration module to boost the patch semantics in the final block.
Experiments conducted on 9 segmentation benchmarks with
various CLIP models demonstrate that CLIPSeg consistently
outperforms all training-free methods by substantial margins,
e.g., a 7.8% improvement in average mIoU for CLIP with a
ViT-L backbone, and competes with learning-based counterparts in generalizing to novel concepts in an efficient way.

Figure 1: Comparison of our Attn and V to previous works.
For segmentation, the dense output of the final block in
CLIP is constructed using the attention and the value. In
current works (represented as GEM), the Attn exhibits confusing relations among local patches and the patch semantics in V encounter contamination by the dominant category
(“horse”). In contrast, our method generates semantic-aware
attention Attn and achieves accurate patch semantics in V.

A group of literature integrates trainable modules into
CLIP and relies on additional supervision to learn OVSS,
such as dense annotations on limited categories (Xu et al.
2022) and additional image-text pairs (Cha, Mun, and Roh
2023). However, training with limited supervision inevitably
compromises the generalization capability of the model,
leading to underwhelming performance on unseen classes.
Furthermore, the complex additional modules and the training process incur huge computational cost for OVSS.
In contrast, the training-free methods eliminate the need
for fine-tuning while retain the capabilities and generalization of CLIP. CLIP-Surgery (Li et al. 2023) excludes the last
feed forward (FFN) as it pushes the patch features towards
negative semantics. ClearCLIP (Lan et al. 2024) removes the
final residual connection to address the issue of noisy segmentation masks. With above modifications, the final block
in CLIP for segmentation is reformed, as depicted in the left
part of Fig. 1. In essence, the segmentation performance is
primarily determined by the attention module (denoted as

Introduction
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) aims to
segment the visual elements of arbitrary categories. Unlike conventional semantic segmentation (Zhou et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2020) that only works on limited predefined categories, OVSS is more practical for real-world applications
where infinite visual concepts exist. However, the high cost
of dense annotations makes it impractical to scale segmentation to large sets of concepts in a fully supervised manner. Motivated by the strong generality and open-vocabulary
understanding capabilities of CLIP (Radford et al. 2021),
recent works on OVSS explore transferring the image-text
alignment towards finer-granularity for pixel-level prediction.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5649

