The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Personalized Label Inference Attack in Federated Transfer Learning
via Contrastive Meta Learning
Hanyu Zhao1 , Zijie Pan2 , Yajie Wang1 * , Zuobin Ying2 , Lei Xu1 , Yu-an Tan1 ,
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
City University of Macau, Macau, China
hanyuzhao@bit.edu.cn, wangyajie0312@foxmail.com

Abstract

parameter decoupling gains significant attention due to its
ability to balance the influence of global model with multiple personalized models, particularly in scenarios involving data heterogeneity (Guo et al. 2024). This approach allows for the creation of more tailored models for individual
clients while maintaining the benefits of shared learning (Yu
et al. 2020; Kang et al. 2019; Yosinski et al. 2014). A large
number of research has demonstrated the simplicity and efficacy of this methodology (Collins et al. 2021; Oh, Kim,
and Yun 2021; Arivazhagan et al. 2019; Liang et al. 2020;
Pillutla et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022; Jang et al.
2022).
Despite the growing popularity of FTL, there is a paucity
of exploration of the potential privacy and security risks in
this domain. Few research examine the potential for backdoor attacks on FTL (Ye et al. 2024; Lyu et al. 2024), and
there is no discernible work on the examination of inference attacks. Admittedly, FTL is more challenging to attack
than other scenarios within FL. On the one hand, transfer
learning has the ability to mitigate privacy breaches, which
may result in researchers failing to pursue further research.
Techniques such as knowledge distillation and parameter decoupling facilitate the separation of the model into an upstream and a downstream component. Incomplete model increase the complexity of attacks to infer privacy knowledge
from heterogeneous data. Furthermore, the content of personalized information in the global model after multi-source
migration learning decrease and the shared model becomes
more generalized. In order to adapt to different data distributions, the shared model may become less detailed in capturing individual data features. This can somewhat mitigate
the risk of personalized information leakage and reduce the
likelihood of an attacker obtaining specific individual data
through reverse inference of the model.
Despite these challenges, we discover that the current design of FTL still presents significant privacy concerns that
warrant further examination. In particular, the parameter
decoupling strategy, which involves fine-tuning structures
and gradient update mechanisms, may inadvertently reveal
personalised information, thereby increasing the probability
that a server could infer private labels from client data. This
gap in the literature highlights the necessity for a comprehensive investigation into the potential privacy vulnerabilities that may emerge in FTL.

Federated Transfer Learning (FTL) is a popular approach to
solve the problem of heterogeneous feature space and label
distribution. Among the mainstream strategies for FTL, parameter decoupling, which balance the impact of a single
global model and multiple personalized models under data
heterogeneity, has attracted the attention of many researchers.
However, few attacks have been proposed to evaluate the
privacy risk of FTL. We find that the fine-tuned structures
and the gradient update mechanisms of parameter decoupling
would be more likely to leak personalized information for
the server to infer private labels. Based on our findings, we
propose the label inference attack that combines meta classifier with contrastive learning in FTL. Our experiments show
that the proposed attack has ability to extract local personalized information from the differences before and after finetuning to improve the accuracy of the attack in the absence of
a downstream model. Our research can reveal potential privacy risks in FTL and motivate more research on private and
secure FTL.

Introduction
With the growing popularity of big data and the increasing
complexity of various scenarios, federated transfer learning
gains significant attention (Liu et al. 2020; Kevin et al. 2021;
Saha and Ahmad 2021). Through FTL, knowledge is transferred from the multiple source domain to the target domain in a continuous interaction as the central server aggregates and participants interact. This allows local models obtained from a specific domain to be used by other
participants, thus alleviating limitations such as data heterogeneity, system heterogeneity, incremental data and labeled data scarcity. FTL mainly includes two mainstreams:
data-based strategies and model-based strategies (Guo et al.
2024). Data-based strategies emphasize knowledge transfer
by modulating and transforming participants’ data to accommodate the preservation or adaptation of space, distribution,
and data attributes without exposing any original private data
(Zhuang et al. 2020). Model-based strategies aim to improve
the accuracy of client’s prediction by modeling other participants. Among the various strategies employed in FTL,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22777

