The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scalable Trajectory-User Linking with Dual-Stream Representation Networks
Hao Zhang1 * , Wei Chen2 * , Xingyu Zhao1 , Jianpeng Qi1 , Guiyuan Jiang1 , Yanwei Yu1†
1

Faculty of Information Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{zhanghao9222,zhaoxingyu}@stu.ouc.edu.cn,onedeanxxx@gmail.com,
{qijianpeng,jiangguiyuan,yuyanwei}@ouc.edu.cn

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on addressing the large-scale TUL
problem using deep learning models. Traditional methods
rely mainly on similarity measurement techniques, such
as LCSS (Ying et al. 2010), STS (Li et al. 2021), and
SR (Jin et al. 2019, 2020), to assess the similarity between
trajectories and link anonymous trajectories with users of
similar ones. Early deep learning models typically employ
deep neural networks, such as Seq2Seq (Gao et al. 2017),
Variational Autoencoders (VAE) (Zhou et al. 2018), and
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Medsker, Jain et al.
2001), to learn spatiotemporal representations of trajectories and model the problem as a trajectory classification
task. Recently, models like MainTUL (Chen et al. 2022)
and S2 TUL (Deng et al. 2023) have been proposed, utilizing mutual distillation learning networks and graph neural networks to capture spatiotemporal movement patterns
and relationships between trajectories for TUL problem, respectively. Additionally, a greedy trajectory-user re-linking
method has been designed to address the issue of time conflicts in S2 TUL.
Despite the notable progress achieved by these methods,
they still face two major limitations. First, existing methods mainly focus on the TUL problem on hundreds of users
using trajectory classification methods, while real-world application scenarios are large-scale and involve massive trajectory users. Current deep leaning models are not specifically designed for large-scale user trajectory data. They are
typically formulated as multi-class trajectory classification
problems, which results in inefficiencies and limited performance (Joulin et al. 2017). Second, most TUL methods
directly learn the representation of trajectories divided by
day or longer historical trajectories, lacking effective exploration of the irregularity of trajectories and failing to effectively capture various different spatio-temporal dependencies in large-scale user trajectories.
To address these challenges, we propose ScaleTUL, a
Scalable Trajectory-User Linking with dual-stream representation networks for large-scale TUL problem. Specifically, we design a spatio-temporal augmentation strategy
that includes both temporal and spatial augmentations. The
temporal augmentation introduces trajectories with different
time granularities to fully capture user movement patterns
across various periods, while the spatial augmentation addresses trajectory sparsity and enhances the potential irreg-

Trajectory-user linking (TUL) aims to match anonymous trajectories to the most likely users who generated them, offering benefits for a wide range of real-world spatio-temporal
applications. However, existing TUL methods are limited by
high model complexity and poor learning of the effective
representations of trajectories, rendering them ineffective in
handling large-scale user trajectory data. In this work, we
propose a novel Scalable Trajectory-User Linking with dualstream representation networks for large-scale TUL problem, named ScaleTUL. Specifically, ScaleTUL generates two
views using temporal and spatial augmentations to exploit supervised contrastive learning framework to effectively capture the irregularities of trajectories. In each view, a dualstream trajectory encoder, consisting of a long-term encoder
and a short-term encoder, is designed to learn unified trajectory representations that fuse different temporal-spatial dependencies. Then, a TUL layer is used to associate the trajectories with the corresponding users in the representation
space using a two-stage training model. Experimental results
on check-in mobility datasets from three real-world cities and
the nationwide U.S. demonstrate the superiority of ScaleTUL
over state-of-the-art baselines for large-scale TUL tasks.

Introduction
The proliferation of various location-based service platforms has generated a vast amount of user mobility data,
offering researchers valuable opportunities to understand
and analyze human movement patterns (Wang, Cao, and
Philip 2020). Trajectory-user linking (TUL) aims to associate given anonymous trajectories with the most likely
users who generated them (Gao et al. 2017). This problem has garnered significant research interest in recent years
because effective TUL methods can benefit a wide range
of spatio-temporal applications, including personalized location recommendations (Liu et al. 2019), route suggestions (Pyshkin et al. 2016), behavior tracking (Chen, Hu, and
Wang 2019), and the identification of terrorist or criminal activities (Huang et al. 2018). Furthermore, such methods can
also be used to test and challenge privacy protection mechanisms in mobility data analysis models (Rao et al. 2020).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Yanwei Yu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13224

