The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Gradient-Guided Credit Assignment and Joint Optimization
for Dependency-Aware Spatial Crowdsourcing
Yafei Li1 * , Wei Chen1 * , Jinxing Yan1 , Huiling Li2 , Lei Gao1 , Mingliang Xu1†
1

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{ieyfli, iexumingliang}@zzu.edu.cn, {chenweizzu, jxyan, leigao}@gs.zzu.edu.cn, cshlli@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

To illustrate DASC, consider a telecommunications network maintenance scenario with three interdependent subtasks: on-site data collection, equipment preparation at a
warehouse, and tower repair. Obviously, repair can only begin after data collection and equipment preparation are complete, and each subtask requires different skills and is indispensable to successful telecommunications network maintenance. As such, DASC diverges significantly from typical spatial crowdsourcing models because, regarding spatial
tasks, it emphasizes subtask dependencies, skill-specific assignments, and comprehensive completion of all the corresponding subtasks. In this paper, we aim to maximize the
platform’s total revenue by optimizing task assignment policies. The optimization problem in DASC is inherently more
complex than traditional spatial crowdsourcing due to the
additional dimensions of inter-task dependencies and heterogeneous skill requirements.
Currently, there is a relative paucity of research focused
on DASC, whereas standard SC problems have been extensively studied. Our approach involves converting the DASC
problem into a standard SC problem, thereby leveraging established SC solutions for the matching process. However,
this conversion presents unique challenges: if all subtasks
are incorporated into the matching process, task completion
efficiency would be substantially impeded as the start time
of subtasks and their predecessors cannot be the same. Conversely, if the matching is limited to subtasks without prerequisites, it neglects the inherent interdependencies among
tasks and may fail to utilize available workers fully. To this
end, we propose a novel two-stage Recommend and Match
Optimization (RMO) framework (Fig.1), which initially analyzes task graph structures and features to recommend subtasks and subsequently strategically matches these subtasks
with appropriate workers.
Specifically, we design a multi-agent network employing
reinforcement learning to explore optimal recommendation
policies for subtasks in the first stage. Since the completion of a spatial task consists of the successful execution
of all the corresponding subtasks with specific dependencies(Wang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022), the task recommendation network must learn to evaluate a subtask’s contribution to both its associated spatial task and the crowdsourcing platform holistically. As such, we categorize the contribution assessment of subtasks as a credit assignment prob-

Dependency-aware spatial crowdsourcing (DASC) addresses
the unique challenges posed by subtask dependencies in spatial task assignments. This paper investigates the task assignment problem in DASC and proposes a two-stage Recommend and Match Optimization (RMO) framework, leveraging multi-agent reinforcement learning for subtask recommendation and a multi-dimensional utility function for subtask matching. The RMO framework primarily addresses two
key challenges: credit assignment for subtasks with interdependencies and maintaining overall coherence between subtask recommendation and matching. Specifically, we employ
meta-gradients to construct auxiliary policies and establish
a gradient connection between two stages, which can effectively address credit assignment and joint optimization of
subtask recommendation and matching, while concurrently
accelerating network training. We further establish a unified gradient descent process through gradient synchronization across recommendation networks, auxiliary policies, and
the matching utility evaluation function. Experiments on two
real-world datasets validate the effectiveness and feasibility
of our proposed approach.

Introduction
With the popularity of smart mobile devices, spatial crowdsourcing (SC) as a promising computing paradigm has become increasingly prosperous (Tong et al. 2020; Kang et al.
2023; Lyu et al. 2023), where workers perform spatial tasks
assigned by the SC platform for payments. Recently, the increasing complexity and requirements of spatial tasks have
induced the emergence of a sophisticated paradigm in SC,
namely Dependency-Aware Spatial Crowdsourcing (DASC)
(Ni et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022). DASC is characterized by its
intricate task structure and complex execution requirements,
further enhancing the challenges and potential applications
of traditional SC. In DASC, spatial tasks consist of multiple interdependent subtasks that require a specific execution
order, and each subtask may require different worker skills.
Task completion is achieved only when all constituent subtasks are finished, and the platform receives remuneration at
this time.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14301

