The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3D Measurement of Complex Textured Objects Based on Bidirectional Fringe
Projection
Yuchong Chen, Jian Yu* , Shaoyan Gai, Zeyu Cai, Feipeng Da*
School of Automation, Southeast University
MoE Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Southeast University
{230228469, yujian, 101011375, zeyucai, dafp}@seu.edu.cn,

(a)

Abstract

(c)

5
mm

In structured light systems, the accuracy of measurement notably diminishes when assessing complex texture objects,
especially encountering boundaries between various colors.
To address this challenge, this paper meticulously analyzes
and establishes an error model, elaborating the correlation
between phase errors and the gradients of phase and grayscale. Based on this analysis, a novel high-precision method
is proposed for measuring complex texture objects via bidirectional fringe projection. This approach firstly leverages
horizontal and vertical fringe projections to derive bidirectional phase information and calculates the angles between
the tangent of the texture edges and the phase gradient. Subsequently, a refined temporal phase correction algorithm is
formulated based on the epipolar matching algorithm and the
devised error model, effectively reducing errors caused by
complex textures. Ultimately, corrected point clouds are calculated based on bidirectional phases, and the obtained point
clouds are merged to further diminish phase errors. Comparison experiments indicate that this method can reduce Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
by 65.74% and 67.75%, respectively. Compared to existing
methods, it improves performance by 27.29% and 33.74%,
respectively, demonstrating superior performance.

(b)

0

-5
Figure 1: A flat plate is measured using FPP. (a) A flat plate
adorned with a mouse pattern; (b) Point cloud error caused
by defocusing of complex texture; (c) Point cloud error corrected by the proposed method.

light assumes that each camera pixel exclusively captures
light emanating from one projector pixel. However, this assumption often fails to hold in many actual measurement situations, such as inter-reflection, subsurface scattering, volumetric scattering, camera defocusing and so on (Nayar et al.
2006; Kobayashi et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2022). These situations are generally referred to multi-path issues that a camera pixel sees light emanating from multiple projector pixels (Zhang, Lau, and Yu 2019; Zhang, Lau, and Wipf 2021).

Introduction

Among these situations, lens defocusing is inevitable for
every camera, which severely impair the performance of
three-dimensional optical measurement techniques. Due to
camera defocusing, each camera pixel essentially captures
the convolution of the point spread function (PSF) with the
intensity of light reflected from points in a specific region
on the object. For objects without texture, where the surface reflectivity can be considered uniform, the impact of
defocusing is minimal, allowing FPP to attain exceptional
reconstruction accuracy. Conversely, for objects with complex textures, especially around edges where surface colors
change, the convolution between the disparate reflectivities
of surface points and PSF leads to cross-contamination in
grayscale of fringe patterns. In the phase data, this manifests
as the phase of contamination points being biased towards
regions with higher reflectivity, thereby adversely affecting
the accuracy of the final reconstruction (Yao et al. 2024). An
example of these objects is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the
errors in the point cloud caused by complex textures are distinctly evident. Currently, many researchers have proposed

Recovering dense 3D shapes of objects from 2D images is
a fundamental artificial intelligence problem, with many research results achieved (Zhang and Yau 2006; Zhang et al.
2019; Khan, Shirazi, and Kim 2018). The point cloud obtained by 3D reconstruction can be used in numerous fields,
such as object detection, object tracking, and 3D shape features learning (Yan et al. 2017; Koh et al. 2022; Li and
Cheng 2022). Therefore, optimizing point clouds and reconstruction algorithms is also a meaningful research direction.
Fringe projection profilometry (FPP) holds a dominant
position among various reconstruction algorithms due to its
low cost, strong robustness, and high spatial resolution (Su
and Zhang 2010; Geng 2011; Quan, Tay, and Chen 2007).
Furthermore, the rapid development of digital light processing (DLP) techniques promotes the research of FPP. Threedimensional measurement technology based on structured
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2329

