The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Physics Informed Neural ODEs
with Partial Measurements
Paul Ghanem1 , Ahmet Demirkaya1 , Tales Imbiriba2 , Alireza Ramezani1 , Zachary Danziger3 ,
Deniz Erdogmus1
1
Northeastern University, Boston Massachusetts
University of Massachusetts, Boston Massachusetts
3
Emory University, Atlanta Georgia
{ghanem.p, demirkaya.a}@northeastern.edu, tales.imbiriba@umb.edu, a.ramezani@northeastern.edu, zdanzige@fiu.edu,
d.erdogmus@northeastern.edu
2

Abstract

standard solutions, which are optimized using the adjoint
method (Boltyanskiy et al. 1962), are compromised. Furthermore, NODE systems may have infinitely many solutions since parameters and unmeasured states are estimated
jointly. As a consequence, even when the model is capable
of fitting the data, unmeasured states cannot be accurately
inferred without constraining the solution space (Demirkaya
et al. 2021). To constrain the solution space, hybrid and
physics informed neural ODEs were developed to incorporate physical knowledge of the system being learned
when available(Sholokhov et al. 2023; O’Leary, Paulson,
and Mesbah 2022). Despite their recent success in neural
ODEs and neural networks in general, these methods lack
the ability to learn dynamical systems under the partial measurements scenario when dynamics generating unmeasured
states are unknown. Moreover, hybrid and physics informed
strategies were leveraged to obtain estimations of missing
states under partial measurements scenario (Imbiriba et al.
2022; Demirkaya et al. 2021; Ghanem et al. 2021). Despite
the lack of a clear formalization, in these works the authors
were imposing some kind of identifiability among states
by adding known parts of the dynamics, resulting in hybrid first-principle data-driven models. Nevertheless, these
works focus on state estimation using data-driven components to improve or augment existing dynamics but fail to
learn global models and do not scale well for large models.

Learning dynamics governing physical and spatiotemporal
processes is a challenging problem, especially in scenarios
where states are partially measured. In this work, we tackle
the problem of learning dynamics governing these systems
when parts of the system’s states are not measured, specifically when the dynamics generating the non-measured states
are unknown. Inspired by state estimation theory and Physics
Informed Neural ODEs, we present a sequential optimization
framework in which dynamics governing unmeasured processes can be learned. We demonstrate the performance of
the proposed approach leveraging numerical simulations and
a real dataset extracted from an electro-mechanical positioning system. We show how the underlying equations fit into
our formalism and demonstrate the improved performance of
the proposed method when compared with baselines.

1

Introduction

Ordinary differential equations (ODEs) are used to describe
the state evolution of many complex physical systems in
engineering, biology, and other fields of natural sciences.
Traditionally, first-principle notions are leveraged in designing ODEs as a form to impose physical meaning and interpretability (Psichogios and Ungar 1992) of latent states.
A major issue, however, is the inherent complexity of realworld problems for which even carefully designed ODE systems cannot account for all aspects of the true underlying
physical phenomenon (Karniadakis et al. 2021). Moreover,
we often require prediction of systems whose dynamics are
not fully understood or are partially unknown.
In this context, Neural ODEs (NODEs) (Chen et al. 2018)
emerged as a powerful tool for learning complex correlations directly from the data, where residual neural networks
(NNs) are used to parameterize the hidden ODEs’ states.
Extensions of NODE were developed to improve learning
speed (Xia et al. 2021; Massaroli et al. 2021) and learning longtime dependencies in irregularly sampled time series(Xia et al. 2021). A major challenge in learning NODEs
arises when latent states of interest contribute indirectly to
the measurements. This is the case when an unmeasured
state influences a measured state. In this scenario, NODE’s

In this paper, we propose a sequential alternating second order optimization approach that, unlike previous approaches, solves at each time step an alternating optimization problem for learning system dynamics under partially
measured states, when states are identifiable. The approach
focuses on learning unknown dynamics from data where the
state related to the unknown dynamics is unmeasured. Since
the unobserved dynamics are unknown, we assume it is described by parametric models such as NNs. We propose aiding a model’s training with the knowledge of the physics
regarding the measured states using a physics-informed loss
term. The motivation for using sequential optimization is to
make second order optimization feasible, while the motivation for using alternating optimization is to enable usage of
hidden states to learn model parameters, which is central for
optimization success in partial observation scenarios. The
proposed approach combines the two optimization frame-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16799

