The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalized Dimension Reduction Using Semi-Relaxed Gromov-Wasserstein
Distance
Ranthony A. Clark1 , Tom Needham2 , Thomas Weighill3
1

Department of Mathematics, Duke University, Durham NC
Department of Mathematics, Florida State University, Tallahassee FL
3
Department of Mathematics & Statistics, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro NC
ranthony.clark@duke.edu, tneedham@fsu.edu, t weighill@uncg.edu
2

Abstract

reflected in the dimension reduction process—indeed, this
was the case for the geospatial data studied in Section 5,
which catalyzed the ideas in this paper. A simple observation is that the MDS problem (1) still makes sense if Rm
is replaced with some other low-dimensional Riemannian
manifold, and the main goal of this paper is to develop a
theoretical and computational framework for this manifoldvalued variant of MDS. Another observation is that the objective of the MDS problem is very similar to that of the
Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance from optimal transport
theory (Mémoli 2011), and our main theoretical result makes
this connection precise.

Dimension reduction techniques typically seek an embedding
of a high-dimensional point cloud into a low-dimensional
Euclidean space which optimally preserves the geometry of
the input data. Based on expert knowledge, one may instead
wish to embed the data into some other manifold or metric
space in order to better reflect the geometry or topology of
the point cloud. We propose a general method for manifoldvalued multidimensional scaling based on concepts from optimal transport. In particular, we establish theoretical connections between the recently introduced semi-relaxed GromovWasserstein (srGW) framework and multidimensional scaling by solving the Monge problem in this setting. We also derive novel connections between srGW distance and GromovHausdorff distance. We apply our computational framework
to analyze ensembles of political redistricting plans for states
with two Congressional districts, achieving an effective visualization of the ensemble as a distribution on a circle which
can be used to characterize typical neutral plans, and to flag
outliers.

Contributions. The contributions of this paper are centered on theoretical results which tie together several ideas
from classical and more recent literature. The impetus for
the paper was the problem of visualizing complex redistricting datasets; our solution provides an extended computational example that illustrates how our framework can
be used to gain important insights into non-Euclidean data.
More specifically, our main contributions are:

Code — github.com/thomasweighill/srgw-embedding
Extended version — arxiv.org/abs/2405.15959

1

• We extend the formulation of semi-relaxed GromovWasserstein distance introduced in (Vincent-Cuaz et al.
2022) to a 1-parameter family of Lp -type distances defined for general metric measure spaces (including continuous spaces). We then show in Corollary 6 that the semirelaxed GW problem generalizes the MDS problem (1) in
several ways. This is based on Theorem 2, which shows
that the semi-relaxed GW distance is realized by a Monge
map in very general situations, thus adding to the growing
recent literature on the existence of Monge maps in the
GW framework (see Remark 4).
• We develop and unify the theory of generalized MDS and
semi-relaxed GW distances by exhibiting connections to
variants of the Gromov-Hausdorff (GH) distance that have
appeared previously in the literature. Theorem 8 and Theorem 9 together show that a symmetrized version of the
p = ∞ semi-relaxed GW distance is equal to the modified
GH distance of (Mémoli 2012), which, in turn, appeared
in classical work on generalized MDS (Bronstein, Bronstein, and Kimmel 2006).
• By drawing the connection between the MDS and srGW
problems, we are able to design an efficient algorithm
(SRGW+GD) for computing MDS embeddings into mani-

Introduction

Dimension reduction is a fundamental task in unsupervised
learning and is frequently a first step in the data exploration
pipeline. Typically, dimension reduction is framed as the
process of determining an embedding of a finite metric space
(X, d) into a low-dimensional Euclidean space Rm which
optimally preserves the geometry of the input data. As a
concrete example, for X = {x1 , . . . , xn }, the metric multidimensional scaling (MDS) problem seeks a point cloud
MDSm (X) ⊂ Rm satisfying
MDSm (X) ∈ argmin
y1 ,...,yn

n
X

(d(xi , xj ) − kyi − yj k)2 . (1)

i,j=1

Based on prior knowledge, it may be natural to theorize that a dataset X is noisily sampled from a distribution
on a specific low-dimensional manifold in the ambient data
space, and the practitioner may wish for this structure to be
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16082

