The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Gradient Alignment Improves Test-Time Adaptation for Medical Image
Segmentation
Ziyang Chen1 , Yiwen Ye1 , Yongsheng Pan1 † , Yong Xia1,2,3 †
1

National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology, School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
3
Ningbo Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University, Ningbo, China
{zychen, ywye}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {yspan, yxia}@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

and operators (Gibson et al. 2018; Ghafoorian et al. 2017),
poses challenges for these models pre-trained on the labeled
dataset (source domain) to generalize across different medical centers (target domain).
Test-time adaptation (TTA) has emerged as a prospective paradigm to mitigate domain shift with minimal data
demand, relying only on test data during inference. Several studies on TTA attempt to alleviate the domain shift
by modifying the statistics stored in batch normalization
(BN) layers (Wang et al. 2023b; Nado et al. 2020; Mirza
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023; Park et al. 2024). A typical example is DUA (Mirza et al. 2022), which incrementally adjusts the statistics within BN layers from the source
to the target domain to enhance feature representations.
Although these methods improve adaptation, their performance potential is limited since the model’s parameters remain fixed. The mainstream TTA methods focus on designing self-supervised objectives (e.g., entropy minimization,
consistency constraint, and rotation prediction) to fine-tune
the pre-trained models to boost their generalization performance on the target domain (Wang et al. 2021; Sun et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2023; Niu et al. 2023; Nguyen et al.
2023; Sinha et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2022; Bateson, Lombaert, and Ben Ayed 2022; Wen et al. 2024). For instance,
TENT (Wang et al. 2021) introduces an entropy minimization objective to TTA to optimize the affine-transformation
parameters of pre-trained models, and TTT (Sun et al. 2020)
updates the model parameters by predicting the rotation angle of test data in a self-supervised manner.
However, all these methods, based on gradient descent,
overlook two critical elements in the optimization procedure: the direction and the step-size. The ith optimization
procedure of the pre-trained model with parameters θ can
be formulated as θi+1 ← θi − η∇Lpse (θi ), where η is the
learning rate, and ∇Lpse denotes the gradient produced by
the self-supervised objective function, called pseudo gradient. Obviously, the optimization direction is determined by
∇Lpse (θi ), and the optimization step-size depends on η.
In Figure 1(a), we displayed two gradients: an empirical gradient, customized for the specific task (segmentation
in this study) using provided labels and not encountered in
the TTA setup; and a pseudo gradient, primarily employed
for fine-tuning pre-trained models in existing TTA methods. Ideally, the pseudo gradient should exhibit a direction

Although recent years have witnessed significant advancements in medical image segmentation, the pervasive issue of
domain shift among medical images from diverse centres hinders the effective deployment of pre-trained models. Many
Test-time Adaptation (TTA) methods have been proposed
to address this issue by fine-tuning pre-trained models with
test data during inference. These methods, however, often
suffer from less-satisfactory optimization due to suboptimal
optimization direction (dictated by the gradient) and fixed
step-size (predicated on the learning rate). In this paper, we
propose the Gradient alignment-based Test-time adaptation
(GraTa) method to improve both the gradient direction and
learning rate in the optimization procedure. Unlike conventional TTA methods, which primarily optimize the pseudo
gradient derived from a self-supervised objective, our method
incorporates an auxiliary gradient with the pseudo one to facilitate gradient alignment. Such gradient alignment enables
the model to excavate the similarities between different gradients and correct the gradient direction to approximate the
empirical gradient related to the current segmentation task.
Additionally, we design a dynamic learning rate based on the
cosine similarity between the pseudo and auxiliary gradients,
thereby empowering the adaptive fine-tuning of pre-trained
models on diverse test data. Extensive experiments establish
the effectiveness of the proposed gradient alignment and dynamic learning rate and substantiate the superiority of our
GraTa method over other state-of-the-art TTA methods on a
benchmark medical image segmentation task.

Code — https://github.com/Chen-Ziyang/GraTa

Introduction
Medical image segmentation assumes a pivotal role in
computer-aided diagnosis, offering precise delineation of
specific anatomical structures. Over the past years, considerable research efforts (Tajbakhsh et al. 2020; Salpea, Tzouveli, and Kollias 2022; Liu et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022;
Tang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024) have been devoted to medical image segmentation utilizing deep-learning techniques,
resulting in significant progress. However, domain shift, primarily caused by variations in scanners, imaging protocols,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author.

2429

