The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Slice-and-Pack: Tailoring Deep Models for Customized Requirements
Ruice Rao* 1,2 , Dingwei Li* 1,2 , Ming Li†1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{raorc, lidw, lim}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Developers

Abstract
The learnware paradigm aims to establish a learnware market
such that users can build their own models by reusing appropriate existing models in the market without starting from
scratch. It is often the case that a single model is insufficient
to fully satisfy the user’s requirement. Meanwhile, offering
multiple models can lead to higher costs for users alongside
an increase in hardware resource demands. To address this
challenge, this paper proposes the “Slice-and-Pack” (S&P)
framework to empower the market to provide users with only
the required model fragments without having to offer entire
abilities of all involved models. Our framework first slices a
set of models into small fragments and subsequently packs
selected fragments according to user’s specific requirement.
In the slicing stage, we extract units layer by layer and connect these units to create numerous fragments. In the packing
stage, an encoder-decoder mechanism is employed to assemble these fragments. These processes are conducted within
data-limited constraints due to privacy concerns. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness of our framework.

Upload

User

Query

Skin
Persist
Infection

Return models

Combine(big)

A model
for normal
disease

Previous framework vs Split-and-Pack
Upload

Query

Persist

Required Assemble
Fragments (small)

Stomach
Specialist
Hospitals

Factorize

Clinic

Figure 1: Comparison of the two frameworks. S&P provides
more compact models with only the necessary abilities, resulting in cost savings and lower device requirements.
mit trained models to the market with a few data points describing their tasks, and the market will assign a specification upon accepting this submitted model. When users try
to tackle a learning task, the market can recommend helpful
learnwares whose specifications match the requirement.
However, in many cases it is hard to find a single model
that fully meets the user’s requirements, especially in the
early stages of the learnware market. In real-world scenarios, the abilities desired by users might spread across several
models. Offering all involved models would make users feel
compelled to purchase for potentially redundant abilities,
and also requires more hardware resource for deployment.
For instance, consider the community clinics that try to use
patient records for diagnosis in Figure 1. Due to the constraints in equipment and treatment capabilities, these clinics are primarily tasked with addressing normal diseases.
In the learnware market, there are several existing wellbehaved models available from specialist hospitals trained
on private data. However, these models are designed to diagnose as many diseases as possible in a specific field. Since
the requirements of community clinics are abilities to diagnose normal diseases, these rare abilities of the model
are redundant for them. It is to be mentioned that models equipped with more capabilities typically demand more
computational power for inference, leading to the need for
more robust devices and higher acquisition costs. As highlighted in (Liang et al. 2022), the cost of commercial models
significantly escalates as the size and capability of the mod-

Introduction
Machine learning has achieved great success in various domains (Bengio, Lecun, and Hinton 2021; Silver et al. 2016;
OpenAI 2023; Luo et al. 2022; Radford et al. 2021). However, building a satisfactory learning model from scratch
is often time-consuming and requires significant expertise,
and personalized customization is often necessary for specific situations. Moreover, the access to raw data is often
limited by privacy concerns, making it even challenging to
train well-behaved models from scratch. To address these
issues, Zhou (2016) proposed the learnware paradigm, aiming to establish a learnware market such that users can build
their own models by reusing appropriate existing models in
the market without starting from scratch. Unlike LLM, the
learnware market enables model construction and reuse in
broader application scenarios such as physics, chemistry, geology, medicine, manufacturing, and more. A learnware is
a pre-trained model associated with a specification describing the model’s specialty and utility. Developers can sub* These authors contributed equally.
†

Ming Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20130

