The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Association Pattern-enhanced Molecular Representation Learning
Lingxiang Jia1,2 , Yuchen Ying1,2 , Tian Qiu1,2 , Shaolun Yao1,2 ,
Liang Xue3 * , Jie Lei4 , Jie Song1,2 , Mingli Song1,2 , Zunlei Feng1,2 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Computing Science and Artificial Intelligence College, Suzhou City University
4
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology
{lingxiangjia, yingyc, tqiu, yaoshaolun}@zju.edu.cn, xliang@szcu.edu.cn,
jasonlei@zjut.edu.cn, {sjie, brooksong, zunleifeng}@zju.edu.cn

2

Abstract
The applicability of drug molecules in various clinical scenarios is significantly influenced by a diverse range of molecular properties. By leveraging self-supervised conditions such
as atom attributes and interatomic bonds, existing advanced
molecular foundation models can generate expressive representations of these molecules. However, such models often
overlook the fixed association patterns within molecules that
influence physiological or chemical properties. In this paper,
we introduce a novel association pattern-aware message passing method, which can serve as an effective yet general plugand-play plugin, thereby enhancing the atom representations
generated by molecular foundation models without requiring additional pretraining. Additionally, molecular propertyspecific pattern libraries are constructed to collect the generated interpretable common patterns that bind to these properties. Extensive experiments conducted on 11 benchmark
molecular property prediction tasks across 8 advanced molecular foundation models demonstrate significant superiority
of the proposed method, with performance improvements of
up to approximately 20%. Furthermore, a property-specific
pattern library is tailored for blood-brain barrier penetration,
which has undergone corresponding mechanistic validation.

Pattern Interaction

Graph-based Message Passing

Association Pattern-aware Message Passing

Figure 1: Illustration of message passing of graph-based and
association pattern-aware for atom representation updates.

The rapid development of deep learning has significantly
advanced the automation of molecular property prediction
for drug compounds. Given the inherent graph structure of
drug molecules, the encoding process for molecular graphs
is typically designed as message passing based on graph
neural networks (Kipf and Welling 2016; Veličković et al.
2018; Xu et al. 2019; Yao et al. 2022), which aggregate information from neighboring nodes to update the representation of a central atom, focusing on local contexts, as illustrated in Figure 1. Currently, state-of-the-art methods in
this field predominantly rely on molecular foundation models (MFMs) (Xia et al. 2023). These models utilize various self-supervised signals, such as atom attributes, interatomic bonds, and 3D structures, to effectively capture complex relationships within molecular structures and expressive representations of molecular properties through pretraining on vast datasets of unlabeled molecular data using graph-based encoders, thus allowing them to transfer the
learned knowledge to a wide range of downstream property
prediction tasks, such as predicting toxicity, solubility, and
other physicochemical properties of these drug candidates.
However, the aforementioned architectures typically overlook the impact of path patterns on learning of expressive
atom representations, even though these patterns are directly
relevant to target properties (Nelson 1982; Al-Hasani and

Code & Appendix — https://github.com/hry98kki/APMP

Introduction
Molecular properties, encompassing aspects such as physiology, biophysics, and physical chemistry, play a critical role
in determining the viability and usability of pharmaceutical
compounds (Glaser 2012; Widmaier, Raff, and Strang 2022;
Silbey et al. 2022). These properties often pose significant
challenges during clinical trials. For instance, extensive toxicity testing is typically required, wherein medical and pharmaceutical experts evaluate the potential presence of toxic
structural alerts in drug candidates. This process is followed
by in vivo and in vitro experiments to further assess the
drug’s safety and feasibility. While such thorough evaluation
is essential to ensure patient safety, it also substantially increases time and resource consumption associated with drug
development (DiMasi, Grabowski, and Hansen 2016). Thus,
efficient strategies are required to promote drug discovery.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17599

