The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Driving in the Occupancy World: Vision-Centric 4D Occupancy Forecasting
and Planning via World Models for Autonomous Driving
Yu Yang 1 * , Jianbiao Mei 1 * , Yukai Ma 1 , Siliang Du 2 † , Wenqing Chen 2 ,
Yijie Qian 1 , Yuxiang Feng 1 , Yong Liu 1†
1

Zhejiang University
Huawei Technologies
{yu.yang, jianbiaomei, yukaima, yijieqian, yuxiangfeng}@zju.edu.cn
{dusiliang, chenwenqing7}@huawei.com,yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

On the other hand, to embed world knowledge and simulate the real-world physics of the driving environment, recent works (Zhang et al. 2023; Min et al. 2024; Yang et al.
2024b) have introduced the world model (Ha and Schmidhuber 2018) to facilitate scalable autonomous driving. Nevertheless, most of them primarily focus on either data generation or the pretraining paradigms of world models, neglecting the enhancement of safety and robustness for end-to-end
planning. For example, many studies (Ma et al. 2024a; Wang
et al. 2023a; Hu et al. 2023a) aimed to generate high-fidelity
driving videos through world models to provide additional
data for downstream training. The very recent ViDAR (Yang
et al. 2024b) pre-trained the visual encoder by forecasting
point clouds from historical visual input, enhancing performance on downstream tasks such as vision-centric 3D detection and segmentation. Therefore, we believe that integrating
the future forecasting capabilities of world models with endto-end planning remains a worthwhile area for exploration.
In this work, we investigate 4D forecasting and planning
using world models to implement future state prediction and
end-to-end planning. With the capability to envision various
futures based on different ego actions, a world model allows
the agent to anticipate potential outcomes in advance. As
illustrated in Figure 1, the world model predicts the future
state of the environment under different action conditions,
using historical observations and various ego actions. Subsequently, the planner employs a cost function that considers both safety and the 3D structure of the environment to
select the most suitable trajectory, enabling the agent to navigate effectively in diverse situations. Finally, the predicted
future state and selected optimal trajectory can be reintroduced into the world model for the next rollout, facilitating continuous future prediction and trajectory planning. We
experimentally demonstrate that leveraging the future forecasting capability of world models enhances the planner’s
generalization and safety robustness while providing more
explainable decision-making, as detailed in Section 4.
Specifically, we propose Drive-OccWorld, a visioncentric 4D forecasting and planning world model for autonomous driving. Our Drive-OccWorld exhibits three key
features: (1) Understanding how the world evolves through
4D occupancy forecasting. Drive-OccWorld predicts plausible future states based on accumulated historical expe-

World models envision potential future states based on various ego actions. They embed extensive knowledge about
the driving environment, facilitating safe and scalable autonomous driving. Most existing methods primarily focus on
either data generation or the pretraining paradigms of world
models. Unlike the aforementioned prior works, we propose
Drive-OccWorld, which adapts a vision-centric 4D forecasting world model to end-to-end planning for autonomous driving. Specifically, we first introduce a semantic and motionconditional normalization in the memory module, which accumulates semantic and dynamic information from historical
BEV embeddings. These BEV features are then conveyed to
the world decoder for future occupancy and flow forecasting, considering both geometry and spatiotemporal modeling.
Additionally, we propose injecting flexible action conditions,
such as velocity, steering angle, trajectory, and commands,
into the world model to enable controllable generation and
facilitate a broader range of downstream applications. Furthermore, we explore integrating the generative capabilities
of the 4D world model with end-to-end planning, enabling
continuous forecasting of future states and the selection of
optimal trajectories using an occupancy-based cost function.
Extensive experiments on the nuScenes dataset demonstrate
that our method can generate plausible and controllable 4D
occupancy, opening new avenues for driving world generation and end-to-end planning.

Project Page — https://drive-occworld.github.io/

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving (AD) algorithms have advanced significantly in recent decades (Ayoub et al. 2019; Chen et al.
2023). These advancements have transitioned from modular pipelines (Guo et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b) to end-to-end
models (Hu et al. 2023b; Jiang et al. 2023), which plan trajectories directly from raw sensor data in a unified pipeline.
However, due to insufficient world knowledge for forecasting dynamic environments, these methods exhibit deficiencies in generalization ability and safety robustness.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9327

