The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adversarial Learning Under Hybrid Perturbations for Robust Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia Classification
Jie Chen1 , Xinyuan Liu1 , Xintong Liu1 , Jianqiang Li1,2 *
1

2

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, China
chenjie@szu.edu.cn, 1227653652@qq.com, 2210273132@email.szu.edu.cn, lijq@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

Le 2019). Additionally, due to variations in doctors’ clinical
practice, spatial-transformed perturbations also exist when
they take images. These perturbations occur simultaneously
in the scenario of ALL classification, which could cause
misclassifications by the model. As illustrated in Fig. 1, after adding random but slight noise and spatial transformations to the original examples, the model made opposite predictions. Consequently, if an ALL cell classification model
failed to consider the robustness, it will lead to diagnostic
errors, inappropriate treatment decisions, and further health
risks, which could cause a significant impact on the patient’s
life. Thus, this work dedicates to the ALL cell classification
models’ robustness.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is a childhood cancer prevalent worldwide, which can prove fatal within weeks or
months. However, current diagnosis models based on machine learning and deep learning methods fail to consider device noise (pixel-level perturbations) and rotation/translation
(spatial-transformed perturbations), which can undermine the
model’s robustness. Adversarial training is a potential solution to this issue. This paper presents a hybrid perturbation
adversarial training (HPAT) strategy that leverages two types
of adversarial samples: pixel-level adversarial samples and
spatial adversarial samples. This work generates these hybrid adversarial samples through Projected Gradient Descent
(PGD) in couple with spatial transformation based on the
Bayesian optimization (STBO) algorithm, respectively. This
work introduced the Mixed Batch Normalization (MixBN)
module to handle both adversarial samples and clean samples,
alleviating the problem of clean accuracy degradation due to
adversarial training. The proposed hybrid adversarial training
strategy is tested on the public acute lymphoblastic leukemia
dataset and found that it outperformed existing acute lymphoblastic cell classification models.

(a) Pixel-level perturbation

Introduction
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) is one of the most
common cancer among children and the most frequent cause
of death from cancer before 20 years old (Smith et al. 2010).
Recently, with the development of medical treatment, the
survival rate of ALL has increased to 90% (Hunger and
Mullighan 2015). However, Low and Middle-Income Countries (LMICs) still suffer from this disease due to the lack
of costly infrastructure, trained human resources, and diagnostic tools at the required scale. Hence, these countries experience higher fatality rates. For example, 84% of
ALL cases are reported from LMICs(Gehlot, Gupta, and
Gupta 2020). Therefore, it is very important to develop a
model for the automatic diagnosis of acute lymphoid leukocytes. Deep Learning (DL)-based outperforms Traditional
Machine Learning in ALL classification due to the capability of automatic features extraction (Lamberti 2022; Prellberg and Kramer 2019; Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018; Tan and

(b) Rotation and transition
Figure 1: Robustness issue in Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia Cell Classification (ALLCC) due to pixel-level
perturbation and spatial-transformed perturbation.

To incorporate model robustness in the acute lymphoblastic leukocyte classification, this paper presents a novel
framework, called Hybrid-Perturbation Adversarial Training
(HPAT) which considers the existence of pixel-level perturbations and spatial-transformed perturbations in the scenario
of acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell classification scenario.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2070

