The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Chain-of-Instructions: Compositional Instruction Tuning on
Large Language Models
Shirley Anugrah Hayati* 1 , Taehee Jung2 , Tristan Bodding-Long2
Sudipta Kar2 , Abhinav Sethy†3 , Joo-Kyung Kim2 , Dongyeop Kang1
1

University of Minnesota
2
Amazon
3
Grammarly
hayat023@umn.edu, dongyeop@umn.edu

Abstract

Style
Transfer

Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) with a collection
of large and diverse instructions has improved the model’s
generalization to different tasks, even for unseen tasks. However, most existing instruction datasets include only single instructions, and they struggle to follow complex instructions
composed of multiple subtasks. In this work, we propose a
novel concept of compositional instructions called chain-ofinstructions (CoI), where the output of one instruction becomes an input for the next like a chain. Unlike the conventional practice of solving single instruction tasks, our proposed method encourages a model to solve each subtask step
by step until the final answer is reached. CoI-tuning (i.e., finetuning with CoI instructions) improves the model’s ability to
handle instructions composed of multiple subtasks as well as
unseen composite tasks such as multilingual summarization.
Overall, our study finds that simple CoI tuning of existing instruction data can provide consistent generalization to solve
more complex, unseen, and longer chains of instructions.

Title
Generation

Summarization

Translation

Number
Conversion
Chain-of-Instructions (CoI)

CoI

Input

I1

O1

I2

Output

O2

X

X

Information
Extraction

Data to Text

I3

Figure 1: Chain-of-Instructions (CoI) example. The summarization output can be an input for a title generation subtask;
the output of the title generation can be an input for style
transfer or translation subtasks. Arrow thickness denotes the
probability of instruction composability. X means that these
subtasks cannot be composed due to format mismatch. Ik is
k th instruction and Ok is k th output.

Code and Datasets — {https://github.com/amazonscience/chain-of-instructions}

We examine what subtasks can be composed more naturally
than others.
In Figure 1, we can see that some tasks can be composed
together, such as input a summary to a title generation task,
while some tasks cannot be composed together, e.g., a summary as input for a Data-to-Text task. Some tasks have a
higher probability of being able to be composed, such as
generating a title from a summary compared to converting
numbers in a summary since sometimes a summary does
not contain a number. Figure 2 illustrates a more detailed
example of CoI. The given instruction “Generate a blog-like
title in French” can be decomposed into three chained subinstructions:
1. Generate a title for the given text
2. Convert the style of the title to be similar to a blog post
title
3. Translate the blog post title into French
When these sub-instructions are composed, we call it
a compositional instruction or chain-of-instructions. Our
study investigates whether LLMs can handle compositional

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in various tasks, from conventional NLP
downstream tasks, such as machine translation and summarization, to open-ended tasks, such as writing an outline for
blog posts and giving tips for presentation, when fine-tuned
on human-like instructions (Ouyang et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022; Conover et al. 2023; Mishra et al. 2022). These models excel at single instruction tasks, but their ability to handle
complex and compositional instructions is less explored.
A compositional instruction contains a series of sequential subtasks, as the output of one subtask becomes the input
of the next one in a chained manner as shown in Figure 1.
We call this problem as Chain-of-Instructions or shortly CoI.
*

Work was partially done during internship at Amazon.
Work was done while at Amazon.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

24005

