The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Fine-grained Domain Generalization via Hyperbolic State Space
Hallucination
Qi Bi1 , Jingjun Yi1 , Haolan Zhan2 , Wei Ji3 * , Gui-Song Xia1∗
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, United States
{q bi, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, wei.ji@yale.edu
CUB-200-2011

Abstract

iNat2017

(c) HSSH

(b) Vmamba

(a) Sample

Fine-grained domain generalization (FGDG) aims to learn a
fine-grained representation that can be well generalized to unseen target domains when only trained on the source domain
data. Compared with generic domain generalization, FGDG
is particularly challenging in that the fine-grained category
can be only discerned by some subtle and tiny patterns. Such
patterns are particularly fragile under the cross-domain style
shifts caused by illumination, color and etc. To push this frontier, this paper presents a novel Hyperbolic State Space Hallucination (HSSH) method. It consists of two key components,
namely, state space hallucination (SSH) and hyperbolic manifold consistency (HMC). SSH enriches the style diversity for
the state embeddings by firstly extrapolating and then hallucinating the source images. Then, the pre- and post- style hallucinate state embeddings are projected into the hyperbolic
manifold. The hyperbolic state space models the high-order
statistics, and allows a better discernment of the fine-grained
patterns. Finally, the hyperbolic distance is minimized, so that
the impact of style variation on fine-grained patterns can be
eliminated. Experiments on three FGDG benchmarks demonstrate its state-of-the-art performance.

NABirds

Figure 1: In each fine-grained domain (first row), due to
the inter-category similarity, the embedding style from the
VMamba baseline (second row) is limited. The proposed
HSSH (third row) enriches the style diversity of the state embedding, which benefits the robustness to unseen domains.
The x- and y- axis refers to the mean and standard deviation
value in the style space, ranging from 0 to 1.

Code — https://github.com/BiQiWHU/HSSH

Introduction
Visual domain generalization is a fundamental task in both
computer vision and machine learning, which handles the
scenarios when the training samples and testing samples are
not independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.). It has
been extensively studied in the past decade, which usually
assumes that the domain gap is caused by the style variation, while the content (i.e., semantic category) is stable
(Yan et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023). Great
success has been witnessed in advancing the generalization
ability of a deep learning model in a variety of applications, such as semantic segmentation and object detection
(Bi, You, and Gevers 2024a,b; Zhao et al. 2022; Lee et al.
2022; Yi et al. 2024b; Bi et al. 2024b). However, learning a domain generalized model for fine-grained visual categorization, termed as Fine-grained domain generalization
(FGDG), remains less explored.

FGDG holds both technical and practical significance.
From a technical view, in generic domain generalization, the
cross-domain content (i.e., semantic category) is stable and
easy to differentiate. However, in FGDG, the fine-grained
categories from a subordinate coarse-grained category can
only be distinguished from some subtle and tiny patterns.
This problem becomes even more challenging when the
cross-domain styles shift. The shallower features of a deep
model are sensitive to the style shift, posed by varied illumination, color, structure, etc. The impact of such permutation accumulates from shallower to deeper features, making
it more difficult to perceive the subtle fine-grained patterns.
From a practical view, FGDG also deserves further study.
Existing fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) datasets
are still small in amount (10K). A pre-trained FGVC model
is likely to encounter unseen and out-of-domain samples
when doing real-world inference.
The emerging selective state space model (SSM) (Gu
et al. 2021; Gu, Goel, and Re 2022), exemplified by the

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1853

