The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Language Pre-training Guided Masking Representation Learning
for Time Series Classification
Liaoyuan Tang, Zheng Wang* , Jie Wang, Guanxiong He, Zhezheng Hao, Rong Wang, Feiping Nie
School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University
127 West Youyi Road, Beilin District
Xi’an Shaanxi, 710072, P.R.China
tangly@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, zhengwangml@gmail.com, jiewang.dl@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, heguanx@mail.nwpu.edu.cn,
haozhezheng@outlook.com, wangrong07@tsinghua.org.cn, feipingnie@gmail.com
Abstract
The representation learning of time series has a wide range of
downstream tasks and applications in many practical scenarios. However, due to the complexity, spatiotemporality, and
continuity of sequential stream data, compared with the representation learning of structural data such as images/videos,
the time series self-supervised representation learning is even
more challenging. Besides, the direct application of existing contrastive learning and masked autoencoder based approaches to time series representation learning encounters inherent theoretical limitations, such as ineffective augmentation and masking strategies. To this end, we propose a Language Pre-training guided Masking Representation Learning (LPMRL) for times series classification. Specifically, we
first propose a novel language pre-training guided masking encoder for adaptively sampling semantic spatiotemporal patches via natural language descriptions and improving
the discriminability of latent representations. Furthermore,
we present the dual-information contrastive learning mechanism to explore both local and global information by meticulously designing high-quality hard negative samples of time
series data samples. As a result, we also design various experiments, such as visualization of masking position and distribution and reconstruction error to verify the reasonability
of proposed language guided masking technique. Last, we
evaluate the performance of proposed representation learning
via classification task conducted on 106 time series datasets,
which demonstrates the effectiveness of proposed method.

Figure 1: Randomly masking vs. proposed language guided
masking. We evaluate the performance different masking
strategy in terms of the metrics of mean square errors on
wine time series data. Obviously, proposed language guided
masking strategy outperforms randomly masking more than
0.1 reconstruction errors on both zero value mask (a) and
mean value mask (b) with almost masked ratios, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of proposed language guided
masking model.

Representation learning aims to learn low-dimensional
discriminative patterns from complex high-dimensional data
which has achieved remarkable success in image/video
understanding recently. Concretely, representation learning
methods of images can be divided into following three parts:
traditional linear dimension reduction (Nie et al. 2019) and
manifold learning (Law and Jain 2006) based approaches assume that the essential structural characteristics are hidden
in the low-dimensional manifold neighbouring subspace. In
order to deal with large scale data, deep learning based representation learning methods have dominated the development trend of this field, such as ResNet (He et al. 2016),
transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), masked autoencoder (He
et al. 2022) and so on. For further alleviating label limitation, contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2020a) has heralded a
new era of remarkable achievement for self-supervised representation learning.
Despite the significant attention garnered by the above
visual representation paradigms, which cannot be directly

Introduction
Time series data are being incrementally collected from
multiple mechanical sensors, which is crucial for various
downstream tasks, such as fault diagnosis (Chen, Liu, and
Kong 2020), machine remaining useful life (RUL) prediction (Chen et al. 2020b) and classification (Eldele et al.
2023). However, due to the high-dimensionality, unstructured and temporality, large amounts of informative patterns
that hidden in long sequence cannot be observed by human,
severely limiting the applications of time series data. Consequently, with the advance of deep learning techniques, representation learning based approaches have been widely exploited to make time series more interpretable.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12631

