The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Modal Logic for Joint Abilities of Structured Strategies
with Bounded Complexity
Ruiqi Jin1 , Yongmei Liu1 * , Liping Xiong2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Wuyi University, Jiangmen 529020, China
jinrq7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, ymliu@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xionglp@wyu.edu.cn

Abstract

of iterated elimination of dominated strategies (Osborne and
Rubinstein 1994). Essentially, a coalition has joint ability
if after such iterated elimination, any remaining collective
strategy achieves the goal. Based on their idea, Liu et al.
(2020) propose JAADL (Alternating-time Dynamic Logic
with Joint Abilities), an extension of ATL∗ with modalities
((A))∞ φ, meaning coalition A has joint ability to achieve
φ. They show that model checking memoryless JAADL can
be done in time exponential in both the model and formula
size, but whether model checking memoryful JAADL is decidable remains open.
In recent years, it has been brought into attention the issue of whether to use combinatorial strategies or syntactic forms of strategies to define strategic abilities. Combinatorial strategies, defined as functions mapping histories
or states to actions, are used in defining strategic abilities in ATL and most strategic logics. However, there have
been arguments that the notion of combinatorial strategies
is not a good representation of human strategies, as humans
are not good at handling combinatorially complex objects
(Jamroga, Malvone, and Murano 2019). Syntactic forms
of strategies, called structured strategies, have been investigated, and regular expressions have been used to represent the internal structures of strategies (Ramanujam and
Simon 2008; van Eijck 2013). Most importantly, Jamroga,
Malvone, and Murano (2017; 2019) propose NatATL, a variation of ATL where strategic abilities are defined in terms of
natural strategies, formalized as sequences of pairs of regular expression conditions and actions. In NatATL, the operator ⟨⟨A⟩⟩≤k φ means coalition A has a collective natural
strategy with complexity ≤ k to ensure the goal φ holds.
In this paper, we propose SJAADL, an adaptation of
JAADL where strategic abilities are defined in terms of
structured strategies with bounded complexity. We choose
to use structured strategies, since they are more general than
natural strategies. Also, our structured strategies are nondeterministic, and hence more expressive, succinct, and natural than deterministic strategies. Just as natural strategies,
there are mainly two advantages in considering structured
strategies instead of combinatorial ones. First, structured
strategies are more human friendly, as they better capture
the intuitive approach a human would use when describing
strategies. Thus, using structured strategies in JAADL would
better describe the process of dominated strategy elimina-

Coordination and joint abilities are important topics in representation and reasoning about multi-agent systems. The
modal logic JAADL proposed by Liu et al. extends ATL
with joint abilities, which enables reasoning about whether a
coalition of agents can coordinate and achieve a goal without communication. However, like ATL, strategic abilities
in JAADL are defined in terms of combinatorial strategies,
which are functions from histories or states to actions. On
the other hand, there has been research on reasoning about
natural strategic abilities, where a natural strategy is formalized as a sequence of condition-action pairs, making it more
human-friendly than the notion of combinatorial strategies.
In this work, we propose SJAADL, a variation of JAADL
where strategic abilities are defined in terms of structured
strategies represented with LDL (linear dynamic logic) formulas, with bounded complexity. We use nondeterministic
strategies since they are more expressive, natural and succinct than determinstic ones. We present syntax and semantics of SJAADL. We show that model checking SJAADL can
be done in time polynomial with the model size, exponential with the formula size, and with the complexity bound of
structured strategies, exponential in the memoryless case and
double exponential in the memoryful case. Finally, we introduce the problem of synthesizing norms to achieve joint abilities, and give two algorithms for it.

Introduction
Representation and reasoning about strategic abilities has
been an active research field in AI and logic. A fundamental
contribution in this field is Alternating-time Temporal Logic
ATL/ATL∗ (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002) where
formula ⟨⟨A⟩⟩φ means coalition A has a strategy to ensure
the LTL goal φ holds. Many variants and extensions of ATL
have been studied in the area of multi-agent systems.
Cooperation and coordination abilities are important
problems in multi-agent systems. There could be multiple
collective strategies to ensure a goal, but a player may not
know other agents’ choices, thus a coalition might end up
with a collective strategy that does not achieve the goal.
Ghaderi, Levesque, and Lespérance (2007) present a formalization of joint abilities of coalitions based on the idea
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15014

