The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

APAR: Modeling Irregular Target Functions in Tabular Regression via
Arithmetic-Aware Pre-Training and Adaptive-Regularized Fine-Tuning
Hong-Wei Wu, Wei-Yao Wang, Kuang-Da Wang, Wen-Chih Peng
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
johnnyhwu.cs11@nycu.edu.tw, sf1638.cs05@nctu.edu.tw, gdwang.cs10@nycu.edu.tw, wcpeng@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Abstract

Prior research (Gorishniy et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2023;
Chen et al. 2023a) has primarily focused on addressing
feature heterogeneity and uninformative features; however,
the issue of irregular target functions remains relatively
unexplored, especially in the context of tabular regression
tasks having continuous labels instead of explicit boundaries between labels. Irregular target functions play a critical role since minor deviations in input features lead to major changes in target values (Beyazit et al. 2023). For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, in a medical scenario (e.g.,
health risk prediction), a slight variation in a patient’s weight
crossing a specific threshold can significantly alter the corresponding health status. In addition, the stock price is degraded significantly due to only the sentiment change (e.g.,
by wars). This phenomenon is less common in other data
modalities; for example, a minor change in a single pixel
in an image is unlikely to change its appearance. As NNs
need to accurately model irregular target functions in tabular regression tasks while suffering from overfitting, it is
crucial to emphasize the significance of advancing tabular
regression methods capable of modeling sensitive changes
between tabular features and labels.
Therefore, we focus on learning to fit irregular target
functions for tabular regression tasks. Prior studies have
mitigated this problem by addressing it from two perspectives: preventing overfitting on samples (Kossen et al. 2021;
Ucar, Hajiramezanali, and Edwards 2021; Wang and Sun
2022) and features (Yoon et al. 2020; Arik and Pfister 2021;
Somepalli et al. 2021). However, they are inferior in terms of
utilizing label information due to the significant sparsity for
regression labels (e.g., supervised contrastive learning for
tabular classification tasks (Cui et al. 2024)) as well as in
corrupting important features that are related to predictions
(e.g., random feature masks (Chen et al. 2023b)).
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a novel Arithmetic-aware Pre-training and AdaptiveRegularized Fine-tuning framework (APAR) for tabular
regression tasks, consisting of the pretrain-finetune strategy for modeling irregular target functions. Specifically,
a Transformer-based (Vaswani et al. 2017) backbone is
adopted with a tabular feature tokenizer to encode tabular
heterogeneity. In the pre-training phase, an arithmetic-aware
task is introduced to learn sample-wise relationships by predicting the combined answer of arithmetic operations on

Tabular data are fundamental in common machine learning applications, ranging from finance to genomics and
healthcare. This paper focuses on tabular regression tasks,
a field where deep learning (DL) methods are not consistently superior to machine learning (ML) models due to
the challenges posed by irregular target functions inherent
in tabular data, causing sensitive label changes with minor
variations from features. To address these issues, we propose a novel Arithmetic-Aware Pre-training and AdaptiveRegularized Fine-tuning framework (APAR), which enables
the model to fit irregular target function in tabular data while
reducing the negative impact of overfitting. In the pre-training
phase, APAR introduces an arithmetic-aware pretext objective to capture intricate sample-wise relationships from the
perspective of continuous labels. In the fine-tuning phase, a
consistency-based adaptive regularization technique is proposed to self-learn appropriate data augmentation. Extensive experiments across 10 datasets demonstrated that APAR
outperforms existing GBDT-, supervised NN-, and pretrainfinetune NN-based methods in RMSE (+9.43% ∼ 20.37%),
and empirically validated the effects of pre-training tasks, including the study of arithmetic operations.

Code — https://github.com/johnnyhwu/APAR

1

Introduction

The tabular regression task, prevalent in sectors such as
healthcare (Rao et al. 2023; Jain et al. 2024) and finance
(Du, Wang, and Peng 2023; Deng et al. 2024), has commonly been addressed using Gradient Boosting Decision
Tree (GBDT) models (e.g., CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al.
2018)). Despite recent advancements in neural networks
(NNs), they often fail to consistently outperform GBDT
models in this domain (Wang et al. 2024). This is attributed to the understanding of important features from distinct characteristics of tabular data, such as feature heterogeneity and the presence of uninformative features, which
make it challenging to identify important features. On the
other hand, the irregular target functions prevent NNs from
learning high-frequency components of heterogeneous tabular datasets, and negatively impact NN performance due to
overfitting (Beyazit et al. 2023).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21536

