The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Poplar: Efficient Scaling of Distributed DNN Training on Heterogeneous GPU
Clusters
WenZheng Zhang1 , Yang Hu2 * , Jing Shi1 , Xiaoying Bai3 *
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University
Center for Information Research, Academy of Military Sciences
3
Advanced Institute of Big Data
zwz@stu.pku.edu.cn, huyang.oceans@gmail.com, jingshi@stu.pku.edu.cn, baixy@aibd.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Scaling Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) requires significant
computational resources in terms of GPU quantity and compute capacity. In practice, there usually exists a large number
of heterogeneous GPU devices due to the rapid release cycle of GPU products. It is highly needed to efficiently and
economically harness the power of heterogeneous GPUs, so
that it can meet the requirements of DNN research and development. The paper introduces Poplar, a distributed training system that extends Zero Redundancy Optimizer (ZeRO)
with heterogeneous-aware capabilities. We explore a broader
spectrum of GPU heterogeneity, including compute capability, memory capacity, quantity and a combination of them.
In order to achieve high computational efficiency across all
heterogeneous conditions, Poplar conducts fine-grained measurements of GPUs in each ZeRO stage. We propose a novel
batch allocation method and a search algorithm to optimize
the utilization of heterogeneous GPUs clusters. Furthermore,
Poplar implements fully automated parallelism, eliminating
the need for deploying heterogeneous hardware and finding
suitable batch size. Extensive experiments on three heterogeneous clusters, comprising six different types of GPUs,
demonstrate that Poplar achieves a training throughput improvement of 1.02 ∼ 3.92x over current state-of-the-art heterogeneous training systems.

Figure 1: High-end GPUs complete their tasks first and then
start waiting before synchronization. Without load balancing, there will be significant idle time.

while a sufficient quantity of heterogeneous GPUs is more
readily available(Weng et al. 2022). Some researchers have
access only to a variety of consumer-grade GPUs that cannot
individually support the training of large models(Song et al.
2023). Furthermore, the cost of purchasing new machines
is substantial due to the rapid release cycle of GPU products(Choquette 2022). In such situations, effectively utilizing heterogeneous GPU resources can help address these
challenges, thereby speed up the model exploration and experiments. Current techniques and systems for distributed
model training mostly assume that the workers are homogeneous(Shoeybi et al. 2019; Rasley et al. 2020). As Figure
1 showed, directly applying these techniques in heterogeneous clusters will result in substantial idle time during synchronization(Kwon et al. 2020), since powerful GPUs must
wait for less ones. Achieving load balancing to minimize the
idle time of each GPU in heterogeneous clusters is challenging(Tang et al. 2021), since both the compute capability and
the memory capacity of GPUs need to be considered.
Many studies have focused on this issue, AMP(Li et al.
2022) and Whale(Jia et al. 2022) incorporate the elements of
heterogeneity into search space of auto-parallel algorithms.
AMP is equipped with an expert-design cost model that considers cluster and model configurations. Whale uses automatic graph optimizations to adapt heterogeneous GPUs(Jia,
Zaharia, and Aiken 2019). Whale and AMP can enhance
the utilization of heterogeneous clusters based on 3D parallelism.
However, previous research only addresses limited as-

Introduction
With the increase in model parameters, the memory and
compute requirements for model training have grown significantly beyond the capability of a single accelerator(Wang
et al. 2023). Training large-scale models requires the efficient utilization of aggregated computing power and memory across hundreds or even thousands of GPUs(Smith et al.
2022). There are two distributed training frameworks to this,
namely 3D Parallelism(Shoeybi et al. 2019; Lai et al. 2023)
and Zero Redundancy Optimizer(ZeRO)(Rajbhandari et al.
2020). 3D Parallelism requires a complex and meticulous
design by domain experts(Zheng et al. 2022). Conversely,
ZeRO needs no code refactoring, which has contributed to
its widespread adoption in model training(Smith et al. 2022).
Acquiring a large number of homogeneous high-end
GPUs within a cluster often requires a long queuing time,
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22587

