The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PanoDiT: Panoramic Videos Generation with Diffusion Transformer
Muyang Zhang1,2 * , Yuzhi Chen1,2 * , Rongtao Xu2,1 , Changwei Wang3 , JinMing Yang2,1 ,
Weiliang Meng2,1† , Jianwei Guo4,2† , Huihuang Zhao5 , Xiaopeng Zhang2,1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Shandong, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Hengyang Normal University, Hunan, China
muyang.zhang@mais.ia.ac.cn, chenyuzhi2022@gmail.com, xurongtao2019@ia.ac.cn, changweiwang@sdas.org,
yangjinming2023@ia.ac.cn, weiliang.meng@ia.ac.cn, jianwei.guo@bnu.edu.cn,
happyday.huihuang@gmail.com,xiaopeng.zhang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
As immersive experiences become increasingly popular,
panoramic video has garnered significant attention in both research and applications. The high cost associated with capturing panoramic video underscores the need for efficient
prompt-based generation methods. Although recent text-tovideo (T2V) diffusion techniques have shown potential in
standard video generation, they face challenges when applied to panoramic videos due to substantial differences in
content and motion patterns. In this paper, we propose PanoDiT, a framework that utilizes the Diffusion Transformer
(DiT) architecture to generate panoramic videos from text
descriptions. Unlike traditional methods that rely on UNetbased denoising, our method leverages a transformer architecture for denoising, incorporating both temporal and global
attention mechanisms. This ensures coherent frame generation and smooth motion transitions, offering distinct advantages in long-horizon generation tasks. To further enhance
motion and consistency in the generated videos, we introduce
DTM-LoRA and two panoramic-specific losses. Compared to
previous methods, our PanoDiT achieves state-of-the-art performance across various evaluation metrics and user study,
with code is available in the supplementary material.

Figure 1: Panoramic videos generated by PanoDiT. For
example, the first video is generated with the prompt: “a
panoramic view of ice and icebergs floating on water.”

time-consuming and resource-intensive. There is an urgent
need for more efficient panoramic video generation methods
to reduce costs, yet research in this area remains limited.
With the advent of emerging diffusion strategies (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020), text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022; Mou et al. 2024; Ramesh et al.
2022; Nichol et al. 2022; Peebles and Xie 2023) have shown
remarkable capabilities in generating images from a wide
range of user prompts, including text and images. These
advancements in image generation have paved the way for
text-to-video (T2V) generation. Recently, several T2V diffusion models (Guo et al. 2023; Deng et al. 2023; An et al.
2023; Singer et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023d; Xing et al.
2024; Zhou et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2024) adopt a spatiotemporal separable architecture, which leverages pre-trained
2D diffusion models for spatial operations, thereby reducing the complexity of constructing a spatio-temporal model
from the ground up. Among these, AnimateDiff (Guo et al.
2023) has made significant contributions by introducing a
U-Net-based Motion module and a lightweight LoRA (Hu
et al. 2021), enabling user-customized motion patterns tailored to specific tasks, which enhances the controllability

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of VR/AR technology, 360degree panoramic videos have become increasingly prevalent, which offers an immersive experience from every angle, making them valuable across various domains, including entertainment, education, and communication. Despite
the emergence of many leading technologies in the field
of computer vision (Xu et al. 2023b,a, 2022; Wang et al.
2023a,b; Wu et al. 2023). Traditionally, capturing these
videos requires the use of high-resolution fisheye camera
arrays to cover a wide field of view, a process that is both
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Weiliang Meng and Jianwei Guo are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10040

