The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual-branch Graph Feature Learning for NLOS Imaging
Xiongfei Su1,2,3 * , Tianyi Zhu2 * , Lina Liu2 , Zheng Chen4 , Yulun Zhang4 ,
Siyuan Li1,3 , Juntian Ye5 , Feihu Xu5 , Xin Yuan3†
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, e-mail: xsuac@zju.edu.cn
2
China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing, China
3
Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
5
University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui, China
N Stages

Abstract
The domain of non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging is advancing rapidly, offering the capability to reveal occluded scenes
that are not directly visible. However, contemporary NLOS
systems face several significant challenges: (1) The computational and storage requirements are profound due to the inherent three-dimensional grid data structure, which restricts
practical application. (2) The simultaneous reconstruction of
albedo and depth information requires a delicate balance using hyperparameters in the loss function, rendering the concurrent reconstruction of texture and depth information difficult. This paper introduces the innovative methodology, DGNLOS, which integrates an albedo-focused reconstruction
branch dedicated to albedo information recovery and a depthfocused reconstruction branch that extracts geometrical structure, to overcome these obstacles. The dual-branch framework segregates content delivery to the respective reconstructions, thereby enhancing the quality of the retrieved data. To
our knowledge, we are the first to employ the GNN as a fundamental component to transform dense NLOS grid data into
sparse structural features for efficient reconstruction. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method attains
the highest level of performance among existing methods
across synthetic and real data.

Pretrained
(a) E2E
N Loops

Pretrained
(b) Unfolding
Converge

Pretrained

Albedo

Fine-tuned

Pretrained
(c) PnP

Scene

(a)

(d) Ours

(b)

(c)

Depth

(d)Ours

Figure 1: Various types of Deep NLOS reconstruction. Blue
arrows denote the transform with physical models. The two
real scene reconstructions are compared, where greeen rectangles highlight the superior performance of DG-NLOS.

Introduction
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging transcends the limitations of rectilinear propagation by examining the diffuse
reflections from a relay surface to image occluded objects (Faccio, Velten, and Wetzstein 2020; Maeda et al.
2019). This technique has extensive applications across various domains, including medical imaging, autonomous driving, and robotic vision. The swift progression in photonsensitive sensors and sophisticated imaging algorithms has
engendered solutions that span a comprehensive range of
ray propagation paradigms, such as occluder-based recovery (Xu et al. 2018; Saunders, Murray-Bruce, and Goyal
2019), Time-of-Flight (ToF) methodologies (Velten et al.
2012; Heide et al. 2014), wavefront shaping (Cao et al.

2022), and alternative non-optical techniques (Lindell, Wetzstein, and Koltun 2019; Scheiner et al. 2020). Several methods exist for reconstructing hidden scenes, including Fermat flow (Xin et al. 2019), temporal focusing (Pediredla,
Dave, and Veeraraghavan 2019), optimization-based reconstruction (Heide et al. 2019; Tsai, Sankaranarayanan, and
Gkioulekas 2019; Ye et al. 2021), deconvolution (O’Toole
et al. 2018; Young et al. 2020), wave-based techniques (Liu
et al. 2019; Lindell, Wetzstein, and O’Toole 2019), and deep
learning (Grau Chopite et al. 2020; Nam et al. 2021; Pei et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2024).
NLOS reconstructions commonly face the following challenges: (i) Low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR): as only a small
fraction of scattered photons are captured (Zhu et al. 2023;
Li et al. 2024). (ii) Ill-posed solution: Signals travel through

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7051

