The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Putting People in LLMs’ Shoes:
Generating Better Answers via Question Rewriter
Junhao Chen, Bowen Wang* , Zhouqiang Jiang, Yuta Nakashima
Osaka University, Japan
{junhao, zhouqiang}@is.ids.osaka-u.ac.jp, {wang, n-yuta}@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant capabilities, particularly in the domain of question answering (QA). However, their effectiveness in QA is often
undermined by the vagueness of user questions. To address
this issue, we introduce single-round instance-level prompt
optimization, referred to as question rewriter. By enhancing
the intelligibility of human questions for black-box LLMs,
our question rewriter improves the quality of generated answers. The rewriter is optimized using direct preference optimization based on feedback collected from automatic criteria
for evaluating generated answers; therefore, its training does
not require costly human annotations. The experiments across
multiple black-box LLMs and long-form question answering (LFQA) datasets demonstrate the efficacy of our method.
This paper provides a practical framework for training question rewriters and sets a precedent for future explorations in
prompt optimization within LFQA tasks.

Figure 1: The original questions posed by the user are difficult for black-box LLMs to understand, resulting in poor
answers. However, when the questions are rewritten by the
rewriter, they become easier for LLMs to comprehend, leading to better answers.

Code — https://github.com/3244we/Question-Rewriter
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10573

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have incorporated extensive
world knowledge through learning vast publicly available
corpora (Roberts, Raffel, and Shazeer 2020). It becomes
increasingly common for people to seek knowledge from
LLMs, especially in fields such as medicine and law (Atallah
et al. 2023; Harrington 2023; Wang et al. 2024). However,
a near-paradoxical issue arises: People ask questions to get
knowledge, while lack of knowledge often leads to poorly
formulated or vague questions, hindering LLMs from providing precise answers (Kim et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2024).
Fine-tuning can enhance LLMs’ ability to understand vague
questions, but most popular LLMs are black-box models,
and their parameters are inaccessible. Thus, a step of transforming user questions into a format that LLMs can understand better, known as question rewriting, is crucial for question answering (QA).
Question rewriting is closely related to prompt optimization. A prompt is an input to LLMs that guides them in

generating a specific response, including a question (possibly with some instructions), a conversation history, etc. (Liu
et al. 2023). Question rewriting is prompt optimization
solely for questions. Previous work on prompt optimization primarily focused on optimizing task-level prompts.
They decompose prompts into task-level instructions and
instance-level inputs, optimizing task-level instructions for
better performance across all instances of the task (Fernando
et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2023; Kong et al. 2024).
Recent studies have shown that directly optimizing the
prompts at the instance level offers more flexibility in
prompt editing tailored for a given prompt(Lin et al. 2024)
and can lead to better responses (Srivastava et al. 2023).
By obtaining feedback from humans or LLMs, they iteratively refine a given prompt, which requires multi-round
interactions. In addition, previous prompt optimization is
mainly applied to arithmetic reasoning (Cobbe et al. 2021)
and short-form question answering (SFQA) (Kwiatkowski
et al. 2019), where the latter involves answers in few words.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23577

