The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Convergence of Tâtonnement for Linear Fisher Markets
Tianlong Nan1 , Yuan Gao2 , Christian Kroer1
1

Columbia University
2
Microsoft
tianlong.nan@columbia.edu, gaoyuan@microsoft.com, christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Abstract

items to buyers, such that each buyer is allocated the optimal
bundle subject to the prices and her budget, and each item is
allocated at its supply.
Alongside the development of market settings and equilibrium solution concepts, market equilibrium computation,
by itself or as part of an end-to-end approach to real-world
resource allocation problems, has seen a growing interest
in various research communities in economics, computer
science, and operations research (Scarf et al. 1967; Kantorovich 1975; Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou
2009; Bateni et al. 2022; Babaioff, Nisan, and TalgamCohen 2019; Othman, Sandholm, and Budish 2010; Cole
et al. 2017; Birnbaum, Devanur, and Xiao 2011; Kroer et al.
2019, 2021; Gao and Kroer 2020; Gao, Peysakhovich, and
Kroer 2021). This is especially so in the past two decades,
as the emergence of internet marketplaces, including advertising systems, require approximating or maintaining equilibrium variables in large-scale market settings.
Tâtonnement is a simple, natural, and decentralized priceadjustment process where prices of items are adjusted to reflect buyers’ demands: the price of a good increases if the demand exceeds the supply under current prices, and decreases
if the supply exceeds the demand. It can also be viewed as
an algorithm for computing market equilibria. Intuitively, if
the tâtonnement process is guaranteed to converge to a market equilibrium, then it lends credence to market equilibrium as a solution concept for the economic allocation of
goods. Indeed, for various market settings, including Fisher
markets with non-linear constant-elasticity-of-substitution
(CES) utilities, the convergence of tâtonnement has been established and is well-understood (Cole and Fleischer 2008;
Cheung, Cole, and Devanur 2019; Avigdor-Elgrabli, Rabani,
and Yadgar 2014). A prominent exception is the simplest,
and arguably most prevalent, setting of linear Fisher markets (LFM), where buyers have linear (additive) utilities over
items. It has long been known that, for LFMs, tâtonnement
does not converge to an equilibrium in the strictest sense,
that is, in terms of a vanishing metric or norm; see, e.g.,
Cole and Tao (2019) and Section 4 for further discussion
and examples. However, whether tâtonnement demonstrates
any form of approximate convergence remains largely unexplored.
One important fact about an LFM is that its market equilibria are captured by the well-known Eisenberg-Gale (EG)

Tâtonnement is a simple, intuitive market process where
prices are iteratively adjusted based on the difference between
demand and supply. Many variants under different market assumptions have been studied and shown to converge to a market equilibrium, in some cases at a fast rate. However, the
classical case of linear Fisher markets have long eluded the
analyses, and it remains unclear whether tâtonnement converges in this case. We show that, for a sufficiently small step
size, the prices given by the tâtonnement process are guaranteed to converge to equilibrium prices, up to a small approximation radius that depends on the stepsize. To achieve
this, we consider the dual Eisenberg-Gale convex program in
the price space, view tâtonnement as subgradient descent on
this convex program, and utilize last-iterate convergence results for subgradient descent under error bound conditions.
In doing so, we show that the convex program satisfies a
particular error bound condition, the quadratic growth condition, and that the price sequence generated by tâtonnement
is bounded above and away from zero. We also show that
a similar convergence result holds for tâtonnement in quasilinear Fisher markets. Numerical experiments are conducted
to demonstrate that the theoretical linear convergence aligns
with empirical observations.

1

Introduction

Market equilibrium (ME) is a central solution concept in
economics. It describes a steady state of the market in which
supply is equal to demand. In recent year, it has found various applications in resource allocation in large-scale online
and physical market places due to its fairness, efficiency in
allocating items, and tractability under various real-worldinspired settings. Since ME was first studied by Léon Walras in 1874, extensive work has been undertaken to establish
the existence and uniqueness of ME in various market models (Walras 1874; Arrow and Debreu 1954; Cole et al. 2017).
In this paper, we focus on the Fisher market setting, a wellknown market model involving m divisible items which are
to be allocated among n buyers. Each item has a fixed supply (usually assumed to be 1) and each buyer is endowed
with a fixed budget of money. In a Fisher market, an equilibrium is a set of prices for the items, and an allocation of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14027

