The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

User Preference meets Pareto-Optimality in Multi-Objective Bayesian
Optimization
Joshua Hang Sai Ip1 , Ankush Chakrabarty2 , Ali Mesbah1 , Diego Romeres2
1

University of California, Berkeley
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
ipjoshua@berkeley.edu, chakrabarty@merl.com, mesbah@berkeley.edu, romeres@merl.com
2

Abstract

to sample-based evaluation of acquisition functions such as
q-Expected Hypervolume Improvement (qEHVI) (Daulton,
Balandat, and Bakshy 2020).
Recently, there has been a growing interest in preferencebased MOBO (e.g., (Abdolshah et al. 2019; Ahmadianshalchi, Belakaria, and Doppa 2024; Shao et al. 2023; Ozaki
et al. 2024)) that aims to incorporate user preferences into
MOO for selecting optimal points. In essence, preferencebased MOBO guides the optimization process towards regions of interest within the Pareto-front by leveraging user
feedback, typically in the form of pairwise comparisons between solutions generated by the optimization algorithm.
These comparisons are used to estimate an underlying utility function that describes user preferences. However, while
preference-based MOBO can effectively identify solutions
with high utility as informed by user feedback, the resulting
solutions may not be Pareto-optimal.
To address this challenge, we present a new method,
termed Preference-Utility-Balanced MOBO (PUB-MOBO),
that systematically approaches the user-informed regions
of interest within the Pareto-front by synergizing global
and local search strategies. PUB-MOBO begins with a
global search driven by utility maximization to identify
regions in the solution space that align with user preferences. Subsequently, a local search is conducted in the vicinity of these solutions to discover solutions that are closer
to Pareto-optimality. Additionally, a new utility function,
the Preference-Dominated Utility Function (PDUF), is proposed that encapsulates the concept of dominance within
a single function. PDUF allows for consistently identifying dominating solutions, while providing a straightforward
means for expressing all possible user preferences. This differs to existing utility functions for preference-based MOBO
such as the negative l1 distance from an ideal solution irrespective of the solution being on the Pareto-front or an infeasible ideal solution (Miettinen 1999), or the weighted sum
where not all Pareto-optimal points can be assigned with the
highest utility value from any choice of weights (Chiandussi
et al. 2012). Empirical demonstrations on several synthetic
benchmark and real-world problems show that PUB-MOBO
not only enhances the utility of the optimization solutions,
but also yields near Pareto-optimal solutions.
In sum, the main contributions of this paper include:

Incorporating user preferences into multi-objective Bayesian
optimization (MOBO) allows for personalization of the optimization procedure. Preferences are often abstracted in the
form of an unknown utility function, estimated through pairwise comparisons of potential outcomes. However, utilitydriven MOBO methods can yield solutions that are dominated
by nearby solutions, as non-dominance is not enforced. Additionally, classical MOBO commonly relies on estimating the
entire Pareto-front to identify the Pareto-optimal solutions,
which can be expensive and ignore user preferences. Here,
we present a new method, termed preference-utility-balanced
MOBO (PUB-MOBO), that allows users to disambiguate between near-Pareto candidate solutions. PUB-MOBO combines utility-based MOBO with local multi-gradient descent
to refine user-preferred solutions to be near-Pareto-optimal.
To this end, we propose a novel preference-dominated utility function that concurrently preserves user-preferences and
dominance amongst candidate solutions. A key advantage
of PUB-MOBO is that the local search is restricted to a
(small) region of the Pareto-front directed by user preferences, alleviating the need to estimate the entire Paretofront. PUB-MOBO is tested on three synthetic benchmark
problems: DTLZ1, DTLZ2 and DH1, as well as on three
real-world problems: Vehicle Safety, Conceptual Marine Design, and Car Side Impact. PUB-MOBO consistently outperforms state-of-the-art competitors in terms of proximity to the
Pareto-front and utility regret across all the problems.

1

Introduction

The challenge of identifying optimal trade-offs between
multiple complex objective functions is pervasive in many
real-world scientific and industrial applications. When
the objectives are black-box functions constructed from
noisy observations, multi-objective Bayesian optimization
(MOBO) (Konakovic Lukovic, Tian, and Matusik 2020;
Daulton, Balandat, and Bakshy 2020) is an effective multiobjective optimization (MOO) approach owing to its high
sample efficiency, especially as compared to classic MOO
methods such as CMA-ES (Hansen and Ostermeier 2001)
and NSGA-II (Deb et al. 2002). Nonetheless, state-of-theart MOBO methods generally seek to estimate the entire
Pareto-front, which can become prohibitively expensive due
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(C1) We introduce a new preference-based MOBO method,
20246

