The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

UAWTrack: Universal 3D Single Object Tracking in Adverse Weather
Yuxiang Yang1 , Hongjie Gu1 , Yingqi Deng1 , Zhekang Dong1 , Zhiwei He1 , Jing Zhang2 *
1

School of Electronics and Information, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
{yyx, hongjiegu, den, englishp, zwhe}@hdu.edu.cn, jingzhang.cv@gmail.com

Abstract
3D single object tracking (3D SOT) in LiDAR point clouds
is essential for autonomous driving. Most existing 3D SOT
methods focus on clear weather, where point clouds are more
defined. However, adverse weather conditions lead to sparser
and noisier point clouds, significantly degrading tracking performance and posing safety risks. In this study, we introduce UAWTrack, a universal 3D SOT model designed to
perform effectively across diverse real-world weather conditions. UAWTrack comprises three key modules: 1) Voxel
Feature Extraction, which mitigates the perturbations in point
clouds caused by adverse weather; 2) Motion-centric Spatialtemporal Aggregation and Motion-guided Feature Fusion,
capturing motion clues and sampling dense BEV motion features to address the issue of sparsity; and 3) Weather-Specific
Tracker, which efficiently handles tracking in various weather
conditions. To fill the gap of lacking benchmarks for 3D
SOT in adverse weather, we simulate physically valid adverse
weather conditions on the KITTI and NuScenes datasets, creating two benchmarks: KITTI-A and NuScenes-A. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that UAWTrack achieves state-ofthe-art performance under all weather conditions.

(a) Clear

(b) Rain

(c) Snow

(d) Fog

Figure 1: Visualization of point clouds from the same scene
under varying weather conditions in our KITTI-A dataset.

and the same tracked object may exhibit varying levels of
sparsity depending on the weather.
While current 3D SOT models (Qi et al. 2020; Hui et al.
2021; Zheng et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2023) perform well in
clear weather, they struggle to address the challenges posed
by adverse conditions. For instance, methods like P2B (Qi
et al. 2020), 3D-SiamRPN (Fang et al. 2020), BAT (Zheng
et al. 2021), and PTT (Shan et al. 2021) follow a pointbased pipeline, extracting point-wise discriminative features
and calculating point-wise similarity through feature aggregation. However, given the inherent sparsity and irregularity
of point clouds, which are further exacerbated by weatherinduced issues like missing data and perturbations, pointwise feature encoding is not well-suited for adverse conditions. An intuitive solution is to use domain adaptation
techniques to transfer knowledge to specific weather conditions, thereby mitigating the domain shift between the
source (clear weather) and target domains (adverse weather).
However, this strategy is less efficient when dealing with
multiple weather types simultaneously, limiting its practical
applicability.
To address the challenges mentioned above, we introduce UAWTrack, a versatile approach inspired by Mixture
of Experts (MoE) (Shazeer et al. 2017) that learns weather-

Code — https://github.com/HDU-VRLab/UAWTrack

Introduction
3D single object tracking (3D SOT) in LiDAR point clouds
is a crucial task for autonomous robots, such as self-driving
cars and drones. For the 3D SOT models to be safely used
in autonomous driving, they must maintain reliable performance under diverse real-world weather conditions. However, adverse weather poses significant challenges due to
sensor distortion. Specifically, the pulsed laser light from
LiDAR struggles to penetrate water particles, leading to two
key issues: 1) Attenuation reduces signal strength from solid
objects, causing sparse 3D point clouds; and 2) Backscattering introduces false peaks in the received signal, leading to
perturbations in 3D point clouds. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
there is a noticeable disparity between point clouds under
different weather conditions. Particularly, point clouds near
the LiDAR are more susceptible to perturbation and noise,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9336

