The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Geolocation Representation from Large Language Models are Generic Enhancers
for Spatio-Temporal Learning
Junlin He* , Tong Nie* , Wei Ma†
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
{junlinspeed.he, tong.nie}@connect.polyu.hk, wei.w.ma@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In the geospatial domain, universal representation models are
significantly less prevalent than their extensive use in natural
language processing and computer vision. This discrepancy
arises primarily from the high costs associated with the input
of existing representation models, which often require street
views and mobility data. To address this, we develop a novel,
training-free method that leverages large language models
(LLMs) and auxiliary map data from OpenStreetMap to derive
geolocation representations (LLMGeovec). LLMGeovec can
represent the geographic semantics of city, country, and global
scales, which acts as a generic enhancer for spatio-temporal
learning. Specifically, by direct feature concatenation, we introduce a simple yet effective paradigm for enhancing multiple spatio-temporal tasks including geographic prediction
(GP), long-term time series forecasting (LTSF), and graphbased spatio-temporal forecasting (GSTF). LLMGeovec can
seamlessly integrate into a wide spectrum of spatio-temporal
learning models, providing immediate enhancements. Experimental results demonstrate that LLMGeovec achieves global
coverage and significantly boosts the performance of leading
GP, LTSF, and GSTF models.

Introduction
Geolocation representation models encode geographical coordinates into latent embeddings with enriched geographic
contextual information. Such embeddings ensure that similar representations reflect analogous sociodemographic attributes, activity patterns, and climatic characteristics across
locations over the globe (Wang et al. 2022; Jean et al. 2019;
Lee et al. 2021; Wang, Li, and Rajagopal 2020; Zhang et al.
2021, 2023a; Zhou et al. 2023b; Kim and Yoon 2022).
These geolocation representations are naturally suited to
enhance spatio-temporal learning because they carry spatial
contextual semantics. Previous research has focused only on
how geolocation representations can be used for geographic
prediction (GP). Specifically, GP tasks are trained on the
attributes of some locations and used to predict the attributes
of the remaining locations. These attributes include crime rate
(Li et al. 2022b; Kim and Yoon 2022), poverty rate (Jean
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17094

et al. 2016; Chi et al. 2022; Marty and Duhaut 2024), public
health (Yeh et al. 2021; Nilsen et al. 2021; Draidi Areed
et al. 2022; Chang et al. 2022; Sheehan et al. 2019), and so
on. However, these geolocation representations are not used
for more complex tasks.
The reason why previous approaches do not further extend
the complex applications is that they do not achieve global
coverage and they have a heavy reliance on expensive input
data such as street views, travel patterns, and traffic trajectories (Wang, Li, and Rajagopal 2020; Kim and Yoon 2022;
Lee et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023a). Although studies have
used free and globally available satellite imagery for geolocation representation, their effectiveness has been hampered by
the low resolution and absence of important features such as
activity patterns (Manvi et al. 2023; Robinson, Hohman, and
Dilkina 2017; Head et al. 2017; Jean et al. 2019; Elmustafa
et al. 2022; Xi et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2023; Sun 2024).
Our objective is to develop a generic and effective geolocation representation method that utilizes only readily
accessible global data to improve more spatio-temporal learning tasks: GP, long-term time series forecasting (LTSF), and
graph-based spatio-temporal forecasting (GSTF). The latter
two are typical spatio-temporal datasets that, given the values
of many nodes at historical moments, predict the future values of those nodes. They differ in that the former tends to deal
with correlations between nodes by channel-mixing strategies
while the latter aggregates spatial connections between nodes
by graph neural networks (GNNs).
Recent advancements have demonstrated the extensive
spatio-temporal and human-related knowledge embedded
within large language models (LLMs). Some studies have
transformed GP tasks as text generation tasks in LLMs
(Manvi et al. 2023, 2024), and some have even found that
LLMs learn linear representations of space and time across
multiple scales (global, country, city) (Gurnee and Tegmark
2023). Inspired by these findings, we explore the potential of
LLMs to generate effective geolocation representations.
In this paper, we introduce a novel, training-free method
that uses LLM and OpenStreetMap auxiliary map data to derive geolocation representations (LLMGeovec). As illustrated
in Fig. 1, our approach first extracts textual descriptions of
the coordinates from OpenStreetMap, which provides a sufficient geographic context. LLMs process these descriptions,
and the final hidden states of individual tokens are averaged

