The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Divide, Conquer and Combine: A Training-Free Framework for High-Resolution
Image Perception in Multimodal Large Language Models
Wenbin Wang1 * , Liang Ding2 * , Minyan Zeng1 , Xiabin Zhou3 ,
Li Shen4 , Yong Luo1† , Wei Yu1† , Dacheng Tao5
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software and Hubei Key Laboratory of
Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
The University of Sydney, Australia
3
Jiangsu University, China
4
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China
5
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wangwenbin97, luoyong, yuwei}@whu.edu.cn, {liangding.liam, minyanz977, xiabinzhou0625, mathshenli,
dacheng.tao}@gmail.com
Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have experienced significant advancements recently, but still struggle to
recognize and interpret intricate details in high-resolution (HR)
images effectively. While state-of-the-art (SOTA) MLLMs
claim to process images at 4K resolution, existing MLLM
benchmarks only support up to 2K, leaving the capabilities of
SOTA models on true HR images largely untested. Furthermore, existing methods for enhancing HR image perception in
MLLMs rely on computationally expensive visual instruction
tuning. To address these limitations, we introduce HR-Bench,
the first deliberately designed benchmark to rigorously evaluate MLLM performance on 4K&8K images. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that while downsampling
HR images leads to vision information loss, leveraging complementary modalities, e.g., text, can effectively compensate
for this loss. Building upon this insight, we propose Divide,
Conquer and Combine, a novel training-free framework for enhancing MLLM perception of HR images. Our method follows
a three-staged approach: 1) Divide: recursively partitioning
the HR image into patches and merging similar patches to
minimize computational overhead, 2) Conquer: leveraging the
MLLM to generate accurate textual descriptions for each image patch, and 3) Combine: utilizing the generated text descriptions to enhance the MLLM’s understanding of the overall HR
image. Extensive experiments show that: 1) the SOTA MLLM
achieves 63% accuracy, which is markedly lower than the 87%
accuracy achieved by humans on HR-Bench; 2) our method
brings consistent and significant improvements (a relative increase of +6% on HR-Bench and +8% on general multimodal
benchmarks).

(a) Comparison of our HR-𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩 with existing benchmarks on image resolution

HR-𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩𝑩
Question: What is the
color of the umbrella?

② Conquer
① Divide

Castle with multiple
spires and turrets. ……
The building is painted in
a light color, possibly ……
A person is holding a blue
umbrella ……

③ Combine
𝟕𝟕𝟕𝟕𝟕𝟕𝟕𝟕 × 𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒

Structure with multiple
turrets and blue roof. ……

(b) The simple schematic of our method Divide, Conquer and Combine (𝑫𝑫𝑪𝑪𝟐𝟐 )

Figure 1: An overview of our work. (a) Existing multimodal
benchmarks is only 2K resolution. To fill the gap, we introduce HR-Bench, designed to evaluate MLLMs on highresolution (HR) images up to 8K. (b) We propose a trainingfree framework – Divide, Conquer and Combine (DC2 ),
which recursively uses image patches to provide relevant
text descriptions, helping existing MLLMs better perceive
HR images.

abilities in vision-language understanding, reasoning, and
interaction (Xu et al. 2024). This progress is primarily due to
the integration of visual signals into Large Language Models
(LLMs), allowing them to perceive the world visually. A key
component of this process is the visual encoding strategy.
However, most current MLLMs (Liu et al. 2024a; Bai et al.
2023b) perceive images in a fixed resolution (e.g., 336×336).
This simplification often results in significant shape distortion
and blurring of high-resolution (HR) image content, which
hurts the performance of MLLMs. Given that real-world im-

Code — https://github.com/DreamMr/HR-Bench

Introduction
Recent advancements in multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) (Liu
et al. 2024a; Dong et al. 2024a) have greatly enhanced their
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7907

