The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ContextHOI: Spatial Context Learning for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Mingda Jia1 , Liming Zhao2 , Ge Li1 * , Yun Zheng2 ,
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Alibaba Group
mingdaj@stu.pku.edu.cn, geli@ece.pku.edu.cn, {lingchen.zlm, zhengyun.zy}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Spatial contexts, such as the backgrounds and surroundings,
are considered critical in Human-Object Interaction (HOI)
recognition, especially when the instance-centric foreground
is blurred or occluded. Recent advancements in HOI detectors
are usually built upon detection transformer pipelines. While
such an object-detection-oriented paradigm shows promise
in localizing objects, its exploration of spatial context is often insufficient for accurately recognizing human actions. To
enhance the capabilities of object detectors for HOI detection, we present a dual-branch framework named ContextHOI, which efficiently captures both object detection features and spatial contexts. In the context branch, we train the
model to extract informative spatial context without requiring
additional hand-craft background labels. Furthermore, we introduce context-aware spatial and semantic supervision to the
context branch to filter out irrelevant noise and capture informative contexts. ContextHOI achieves state-of-the-art performance on the HICO-DET and v-coco benchmarks. For
further validation, we construct a novel benchmark, HICOambiguous, which is a subset of HICO-DET that contains
images with occluded or impaired instance cues. Extensive
experiments across all benchmarks, complemented by visualizations, underscore the enhancements provided by ContextHOI, especially in recognizing interactions involving occluded or blurred instances.

1

or

Parking lot

City road

parking

driving

A photo of a person
< ? >ing a car

Figure 1: The role of context learning in HOI Detection.
Spatial context, like a parkinglot or a cityroad helps little with identify the salient car. However, context is critical in distinguishing human interactions. Both parking and
driving are highly related to the context information.

the captured instance-centric attributes, while the two-stage
methods rely more heavily on the confidence of their pretrained object detection backbones (Zhang et al. 2022).
Despite significant advancements, existing HOI detectors
face a major difficulty. They are vulnerable in identifying
HOI scenes with limited foreground visual cues, such as
when subjects are blurred or occluded. In contrast, Humans
can accurately recognize HOIs even when instances are unclear or completely unseen. For example, we can easily infer the presence of a driver driving in a car on the highway,
though the driver is obscured by the tinted windows of the
car, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Upon analysing such difficulties, we observe a potential tendency to overemphasize instance-centric attributes
in previous HOI detectors. Detection transformers (DETR),
foundational to many HOI detectors, often capture minimal
context information while neglecting most backgrounds as
negative or irrelevant. Although this approach is a consensus of object detection, it may not be sufficient enough
for robust action recognition, which requires a more comprehensive scene understanding. Therefore, the core issue
appears to be the misalignment between the minimal context modelling inherent in object detection and the extensive
contextual requirements essential for HOI detection. While

Introduction

Human-object interaction (HOI) detection (Gao et al. 2018)
involves identifying instance locations and their interactions,
typically represented as <Human, Interaction, Object>
triplets. Visual uncertainties in real-world scenes, such as
occlusion, significantly affect the discernibility of the subjects (Sun et al. 2022). Thus, a primary challenge of HOI
detection is accurately inferring the interactions with limited
visual cues.
Recent advancements in HOI detection are driven by various approaches, including those based on convolutional networks (Wang et al. 2019), and graphs (Gao et al. 2020). HOI
detectors built upon transformers generally demonstrate superior performance (Ning et al. 2023). Both one-stage and
two-stage HOI detectors perform inference depending on
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3931

