The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MindPainter: Efficient Brain-Conditioned Painting of Natural Images via
Cross-Modal Self-Supervised Learning
Muzhou Yu1 * , Shuyun Lin2 * , Hongwei Yan2 , Kaisheng Ma2†
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Tsinghua University
muzhou9999@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {linshuyu21, yanhw22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite significant advancements in image and text conditional image editing, the exploration of using brain signals,
which are more direct and personalized to reflect user intentions, remains limited. An intuitive method is to convert implicit brain signals into explicit representations such as images, which can then serve as prompts for editing. However,
such two-stage method suffers from low inference efficiency,
inaccurate brain interpretation, and unnatural editing results.
In this paper, we apply brain signals of visual perception
as prompts and propose a cross-modal self-supervised learning for natural image painting (MindPainter). This method
achieves efficient and natural brain-conditioned image editing in a straightforward manner. MindPainter is trained for reconstruction from masked images directly with pseudo-brain
signals, which is simulated by the proposed Pseudo Brain
Generator. It facilitates efficient cross-modal integration. The
proposed Brain Adapter further eliminates the gap in implicit space between modalities, ensuring accurate semantic
interpretation of brain signals and coherent consolidation. Besides, the designed Multi-Mask Generation Policy enhances
the generalization, realizing high-quality editing in various
painting scenarios, including inpainting and outpainting. To
the best of our knowledge, MindPainter is the first work to
achieve efficient brain-conditioned image painting, providing
potential for direct brain control in creative AI. The code and
the link to the extended version will be available on GitHub.

Figure 1: MindPainter performs high-quality, consistent
editing on brain-conditioned painting tasks. Here we provide the fMRI of visual stimuli to paint the results, where
annotations 1, 2, 3, and 4 represent the source, masked image, visual stimuli, and generated image, respectively.

Introduction
Image editing (Oh et al. 2001; Kawar et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2024; Suvorov et al. 2022a) is a powerful tool for enhancing visual content, with significant applications in creative
industries. The advent of GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2020;
Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) and diffusion models (Saharia
et al. 2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Gu et al. 2022) has greatly
improved image editing, achieving high levels of realism
and precision. Conditional editing, which has gained considerable interest, enables users to image personalization. Commonly, it can be classified into text-conditioned (Bar-Tal
et al. 2022; Bermano et al. 2022; Kim, Kwon, and Ye 2022a)
and image-conditioned editing (Yang et al. 2023) based on

the type of control input. These methods fine-tune generative models for specific conditions, producing high-fidelity
images. Meanwhile, the large-scale brain activity datasets
recording functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
or electroencephalogram (EEG) have significantly advanced
the field of brain decoding (Scotti et al. 2023; Chen et al.
2023). It decodes the implicit brain signals into explicit representations like images. However, brain signal, as a modal
of information, has been seldom utilized for image editing.
Previous works primarily focus on facial editing with only a
few brain attributes as conditions (Davis, de la Torre-Ortiz,
and Ruotsalo 2022), hindering the widespread use. Therefore, we raise the question that how about brain signals as
prompts enable the editing of more generic images?
Although recent advancements in text and image-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14468

