The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ReX: A Framework for Incorporating Temporal Information
in Model-Agnostic Local Explanation Techniques
Junhao Liu, Xin Zhang*
Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University), Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
liujunhao@pku.edu.cn, xin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Input Sentence

Existing local model-agnostic explanation techniques are ineffective for machine learning models that consider inputs of
variable lengths, as they do not consider temporal information embedded in these models. To address this limitation, we
propose R E X, a general framework for incorporating temporal information in these techniques. Our key insight is that
these techniques typically learn a model surrogate by sampling model inputs and outputs, and we can incorporate temporal information in a uniform way by only changing the
sampling process and the surrogate features. We instantiate
our approach on three popular explanation techniques: Anchors, LIME, and Kernel SHAP. To evaluate the effectiveness
of R E X, we apply our approach to six models in three different tasks. Our evaluation results demonstrate that our approach 1) significantly improves the fidelity of explanations,
making model-agnostic techniques outperform a state-of-theart model-specific technique on its target model, and 2) helps
end users better understand the models’ behaviors.

Explanation
Input Sentence
Explanation

II. He never attends any lecture,
so he fails in any exam.
(a) {never, fails}
Negative
(b) {never, fails}
Negative
∧ Posfails − Posnever ≥ 2

Figure 1: Example Anchors explanations (a) and REXaugmented Anchors explanations (b).

to produce faithful explanations that are understandable, or
do not consider it at all and therefore produce explanations
of low fidelity. All existing techniques that consider temporal information are global (Jacobsson 2005; Wang et al.
2018) (e.g. surrogate deterministic finite automatons (Omlin and Giles 1996; Weiss, Goldberg, and Yahav 2018; Dong
et al. 2020)), which explain target models on the whole input
domain (Dwivedi et al. 2023). However, faithful global explanations are complex for real-world models, which renders
them hard for end users to understand, and limits their application in practice. In contrast, local techniques (Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016, 2018; Zhang, Solar-Lezama, and
Singh 2018; Arras et al. 2017; Wachter, Mittelstadt, and
Russell 2017; Lundberg and Lee 2017) explain target models on a particular set of inputs (typically ones that are similar to a given input), so they can produce more tractable and
understandable explanations (Zhang et al. 2021). However,
none of them captures the effect of temporal information,
which leads to low fidelity.
To bridge this gap, we plan to incorporate temporal information into various popular local explanations. Moreover,
to ensure our method can explain a wide range of models,
we focus on local model-agnostic techniques. Towards this
end, we propose R E X, a general framework for incorporating temporal information in various local model-agnostic
explanation techniques.
We take two popular local model-agnostic explanation
techniques, Anchors (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018)
and LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), as examples
to show how our framework improves existing techniques.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.03798

1

I. He never fails in any exam.
(a) {never, fails}
Positive
{never,
fails}
Positive
(b)
∧ Posfails − Posnever = 1

Introduction

As more critical applications employ machine learning models, how to explain the rationales behind these models has
emerged as an important problem. Such explanations allow end users to 1) judge whether the results are trustworthy (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Doshi-Velez et al.
2017) and 2) understand knowledge embedded in the models, so they can use the knowledge to manipulate future
events (Poyiadzi et al. 2020; Prosperi et al. 2020; Zhang,
Solar-Lezama, and Singh 2018). This paper focuses on the
problem of explaining deep models processing sequential
data of variable lengths, such as Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) and Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017; Wolf et al.
2020) including large language models (LLMs) (Touvron
et al. 2023; Achiam et al. 2023).
To faithfully describe the behaviors of these models, it is
important to consider the effect of temporal information, as
the models care about not only the values of features but also
their positions when making decisions. Unfortunately, existing techniques either consider temporal information but fail
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18888

