The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Restabilizing Diffusion Models with Predictive Noise Fusion Strategy
for Image Super-Resolution
Luoqian Jiang1 * , Yong Guo1 * , Bingna Xu1 , Haolin Pan1 , Jiezhang Cao2 , Wenbo Li3 , Jian Chen1†
1

South China University of Technology
2
Harvard University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
seluoqianjiang@mail.scut.edu.cn, guoyongcs@gmail.com, sexbn@mail.scut.edu.cn, mr.haolinpan@qq.com,
jcao16@bwh.harvard.edu, fenglinglwb@gmail.com, ellachen@scut.edu.cn
Abstract

to multiple high-resolution (HR) counterparts, yet the content of each restored HR image must keep consistency with
the LR image. Current DM-based SR approaches leverage
LR images as conditions to restore HR images from Gaussian noise. This randomness enhances diversity but introduces uncertainty detrimental to SR. Most traditional methods tend to use DDPM (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) sampler.
However, DDPM conducts multiple steps e.g. 1000, and becomes very expensive. To address this, DDIM (Song, Meng,
and Ermon 2020) is proposed to accelerate by reducing steps
from 1000 to 100 or 20. Nevertheless, DDIM requires a
random initial noise which inevitably introduces randomness and instability. In practice, DDIM often produces unexpected artifacts. Thus, addressing the instability of DMbased SR methods becomes an important problem.
To investigate the performance of diffusion models under varied initial Gaussian noises, we compare SR results
between SD-Upscaler, LDM, and our method on a single
LR image from the Manga109 dataset. We conducted experiments with a set of 10 Gaussian noises. As shown in
the Figure 1, SD-Upscaler and LDM exhibit significant performance fluctuations under different initial noises, with a
PSNR difference of 4.42 dB between the best and worst results. The visual results corresponding to low PSNR values
contain noticeable errors and artifacts. We obtained these
low-quality results using a few random noises without deliberate selection, indicating that the instability in diffusion
models is far from coincidental. Therefore, it is crucial to
analyze the impact of Gaussian noise on diffusion models
and to address the instability issues.
Research on addressing instability issues in diffusion
models remains limited. Sun et al. (Sun et al. 2023) propose
a non-uniform time-step learning strategy to retrain diffusion models, aiming to improve efficiency and stability. Ma
et al. (Ma et al. 2023) stabilize the sampling process of pretrained diffusion models by solving diffusion partial differential equations using optimal boundary conditions. However, these methods have limitations. Retraining requires
significant computational resources and may not be easily
adaptable to different datasets. Solving diffusion partial differential equations is complex and does not guarantee the
authenticity of HR images. These approaches primarily focus on tuning model structures or optimizing diffusion sampling strategies without adequately addressing the impact of

Diffusion models are prominent in image generation for producing detailed and realistic images from Gaussian noises.
However, they often encounter instability issues in image
restoration tasks, e.g., super-resolution. Existing methods
typically rely on multiple runs to find an initial noise that
produces a reasonably restored image. Unfortunately, these
methods are computationally expensive and time-consuming
without guaranteeing stable and consistent performance. To
address these challenges, we propose a novel Predictive Noise
Fusion Strategy (PNFS) that predicts pixel-wise errors in the
restored image and combines different noises to generate a
more effective noise. Extensive experiments show that PNFS
significantly improves the stability and performance of diffusion models in super-resolution, both quantitatively and qualitatively. Furthermore, PNFS can be flexibly integrated into
various diffusion models to enhance their stability.

Code — https://github.com/Rosiekk/PNFS-main

Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) have significantly advanced generative modeling in recent years (Song and Ermon 2019;
Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon 2020;
Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Nichol and Dhariwal 2021;
Li et al. 2022). Unlike generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2020), they avoid mode collapse
and training instability while offering more compact latent
representations that mitigate blurry in variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013). Their robust
generative power has been demonstrated in tasks like image
super-resolution (SR) (Batzolis et al. 2021; Rombach et al.
2022; Saharia et al. 2022b; Sun et al. 2023), image inpainting (Chung, Sim, and Ye 2022; Esser et al. 2021; Jing et al.
2022), and image editing (Avrahami, Lischinski, and Fried
2022; Choi et al. 2021; Meng et al. 2021).
Diffusion models face unique challenges in SR task. SR is
an ill-posed inverse problem (Wang, Chen, and Hoi 2020),
where a single low-resolution (LR) image can correspond
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author.

4021

