The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Advancing Retrosynthesis with Retrieval-Augmented Graph Generation
Anjie Qiao* 1 , Zhen Wang* †1,2 , Jiahua Rao1 , Yuedong Yang†1 , Zhewei Wei3
1
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Computational Science
3
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
qiaoanj@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {wangzh665,raojh7,yangyd25}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, zhewei@ruc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Diffusion-based molecular graph generative models have
achieved significant success in template-free, single-step retrosynthesis prediction. However, these models typically generate reactants from scratch, often overlooking the fact that
the scaffold of a product molecule typically remains unchanged during chemical reactions. To leverage this useful
observation, we introduce a retrieval-augmented molecular
graph generation framework. Our framework comprises three
key components: a retrieval component that identifies similar
molecules for the given product, an integration component
that learns valuable clues from these molecules about which
part of the product should remain unchanged, and a base generative model that is prompted by these clues to generate the
corresponding reactants. We explore various design choices
for critical and under-explored aspects of this framework
and instantiate it as the Retrieval-Augmented RetroBridge
(RARB). RARB demonstrates state-of-the-art performance
on standard benchmarks, achieving a 14.8% relative improvement in top-1 accuracy over its base generative model, highlighting the effectiveness of retrieval augmentation. Additionally, RARB excels in handling out-of-distribution molecules,
and its advantages remain significant even with smaller models or fewer denoising steps. These strengths make RARB
highly valuable for real-world retrosynthesis applications,
where extrapolation to novel molecules and high-throughput
prediction are essential.

1

Figure 1: Randomly sampled chemical reactions and retrieved molecules similar to the given product, showcasing
the intuition that they can provide clues about which parts of
the product should remain unchanged.

Many existing methods formulate this prediction task as
a sequence-to-sequence translation problem based on the
SMILES (Weininger 1988) of reactants and products (Zheng
et al. 2019; Tetko et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2021; Wan et al.
2022; Zhong et al. 2022; Zeng et al. 2024; Han et al.
2024). Despite their advantages, such as simplicity and efficiency, representing molecules as sequences can lose important structural information from the molecular graph, which
might lead to less accurate predictions (Shi et al. 2020).
However, turning to graph-to-graph translation problem
is not a free lunch since graph generation is challenging, mainly due to the combinatorial nature of graph data
that often results in a high intrinsic dimension. As even a
single error in predicting a bond or atom type can make
the whole synthesized graph incorrect, traditional one-shot
graph generation methods struggle to achieve satisfactory
performance (Igashov et al. 2024). Recently, diffusion models have become the state-of-the-art for molecular graph
generation, where an iterative process decomposes the original one-shot generation into a series of small graph edits (Vignac et al. 2023). Therefore, some recent works utilize diffusion models to frame retrosynthesis prediction as a conditional graph generation problem, achieving unprecedented
successes (Wang et al. 2023; Laabid et al. 2024; Igashov
et al. 2024).
Although the decomposition strategy of diffusion models

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning methods have shown great
promise in accelerating the de novo drug discovery process (Blakemore et al. 2018). A crucial stage of this process is retrosynthesis prediction—designing the synthesis
routes that can lead to the target molecules through a series of chemical reactions (Strieth-Kalthoff et al. 2020). In
this paper, we focus on template-free, single-step prediction,
namely identifying direct precursor(s) of a given product
molecule, which can serve as a building block in designing the entire synthesis pathway (Segler, Preuss, and Waller
2018; Zhong et al. 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20004

