The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Heuristic-free Knowledge Distillation for Streaming ASR via Multi-modal
Training
Ji Won Yoon
Department of AI, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, South Korea.
jiwonyoon@cau.ac.kr

Abstract

distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2014; Bucila,
Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006). In the context of KD
for streaming ASR, the non-streaming and streaming models are typically adopted as the teacher and student, respectively. Since non-streaming models benefit from having access to the entire speech utterance, they can offer more accurate hypotheses, thus producing better knowledge for the
ASR task. By leveraging the knowledge from a powerful offline teacher during training, the online student can improve
its performance compared to its baseline, which is trained
solely with ground truth.
Despite the widespread adoption of KD for streaming
ASR, most existing methods share a common limitation:
they manually shift the output of the non-streaming teacher
in a heuristic manner (Yang, Li, and Woodland 2022;
Weninger et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2021b). Since the nonstreaming model (teacher) has no incentive to delay its output, its predictions usually have lower latency compared to
those of the streaming model (student). Due to significant
misalignment between the teacher and student models, it has
been confirmed that naive frame-to-frame KD can misguide
the streaming student (Yu et al. 2021b; Inaguma and Kawahara 2021; Liang et al. 2023). Therefore, the teacher’s predictions are typically required to be shifted by τ frames before being transferred to the student model. Here, the shifting parameter τ is determined heuristically. Setting a sensible value for τ is crucial for successful knowledge transfer,
as the performance of the student model varies with different
τ values (Yang, Li, and Woodland 2022).
In this paper, we observe that using a fixed parameter τ for KD is sub-optimal and introduce a novel framework for streaming ASR, namely Heuristic-free KD. Specifically, Heuristic-free KD encapsulates two key components.
First, we employ a self-distillation setup for streaming ASR,
which aims at distilling the knowledge within the streaming
architecture itself without any extra non-streaming teacher.
Rather than extracting knowledge from the non-streaming
teacher, the proposed teacher and student share the same
streaming ASR model parameters, ensuring that the framelevel alignment from the teacher is highly similar to that
of the student. This allows the teacher’s knowledge to be
transferred without requiring any time shifting by τ . Second, we incorporate full-context textual information as an
auxiliary multi-modal input for the proposed teacher. In par-

Existing knowledge distillation (KD) studies for streaming
automatic speech recognition (ASR) adopt a non-streaming
model as the teacher and a streaming model as the student,
respectively. Since the non-streaming teacher usually has
less emission latency compared to the streaming student, the
teacher’s prediction is typically shifted by τ frames, where
the parameter τ is selected heuristically. In this paper, we observe that this manual shifting is sub-optimal and propose
a novel framework, namely Heuristic-free KD. Instead of
leveraging knowledge from the non-streaming teacher model,
we employ a self-distillation setup, distilling the knowledge
within the streaming architecture itself. Since the teacher and
student share the same streaming ASR backbone, the alignment mismatch issue can be effectively mitigated without requiring any time shifting by τ . Additionally, we incorporate
full-context textual information as an auxiliary multi-modal
input for the proposed teacher. Although the streaming architecture lacks future context, the additional linguistic input enables it to generate more accurate knowledge for selfdistillation. We empirically demonstrate that the proposed
KD approach significantly improves the performance of the
streaming ASR model, outperforming conventional methods
that rely on the offline teacher and heuristic parameter.

Introduction
In recent years, a streaming automatic speech recognition
(ASR) framework has attracted significant attention for its
ability to transcribe spoken language into text in real time.
Such capability is crucial for enhancing interactions with
various applications, including real-time captioning, on-thefly language translation, voice command recognition, and dialogue systems, by providing immediate feedback and interactions. However, despite its potential, the streaming ASR
model often underperforms compared to its non-streaming
(a.k.a. offline or full-context) counterpart. This performance
degradation stems from a significant constraint: streaming
ASR lacks future context, a limitation designed to minimize
the delay between spoken input and textual output. Improving performance has proven to be challenging in streaming
ASR (He et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Sainath et al. 2020).
To bridge the gap between offline and online ASR models, there have been numerous efforts to adopt knowledge
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25733

