The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PRAGA: Prototype-aware Graph Adaptive Aggregation for Spatial
Multi-modal Omics Analysis
Xinlei Huang1, 2 , Zhiqi Ma1, 3 , Dian Meng1 , Yanran Liu1, 4 , Shiwei Ruan1 ,
Qingqiang Sun1 , Xubin Zheng1, 2, * , Ziyue Qiao1
2

1
School of Computing and Information Technology, Great Bay University, Dongguan, 523000, China
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mathematical and Neural Dynamical Systems, Dongguan, 523000, China
3
School of Medicine, The Chinese University of HongKong (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, 518000, China
4
College of Business, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 999077, China
xbzheng@gbu.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatial multi-modal omics technology, highlighted by Nature
Methods as an advanced biological technique in 2023, plays a
critical role in resolving biological regulatory processes with
spatial context. Recently, graph neural networks based on Knearest neighbor (KNN) graphs have gained prominence in
spatial multi-modal omics methods due to their ability to
model semantic relations between sequencing spots. However, the fixed KNN graph fails to capture the latent semantic relations hidden by the inevitable data perturbations during the biological sequencing process, resulting in the loss of
semantic information. In addition, the common lack of spot
annotation and class number priors in practice further hinders the optimization of spatial multi-modal omics models.
Here, we propose a novel spatial multi-modal omics resolved
framework, termed PRototype-Aware Graph Adaptative Aggregation (PRAGA). PRAGA constructs a dynamic graph to
capture latent semantic relations and comprehensively integrate spatial information and feature semantics. The learnable graph structure can also denoise perturbations by learning cross-modal knowledge. Moreover, a dynamic prototype
contrastive learning is proposed based on the dynamic adaptability of Bayesian Gaussian Mixture Models to optimize the
multi-modal omics representations for unknown biological
priors. Quantitative and qualitative experiments on simulated
and real datasets with 7 competing methods demonstrate the
superior performance of PRAGA.

















 

  

Figure 1: Visualization of adjacency graph of random anchor
spots on the Human Lymph Node dataset. (a) highlights the
spots with the same cell type. (b) and (c) shows the related
spots found by spatial and feature adjacency KNN graphs,
respectively. (d) shows the potential relevant spots revealed
by our proposed dynamic omic-specific graph.

The major challenge in spatial multi-modal omics is how
to encode omics features from different modalities with corresponding spatial information into a unified latent space.
Existing methods mainly build K-nearest neighbor (KNN)
graphs to model the feature correlation with spatial positions
between sequencing spots and generate unified comprehensive representations through Graph Neural Networks. For instance, the spatial transcriptomic method STAGATE (Dong
and Zhang 2022) utilizes KNN to construct a spatial adjacency graph for encoded transcriptomics data. Spatial multimodal omics method SpatialGlue (Long et al. 2024) constructs the omics KNN graph as well as spatial adjacency
graph for each modality separately and obtains a comprehensive latent representation through GCN (Kipf and
Welling 2016). However, these methods ignore the interference in semantic relations caused by the perturbations inevitably introduced during the biological sequencing process, which KNN fails to overcome due to the artificially
set K value limit.
Technically, the current single-cell sequencing technology inevitably introduces perturbations in the sequencing
data due to biological variation and other uncontrollable
factors. These perturbations hide some informative seman-

Code — https://github.com/Xubin-s-Lab/PRAGA

Introduction
Spatially resolved transcriptomics was crown as the Method
of the Year by Nature (Xiaowei 2021). This technology expanded the biological view of the gene expression abundance in single cells to spatial context, deciphering cell types
and the heterogeneity in complex tissues. Recently, spatially
resolved multi-modal omics, including transcriptomics, proteomics, and chromatin accessibility, were proposed to aggregate these modalities for comprehensively resolving gene
regulation and microenvironment with spatial information in
complex tissues (Li et al. 2024; Long et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

326

