The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Multi-Robot Semantic Navigation Through Multimodal
Chain-of-Thought Score Collaboration
Zhixuan Shen, Haonan Luo* , Kexun Chen, Fengmao Lv, Tianrui Li
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University, China
{shenzx29, chenkexun}@my.swjtu.edu.cn, {lhn, trli}@swjtu.edu.cn, fengmaolv@126.com

VLM multimodal CoT

Abstract

MCoCoNav
Building
global
map

Understanding how humans cooperatively utilize semantic
knowledge to explore unfamiliar environments and decide on
navigation directions is critical for house service multi-robot
systems. Previous methods primarily focused on single-robot
centralized planning strategies, which severely limited exploration efficiency. Recent research has considered decentralized planning strategies for multiple robots, assigning separate planning models to each robot, but these approaches
often overlook communication costs. In this work, we propose Multimodal Chain-of-Thought Co-Navigation (MCoCoNav), a modular approach that utilizes multimodal Chainof-Thought to plan collaborative semantic navigation for multiple robots. MCoCoNav combines visual perception with Vision Language Models (VLMs) to evaluate exploration value
through probabilistic scoring, thus reducing time costs and
achieving stable outputs. Additionally, a global semantic map
is used as a communication bridge, minimizing communication overhead while integrating observational results. Guided
by scores that reflect exploration trends, robots utilize this
map to assess whether to explore new frontier points or revisit history nodes. Experiments on HM3D v0.2 and MP3D
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

The room is painted in
a light color, which
gives it a clean and
minimalistic look.
...
CoT

Invalid
information

I can't tell if it's
worth exploring.

Perception Score
Sending Local
Map
Judgment

CoT

Judgment Score

Starting Point

A

Robot

Decision
Decision Score
(History Nodes)

History Node
Robot Pose

B
A
C

(a) VLM multimodal CoT

Frontier
Goal

(b) MCoCoNav

Figure 1: Examples of (a) VLM multimodal CoT reasoning
and (b) MCoCoNav cross-image multimodal CoT reasoning. Our MCoCoNav utilizes cross-image multimodal CoT
to facilitate robots’ simultaneous understanding of scene
perspectives and the global semantic map for effective zeroshot multi-robot semantic navigation.
To establish a structured navigation cooperation framework for multiple robots, centralized planning strategies (Zhao et al. 2024; Agashe, Fan, and Wang 2023; Yu,
Kasaei, and Cao 2023a; Chen et al. 2023b) map all robots’
observations, histories, and other pertinent information to a
unified channel, with a single planning model tasked with
assigning objectives to each robot group or individual. However, as the complexity of the environment and the number
of robots increases, the information processing burden on
the planning model significantly escalates. Alternatively, decentralized planning strategies (Chen et al. 2023b; Ying et al.
2024; Liu et al. 2023; Wang, He, and Kantaros 2024) assign
each robot an individual ”brain” for independent reasoning,
allowing the robots to communicate and share information
about explored areas similarly to how humans do. These
approaches facilitate the connection between new discoveries and previously explored regions, enabling adaptive decisions. By distributing the information generated by multiple
robots across various planning models, the burden of decision is alleviated. Nevertheless, the decentralized planning
strategy is still limited due to the substantial communication

Introduction
The capability to navigate to designated goals is crucial
for house service robots, enabling them to effectively find
designated objects in unfamiliar indoor environments and
complete various subsequent tasks. Consequently, the Object Goal Navigation (ObjectNav) (Du, Yu, and Zheng 2020;
Mayo, Hazan, and Tal 2021; Chaplot et al. 2020) task has
garnered significant attention. Traditional ObjectNav tasks
require robots to be navigated to user-specified categories of
objects in an unseen and unmapped environment based on
visual observations. Given that the environment is invisible
to all robots, they must collaboratively infer potential positions where the goals may appear. This necessitates effective communication and cooperation among multiple robots
(e.g., conflict-free communication and global planning after communication), enabling them to make corresponding
decisions based on the observed visual cues.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14664

