The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network on Semantic Tree
Mingyu Guan1 , Jack W. Stokes2 , Qinlong Luo2 , Fuchen Liu2 , Purvanshi Mehta3 , Elnaz Nouri2 ,
Taesoo Kim1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology,
2
Microsoft Corporation,
3
Lica World Inc
mingyu.guan@gatech.edu, {jstokes, qinlongluo, fuchen.liu}@microsoft.com, purvanshi@lica.world, elnaaz@gmail.com,
taesoo@gatech.edu
Abstract
The recent past has seen an increasing interest in Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks (HGNNs), since many realworld graphs are heterogeneous in nature, from citation graphs
to email graphs. However, existing methods ignore a tree hierarchy among metapaths, naturally constituted by different
node types and relation types. In this paper, we present H ETT REE, a novel HGNN that models both the graph structure
and heterogeneous aspects in a scalable and effective manner.
Specifically, H ET T REE builds a semantic tree data structure to
capture the hierarchy among metapaths. To effectively encode
the semantic tree, H ET T REE uses a novel subtree attention
mechanism to emphasize metapaths that are more helpful in
encoding parent-child relationships. Moreover, H ET T REE proposes carefully matching pre-computed features and labels
correspondingly, constituting a complete metapath representation. Our evaluation of H ET T REE on a variety of real-world
datasets demonstrates that it outperforms all existing baselines
on open benchmarks and efficiently scales to large real-world
graphs with millions of nodes and edges.

Code — https://github.com/microsoft/HetTree

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely explored
in a variety of domains from social networks to molecular
properties (Pal et al. 2020; Park et al. 2019; Sun, Dai, and Yu
2022), where graphs are usually modeled as homogeneous
graphs. However, real-world graphs are often heterogeneous
in nature (Hu et al. 2020a; Lv et al. 2021). For example,
as shown in Figure 1(a), a heterogeneous email graph can
include multiple types of nodes - Domain, Sender, Recipient,
Message, and IP Address - and the relations among them.
Moreover, multiple relations can exist between two entities
in complex heterogeneous graphs. For example, a Sender
node can be a P1 sender and/or P2 sender of a Message,
where the P1 sender denotes the entity that actually sent the
message while an email application displays the P2 sender
as the “From” address. For example, if Bob sends an email
on behalf of Alice, the email appears to originate from Alice,
making Alice the P2 sender and Bob the P1 sender. As a
result, there are two relations between Sender and Message
in Figure 1(a), p1 sends and p2 sends.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16924

To better understand real-world heterogeneous graphs, various heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNNs) have
been proposed. The most well-known approaches are the
metapath-based methods (Schlichtkrull et al. 2017; Wang
et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2020), which first aggregate neighbor representations along each metapath at the node level
and then aggregate these representations across metapaths
at the metapath (semantic) level. However, metapath-based
approaches often involve manual effort to select a subset
of meaningful metapaths, because the node-level aggregation along each metapath is computationally expensive (Fu
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019). Other models that do not
apply the metapath method, such as HetGNN (Zhang et al.
2019) and HGT (Hu et al. 2020b), carefully encode representations for different node types and/or relation types in
heterogeneous graphs. These fine-grained embedding methods often utilize multi-layer message-passing techniques as
in traditional GNNs, thus facing scalability issues. To efficiently model real-world web-scale graphs, researchers and
practitioners have explored various ways to scale HGNNs.
Sampling-based methods sample sub-graphs with different
strategies (Hu et al. 2020b; Zhang et al. 2019), while others
use model simplification to execute feature propagation as
a pre-processing stage before training (Yu et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2022).
However, existing HGNNs fail to account for a tree hierarchy among the metapaths. A metapath represents an
ordered sequence of composite relationships connecting distinct or identical node types (Definition 3.2). For instance, as
p1 sends

illustrated in Figure 1(a), the metapath Sender −−−−−→
is sent f rom

M essage −−−−−−−−→ IP is intuitively more closely
p1 sends

associated with Sender −−−−−→ M essage than with
s has domain of
Sender −−−−−−−−−−−→ Domain due to a greater overlap
in node types and relationships. This overlap can be conceptualized as a parent-child relationship, where the parent
metapath serves as a prefix to its child metapaths. Consequently, these parent-child relationships naturally form a tree
hierarchy among the metapaths.
The exploration of tree structures in heterogeneous graphs
is not a new topic, as several tree-based HGNNs have investigated this concept. However, existing tree-based HGNNs (Xu
et al. 2021; Wu and Wang 2022; Qiao et al. 2020) pri-

