The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual-Channel Interactive Graph Transformer for Traffic Classification with
Message-Aware Flow Representation
Xing Qiu1 , Guang Cheng1,2,3 * , Weizhou Zhu1 , Dandan Niu1 , Nan Fu1
1

Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Purple Mountain Laboratories, China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratories, China
{230218524, chengguang, 220224855, 220215222, 230229203}@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Traffic classification is crucial for network management and
security. Recently, deep learning-based methods have demonstrated good performance in traffic classification. However,
they primarily capture features from raw packet bytes, overlooking the significance of inter-packet correlations within
flows from a global perspective. Additionally, effectively handling both packet-length and temporal information, while extracting the structural relationships from a graph into the
model, remains a challenge for enhancing the performance
of traffic prediction. In this paper, we propose DigTraffic, a
novel dual-channel interactive graph transformer to address
these limitations. DigTraffic employs a message-level graphstructured flow representation combined with message-aware
structural aggregation. To learn intrinsic flow representations,
DigTraffic constructs traffic interaction graphs, by incorporating three well-designed heterogeneous types of edges to
capture client-server interactions. After that, we separately
encode lengthy and temporal flow sequences using a dualchannel network and fuse these modalities within a Transformer architecture. Furthermore, DigTraffic introduces a
message-aware Graph Transformer that leverages both node
embeddings and edge spatial relations to capture complex
graph structures and rich structural information. Experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on four real-world traffic
datasets.

Figure 1: The construction of Message-level Traffic Interaction Graphs (MTIG)

and anonymous network technologies complicates analysis,
making the accurate classification of complex traffic patterns
difficult. To build a refined traffic analyzer for more precise
classification, it is crucial to mine latent and robust representation within both traffic flows and message interactions.
Traditional traffic analysis methods employ hand-crafted
features to train Machine Learning (ML) classifiers, requiring significant manual effort and resources to construct specific traffic features. They may also result in severe overfitting due to their heavy reliance on specific traffic features and particular communication patterns. Alternatively,
Deep Learning (DL) techniques can automatically extract
features from raw traffic packets, and effectively leverage
underlying interactive information in message transmission
(Zhao et al. 2022b). However, those DL-based methods lack
the ability to represent semantic relationships between packets on a global insight, causing performance instability. Besides, simultaneously integrating lengthy and temporal features from traffic modalities to holistically guide the model
poses a significant challenge. Therefore, a graph-level flow
representation of transmitted packets is necessary to capture
the full range of interactive messages across modalities.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various domains, particularly in Computer

Code — https://github.com/SeuXing/DigTraffic

1

Introduction

Traffic classification has become a vital technique, allowing third-party passive observers to identify application categories from encrypted traffic. Understanding traffic content enables network operators to swiftly apply tailored
network management strategies, enhancing service quality and user experience while supporting diverse business
goals (Panchenko et al. 2016). Moreover, such advancements could infer more granular user privacy, including
online shopping behaviors and even insights into political inclinations. However, rising usage of encrypted traffic
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

685

