The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ALADE-SNN: Adaptive Logit Alignment in Dynamically Expandable Spiking
Neural Networks for Class Incremental Learning
Wenyao Ni1,2 , Jiangrong Shen3,1,2 * , Qi Xu4 , Huajin Tang1,2 *
1

State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology
2

Abstract

resemble the workings of biological neurons through their
event-driven processing, efficient synaptic plasticity and rich
spatiotemporal dynamics, present a promising avenue for
achieving biologically plausible continual learning (Maass
1997; Pei et al. 2019; Subbulakshmi R et al. 2021; Shi, Hao,
and Yu 2024; Xu et al. 2024a; Yang et al. 2024). In this paper, we focus on designing novel continual learning method
for SNNs, by leveraging insights from dynamic neural architectures and neural activity redistribution.
Among continual learning scenarios, class-incremental
learning (CIL) requires the network agents to fit new tasks
arriving incrementally and always to perform well among
the whole encountered task space, which makes it the most
challenging scenario. In CIL, the conflict between learning
new knowledge and retaining old ones is crucial for the overall performance (Shen et al. 2024). Hence, it is necessary to
optimize task-specific subspace when learning new classes
without disturbing old classes.
To address the issue of catastrophic forgetting in CIL, several methods have been proposed for traditional deep neural
networks. Wherein, dynamic network methods can achieve
superior results in CIL scenarios by expanding network
structures to adapt representation ability of new classes, thus
eliminating dependencies on parameter masks and prior task
information. Meanwhile, in the realm of SNNs, efforts to
tackle continual learning challenges based on combinations
of dynamic networks (Chen et al. 2022; Shi et al. 2024;
Shen et al. 2023, 2021) and other data replay methods have
led to innovative approaches, such as DSD-SNN and SORSNN (Han et al. 2023b,a). Despite significant advancements,
the problem of unbalanced task cognition, which is caused
by the limited number of memory samples during the rehearsal process of the learned task, still hurts. Although
some techniques have been used to alleviate that problem,
those methods tend to introduce hyper-parameters related to
tasks (Wang et al. 2022) or rely solely on rough intuition
(Yan, Xie, and He 2021) that does not adequately address
that problem and finally cause the insufficient effectiveness
of those approaches. Addressing this imbalance is crucial for
improving the efficacy of continual learning models.
Therefore, based on the insights above, our research focuses on developing a novel CIL model tailored specifically
for SNNs by leveraging insights from neural architecture reconfiguration and neural activity redistribution in the brain.

Inspired by the human brain’s ability to adapt to new tasks
without erasing prior knowledge, we develop spiking neural
networks (SNNs) with dynamic structures for Class Incremental Learning (CIL). Our comparative experiments reveal
that limited datasets introduce biases in logits distributions
among tasks. Fixed features from frozen past-task extractors
can cause overfitting and hinder the learning of new tasks.
To address these challenges, we propose the ALADE-SNN
framework, which includes adaptive logit alignment for balanced feature representation and OtoN suppression to manage weights mapping frozen old features to new classes during training, releasing them during fine-tuning. This approach
dynamically adjusts the network architecture based on analytical observations, improving feature extraction and balancing performance between new and old tasks. The experimental results show that ALADE-SNN achieves an average
incremental accuracy of 75.42 ± 0.74% on the CIFAR100B0 benchmark over 10 incremental steps. ALADE-SNN not
only matches the performance of DNN-based methods but
also surpasses state-of-the-art SNN-based continual learning
algorithms. This advancement enhances continual learning in
neuromorphic computing, offering a brain-inspired, energyefficient solution for real-time data processing.

Introduction
The human brain exemplifies a sophisticated system utilizing synaptic plasticity to adapt neural circuits to new tasks,
without erasing previously stored knowledge during new
learning (Bassett et al. 2011). This ability, known as lifelong learning, is crucial for survival in dynamic environments (Yang, Pan, and Gan 2009; Kudithipudi et al. 2022).
These processes involve the dynamic reorganization of neural circuits and the redistribution of neural activities, allowing the brain to allocate resources more efficiently in response to varying task complexities, thereby facilitating cognitive functions. However, current deep learning algorithms
always cause the networks to quickly fall into catastrophic
forgetting (French 1999) when learning new tasks. Inspired
by the biological comuting processes, researchers aim to
develop artificial neural networks that can mimic this ability. Spiking neural networks (SNNs), which more closely
* Corresponding author: jrshen@zju.edu.cn, htang@zju.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19712

