The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Advancing Comprehensive Aesthetic Insight with Multi-Scale Text-Guided
Self-Supervised Learning
Yuti Liu* , Shice Liu* , Junyuan Gao, Pengtao Jiang, Hao Zhang, Jinwei Chen, Bo Li†
vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China
{kira66arik* , junyuangao577}@gmail.com; {liushice* , pt.jiang, haozhang, jinwei.chen, libra† }@vivo.com

Abstract

Recently, Personalized Image Aesthetic Assessment (PIAA)
has emerged as a burgeoning field, which aims to predict an
individual’s aesthetic preferences based on his historical image scoring. While effective in certain scenarios, approaches
focusing on a single task often fail to address linkages between different tasks, suffering from overfitting to specific
tasks. This realization has inspired us to prioritize holistic
aesthetic analysis and comprehension in our research efforts.
Recently, MLLMs have demonstrated strong comprehension and reasoning abilities across various domains. Models
such as VILA (Ke et al. 2023), Q-Align (Wu et al. 2023),
and UNIAA (Zhou et al. 2024) have also attempted to utilize MLLMs for IAA to compensate for perceptual and reasoning processes. However, two major obstacles limit their
effectiveness. First, these models rely solely on semantic
features, neglecting a wealth of valuable aesthetic information. Second, despite efforts by Q-Align and UNIAA to
construct aesthetic question-answer pairs for enhancement,
the scarcity of labeled data and the presence of potentially
mislabeled data continue to restrict their performance. Consequently, integrating comprehensive aesthetic information
into MLLMs and developing a refined learning strategy to
accurately leverage massive image data are essential.
In this paper, we propose Comprehensive Aesthetic Large
language Model (CALM) which excels in various IAA tasks
and demonstrates deep aesthetic comprehension and analytical skills in dialogues. Fig. 1 illustrates the functional differences between CALM and other IAA models.
Inspired by popular MLLMs, CALM incorporates a visual encoder, a Multi-scale Feature Alignment Module
(MFAM) and a Large Language Model (LLM). Recognizing
that mainstream visual encoders and LLMs excel at feature
extraction and language expression, we have focused our efforts on the MFAM to ensure that the subsequent LLM can
fully leverage a broader spectrum of aesthetic information
provided by the visual encoder. To achieve this, we introduce
a multi-scale text-guided self-supervised learning technique.
Specifically, the MFAM is designed to structurally access
aesthetic features at multiple levels, while text-guided selfsupervised learning enables the MFAM to benefit from unlabeled data. Unlike previous aesthetic self-supervised approaches that rely on score pseudo-labels, our method uses
attribute-related textual pseudo-labels. This change ensures
accurate learning and simplifies the integration of pseudo-

Image Aesthetic Assessment (IAA) is a vital and intricate
task that entails analyzing and assessing an image’s aesthetic
values, and identifying its highlights and areas for improvement. Traditional methods of IAA often concentrate on a single aesthetic task and suffer from inadequate labeled datasets,
thus impairing in-depth aesthetic comprehension. Despite efforts to overcome this challenge through the application of
Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs), such models remain underdeveloped for IAA purposes. To address this,
we propose a comprehensive aesthetic MLLM capable of nuanced aesthetic insight. Central to our approach is an innovative multi-scale text-guided self-supervised learning technique. This technique features a multi-scale feature alignment module and capitalizes on a wealth of unlabeled data
in a self-supervised manner to structurally and functionally
enhance aesthetic ability. The empirical evidence indicates
that accompanied with extensive instruct-tuning, our model
sets new state-of-the-art benchmarks across multiple tasks,
including aesthetic scoring, aesthetic commenting, and personalized image aesthetic assessment. Remarkably, it also
demonstrates zero-shot learning capabilities in the emerging
task of aesthetic suggesting. Furthermore, for personalized
image aesthetic assessment, we harness the potential of incontext learning and showcase its inherent advantages.

1

Introduction

As artificial intelligence evolves, there’s a growing demand
for agents to mimic human perception and exhibit emotional
responses to their surroundings. IAA emerges as a key area
within this scope, and gauges images’ aesthetic appeal akin
to human judgment. Its complexity lies in its subjectivity,
governed by factors like photographic subjects and personal
experiences, which makes IAA a challenging endeavor.
In the last decade, IAA has been concretized into a variety of tasks. EAT (He et al. 2023b) predicts aesthetics based
on a single human-assigned score per image—a task known
as Aesthetic Scoring (AS). Meanwhile, CWS (Ghosal et al.
2019) assesses an image’s aesthetic appeal directly through
language, which is referred to Aesthetic Commenting (AC).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

This author is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5748

