The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GoHD: Gaze-oriented and Highly Disentangled Portrait Animation with
Rhythmic Poses and Realistic Expressions
Ziqi Zhou1,2 , Weize Quan1,2 * , Hailin Shi3 , Wei Li4 , Lili Wang5 , Dong-Ming Yan1,2
1

MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
NIO
4
Banma
5
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
Gaze Orient.

Abstract
Audio-driven talking head generation necessitates seamless
integration of audio and visual data amidst the challenges
posed by diverse input portraits and intricate correlations between audio and facial motions. In response, we propose a robust framework GoHD designed to produce highly realistic,
expressive, and controllable portrait videos from any reference identity with any motion. GoHD innovates with three
key modules: Firstly, an animation module utilizing latent
navigation is introduced to improve the generalization ability across unseen input styles. This module achieves high
disentanglement of motion and identity, and it also incorporates gaze orientation to rectify unnatural eye movements
that were previously overlooked. Secondly, a conformerstructured conditional diffusion model is designed to guarantee head poses that are aware of prosody. Thirdly, to estimate
lip-synchronized and realistic expressions from the input audio within limited training data, a two-stage training strategy is devised to decouple frequent and frame-wise lip motion distillation from the generation of other more temporally
dependent but less audio-related motions, e.g., blinks and
frowns. Extensive experiments validate GoHD’s advanced
generalization capabilities, demonstrating its effectiveness in
generating realistic talking face results on arbitrary subjects.

Identity 2

𝐠 = 0, 0

𝐠 = 0, 0.3

𝐠 = 0, −0.3

Driving Audio

Figure 1: Illustration of gaze orientation experiments. The
results of two identities driven by the same audio clip and
different gaze directions are presented. The true pitch and
yaw angles are multiplied by π.
2021; Ji et al. 2022). In addition to the difficulties in generating audio-synchronized lip motions, there are challenges in
accurately estimating other spontaneous motions like head
poses and eye motions, often resulting in poor performance
(Zhou et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2023) or reliance on another
reference video (Zhou et al. 2021; Ji et al. 2022; Ma et al.
2023a,b), which is not available in most scenarios. Consequently, crafting a robust portrait animation framework that
is effective for all types of input portraits and can independently generate satisfactory talking motions remains an unresolved issue.
Therefore, to devise a novel talking face system that can
generalize well to any initial identities with various facial
motions, several challenges remain to be addressed: 1) The
input portraits may vary significantly in terms of appearance, expression, and other factors, requiring the system to
learn a robust representation of facial features and movements that can be applied to new, unseen subjects. Animating techniques of current methods (Wang et al. 2021; Ji
et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2020) fail to fully disentangle identity and motion, resulting in poor generalization and distortions, especially when applied to out-of-distribution images
with rich expressions. 2) Existing implicit or explicit motion representation methods (Deng et al. 2019; Zhou et al.
2021; Yu et al. 2023) for facial animation encounter limitations in gaze orientation, inevitably creating unnatural looking directions in the generated videos. 3) The intricate map-

Code — https://github.com/Jia1018/GoHD

1

Identity 1

Introduction

Audio-driven portrait animation, widely applied in social
media and mixed reality contexts like avatar creation and
teleconferencing, has made notable progress fueled by artificial intelligence (Chen et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2021; Prajwal et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2023;
Yu et al. 2023; Tian et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024; Drobyshev
et al. 2024). However, various problems persist in existing
animation methods. Specifically, some struggle with maintaining natural mouth shapes when animating exaggerated
expressions (Zhou et al. 2020; Prajwal et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2023), while others encounter severe warping distortions and identity alternations for unseen data (Wang et al.
* Corresponding author: qweizework@gmail.com.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10914

