The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revisiting Attention for Multivariate Time Series Forecasting
Haixiang Wu
School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China
2232208015@stmail.ujs.edu.cn

Abstract
Current Transformer methods for Multivariate Time-Series
Forecasting (MTSF) are all based on the conventional attention mechanism. They involve sequence embedding and performing a linear projection for Q, K, and V, and then computing attention within this latent space. We have not yet delved
into the attention mechanism to explore whether such a mapping space is optimal for MTSF. To investigate this issue,
we first propose Frequency Spectrum attention (FSatten), a
novel attention mechanism based on the frequency domain
space. It employs the Fourier transform for embedding and
introduces Multi-head Spectrum Scaling (MSS) to replace the
conventional linear mapping for Q and K. FSatten can accurately capture the periodic dependencies between sequences
and outperform the conventional attention, without necessitating changes to mainstream architectures. We further design a more general method dubbed Scaled Orthogonal attention (SOatten). We propose an orthogonal embedding and a
Head-Coupling Convolution (HCC) based on the neighboring similarity bias to guide the model in learning comprehensive dependency patterns. Experiments show that FSatten and
SOatten surpass the SOTA which uses conventional attention,
making it a good alternative as a basic attention mechanism
for MTSF.

Figure 1: Performance of FSatten and SOatten.

Introduction

upon these architectures. We aim to understand where these
correlations between sequences manifest. In the attention
mechanism, sequences are mapped to a learnable space by
embedding and linear projection, and then the correlations
are calculated within this latent space. Although we cannot
provide physical interpretations for the learned characteristics of black-box neural networks, it is worth considering
whether the dependency capturing within this latent space is
optimal.
To explore the interpretability of time-series attention and
make further improvements for MTSF, we propose Frequency Spectrum attention (FSatten), which is based on the
frequency domain space. The consideration is that dependencies between non-stationary sequences are complex and
can be synchronous or asynchronous at different frequencies. It is appropriate to consider these dependencies from
the frequency domain perspective, as previous works have
made improvements (Zhou et al. 2022) (Xu, Zeng, and Xu
2023). In FSatten, Fourier transform is utilized for the embedding, and Query and Key are projected by a proposed

Multivariate Time Series Forecasting (MTSF) is extensively
applied in real-world scenarios such as finance, electricity, and transportation. Benefiting from the attention mechanism’s (Vaswani et al. 2017) ability to effectively capture
both long- and short-term dependencies, many Transformerbased methods have demonstrated remarkable performance.
These methods mainly include the Temporal Transformer,
which evolves from applying attention between time steps
(Zhou et al. 2021) (Li et al. 2019) (Liu et al. 2021) to applying attention between subseries (Wu et al. 2021) (Zhou et al.
2022) (Nie et al. 2022), and the Variate Transformer, which
explicitly models the correlations between variates through
attention (Zhang and Yan 2022) (Liu et al. 2023).
Temporal and Variate Transformers, as shown in Figure
2, primarily apply attention mechanisms to time series sequences and have become mainstream, with many subsequent studies (Zhou et al. 2023) (Jin et al. 2023) building
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21528

