The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CITI: Enhancing Tool Utilizing Ability in Large Language Models Without
Sacrificing General Performance
Yupu Hao1, 2 , Pengfei Cao1, 2 , Zhuoran Jin1, 2 , Huanxuan Liao1, 2 , Yubo Chen1, 2 ,
Kang Liu1, 2, 3 * , Jun Zhao1, 2
1

The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{haoyupu2023, liaohuanxuan2023}@ia.ac.cn, {pengfei.cao, zhuoran.jin, yubo.chen, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
100
80
60
40
20
0

Accuracy

Tool learning enables Large Language Models (LLMs) to interact with the external environment by invoking tools, enriching the accuracy and capability scope of LLMs. However, previous works predominantly focus on improving the
model’s tool-utilizing accuracy and the ability to generalize
to new, unseen tools, excessively forcing LLMs to adjust specific tool-invoking pattern without considering the harm to
the model’s general performance. This deviates from the actual applications and original intention of integrating tools
to enhance the model. To tackle this problem, we dissect
the capability trade-offs by examining the hidden representation changes and the gradient-based importance score of
the model’s components. Based on the analysis result, we
propose a Component Importance-based Tool-utilizing ability Injection method (CITI). According to the gradient-based
importance score of different components, it alleviates the capability conflicts caused by the fine-tuning process by applying distinct training strategies to different components. CITI
applies Mixture-Of-LoRA (MOLoRA) for important components. Meanwhile, it fine-tunes the parameters of a few components deemed less important in the backbone of the LLM,
while keeping other parameters frozen. CITI can effectively
enhance the model’s tool-utilizing capability without excessively compromising its general performance. Experimental
results demonstrate that our approach achieves outstanding
performance across a range of evaluation metrics.

Figure 1: The model’s performance in tool-utilizing and general tasks, FT represents full parameter fine-tuning on the
dataset API-Bank (Li et al. 2023b).

interest in enabling LLMs to interact with the external environment by equipping various tools (Qin et al. 2024; Schick
et al. 2023; Gao et al. 2023a; Chen et al. 2023; Nakano et al.
2022; Lu et al. 2023).
There have been a substantial number of benchmarks
evaluating different tool-utilizing aspects (Ye et al. 2024; Li
et al. 2023b; Zhan et al. 2024), along with a suite of proposed methodologies (Qin et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2023).
These approaches predominantly leverage in-context learning (Shen et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023) or fine-tuning techniques (Shen et al. 2024; Gao et al. 2023b; Chen et al.
2024) to equip the model with tool-invoking ability. In contrast to in-context learning, fine-tuning has gained popularity
for its capability to deeply integrate task-specific knowledge
into model parameters, enhancing its adaptability to specific
tasks. However, as illustrated in Figure 1, we find that excessive fine-tuning on tool learning datasets severely diminishes the model’s broader cognitive competencies, leading
to a decline in the model’s general abilities and catastrophic
forgetting about parametric knowledge.
Tools serve models rather than models serving tools. Consequently, it is crucial for the tool-augmented models to
incorporate tool-utilizing ability while simultaneously preserving their original general versatility. Thus, an intriguing question is what happens in LLMs when fine-tuning on
tool learning dataset? We dissect the question from two

Code — https://github.com/hypasd-art/CITI
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.13202

1

Llama-3-8B-Instruct
FT
General Tasks
Tool-utilizing
Performance
Performance

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant capabilities in understanding language and generating
human-like text (Zhao et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023a). Despite
their impressive performance, LLMs still face limitations,
such as the tendency to generate hallucinated information
(Huang et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024) and an inability to interact with the real physical world (Qin et al. 2023). To tackle
these limitations and expand the model’s capabilities scope
beyond traditional natural language tasks, there is a growing
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23996

