The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Can Private Machine Learning Be Fair?
Joseph Rance, Filip Svoboda
Department of Computer Science & Technology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
{jr879, fs437}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

cannot be assumed to be fair, leading to a dilemma when
attempting to train a fair model on private data:

We show that current SOTA methods for privately and fairly
training models are unreliable in many practical scenarios.
Specifically, we (1) introduce a new type of adversarial attack
that seeks to introduce unfairness into private model training,
and (2) demonstrate that the use of methods for training on
private data that are robust to adversarial attacks often leads
to unfair models, regardless of the use of fairness-enhancing
training methods. This leads to a dilemma when attempting
to train fair models on private data: either (A) we use a robust
training method which may introduce unfairness to the model
itself, or (B) we train models which are vulnerable to adversarial attacks that introduce unfairness. This paper highlights
flaws in robust learning methods when training fair models,
yielding a new perspective for the design of robust and private
learning systems.

A. To defend against attacks on fairness, we introduce a robust training method which, as we claim in this paper,
introduces unfairness itself.
B. We do not defend against attacks on fairness, leaving the
model vulnerable to unfairness from these attacks.
Thus, due to (1) the threat of attacks on fairness and (2)
our inability to ensure robustness without introducing unfairness, we cannot be confident a private training procedure will result in a fair model. For example, consider
a model trained to predict interactions between pairs of
molecules using private data produced by a group of participating companies (Mittone et al. 2023). One company may
employ an attack on fairness to reduce accuracy on drugs
produced by competitors. Either we risk vulnerability to this
attack, or we risk discarding data on rare drug interactions.
Although, in some tasks, a robust learning method can
be configured to introduce negligible unfairness while sufficiently protecting against most attacks, to our knowledge,
there is no learning method that will have such a configuration on any given task. We make the following contributions:

Code — https://github.com/Joseph-Rance/unfair-fl

1

Introduction

Ethically training Machine Learning systems on user data
has long been a source of interest to the Machine Learning
community (Arachchige et al. 2020; Cho, Wang, and Joshi
2020; Cao et al. 2020). We often wish to train a model that
has uniform accuracy between different groups of participating users (fairness) without requiring private data to leave
a user’s local device; for example, this is important when
training models on hospital patient data (Soltan et al. 2024;
Nicola et al. 2020). We show that methods of privately training fair models can be unreliable in practical scenarios.
Previous work has demonstrated effective methods for fair
and private training (Mohri, Sivek, and Suresh 2019; Li et al.
2020, 2021a), however these works assume no users are malicious. There are similarly many techniques for ensuring robustness to attacks from participating users during private
training (Blanchard et al. 2017; Nguyen et al. 2023; Sun
et al. 2019), yet few have examined the problem of ensuring
privacy, fairness, and robustness simultaneously. We show
that attempting to achieve all three attributes by combining
these separate methods serves to reverse their effects.
Furthermore, we show that it is possible for adversarial
attacks to seek to introduce unfairness into the training process. Therefore, methods that are not robust to these attacks

• We propose a new type of training-time attack that introduces unfairness into the model. We show that attacks on
fairness are well-founded and that they can be a threat in
a wide range of practical learning scenarios (section 3).
• We explore the shortcomings of current strategies for ensuring robustness, fairness, and privacy and show that
three methods for robust model training can introduce
unfairness (section 4).
• We design a framework for testing robust learning methods that includes attacks on fairness.
A

Attacker

Unfairness

Attacker

Unfairness

B

Defence

Unfairness

Model
Model

Figure 1: Two possible scenarios under an attack on fairness,
both leading to unfairness in the global model.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20121

