The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PointCFormer: A Relation-Based Progressive Feature Extraction Network for
Point Cloud Completion
Yi Zhong1 , Weize Quan2,3 , Dong-Ming Yan2,3 , Jie Jiang1 * , Yingmei Wei1
1

National University of Defense Technology
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhongyi, jiejiang, weiyingmei}@nudt.edu.cn, {qweizework, yandongming}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Point cloud completion aims to reconstruct the complete 3D
shape from incomplete point clouds, and it is crucial for
tasks such as 3D object detection and segmentation. Despite
the continuous advances in point cloud analysis techniques,
feature extraction methods are still confronted with apparent limitations. The sparse sampling of point clouds, used
as inputs in most methods, often results in a certain loss
of global structure information. Meanwhile, traditional local
feature extraction methods usually struggle to capture the intricate geometric details. To overcome these drawbacks, we
introduce PointCFormer, a transformer framework optimized
for robust global retention and precise local detail capture
in point cloud completion. This framework embraces several
key advantages. First, we propose a relation-based local feature extraction method to perceive local delicate geometry
characteristics. This approach establishes a fine-grained relationship metric between the target point and its k-nearest
neighbors, quantifying each neighboring point’s contribution
to the target point’s local features. Secondly, we introduce
a progressive feature extractor that integrates our local feature perception method with self-attention. Starting with a
denser sampling of points as input, it iteratively queries longdistance global dependencies and local neighborhood relationships. This extractor maintains enhanced global structure
and refined local details, without generating substantial computational overhead. Additionally, we develop a correction
module after generating point proxies in the latent space to
reintroduce denser information from the input points, enhancing the representation capability of the point proxies. PointCFormer demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on several
widely used benchmarks.

Figure 1: Improved global shape and enriched local detail in
point cloud completion using our method.

and Wang 2010), however, due to inevitable external factors
such as occlusion, light reflection, and limited sensor resolution (Chen and Yang 2016), as well as internal factors such
as the inherent shape deficiencies of the object itself, point
cloud data often exhibits incomplete and sparse characteristics. Point cloud completion is restoring this incomplete and
sparse 3D point cloud data to a point cloud representing the
complete shape of the object.
Recent deep learning advances have solidified the
encoder-decoder framework as a staple for point cloud completion, with PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) and PointNet++ (Qi
et al. 2017b) laying the foundation for the feature encoder. The pioneering PointTr (Yu et al. 2021) leverages
the Transformer model to enhance this architecture. SeedFormer (Zhou et al. 2022) introduces an innovative shape
representation for feature integration, while (Wang et al.
2022) focuses on local feature grouping to improve completion. FBNet (Yan et al. 2022) combines feedback loops
and cross transformers to better link feature levels, while
SnowflakeNet (Xiang et al. 2021) employs skip transformers to inject spatial relationships into the decoding stage.
AnchorFormer (Chen et al. 2023) introduces anchors for
region differentiation and predicts the complete shape by
merging these anchors with the observed input points. AdaPoinTr (Yu et al. 2023) improves the performance based
on PointTr, while the Mamba structure in 3DMambaCom-

Code — https:
//github.com/Zyyyyy0926/PointCFormer Plus Pytorch
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08421

Introduction
Point cloud is a common data format in 3D vision tasks, and
point cloud-based analysis tasks have greatly promoted the
development of 3D computer vision (Mao et al. 2024). Point
cloud data is generally obtained through 3D sensors (Bi
* Corresponding author: Jie Jiang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10689

