The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging Consistent Spatio-Temporal Correspondence
for Robust Visual Odometry
Zhaoxing Zhang1 * , Junda Cheng1 * , Gangwei Xu1 , Xiaoxiang Wang1 , Can Zhang1 , Xin Yang1,2†
1

School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Hubei Key Laboratory of Smart Internet, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{zzx, jundacheng, gwxu, xiaoxiang0012, can zhang, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Average Trajectory Error (ATE)

DeepV2d

Recent approaches to VO have significantly improved performance by using deep networks to predict optical flow between video frames. However, existing methods still suffer
from noisy and inconsistent flow matching, making it difficult to handle challenging scenarios and long-sequence estimation. To overcome these challenges, we introduce SpatioTemporal Visual Odometry (STVO), a novel deep network architecture that effectively leverages inherent spatiotemporal cues to enhance the accuracy and consistency of
multi-frame flow matching. With more accurate and consistent flow matching, STVO can achieve better pose estimation
through the bundle adjustment (BA). Specifically, STVO introduces two innovative components: 1) the Temporal Propagation Module that utilizes multi-frame information to extract and propagate temporal cues across adjacent frames,
maintaining temporal consistency; 2) the Spatial Activation
Module that utilizes geometric priors from the depth maps
to enhance spatial consistency while filtering out excessive
noise and incorrect matches. Our STVO achieves state-ofthe-art performance on TUM-RGBD, EuRoc MAV, ETH3D
and KITTI Odometry benchmarks. Notably, it improves accuracy by 77.8% on ETH3D benchmark and 38.9% on KITTI
Odometry benchmark over the previous best methods.

TartanVO
DROID-VO
DPVO
STVO (Ours)

Average Performance

TUM-RGBD

EuRoC

ETH3D

KITTI Odometry

Dataset

Figure 1: Comparison of STVO with other influential visual odometry methods. Our STVO, denoted by red stars,
achieves state-of-the-art performance in all benchmarks.
Tan 2018; Wang, Hu, and Scherer 2021), which map visual
inputs directly to poses. End-to-end deep learning methods
can achieve more stable matching, but neural networks often struggle to predict 6-degree-of-freedom poses from highdimensional features directly. As a result, their accuracy often falls short compared to classical optimization backends
which have strong geometric constraints.
To address these limitations, a hybrid VO framework
(Teed and Deng 2021; Teed, Lipson, and Deng 2024; Chen
et al. 2024) has emerged, integrating the strengths of classical methods with deep learning techniques. These frameworks initially employ neural networks to predict flow correspondences and subsequently use correspondences for pose
estimation through geometric optimization. By combining
the powerful matching capabilities of deep learning with
classical geometric constraints, hybrid VO frameworks significantly reduce overfitting and enhance robustness and accuracy. However, since correspondence estimation is pivotal
to the robustness of hybrid VO systems, the persistent issues
of noisy and inconsistent flow matching in existing hybrid
methods result in significant performance degradation, particularly in challenging scenarios. Furthermore, VO systems
commonly experience cumulative trajectory drift, which is
exacerbated by these matching problems, resulting in increasingly inaccurate estimations over long sequences.
Existing hybrid methods rely solely on the information
between two frames to obtain correspondences. However,

Introduction
Visual Odometry (VO) is a pivotal technology for estimating a robot’s position and orientation by analyzing data from
visual sensors. Classical VO methods utilize optimization
techniques to either minimize the photometric error of pixel
intensities (Forster, Pizzoli, and Scaramuzza 2014; Engel,
Koltun, and Cremers 2017) or minimize the reprojection
error of correspondences (Mur-Artal, Montiel, and Tardos
2015; Mur-Artal and Tardós 2017; Campos et al. 2021; Yuan
et al. 2022, 2024, 2023) to estimate trajectories. However,
due to limited matching capabilities, classical methods frequently encounter issues with robustness, particularly when
the image lacks distinct feature points or the assumption of
photometric consistency is not met. In the last decade, there
has been a shift towards employing end-to-end deep learning
methods (Wang et al. 2017; Teed and Deng 2018; Tang and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10367

