The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Addressing Cold-Start Problem in Click-Through Rate Prediction via Supervised
Diffusion Modeling
Wenqiao Zhu, Lulu Wang, Jun Wu
HiThink Research
{zhuwenqiao, wanglulu2, wujun2}@myhexin.com

Abstract

of the model’s parameters and determines the input for the
feature interaction and MLP modules. Thus, it is imperative
to improve the embedding layer to mitigate the cold-start
problem in CTR prediction tasks.
To address the challenge of the cold-start problem, several approaches have been proposed that leverage either the
limited available samples or the side information associated
with new items. Approaches that make use of the limited
available samples often employ a meta-learning framework,
such as MAML (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017), to derive
robust representations for new items through an optimized
training procedure (Pan et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019; Lu,
Fang, and Shi 2020; Ouyang et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021).
On the other hand, methods that leverage side information
generally learn a transformation from user/item attributes to
robust embeddings (Mo et al. 2015; Roy and Guntuku 2016;
Saveski and Mantrach 2014; Schein et al. 2002; Seroussi,
Bohnert, and Zukerman 2011; Wei et al. 2021; Zhu et al.
2020).
The aforementioned approaches learn representations as
fixed points in the embedding space. However, due to the
limited data available in cold-start scenarios, it is highly
challenging to learn a reliable representation (Zhang et al.
2019). To achieve reliable embedding learning for cold-start
items, some variational approaches have been proposed (Xu
et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022). These approaches treat embedding learning as a distribution estimation problem and
have shown effectiveness in tackling the cold-start problem.
However, these approaches struggle with the trade-off between traceability and flexibility (Kingma et al. 2016; SohlDickstein et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2023), and they also suffer from the model collapse problem (Shi et al. 2020). To
address the limitations of existing methods and further improve the performance of cold-start in CTR prediction, we
propose a diffusion model named CSDM, which constructs
the transition between embeddings and side information in
a denoising manner. While diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015) have achieved remarkable results in image synthesis tasks (Teng et al. 2024)
and can address the limitations in variational auto-encoder
methods, it is not straightforward to adopt diffusion models
to tackle the cold-start problem directly due to the following
reasons: (1) Standard diffusion models construct transitions
between the data distribution and standard Gaussian distri-

Predicting Click-Through Rates is a crucial function within
recommendation and advertising platforms, as the output of
CTR prediction determines the order of items shown to users.
The Embedding and MLP paradigm has become a standard approach for industrial recommendation systems and
has been widely deployed. However, this paradigm suffers
from cold-start problems, where there is either no or only
limited user action data available, leading to poorly learned
ID embeddings. The cold-start problem hampers the performance of new items. To address this problem, we design a
novel diffusion model to generate a warmed-up embedding
for new items. Specifically, we define a novel diffusion process between the ID embedding space and the side information space. In addition, we can derive a sub-sequence from the
diffusion steps to expedite training, given that our diffusion
model is non-Markovian. Our diffusion model is supervised
by both the variational inference and binary cross-entropy objectives, enabling it to generate warmed-up embeddings for
items in both the cold-start and warm-up phases. Additionally, we have conducted extensive experiments on three recommendation datasets. The results confirmed the effectiveness of our approach.

Code — https://github.com/WNQzhu/CSDM

Introduction
Recommendation systems are crucial components of numerous commercial platforms, addressing the challenge of information overload prevalent in the digital age. A primary
goal of many such systems often involves predicting ClickThrough Rates (CTR). Embedding & MLP (Multilayer Perceptron) methods (Guo et al. 2017, 2021; Zhou et al. 2019)
have been widely utilized for this purpose. However, the
Embedding & MLP approach faces the cold-start problem,
which arises from the long-tail distribution of candidate
items and the dynamic nature of real-world recommendation
systems. New items in recommendation systems often have
no or very limited user interactions. Consequently, the embeddings for these items are not adequately learned, leading
to sub-optimal performance in predicting their CTRs. Furthermore, the embedding layer makes up a substantial part
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13455

