The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridge 2D-3D: Uncertainty-aware Hierarchical Registration Network with
Domain Alignment
Zhixin Cheng, Jiacheng Deng, Xinjun Li, Baoqun Yin, Tianzhu Zhang *
Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
chengzhixin, dengjc, lxj3017@mail.ustc.edu.cn, bqyin, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The method for image-to-point cloud registration typically
determines the rigid transformation using a coarse-to-fine
pipeline. However, directly and uniformly matching image
patches with point cloud patches may lead to focusing on
incorrect noise patches during matching while ignoring key
ones. Moreover, due to the significant differences between
image and point cloud modalities, it may be challenging to
bridge the domain gap without specific improvements in design. To address the above issues, we innovatively propose the
Uncertainty-aware Hierarchical Matching Module (UHMM)
and the Adversarial Modal Alignment Module (AMAM).
Within the UHMM, we model the uncertainty of critical information in image patches and facilitate multi-level fusion
interactions between image and point cloud features. In the
AMAM, we design an adversarial approach to reduce the domain gap between image and point cloud. Extensive experiments and ablation studies on RGB-D Scene V2 and 7-Scenes
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our method, making it a state-of-the-art approach for image-to-point cloud registration tasks.

(a)

Introduction
Image-to-point cloud registration aims to determine the rigid
transformation from the point cloud to the camera coordinate system, which involves the cross-modal matching of
image and point cloud, followed by a pose estimator to
compute rotation and translation matrices. Such registration
is crucial for 3D reconstruction (Mouragnon et al. 2006),
SLAM (Durrant-Whyte and Bailey 2006), and visual localization (Bolognini, Rasi, and Làdavas 2005) tasks. However,
while images are dense 2D grids, point clouds are sparse and
irregular 3D data. These fundamental differences pose challenges in cross-modal matching.
A range of methods has been proposed to address this
challenge. Image-to-point cloud registration can be broadly
categorized into detect-then-match (Feng et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2021; Li and Lee 2021; Ren et al. 2022) and detectionfree methods (Kang et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023). Detect-thenmatch methods first independently detect 2D key points in
images and 3D key points in point clouds, then match them

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Visualization of uncertainty modeling, I and P
form a pair. Variance indicates uncertainty: better matches
have lower uncertainty, while poor matches have higher uncertainty. (b) Visualization of modality differences. With
training, the modalities and distributions of the point cloud
and image become aligned.

based on their semantic features. These methods face two
main challenges: detecting key points is difficult because 2D
key points rely on texture and color, while 3D key points
depend on geometric structure. Additionally, 2D and 3D descriptors encode different visual information, complicating
the extraction of consistent descriptors for matching. Thus,
detection-free methods have gained prominence. The 2D3DMATR (Li et al. 2023) introduces a coarse-to-fine pipeline

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2491

