The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring Activation Patterns of Parameters in Language Models
Yudong Wang, Damai Dai, Zhe Yang, Jingyuan Ma, Zhifang Sui
School of Computer Science
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing
Peking University
{yudongwang, mjy}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {daidamai, yz young, szf}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Most work treats large language models as black boxes without
an in-depth understanding of their internal working mechanism. To explain the internal representations of LLMs, we
utilize a gradient-based metric to assess the activation level
of model parameters. Based on this metric, we obtain three
preliminary findings. (1) When the inputs are in the same
domain, parameters in the shallow layers will be activated
densely, which means a larger portion of parameters will have
great impacts on the outputs. In contrast, parameters in the
deep layers are activated sparsely. (2) When the inputs are
across different domains, parameters in shallow layers exhibit
higher similarity in the activation behavior than in deep layers.
(3) In deep layers, the similarity of the distributions of activated parameters is positively correlated to the empirical data
relevance. Further, we develop three validation experiments
to solidify these findings. (1) Firstly, starting from the first
finding, we attempt to configure different sparsities for different layers and find this method can benefit model pruning. (2)
Secondly, we find that a pruned model based on one calibration set can better handle tasks related to the calibration task
than those not related, which validates the second finding. (3)
Thirdly, Based on the STS-B and SICK benchmarks, we find
that two sentences with consistent semantics tend to share similar parameter activation patterns in deep layers, which aligns
with our third finding. Our work sheds light on the behavior
of parameter activation in LLMs, and we hope these findings
will have the potential to inspire more practical applications.

Code — https://github.com/Qian2333/Exploring-ActivationPatterns-of-Parameters-in-Language-Models

Introduction
Since the emergence of GPT-4 (Achiam et al. 2023), there has
been a surge of interest in Large Language Models (LLMs).
As these LLMs continue to advance and their capabilities
strengthen, there remains a noticeable gap in research dedicated to their interpretability.
The study aims to investigate the coexistence of different
capabilities within the model. More specifically, when faced
with inputs across various domains, we observe variations in
the internal representation of LLMs. There have been some
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25416

explorations into the functions of specific layers and parameters in LLMs (Azaria and Mitchell 2023; Geiger et al. 2024).
It is generally recognized that some significantly different
capabilities of LLMs cannot fully coexist within a limited
scale. However, no targeted research analyzes the operational
patterns of specific capabilities within language models in a
more general sense.
Recent work has found that some parameters within the
model exist for specific tasks. Fu et al. (2023) revealed that
while the distilled model excels in the specific task it was
designed for, the original, more general model experiences a
decline in performance in other tasks previously proficient
in. This observation suggests that different tasks may tap
into distinct capacities within a model, and these capacities
seem to be mutually exclusive to some extent. In another
study, Zhang et al. (2021) introduced the notion that LLMs
inherently evolve into a Mixture of Experts (MoE) within
themselves. This concept implies that different parts of the
network are tasked with handling different inputs, further
strengthening the idea of internal specialization within the
model.
Building on the insights from the aforementioned phenomena, this study seeks to unravel the following questions:
Which parameters within the network are activated to determine the outputs, and does the distribution of these activated weights exhibit distinct patterns when faced with inputs across different domains? In essence, we aim to explore
whether the degree of parameter activation in different layers
varies in response to non-homogenous input scenarios and if
so, to what extent.
Drawing on methods from network pruning (Ma, Fang,
and Wang 2023), we assess the influence of a parameter by
comparing the original output of a model to that of a model
in which the parameter is set to 0. Specifically, we employ
the first-order term of the Taylor expansion of the model to
gauge the impact of a parameter on the outputs. Given two
sentences s1 , s2 , whether homogenous or not, we derive two
vectors Vs1 , Vs2 that characterize the influence of the internal
parameters of the model. By examining the cosine similarity
between these two vectors from LLM with different data
(LLMDcos), we observe three phenomena:
• For inputs in the same domain, parameters in the shallow
layers of the model are activated densely, while parameters in the deep layers are activated sparsely.

