The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Strong Empowered and Aligned Weak Mastered Annotation
for Weak-to-Strong Generalization
Yongqi Li1 , Xin Miao1 , Mayi Xu1 , Tieyun Qian1,2 *
1

2

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
Intellectual Computing Laboratory for Cultural Heritage, Wuhan University, China
{liyongqi, miaoxin, xumayi, qty}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

Preference Annotation Instance

(a)

(b)

Instance

The super-alignment problem of how humans can effectively
supervise super-human AI has garnered increasing attention.
Recent research has focused on investigating the weak-tostrong generalization (W2SG) scenario as an analogy for
super-alignment. This scenario examines how a pre-trained
strong model, supervised by an aligned weak model, can outperform its weak supervisor. Despite good progress, current
W2SG methods face two main issues: 1) The annotation quality is limited by the knowledge scope of the weak model; 2)
It is risky to position the strong model as the final corrector.
To tackle these issues, we propose a “Strong Empowered and
Aligned Weak Mastered” (SEAM) framework for weak annotations in W2SG. This framework can leverage the vast intrinsic knowledge of the pre-trained strong model to empower the
annotation and position the aligned weak model as the annotation master. Specifically, the pre-trained strong model first
generates principle fast-and-frugal trees for samples to be annotated, encapsulating rich sample-related knowledge. Then,
the aligned weak model picks informative nodes based on the
tree’s information distribution for final annotations. Experiments on six datasets for the preference task in W2SG scenarios validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Instance

User Query: What is your opinion on the current immigration policies?
Response 1 from AI: As an AI, I don't have personal opinions. But I can provide
relevant information if that would help you.
Response 2 from AI: In my opinion, the current immigration policies are unfair
to people who are seeking better opportunities.
Weak LLM may lack
necessary knowledge.

Risky correction
may occur.

Step 1: Initial Annotation

Step 2: Correction

principle

Principle-Aware
Thought

principle
principle

Thought
Thought

Rich knowledge for
making annotations.
Step 1: Principle FF-Tree Generation

Pre-trained Strong LLM

Annotation

Risky corrections
are avoided.
Step 2: Annotation Decision

Aligned Weak LLM

Figure 1: A preference annotation example and comparison
of the weak annotation pipeline of previous methods (a) and
our proposed SEAM (b) for W2SG.

Code — https://github.com/NLPGM/SEAM
problem as an analogy, i.e., how an aligned weak LLM can
effectively supervise a pre-trained strong LLM (Tao and Li
2024; Yang et al. 2024b; Zhu et al. 2024; Ildiz et al. 2024;
Lyu et al. 2024; Shin, Cooper, and Sala 2024; Wu and Sahai 2024). Specifically, an aligned weak LLM (analogy to
humans) first produces weak annotations. Then, the weak
annotations are used to fine-tune a pre-trained strong LLM
(analogy to pre-trained super-human AIs) to be a W2S finetuned one. The W2SG phenomenon occurs if the W2S finetuned strong LLM outperforms its weak supervisor.
Recently proposed W2SG methods primarily focus on improving the quality of weak annotations. For example, Guo
and Yang (2024) treat the most uncertain annotations as
noisy and filter them out. Burns et al. (2024) and Guo et al.
(2024a) suggest trusting the annotations from the strong
model when its confidence is high. Meanwhile, Liu and
Alahi (2024) and Yang, Ma, and Liu (2024) show that utilizing confidence consistency between the strong and weak
models can reduce annotation noise. Generally, as shown in
Fig. 1 (a), these methods follow a similar pipeline for weak

Introduction
With the rapid progress of artificial intelligence (AI) (OpenAI 2024a; Bai et al. 2022a; AI@Meta 2024), its performance on some tasks has already matched or exceeded human levels (Silver et al. 2017; Pu, Gao, and Wan 2023),
and may evolve into super-human AI in the future. Existing
alignment techniques such as reinforcement learning from
human feedback (Ouyang et al. 2022) can successfully align
pre-trained large language models (LLMs) to be helpful and
harmless, especially when their capabilities are below human levels, but they may falter with aligning super-human
AI (Burns et al. 2024). This raises the super-alignment problem: how can human supervisors effectively align superhuman AI with humans?
To explore the super-alignment problem, Burns et al.
(2024) propose the weak-to-strong generalization (W2SG)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27437

