The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond IID: Optimizing Instruction Finetuning from the Perspective of
Instruction Interaction and Dependency
Hanyu Zhao∗ , Li Du* † , Yiming Ju, Chengwei Wu, Tengfei Pan
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{hyzhao, duli, ymju, cwwu, tfpan}@baai.ac.cn

Abstract

relationships exist between different categories of instructions. Therefore, considering the quality of individual instructions alone can be a suboptimal approach for building a fine-tuning instruction set. Research indicates that
these categories are interrelated; incorporating one category
of instructions may enhance or diminish the model’s performance in others (Dong et al. 2023; Huang and Chang
2023). Additionally, the skills requiblack for different tasks
often form hierarchical taxonomies. For instance, solving a
bioinformatics problem requires both biological knowledge
and coding skills. Consequently, instructions are interconnected and collectively influence model performance. Ignoring these correlations can blackuce the efficiency of instruction selection, as incorporating one category of instruction may even degrade the model’s performance in another
category. Moreover, the dependency between skills necessitates that models acquire foundational knowledge before
progressing to more complex tasks; otherwise, the effectiveness of instruction tuning will be compromised (Longpre et
al. 2023).
Hence, it is crucial to account for these joint effects for optimizing the instruction set. However, two main challenges
remain unaddressed: (1) The potential correlation and dependency patterns are largely unknown; (2) How to optimize the instruction set while considering these correlation
and dependency patterns remains an unexploblack area. To
fill these gaps, as Figure 1 (b)-(e) shows, we systemically
investigated the correlation patterns between different categories of instructions, and induced an ability taxonomy of
instructions based on causal interventions on the distribution
of the instruction set. Then, with the guidance of the correlation patterns and dependency taxonomy, we optimized the
instruction set by adjusting the proportion of different categories of instructions, and arranging the order of learning
different categories of instructions.
Specifically, we construct an automatic tagging system
to assign the instruction with tags describing the detailed
capability and knowledge requiblack to complete this instruction. With the tags, we do interventions in the dataset
distribution by adding or removing instructions with certain tags, so that we can observe how the LLM’s performance changes with the incorporation of each category of
instructions, as well as how the performance of the LLM on
one category of instruction changes depending on another

With the availability of various instruction datasets, a pivotal
challenge is how to effectively select and integrate these instructions to fine-tune large language models (LLMs). Previous research mainly focuses on selecting individual highquality instructions. However, these works overlooked the
joint interactions and dependencies between different categories of instructions, leading to suboptimal selection strategies. Moreover, the nature of these interaction patterns remains largely unexploblack, let alone optimize the instruction set with regard to them. To fill these gaps, in this paper,
we: (1) systemically investigate interaction and dependency
patterns between different categories of instructions, (2) manage to optimize the instruction set concerning the interaction
patterns using a linear programming-based method, and optimize the learning schema of SFT using an instruction dependency taxonomy guided curriculum learning. Experimental
results across different LLMs demonstrate improved performance over strong baselines on widely adopted benchmarks.

Introduction
Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is the key to aligning large language models (LLMs) with human beings, enabling them
to complete various downstream tasks and adapt to specific
domains such as healthcare and finance (Zhao et al. 2023a).
The effectiveness of the SFT process relies on a high-quality
instruction set, so as to ensure the performance of LLMs
(Longpre et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023).
Temporarily, with the availability of various instruction sets,
a new challenge has been raised, i.e., how to select and integrate existing datasets to obtain an optimized instruction set.
To address this issue, previous research typically works by
selecting and combining individual “high-quality” instructions. They often construct proxy indicators to evaluate different aspects of quality, such as factual correctness, complexity, and informativeness. Then the raw instruction set
could be refined by selecting instructions with the highest
relative quality scores (Latif and Zhai 2024; Li et al. 2024;
Lu et al.; Zhao et al. 2023b).
However, emerging evidence (Yuan et al. 2023) and our
analyses indicate that complex correlation and dependency
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26031

