The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Joint Class-level and Instance-level Relationship Modeling for Novel Class
Discovery
Jiaying Zhou1, 2 , Qingchao Chen1, 2, 3 *
1

National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
{zhoujiaying, qingchao.chen}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Novel class discovery(NCD) aims to cluster the unlabeled
data with the help of a labeled set containing different but related classes. The key to solving NCD is the knowledge transfer between labeled and unlabeled sets. Since NCD requires
that known classes and unknown classes are related, it is significant to explore class-level relationships between known
and unknown for more effective knowledge transfer. However, most existing methods either facilitate knowledge transfer by learning a shared representation space or by modeling
coarse-grained or asymmetric relationships between known
and unknown, neglecting class-level relationships. To tackle
these challenges, we propose a symmetric class-to-class relationship modeling and knowledge transfer method, achieving bidirectional knowledge transfer at class-level. Considering that class-level modeling often overlooks the subtle distinctions between samples, we propose pairwise similaritybased relationship modeling and consistency constraint for
instance-level knowledge transfer. Extensive experiments on
CIFAR100 and three fine-grained datasets demonstrate that
our method achieves significant performance improvements
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Differences between IIC, CrKD and our method.
In figure, different colors represent different classes, classes
with the same color family(such as dark green and light
green) have higher semantic similarity. Unlabeled sample in
light green belongs to the class in same color.

network to unlabeled data(Hsu, Lv, and Kira 2017; Hsu
et al. 2019). In two-stage methods, labeled data and unlabeled data streams remain disjoint. On the contrary, onestage methods focus on the simultaneous utilization of labeled and unlabeled data(Fini et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023a).
The basic hypothesis of NCD is that unknown classes are
related to known classes(Zhao and Han 2021). Therefore, a
widely accepted key to solving NCD is the knowledge transfer from known classes to unknown classes(Li et al. 2023b,
2022). Unfortunately, most existing work achieves knowledge transfer by learning a shared representation space,
without considering how to leverage the the relationships
between known and unknown classes to enhance performance. Recently, IIC(Li et al. 2023a) and CrKD(Gu et al.
2023) proposes to achieve knowledge transfer through relationship modeling. In detail, IIC emphasizes the “disjoint”
characteristic of known and unknown classes, and forces
known classes to be distant from unknown ones. As shown
in Figure.1(a), this “forced separation” may cause classes
with high semantic similarity to be pushed apart.
CrKD, on the other hand, takes the unlabeled samples’
predicted logits output by classification head trained on
known classes as class relation representation. It claims that
such class relation should be maintained during discovery
stage and proposes a knowledge distillation framework for

Introduction
The remarkable success of deep learning in image classification relies heavily on abundant labeled data. However,
data-labeling is cost-prohibitive at scale. In addition, labeled
data cannot encompass all potential categories. This means
that the trained model can only recognize a limited set of
predefined categories, lacking the ability to discover and
identify novel classes. Inspired by this, Novel Class Discovery(NCD) has been proposed and garnered significant attention(Troisemaine et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2024).
NCD refers to the process of identifying previously unknown classes within an unlabeled set with the help of
knowledge from a labeled set. Unlike semi-supervised learning, NCD typically assumes that the samples in the unlabeled set are all from unknown classes and the number of
unknown classes is known. Existing NCD methods can be
divided into two categories: two-stage methods and onestage methods. Two-stage methods typically involve training a network on labeled data and then applying the learned
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10779

