The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MAGIC: Generating Self-Correction Guideline for In-Context Text-to-SQL
Arian Askari1 * , Christian Poelitz2 , Xinye Tang3
1
Leiden University
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK,
3
Microsoft Redmond
{cpoelitz, xinye.tang}@microsoft.com, a.askari@liacs.leidenuniv.nl
2

Abstract

Question: What is the biggest monthly consumption of the
customers who use euro as their currency?

Self-correction in text-to-SQL is the process of prompting
large language model (LLM) to revise its previously incorrectly generated SQL, and commonly relies on manually
crafted self-correction guidelines by human experts that are
not only labor-intensive to produce but also limited by the human ability in identifying all potential error patterns in LLM
responses. We introduce MAGIC, a novel multi-agent method
that automates the creation of the self-correction guideline.
MAGIC uses three specialized agents: a manager, a correction,
and a feedback agent. These agents collaborate on the failures
of an LLM-based method on the training set to iteratively generate and refine a self-correction guideline tailored to LLM
mistakes, mirroring human processes but without human involvement. Our extensive experiments show that MAGIC’s
guideline outperforms expert human’s created ones. We empirically find out that the guideline produced by MAGIC enhances the interpretability of the corrections made, providing
insights in analyzing the reason behind the failures and successes of LLMs in self-correction.

Texto-to-SQL via GPT4 using DIN-SQL method

SELECT MAX(SUM(yearmonth.Consumption) / 12) FROM
yearmonth INNER JOIN customers ON yearmonth.CustomerID =
customers.CustomerID WHERE customers.Currency = 'EUR'

Incorrect
SQL

Self-correction w/ MAGIC’s guideline (Entire response of GPT4)

Datasets —
https://huggingface.co/datasets/microsoft/MAGIC

Introduction
Converting natural language questions to SQL database
queries, known as text-to-SQL, serves as a pivotal component for empowering non-expert data analysts in extracting
desired information from relational databases using natural
language (Qu et al. 2024). While large language models have
shown a significant improvement in text-to-SQL and serve
as state-of-the methods according to the leaderboards (Li
et al. 2024c), they are prone to mistakes and even GPT4 has
a notable accuracy gap of 30% within human (Li et al. 2023).
A solution for resolving the mistakes of LLM is the emerging concept of ‘self-correction’ (Madaan et al. 2023) that
defines as the ability of LLMs in revising their previous mistakes under the hypothesis that recognizing errors is easier
than avoiding them (Gou et al. 2024; Madaan et al. 2023).
Self-correction in context of text-to-SQL is the process of
prompting an LLM to revise its previously incorrectly generated SQL (Zhang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023).
* Work done during an internship at Microsoft.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23433

1.Aggregation within Aggregation: Did I mistakenly try to use an
aggregate function (SUM) directly inside another aggregate
function (MAX) without a subquery? Yes, this is not allowed in SQL.
I need to calculate the total consumption per customer first, then
find the maximum of these averages.
2.Grouping by Customer: Did I forget to group by the customer ID
after summing their consumption? Yes, to calculate the total
consumption per customer, I need to group by CustomerID.
3.Correct Calculation of Monthly Consumption: Did I correctly
calculate the monthly consumption by dividing the total
consumption by 12? Yes, but this calculation should be done after
summing up the consumption for each customer.
4.Filtering on Currency: Did I correctly filter customers based on
their currency being 'EUR'? Yes, this part of the query is correct.
5.Selecting the Maximum Monthly Consumption: Did I ensure to
select the maximum monthly consumption after calculating the
monthly consumption for each customer? This needs to be done in
a step after calculating the monthly consumption for each
customer.
Revised SQL: SELECT MAX(MonthlyConsumption) FROM
(SELECT yearmonth.CustomerID, SUM(yearmonth.Consumption) /
12 AS MonthlyConsumption FROM yearmonth INNER JOIN
customers ON yearmonth.CustomerID = customers.CustomerID
WHERE customers.Currency = 'EUR' GROUP BY
yearmonth.CustomerID)

Mistake
found

Mistake
found

Mistake
found

No
mistake

Mistake
found

Correct
SQL

Figure 1: Example of self-correction using automatically
generated guidelines by MAGIC

While self-correction for LLMs has been widely studied
in variety of tasks including code generation with GPT4
(Shypula et al. 2024; Pan et al. 2023; Kamoi et al. 2024), it
has been relatively unexplored in text-to-SQL. The common
method for self-correcting in existing few-shot LLM based
methods that achieve state-of-the-art effectiveness is designing a self-correction guideline by human and prompting it
to GPT-4 together with its initial generated SQL (Pourreza
and Rafiei 2023). This self-correction guideline commonly
engineered based on the train set where an expert human analyzes common mistakes of the LLM on the training data and
design a guideline to prevent common mistakes. This process
is a time-consuming and challenging task that is limited to
the ability of humans in identifying all the mistake patterns

