The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GeCC: Generalized Contrastive Clustering with Domain Shifts Modeling
Yujie Chen1 , Wenhui Wu 1, 2 * , Le Ou-Yang 1, 3 * , Ran Wang 4 , Debby D. Wang 5
1

2

College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China
3
Faculty of Engineering, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, Shenzhen, 518116, China
4
College of Mathematics and Statistics, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China
5
School of Science and Technology, Hong Kong Metropolitan University, HongKong, China
2110436012@email.szu.edu.cn, {wuwenhui, leouyang, wangran}@szu.edu.cn, dwang@hkmu.edu.hk
Original

Abstract
Contrastive clustering performs clustering and data representation in a unified model, where instance- and cluster-level
constrastive learning are conducted simultaneously. However, commonly-used data augmentation methods make contrastive mechanism effect but may cause representation learning getting stuck in domain-specific information, which further deteriorates clustering performance and limits generalization ability. To this end, we propose a new framework, named Generalized Contrastive Clustering with domain shifts modeling (GeCC), which can integrate diverse
domain knowledge to improve the clustering performance.
Specifically, we first design a cluster-guided domain shifts
modeling module to synthesize a reference view with diverse
domain information. Then, we introduce instance representation and cluster assignment contrastive modules with welldesigned attention weights to guide the representation learning and clustering. In this way, our method can maximize
the extraction of cluster-related information and avoid overfitting domain-specific features. Experimental results on four
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed method
consistently outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.

CC

DivClust

Ours

Penguin

Orange

Truck

Figure 1: The class activation map (CAM) visualization of
clustering prediction. Results from vanilla contrastive clustering methods (i.e., CC and DivClust) get stuck in domainspecific feature such as the background, impeding effective
clustering. Nevertheless, the visualization for the proposed
method focuses more on the objects, demonstrating its ability in extracting cluster-related features.

Code — https://github.com/mia-7/GeCC
framework. For example, several methods (Yang et al., 2016;
Chang et al., 2017; Caron et al., 2018; Asano et al., 2019)
utilize additional clustering algorithms to derive pseudolabels, which are then employed as supervision to guide
network training. However, these two-step approaches may
accumulate errors during the alternating process between
clustering and representation learning, potentially leading to
suboptimal performance. Consequently, some methods (Ji et
al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2023; Niu et al.,
2022) have been devised to simultaneously learn representations and cluster assignments.
Recently, contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2020; Grill
et al. 2020) has demonstrated promising performance in
unsupervised scenarios. Data augmentation is usually utilized to create multiple views. Treating different views of
a sample as positive pairs and maximizing their similarities, and considering different samples as negative pairs and
minimizing their similarities, contrastive learning can distill
representations with discriminative content. Building upon
this contrastive mechanism, various clustering methods have
been proposed (Li et al. 2021b; Liu et al. 2023b; Huang et al.

Introduction
Over the past decade, deep learning has achieved excellent
performance based on large amounts of annotated training
samples. However, acquiring supervisory information can
be time-consuming and laborious in certain practical scenarios. Clustering, as one of the most fundamental unsupervised
learning methods, has garnered significant attention. It involves grouping data into distinct clusters without the need
for any labels. Leveraging the capacity of neural networks
to model intricate data, deep clustering (Ren et al. 2022; Wu
et al. 2023) learns informative representations, facilitating
subsequent downstream tasks such as multi-view clustering
(Xue et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022) and cell clustering (Mrabah
et al. 2023; He et al. 2023).
Extensive research has concentrated on integrating representation learning and clustering within an end-to-end
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15966

