The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Label-Free Heterophily-Guided Approach
for Unsupervised Graph Fraud Detection
Junjun Pan1 , Yixin Liu1 , Xin Zheng1 , Yizhen Zheng2 ,
Alan Wee-Chung Liew1 , Fuyi Li3 , Shirui Pan1 *
1

School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Queensland, Australia
2
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, The University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
{junjun.pan, yixin.liu, xin.zheng, a.liew, s.pan}@griffith.edu.au, yizhen.zheng1@monash.edu, fuyi.li@adelaide.edu.au
Abstract
Graph fraud detection (GFD) has rapidly advanced in protecting online services by identifying malicious fraudsters.
Recent supervised GFD research highlights that heterophilic
connections between fraudsters and users can greatly impact
detection performance, since fraudsters tend to camouflage
themselves by building more connections to benign users.
Despite the promising performance of supervised GFD methods, the reliance on labels limits their applications to unsupervised scenarios; Additionally, accurately capturing complex
and diverse heterophily patterns without labels poses a further
challenge. To fill the gap, we propose a Heterophily-guided
Unsupervised Graph fraud dEtection approach (HUGE) for
unsupervised GFD, which contains two essential components: a heterophily estimation module and an alignmentbased fraud detection module. In the heterophily estimation module, we design a novel label-free heterophily metric called HALO, which captures the critical graph properties for GFD, enabling its outstanding ability to estimate heterophily from node attributes. In the alignment-based fraud
detection module, we develop a joint MLP-GNN architecture with ranking loss and asymmetric alignment loss. The
ranking loss aligns the predicted fraud score with the relative order of HALO, providing an extra robustness guarantee
by comparing heterophily among non-adjacent nodes. Moreover, the asymmetric alignment loss effectively utilizes structural information while alleviating the feature-smooth effects
of GNNs. Extensive experiments on 6 datasets demonstrate
that HUGE significantly outperforms competitors, showcasing its effectiveness and robustness.

(a) Heterophily-based supervised GFD method.

(b) Unsupervised GAD method.

(c) Our heterophily-guided unsupervised GFD method.

Figure 1: Concept maps of existing GFD/GAD methods and
our proposed unsupervised GFD method HUGE.
By analyzing both structural patterns and attribute contexts
within networks, GFD ensures the integrity of online applications (Motie and Raahemi 2023; Deng et al. 2022; Yu et al.
2022).
Recently, supervised GFD methods based on graph neural
networks (GNNs) have shown significant progress and attached considerable research interest (Dou et al. 2020; Gao
et al. 2023a; Li et al. 2022). One of the mainstream research
focuses is on addressing the graph heterophily introduced
by fraudsters (Gao et al. 2023a; Zheng et al. 2022a), i.e.,
fraudsters tend to establish connections with benign users
to avoid being detected for concealing their suspicious activities. In this way, conventional GNN models struggle to
differentiate between the representations of fraudsters and
benign users due to the smooth effect of message passing (Cai and Wang 2020), resulting in sub-optimal GFD performance. In light of this, various strategies have been proposed to mitigate the impact of heterophily, such as dropping
edges (Gao et al. 2023a), or using spectral GNNs (Tang et al.
2022). Despite the promising performance of these methods,
they rely heavily on annotated labels of both fraudsters and
benign users for modeling the heterophily property. How-

Introduction
With the advancement of information technology, graphstructured data have become ubiquitous in online services
such as e-commerce (Motie and Raahemi 2023; Zheng et al.
2022b, 2024b, 2022c; Wang et al. 2024a; Zheng et al.
2024a) and social media (Deng et al. 2022). However, this
widespread usage has led to a significant increase in various malicious activities, including fraud, spam, and fake reviews, making detecting such activities crucial. To address
this issue, graph fraud detection (GFD) is an emerging research topic that aims to identify these suspicious activities.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12443

