The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

NeuralFlix: A Simple While Effective Framework for Semantic Decoding of
Videos from Non-invasive Brain Recordings
Jingyuan Sun1 * , Mingxiao Li2 * , Marie-Francine Moens2
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, UK
2
KU Leuven, Belgium
jingyuan.sun@manchester.ac.uk
mingxiao.li@kuleuven.be
sien.moens@kuleuven.be

Abstract

Consequently, a key objective in this field is to develop systems capable of decoding brain activity using non-invasive
techniques to reconstruct human visual perceptions. Achieving such advancements could greatly enhance accessibility
for individuals with sensory impairments while deepening
our understanding of the neural foundations of visual perception.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) a noninvasive neuro-imaging technology well-regarded for its
high spatial resolution, which is crucial for recording detailed activations in the visual cortex and other brain regions
(Hénaff et al. 2021). This capability is essential for reconstructing visual content based on brain activity. While reconstructing static images has seen notable progress (Chen
et al. 2022; Sun, Li, and Moens 2023), reconstructing videos
is still an area of active research. One of the main challenges
with fMRI is its reliance on measuring changes in the bloodoxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal, which can exhibit
spatial redundancy and sometimes lag behind actual neural activity due to the hemodynamic response (Uğurbil et al.
2013; de Zwart et al. 2009). Additionally, the non-invasive
nature of fMRI means it can pick up noise from various
physiological and scanner-related sources, which complicates the reconstruction of high-quality videos (Parrish et al.
2000).
To address these challenges, we have developed a twophase framework called NeuralFlix which aims to reconstruct high-resolution videos from fMRI data which are semantically consistent with the videos viewed by human subjects. In the first phase, we use spatial masking and temporal interpolation to enhance fMRI data, while an optimized
fMRI encoder is trained to resist disturbances from these
augmentations. In the second phase, this trained fMRI encoder guides a video diffusion model in generating videos.
We further improve this phase by introducing noise models
that compensate for the low signal-to-noise ratio typical of
fMRI data. Together, these innovations help our framework
to convert complex and noisy fMRI data into precise and
meaningful visual reconstructions, showcasing the potential
of combining advanced neural imaging with machine learning to decode brain activity.
We tested our method on a publicly available dataset
of fMRI-video pairs, involving three individuals watching

In our quest to decode the visual processing of the human
brain, we aim to reconstruct dynamic visual experiences from
brain activities, a task both challenging and intriguing. Although recent advances have made significant strides in reconstructing static images from non-invasive brain recordings, the translation of continuous brain activities into video
formats has not been extensively explored. Our study introduces NeuralFlix, a simple but effective dual-phase framework designed to address the inherent challenges in decoding
fMRI data, such as noise, spatial redundancy, and temporal
lags. The framework employs spatial and temporal augmentation for contrastive learning of fMRI representations, and a
diffusion model enhanced with dependent prior noise for generating videos. Tested on a publicly available fMRI dataset,
NeuralFlix demonstrates promising results, significantly outperforming previous state-of-the-art models by margins of
20.97%, 31.00%, and 12.30%, respectively, in decoding the
brain activities of three subjects individually, as measured by
SSIM.

Code — https://github.com/soinx0629/NeuralFlix

Introduction
The visual world that we encounter in daily life is highly
dynamic, marked by fluid and continuously evolving sensory experiences (Varela, Thompson, and Rosch 2017). The
human brain, with its remarkable complexity, continuously
processes these visual inputs to construct a coherent narrative of perception (Bartels, Zeki, and Logothetis 2008;
Nishimoto et al. 2011). Unraveling the layers of this intricate system and deciphering the associated neural processes
represent considerable challenges (Chen, Qing, and Zhou
2023). Although invasive neural imaging methods such as
ECoG offer certain advantages (Kanth and Ray 2020) over
non-invasive techniques in studying human brain’s visual
processing—particularly in terms of an improved signal-tonoise ratio—their requirement for surgical implantation and
associated safety concerns limit their widespread application, especially when compared with non-invasive methods.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7096

