The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FoMo: Multi-Modal, Multi-Scale and Multi-Task Remote Sensing Foundation
Models for Forest Monitoring
Nikolaos Ioannis Bountos1,2,3 , Arthur Ouaknine1,4 , Ioannis Papoutsis2 , David Rolnick1,4
1

2

Mila - Québec AI Institute
Orion Lab, National Observatory of Athens & National Technical University of Athens
3
Harokopio University of Athens
4
McGill University
Abstract

depends. They also play a vital role in biodiversity conservation, harboring countless species and maintaining ecological
balance. However, forests are rapidly changing as a result
of land use decisions, climate change and invasive species
(Bonan 2008; Curtis et al. 2018; Hartmann et al. 2022) leading to significant biodiversity decline and economic losses.
However, effective forest management and conservation are
hampered by a lack of information, highlighting the need
for scalable forest monitoring. This gap encompasses multiple specific problems, such as tree species identification,
tree size assessment, land cover classification, etc., which
also vary considerably across geographies, climatic zones
and landscapes.

Forests are vital to ecosystems, supporting biodiversity and
essential services, but are rapidly changing due to land use
and climate change. Understanding and mitigating negative
effects requires parsing data on forests at global scale from
a broad array of sensory modalities, and using them in diverse forest monitoring applications. Such diversity in data
and applications can be effectively addressed through the
development of a large, pre-trained foundation model that
serves as a versatile base for various downstream tasks. However, remote sensing modalities, which are an excellent fit for
several forest management tasks, are particularly challenging considering the variation in environmental conditions,
object scales, image acquisition modes, spatio-temporal resolutions, etc. With that in mind, we present the first unified Forest Monitoring Benchmark (FoMo-Bench), carefully
constructed to evaluate foundation models with such flexibility. FoMo-Bench consists of 15 diverse datasets encompassing satellite, aerial, and inventory data, covering a variety of
geographical regions, and including multispectral, red-greenblue, synthetic aperture radar and LiDAR data with various
temporal, spatial and spectral resolutions. FoMo-Bench includes multiple types of forest-monitoring tasks, spanning
classification, segmentation, and object detection. To enhance
task and geographic diversity in FoMo-Bench, we introduce TalloS, a global dataset combining satellite imagery
with ground-based annotations for tree species classification
across 1,000+ categories and hierarchical taxonomic levels.
Finally, we propose FoMo-Net, a pre-training framework to
develop foundation models with the capacity to process any
combination of commonly used modalities and spectral bands
in remote sensing. This work aims to inspire research collaborations between machine learning and forest biology researchers in exploring scalable multi-modal and multi-task
models for forest monitoring and beyond.

Remote sensing (RS) has been explored for forest monitoring using various sensors and spatial scales (Guimarães
et al. 2020; Michałowska and Rapiński 2021), while increasingly, deep learning methods have been used to address
various specific forest-related problems (Kattenborn et al.
2021). Simultaneously, the field of computer vision has seen
a growth in foundation models (Bommasani et al. 2022),
i.e. models flexible to diverse modalities, scales and data
regimes while performing well across downstream tasks
(Kirillov et al. 2023; Jaegle et al. 2021, 2022). However, it
has been noted that general-purpose foundation models in
computer vision may be ineffective in specific problem domains (Rolf et al. 2024), presenting a need for foundation
models explicitly designed for specific problem spaces, such
as Earth observation (Lacoste et al. 2021) and weather or climate modeling (Mukkavilli et al. 2023). Foundation models
offer the potential for a flexible backbone that can rapidly
be fine-tuned on smaller annotated datasets. Given the diverse nature of RS data and applications, Earth observation
foundation models should be able to operate on a wide array
of Ground Sampling Distances (GSD), spectral bands, image acquisition modes, and environmental conditions. Assessing the capacity of such models is far more challenging
than comparing performance on standard RS datasets. In this
work, we propose a framework to evaluate general remote
sensing foundation models utilizing the inherent diversity
of critical forest-monitoring tasks. Our Forest Monitoring
Benchmark (FoMo-Bench) brings together a wide range
of publicly available datasets for forest monitoring, encompassing significant spatial, temporal, and spectral diversity
as illustrated in Fig. 1. FoMo-Bench includes a mixture of

Code and Data —
https://github.com/RolnickLab/FoMo-Bench
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10114

1

Introduction

Forests are an essential part of Earth’s ecosystems and natural systems, providing critical services on which humanity
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27858

