The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Leveraging RGB-D Data with Cross-Modal Context Mining for Glass Surface
Detection
Jiaying Lin* , Yuen-Hei Yeung* , Shuquan Ye† , Rynson W.H. Lau†
City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Glass surfaces are becoming increasingly ubiquitous as modern buildings tend to use a lot of glass panels. This, however,
poses substantial challenges to the operations of autonomous
systems such as robots, self-driving cars, and drones, as these
glass panels can become transparent obstacles to navigation.
Existing works attempt to exploit various cues, including
glass boundary context or reflections, as priors. However,
they are all based on input RGB images. We observe that the
transmission of 3D depth sensor light through glass surfaces
often produces blank regions in the depth maps, which can
offer additional insights to complement the RGB image features for glass surface detection. In this work, we first propose
a large-scale RGB-D glass surface detection dataset, RGB-D
GSD, for rigorous experiments and future research. It contains 3,009 images, paired with precise annotations, offering
a wide range of real-world RGB-D glass surface categories.
We then propose a novel glass surface detection framework
combining RGB and depth information, with two novel modules: a cross-modal context mining (CCM) module to adaptively learn individual and mutual context features from RGB
and depth information, and a depth-missing aware attention
(DAA) module to explicitly exploit spatial locations where
missing depths occur to help detect the presence of glass surfaces. Experimental results show that our proposed model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Image

Depth GSDNet EBLNet

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Advantages of detecting glass surfaces with RGBD images. These examples show that the depth map can provide a strong cue for glass surface detection. State-of-the-art
methods, GSDNet (Lin, He, and Lau 2021) and EBLNet (He
et al. 2021), relying only on input RGB images are not able
to correctly separate the glass surfaces from the background.
Through learning the cross-modal contexts and the correlation between depth-missing regions and glass surface regions, our proposed model can detect the glass surfaces accurately in all three challenging scenes. Note that red regions
in the depth images represent missing depths.
The potential of deep learning models for glass surface
detection (GSD) was first demonstrated by (Mei et al. 2020)
and GSDNet(Lin, He, and Lau 2021). EBLNet (He et al.
2021) was proposed for GSD through enhanced boundary
learning on glass surfaces. However, since EBLNet is an
RGB-based method and relies heavily on boundary learning,
it may fail if the boundaries of glass surfaces are ambiguous
or there are some distracting glass-like regions in the input
image. Fig. 1 shows three challenging scenarios where stateof-the-art RGB-based glass surface detection methods fail.
In the first row, both GSDNet and EBLNet are confused by
the similarity between glass regions and tiles. As a result,
some tiles are mis-recognized as glass regions. The other
rows show challenging scenes where some glass surfaces are
difficult even for humans to identify. GSDNet and EBLNet
either over- or under-detect them.
In this paper, we aim to address the limitation of RGBbased glass surface detection methods, which heavily rely on
boundary learning, causing them to fail if the glass boundaries are ambiguous or there are glass-like regions in the
image. Here, we propose to address this problem from a

Code, Dataset and Extended version —
https://jiaying.link/AAAI25-RGBDGlass/

Introduction

Although most objects that we see in our daily life exhibit distinctive visual characteristics, glass surfaces, however, typically do not possess any distinctive visual properties. Their contents are essentially represented by the contents behind them, making it difficult for existing computer
vision systems to detect them. However, modern architects
and designers tend to use glass panels frequently in their designs, which makes them prevalent both indoors and outdoors, e.g., glass doors, windows and walls. Hence, detecting these glass panels accurately is crucial for the safe operation of machines such as robots and drones.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Shuquan Ye and Rynson Lau are joint corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5254

