The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Structural Entropy Guided Unsupervised Graph Out-Of-Distribution Detection
Yue Hou1,2 , He Zhu1 , Ruomei Liu1 , Yingke Su2 , Jinxiang Xia1 , Junran Wu1 * , Ke Xu1
1

State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University
2
Shen Yuan Honors College, Beihang University
{hou yue, roy zh, rmliu, suyingke, jinxiangxia, wu junran, kexu}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
With the emerging of huge amount of unlabeled data, unsupervised out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is vital for ensuring the reliability of graph neural networks (GNNs) by
identifying OOD samples from in-distribution (ID) ones during testing, where encountering novel or unknown data is inevitable. Existing methods often suffer from compromised
performance due to redundant information in graph structures, which impairs their ability to effectively differentiate
between ID and OOD data. To address this challenge, we
propose SEGO, an unsupervised framework that integrates
structural entropy into OOD detection regarding graph classification. Specifically, within the architecture of contrastive
learning, SEGO introduces an anchor view in the form of
coding tree by minimizing structural entropy. The obtained
coding tree effectively removes redundant information from
graphs while preserving essential structural information, enabling the capture of distinct graph patterns between ID and
OOD samples. Furthermore, we present a multi-grained contrastive learning scheme at local, global, and tree levels using triplet views, where coding trees with essential information serve as the anchor view. Extensive experiments on realworld datasets validate the effectiveness of SEGO, demonstrating superior performance over state-of-the-art baselines
in OOD detection. Specifically, our method achieves the best
performance on 9 out of 10 dataset pairs, with an average improvement of 3.7% on OOD detection datasets, significantly
surpassing the best competitor by 10.8% on the FreeSolv/ToxCast dataset pair.

(a) ID and OOD graph samples

(b) Before minimization

(c) After minimization

Figure 1: A toy example of ID and OOD graphs and scoring
distributions before/after structural entropy minimization.
trained on in-distribution (ID) graphs and then predicts a
score for each test sample to indicate its ID/OOD status.
Recent advancements (Wang et al. 2024; Guo et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2023; Yuan et al. 2024b) in graph OOD detection and generation have been explored with growing interest. Several studies (Wang et al. 2024; Guo et al. 2023) employ well-trained graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and
Welling 2017; Xu et al. 2019) to fine-tune OOD detectors
to identify OOD samples. However, these methods require
annotated ID data to pre-train GNNs, which limits their applicability in scenarios where labeled data is unavailable. In
contrast, other research (Liu et al. 2023) focuses on training OOD-specific GNN models using only ID data, without
relying on any labels or OOD data. They employ unsupervised learning techniques such as graph contrastive learning
(GCL) to learn discriminative patterns of unlabeled ID data.
Despite the progress made in this area, a challenge still
remains less explored. Due to the prevalent presence of redundant information in graph structures, current methods
struggle to effectively capture and distinguish the essential
structure between ID and OOD data. Without mechanisms
to extract substantive information, models are susceptible to
irrelevant features and structures that can mislead the learning process. Besides, GCL methods commonly adopt arbitrary augmentations, which may unexpectedly perturb both
structural and semantic patterns of the graph, introducing

Code — https://github.com/name-is-what/SEGO

Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection (Yang et al. 2024; Wu
et al. 2024; Bao et al. 2024) is a crucial task in machine
learning that aims to identify whether a given data point deviates significantly from the training distribution, especially
for models deployed in real-world applications where encountering novel or unknown data is inevitable. In graphbased data, the challenge of OOD detection is heightened
due to the complex structure and relationships inherent in
graphs. In this context, a specific OOD detection model is
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17258

