The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Error Analysis Affected by Heavy-Tailed Gradients for Non-Convex Pairwise
Stochastic Gradient Descent
Jun Chen1 , Hong Chen1, 2, 3 * , Bin Gu4 , Guodong Liu5 , Yingjie Wang6 , Weifu Li1, 2, 3 *
1

2

College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, Wuhan, China
3
Key Laboratory of Smart Farming for Agricultural Animals, Wuhan, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Jilin, China
5
University of Pittsburgh
6
College of Control Science and Engineering, China University of Petroleum (East China), Qingdao, China
chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn; liweifu@mail.hzau.edu.cn

burden as its optimization objective involves O n2 terms
for the problems with n training samples.
It is well known that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is
ubiquitous and popular for deploying learning systems due
to its low time complexity (Lei, Liu, and Ying 2021; Wang
et al. 2022; Tang et al. 2024) and high adaptability to big
data (Bottou and Bousquet 2007; Lei and Ying 2020). As
a natural extension of SGD, minibatch SGD iteratively updates the model parameter based on several selected samples rather than a single sample, which can further reduce
the variance and accelerate algorithmic convergence (Cotter et al. 2011; Dekel et al. 2012). Therefore, it is natural
to employ SGD and minibatch SGD to formulate the procedure of pairwise learning. Along with the wide applications
of SGD and minibatch SGD in pairwise learning, there are
some theoretical progresses focusing on their generalization
guarantees recently (Lei, Liu, and Ying 2021; Lei, Ledent,
and Kloft 2020; Shen et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2021). However, most of the existing theoretical results are limited to
convex losses, which can not cover typical non-convex pairwise learning algorithms, e.g., neural networks-based pairwise learning (Köppel et al. 2019; Li et al. 2022), let alone
the ones with heavy-tailed gradient noise.
Moreover, most of the previous theoretical works on pairwise SGD and its variants require the bounded variance condition (Zhou, Liang, and Zhang 2022) and the sub-Gaussian
tail assumption limiting the tail performance of the gradient noise (Simsekli et al. 2019; Simsekli, Sagun, and
Gürbüzbalaban 2019). However, these assumptions may be
too idealistic in practice. Indeed, SGD may only involve the
bounded p-th moment for some p ∈ (1, 2] rather than the
bounded variance (Cutkosky and Mehta 2021), and it often shows the heavier-tailed gradient noise in many learning problems (Madden, Dall’Anese, and Becker 2020; Lei
and Tang 2021; Li and Liu 2022). For example, Simsekli,
Sagun, and Gürbüzbalaban (2019) statistically characterized
the gradient noise of SGD and stated that the gradient noise
expresses a heavy-tailed behavior under an isotropic model
(also see Zhou et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2020b)). The
heavy-tailed gradient noise may degrade the generalization
performance of SGD methods significantly (Nguyen et al.
2019; Hodgkinson and Mahoney 2021). However, Raj et al.
(2023a,b) found that heavy tails of gradient noise can help

Abstract
In recent years, there have been a growing number of works
studying the generalization properties of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) from the perspective of algorithmic stability.
However, few of them devote to simultaneously studying the
generalization and optimization for the non-convex setting,
especially pairwise SGD with heavy-tailed gradient noise.
This paper considers the impact of the heavy-tailed gradient
noise obeying sub-Weibull distribution on the stability-based
learning guarantees for non-convex pairwise SGD by investigating its generalization and optimization jointly. Specifically, based on two novel pairwise uniform model stability tools, we firstly bound the generalization error of pairwise SGD in the general non-convex setting after bridging
the quantitative relationships between stability and generalization error. Then, we further consider the practical heavytailed sub-Weibull gradient noise condition to establish a
refined generalization bound without the bounded gradient
condition. Finally, sharper error bounds for generalization
and optimization are built by introducing the gradient dominance condition. Comparing these results reveals that subWeibull gradient noise brings some positive dependencies on
the heavy-tailed strength for generalization and optimization.
Furthermore, we extend our analysis to the corresponding
pairwise minibatch SGD and derive the first stability-based
near-optimal generalization and optimization bounds which
are consistent with many empirical observations.

Introduction
Pairwise learning has attracted much attention in machine
learning literature, where its prediction performance is measured by pairwise loss function. Typical paradigms of pairwise learning include metric learning (Xing et al. 2002; Jin,
Wang, and Zhou 2009), ranking (Clémençon, Lugosi, and
Vayatis 2008; Agarwal and Niyogi 2009), AUC maximization (Cortes and Mohri 2003; Gao et al. 2013), gradient
learning (Mukherjee and Zhou 2006), and learning under the
minimum error entropy criterion (Prı́ncipe 2010). Despite
enjoying the benefits of particular contrastive motivations,
pairwise learning often suffers from a heavy computational
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding authors.

15803

