The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MotionCraft: Crafting Whole-Body Motion with Plug-and-Play
Multimodal Controls
Yuxuan Bian1 , Ailing Zeng2 * , Xuan Ju1 , Xian Liu1 , Zhaoyang Zhang1 , Wei Liu2 , Qiang Xu1∗
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Tencent, Guangdong Province, China

Abstract

2024b; Ling et al. 2023). Text-to-motion (T2M) primarily generate torso movements based on text descriptions (Guo et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023), while speech-togesture (S2G) synthesizes gestures and facial expressions
from first-person audio (Liu et al. 2024a; Yi et al. 2023).
Music-to-dance (M2D) involves more complex correlations between third-person music and full-body movements (Li et al. 2023). Due to these distinct distributions,
prior works have typically focused on individual tasks to
avoid challenges in cross-task generalization.
➠ Optimization challenges under mixed conditions: Existing multimodal motion generation approaches attempt
to unify diverse control signals (E.g., texts, music, and
speech) by projecting them into a shared space. This unification is achieved through methods like transformer token embeddings (Zhou, Wan, and Wang 2023) and ImageBind’s feature space (Girdhar et al. 2023), and it faces
two key limitations: cross-modal alignment inconsistencies and optimization difficulties when handling conditions at varying granularities (Team et al. 2023).
➠ Non-uniform whole-body motion format and evaluation: Finally, there are no high-quality multimodal
whole-body human motion generation benchmarks with
unified motion representation and evaluation pipelines.
In this work, we propose a unified motion diffusion transformer, MotionCraft, that crafts whole-body motion with
plug-and-play multimodal controls, generating fine-grained
motions aligned with given texts, speech, or music. It also
supports simultaneously generating motion with multiple
conditions, such as text combined with speech or music.
To enable precise control over specific modalities while
preserving semantic coherence and avoiding training conflicts, MotionCraft implements a hierarchical two-stage multimodal generation, progressing from coarse to fine control.
The first stage develops core motion generation capabilities
using broad textual guidance, while the second stage introduces fine-grained control modules on top of the frozen
first-stage backbone. To address motion distribution drifts
across various generation scenarios, we analyze human motion kinematics and distribution using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding. We find that motion distributions
corresponding to different control signals can be decomposed into static human topology structures and dynamic
topology relationships that can be generalizable across dif-

Whole-body multimodal motion generation, controlled by
text, speech, or music, has numerous applications including
video generation and character animation. However, employing a unified model to process different condition modalities presents two main challenges: motion distribution drifts
across different tasks (e.g., co-speech gestures and text-driven
daily actions) and the complex optimization of mixed conditions with varying granularities (e.g., text and audio). In
this paper, we propose MotionCraft, a unified diffusion transformer that crafts whole-body motion with plug-and-play
multimodal control. Our framework employs a coarse-to-fine
training strategy, starting with the text-to-motion semantic
pre-training, followed by the multimodal low-level control
adaptation. To effectively learn and transfer motion knowledge across different distributions, we design MC-Attn for
parallel modeling of static and dynamic human topology
graphs. To overcome the motion format inconsistency of existing benchmarks, we introduce MC-Bench, the first available multimodal whole-body motion generation benchmark
based on the unified SMPL-X format. Extensive experiments
show that MotionCraft achieves state-of-the-art performance
on various standard motion generation tasks.

Code — https://cure-lab.github.io/MotionCraft

Introduction
Whole-body human motion generation with multimodal
controls (Zhang et al. 2024b), which produces coherent human movements based on multimodal conditions, has numerous applications, including human video generation (Hu
2024) and character animation (Zhang et al. 2023a).
Recent advancements in single-conditioned motion generation can generate realistic motion from conditions with
varying granularities, including text descriptions (Guo et al.
2022; Zhang et al. 2023c), music clips (Siyao et al. 2022;
Li et al. 2023), and speech segments (Liu et al. 2024a; Chen
et al. 2024). However, extending them to whole-body motion
generation with multimodal controls within a unified model
introduces several significant challenges:
➠ Motion distribution drifts: Motion patterns exhibit significant variations across different contexts (Zhang et al.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1880

