The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FBRT-YOLO: Faster and Better for Real-Time Aerial Image Detection
Yao Xiao, Tingfa Xu* , Yu Xin, Jianan Li∗
Beijing Institute of Technology
{3220220586, ciom xtf1,3220220587,lijianan}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

Crop

Embedded flight devices with visual capabilities have become essential for a wide range of applications. In aerial image detection, while many existing methods have partially addressed the issue of small target detection, challenges remain
in optimizing small target detection and balancing detection
accuracy with efficiency. These issues are key obstacles to the
advancement of real-time aerial image detection. In this paper, we propose a new family of real-time detectors for aerial
image detection, named FBRT-YOLO, to address the imbalance between detection accuracy and efficiency. Our method
comprises two lightweight modules: Feature Complementary
Mapping Module (FCM) and Multi-Kernel Perception Unit
(MKP), designed to enhance object perception for small targets in aerial images. FCM focuses on alleviating the problem
of information imbalance caused by the loss of small target
information in deep networks. It aims to integrate spatial positional information of targets more deeply into the network,
better aligning with semantic information in the deeper layers to improve the localization of small targets. We introduce
MKP, which leverages convolutions with kernels of different sizes to enhance the relationships between targets of various scales and improve the perception of targets at different
scales. Extensive experimental results on three major aerial
image datasets, including Visdrone, UAVDT, and AI-TOD,
demonstrate that FBRT-YOLO outperforms various real-time
detectors in terms of performance and speed.

Feature
Extraction

Feature
Integration

Prediction
Decoder

Previous Method
Feature Extraction
Spatial
Encoding

Crop

Prediction
Feature
Integration

Semantic
Encoding

:

Decoder

Complementary Mapping Relationship

Our Method

Figure 1: The previous method overlooked the embedding
of spatial information in deeper layers of the backbone network during feature extraction, leading to spatial semantic
inconsistencies. Our method aims to transfer shallow spatial location information into deeper layers of the network
during the feature extraction process, thereby enhancing the
expression of semantic information.

burden, hampering real-time performance. A key challenge
is the mismatch between low-resolution semantic information from deep networks and high-resolution spatial information from shallow networks. Feature pyramids (2017) address this by integrating deep and shallow features, enhancing small object localization and multi-scale feature expression while improving computational efficiency. However, as
shown in Fig. 1(a), backbone networks still struggle with
integrating and preserving shallow information, leading to
feature mismatch issues.
To address the challenges associated with object detection
in aerial images, we aim to achieve a more effective network
design that meets the requirements for both accuracy and efficiency in real-time aerial image analysis. In this paper, we
propose a novel network that includes two lightweight modules: the Feature Complementary Mapping Module (FCM)
and the Multi-Kernel Perception Unit (MKP). Firstly, to alleviate information imbalance within the backbone network
and promote better integration of semantic and spatial location information, we introduce the Feature Complementary Mapping Module (FCM). FCM implicitly encodes the
target’s spatial location information into high-dimensional

Code — https://github.com/galaxy-oss/FCM.

Introduction
Recent advancements in deep neural networks have significantly improved object detection in low-resolution natural
images (2022; 2023). However, these methods struggle with
efficiency and accuracy on high-resolution aerial images, especially in resource-constrained flight equipment. Key challenges include: i) detecting objects that are small or obscured
by backgrounds in aerial images, and ii) balancing accuracy
with real-time detection requirements on devices with limited computational resources.
To improve small object detection, increasing image resolution (2017; 2020) is common but adds computational
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8673

