The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DCC: Differentiable Cardinality Constraints for Partial Index Tracking
Wooyeon Jo1,3 , Hyunsouk Cho1,2 *
2

1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Ajou University, Suwon, Republic of Korea
Department of Software and Computer Engineering, Ajou University, Suwon, Republic of Korea
3
The AI Lab Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea
{qt5828, hyunsouk}@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract

constraints enforce a limit on the number of selected stocks,
resulting in a discrete solution space, unlike the continuous
one encountered in full replication. ii) Combinatorial Complexity: These constraints give rise to a combinatorial optimization problem, where all possible combinations must
be considered. Their independent and non-continuous nature complicates to reformulate the problem into a form
that can be solved using traditional mathematical optimization techniques, such as those requiring linearity, convexity,
or differentiability. iii) Computational Complexity: Finding
a solution that satisfies the cardinality constraint is classified as an NP-hard problem, characterized by high computational complexity, making it difficult to identify efficient
solutions. Due to these inherent characteristics, traditional
mathematical optimization approaches, which were effective for solving full replication problems, struggle with partial replication. Consequently, heuristic methods (Beasley,
Meade, and Chang 2003; Wu, Kwon, and Costa 2017; Erwin
and Engelbrecht 2023; Kabbani 2022; Zheng et al. 2020)
have been proposed to address partial replication. However,
these heuristic approaches have significant drawbacks, including the non-interpretability of some solution processes
and the persistence of high complexity.
To overcome these limitations, it would be advantageous to transform cardinality constraints into a form that
can be tackled using mathematical optimization techniques.
Thus, we propose the Differentiable Cardinality Constraint
(DCC), which is not only adaptable to mathematical optimization techniques but also ensures the enforcement of actual cardinality constraints. In summary, our contributions
are as follows:

Index tracking is a popular passive investment strategy aimed
at optimizing portfolios, but fully replicating an index can
lead to high transaction costs. To address this, partial replication have been proposed. However, the cardinality constraint renders the problem non-convex, non-differentiable,
and often NP-hard, leading to the use of heuristic or neural network-based methods, which can be non-interpretable
or have NP-hard complexity. To overcome these limitations,
We propose a Differentiable Cardinality Constraint (DCC)
for index tracking and introduce a floating-point precisionaware method to address implementation issues. We theoretically prove our methods calculate cardinality accurately and
enforce actual cardinality with polynomial time complexity.
We propose the range of the hyperparameter ensures that our
method has no error in real implementations, based on theoretical proof and experiment. Our method applied to mathematical method outperforms baseline methods across various
datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of the identified hyperparameter.

1

Introduction

Index tracking, particularly through full replication, is one
of the most widely used strategies in portfolio optimization.
This approach constructs a portfolio that mimics a specific
market index by including all constituent stocks with corresponding weights. Full replication can be effectively solved
as a basic regression problem using mathematical optimization techniques, enabling the efficient and precise portfolio construction. However, this method assigns continuous
weights to all stocks in the portfolio, leading to significant
transaction costs—a critical challenge in real-world investment scenarios. To mitigate these costs, partial replication
has been proposed (Meade and Salkin 1989), (Ertenlice and
Kalayci 2018), where only a subset of stocks is assigned
weights, reducing the overall number of transactions. Partial
replication extends full replication by incorporating a cardinality constraint to limit the number of stocks.
Cardinality constraints, integral to partial replication, exhibit several notable technical challenges (Chang et al. 2000;
Pandey and Banerjee 2024): i) Discreteness: Cardinality

1. We propose DCC, applicable to any optimization algorithm handling differentiable constraints, particularly using the Lagrangian multiplier method for partial replication.
2. To address implementation challenges, we introduce a
floating-point precision-aware variant, DCCf pp , ensuring accurate enforcement of cardinality constraints.
3. We establish conditions for the constant a in DCCf pp ,
providing accurate cardinality calculations and constraint
enforcement.
4. We validate DCCf pp ’s performance in partial replication
using the SLSQP method, demonstrating improved re-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11264

