The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RDPI: A Refine Diffusion Probability Generation Method for Spatiotemporal
Data Imputation
Zijin Liu1 , Xiang Zhao2 , You Song2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{liuzijin, by2321118, songyou}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Schaar 2018; Che et al. 2018), Transformer-based Networks
(Vaswani et al. 2017; Du, Côté, and Liu 2023; Shan, Li,
and Oliva 2023), and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Cini,
Marisca, and Alippi 2021; Marisca, Cini, and Alippi 2022)
have been widely employed. These methods leverage the
powerful representation learning capabilities of neural networks to learn complex spatiotemporal patterns from data
and use learned models to predict missing data. However,
deterministic methods often lack modeling of data uncertainty, which can pose challenges when dealing with complex spatiotemporal dependencies.
Probabilistic methods use statistical models or machine
learning techniques to model the probability distribution of
data and perform imputation based on these distributions.
In addition to Variational Autoencoders (VAE) (Kim et al.
2023; Mulyadi, Jun, and Suk 2021; Fortuin et al. 2020) and
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Luo et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2019; Miao et al. 2021), other methods such as
generative models and Bayesian networks are also utilized.
These methods not only learned distributions from existing
data, but also leveraged the latent structures and patterns
within the data to handle data uncertainty. For example, VAE
learns a latent-space representation of the data, effectively
imputing missing data.
To better simulate the diffusion process of data over time
and space and capture the dynamic changes and complex
dependencies of spatiotemporal data, researchers have proposed methods based on diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Han, Zheng, and Zhou 2022). The Conditional
Diffusion model for Imputation (CDI) (Tashiro et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023) is widely adopted as a typical approach. However, traditional CDI models often only
consider conditional factors during denoising network training, neglecting them in the forward and imputation process.
This limitation may result in conditional models that fail to
fully capture the complex dependencies in spatiotemporal
traffic data, thereby affecting their performance in practical
data imputation tasks.
To address the key challenges in spatiotemporal data imputation, we propose a novel two-stage refined diffusion
probability imputation (RDPI) framework. In the first stage,
a preliminary estimate is generated using an initial network.
In the second stage, a novel conditional diffusion model is
proposed to refine the results. By integrating conditional in-

Spatiotemporal data imputation plays a crucial role in various fields such as traffic flow monitoring, air quality assessment, and climate prediction. However, spatiotemporal
data collected by sensors often suffer from temporal incompleteness, and the sparse and uneven distribution of sensors
leads to missing data in the spatial dimension. Among existing methods, autoregressive approaches are prone to error accumulation, while simple conditional diffusion models
fail to adequately capture the spatiotemporal relationships between observed and missing data. To address these issues,
we propose a novel two-stage Refined Diffusion Probability
Impuation (RDPI) framework based on an initial network and
a conditional diffusion model. In the initial stage, deterministic imputation methods are used to generate preliminary estimates of the missing data. In the refinement stage, residuals
are treated as the diffusion target, and observed values are innovatively incorporated into the forward process. This results
in a conditional diffusion model better suited for spatiotemporal data imputation, bridging the gap between the preliminary estimates and the true values. Experiments on multiple
datasets demonstrate that RDPI not only achieves state-ofthe-art imputation performance but also significantly reduces
sampling computational costs.

Introduction
Spatiotemporal data encompass both temporal and spatial
dimensions, primarily including traffic flow data, meteorological data, environmental monitoring data, etc. playing a crucial role in scientific research and social development. However, due to equipment aging, sensor malfunctions, or communication issues, spatiotemporal data often
experiences partial or even complete data loss from sensors, which severely affects the reliability and effectiveness
of subsequent analyses. Therefore, effectively imputing spatiotemporal data has become a crucial research issue.
Currently, methods for addressing spatiotemporal data
imputation issues are mainly categorized into deterministic methods, probabilistic methods, and diffusion methods.
Deterministic methods attempt to impute values using rules
or deterministic algorithms, such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Cao et al. 2018; Yoon, Zame, and van der
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12255

