The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FreeGen: Bridging Visual-Linguistic Discrepancies Towards Diffusion-based
Pixel-level Data Synthesis
Wenzhuang Wang1,2 , Mingcan Ma2 , Yong Chen2 , Changqun Xia3∗ , Zhenbao Liang2 , Jia Li1 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
Geely Automobile Research Institute
3
Pengcheng Laboratory
{wz wang, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn, xiachq@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion model has inspired research into textto-data synthesis without human intervention, where spatial
attentions correlated with semantic entities in text prompts
are primarily interpreted as pseudo-masks. However, these
vannila attentions often deliver visual-linguistic discrepancies, in which the associations between image features and
entity-level tokens are unstable and divergent, yielding inferior masks for realistic applications, especially in more practical open-vocabulary settings. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel text-guided self-driven generative paradigm,
termed FreeGen, which addresses the discrepancies by recalibrating intrinsic visual-linguistic correlations and serves
as a real-data-free method to automatically synthesize openvocabulary pixel-level data for arbitrary entities. Specifically,
we first learn an Attention Self-Rectification mechanism to
reproject the inherent attention matrices to achieve robust
semantic alignment, thereby obtaining class-discriminative
masks. A Temporal Fluctuation Factor is present to assess
mask quality based on its variation over uniform sampling
timesteps, enabling the selection of reliable masks. These
masks are then employed as self-supervised signals to support the learning of an Entity-level Grounding Decoder in
a self-training manner, thus producing open-vocabulary segmentation results. Extensive experiments show that the existing segmenters trained on FreeGen narrow the performance
gap with real data counterparts and remarkably outperform
the state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: The visualization of visual-linguistic correspondences between our FreeGen and other methods. Compared
to (a) DiffuMask (Wu et al. 2023b) and (b) Dataset Diffusion (Nguyen et al. 2024), Our FreeGen (c) can obtain better
visual-linguistic correlations.

improvements and urge scholars to rethink model-centric semantic segmentation from a data-centric perspective.
In light of generative models, an alternative strategy aims
to harness them to synthesize images with ground truth,
thereby augmenting or even replacing the role for real data
in downstream tasks. Predominant methods (Zhang et al.
2021; Li et al. 2022b) involves utilizing GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018) to
generate pixel-level data. However, due to the unattainable
Nash equilibrium, these works often produce monotonous
images with imprecise masks. Inspired by the remarkable
success of latent diffusion model (LDM) (Rombach et al.
2022), researchers are unlocking their possibilities in generating image-mask pairs based on free-form text prompts
without manual intervention, i.e., text-to-data synthesis.
In line with a common thought, the concurrent works Diffusionseg (Ma et al. 2023), DiffuMask (Wu et al. 2023b)
and Attn2Mask (Yoshihashi et al. 2023) directly mine crossattention associations, which bind visual features and entity tokens in the text prompt, to roughly identify object
positions and generate semantic labels. Nevertheless, as

Introduction
Modern semantic segmenters typically demand vast volumes of visual images paired with dense annotations to
achieve satisfactory fine-grained recognition. However, the
procedure for collecting large-scale images and labelling
them with dense labels is extremely cost-prohibitive for primary manual efforts. Moreover, due to concerns over data
privacy in real-world applications, acquiring a considerable
number of training data poses a formidable barrier. The
above challenges significantly hinder further performance
* Correspondence should be addressed to Changqun Xia (xiachq@pcl.ac.cn) and Jia Li (jiali@buaa.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7916

