The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pre-Trained Vision-Language Models as Noisy Partial Annotators
Qian-Wei Wang1,2 , Yuqiu Xie1 , Letian Zhang1 , Zimo Liu2 , Shu-Tao Xia1,2
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Pengcheng Laboratory
{wanggw21, jieyq22, zlt23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuzm@pcl.ac.cn, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

aforementioned assumption is relaxed, allowing the groundtruth labels of some noisy samples to appear outside their
candidate label sets.
Previous research on NPLL typically assumes that the
partial annotations of training dataset originate from manually labelling manners. With the emergence of powerful pretrained vision-language models, e.g. CLIP (Radford et al.
2021), which learns from massive ”image-natural language”
pairs and can generalize to unseen tasks by leveraging textual categorical description, it is natural to consider using
these models to automatically label training samples instead
of relying on laborious manual annotation.
In this paper, we investigate the pipeline of employing
pre-trained vision-language model CLIP to annotate images
of downstream tasks with partial labels, and then training
a specialized model using these partial labels. Here, each
prompt template corresponds to a classification result of a
sample, and the classification results from multiple prompt
templates collectively form the candidate label set. Compared to simulated settings such as random noise (also called
symmetric noise), which are typically experimented on by
previous NPLL research, training on datasets annotated by
CLIP becomes significantly more challenging. This is because the noise here is instance-dependent and follows the
underlying patterns of the pre-trained model. Specifically,
even if a dataset contains a large amount of random noise,
since the model cannot learn any effective patterns from it,
the algorithm can easily identify that those noisy labels conflict with the current model’s output and consequently correct them by assigning pseudo-labels. However, when dealing with noise from a pre-trained model, the algorithm can
easily misinterpret noisy labels as high-confidence true labels, since they may align with the patterns learned from the
pre-trained model’s annotations.
To address this issue, we propose a novel Collaborative
consistency Regularization (Co-Reg) method. Our method
simultaneously trains two neural networks, which collaboratively purify training labels for each other, called CoPseudo-Labeling, and performs consistency regularization
between label and representation levels. In Co-PseudoLabeling, we train two neural networks simultaneously and
each network divides the pre-trained model’s annotated partial labels into valid and noisy, which are then provided to
the other network for training. This approach effectively

In noisy partial label learning, each training sample is associated with a set of candidate labels, and the ground-truth label may be contained within this set. With the emergence of
powerful pre-trained vision-language models, e.g. CLIP, it is
natural to consider using these models to automatically label
training samples instead of relying on laborious manual annotation. In this paper, we investigate the pipeline of learning
with CLIP annotated noisy partial labels and propose a novel
collaborative consistency regularization method, in which
we simultaneously train two neural networks, which collaboratively purify training labels for each other, called CoPseudo-Labeling, and perform consistency regularization between label and representation levels. For instance-dependent
noise that embodies the underlying patterns of the pre-trained
model, our method employs multiple mechanisms to avoid
overfitting to noisy annotations, effectively mines information from potentially noisy sample set while iteratively optimizing both representations and pseudo-labels during the
training process. Comparison experiments with various kinds
of annotations and weakly supervised methods, as well as
other pre-trained model application methods demonstrates
the effectiveness of method and the feasibility of incorporating weakly supervised learning into the distillation of pretrained models.

Code — https://github.com/Portugas0807/Co-Reg

Introduction
Partial label learning (PLL) (Lv et al. 2020; Zhang and Yu
2015; Lyu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022a; Wu, Wang, and
Zhang 2022), a type of weakly supervised learning (WSL),
deals with the classification problem where each training example is associated with multiple candidate labels, called
partial label, among which only one label is the groundtruth. Due to the fundamental assumption that the groundtruth label must be within the candidate label set, which cannot be satisfied in many scenarios and thus affects the practical applicability of PLL, recent years have seen a growing focus on noisy partial label learning (NPLL) (Qiao et al.
2023; Shi et al. 2023b,a; Wang et al. 2022b). In NPLL, the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21189

