The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Semi-Supervised Online Cross-Modal Hashing
Xiao Kang 1 , Xingbo Liu2 * , Xuening Zhang 3 , Wen Xue 1 , Xiushan Nie2, 4 , Yilong Yin 1
1
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan 250101, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong Jianzhu University, Jinan 250101, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
4
Shandong Yunhai Guochuang Cloud Computing Equipment Industry Innovation Co., Ltd, Jinan, China
{sckx, sclxb, ctxw}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, yukizhang0527@outlook.com, niexiushan@163.com, ylyin@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Online cross-modal hashing has gained increasing interest due
to its ability to encode streaming data and update hash functions simultaneously. Existing online methods often assume
either fully supervised or completely unsupervised settings.
However, they overlook the prevalent and challenging scenario
of semi-supervised cross-modal streaming data, where diverse
data types, including labeled/unlabeled, paired/unpaired, and
multi-modal, are intertwined. To address this issue, we propose Semi-Supervised Online Cross-modal Hashing (SSOCH).
It presents an alignment-free pseudo-labeling strategy that extracts semantic information from unlabeled streaming data
without relying on pairing relations. Furthermore, we design
an online tri-consistent preserving scheme, integrating pseudolabeled data regularization, discriminative label embedding,
and fine-grained similarity preservation. This scheme fully
explores consistency across data annotation, modalities, and
streaming chunks, improving the model’s adaptiveness in these
challenging scenarios. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrate the superiority of SSOCH under various scenarios, highlighting the importance of semi-supervised
learning for online cross-modal hashing.

Introduction
With the continuous accumulation and explosive growth of
multimedia data, cross-modal hashing has received extensive
attention in various domains, such as image-text retrieval,
video-audio synchronization, and personalized multimedia
recommendation systems. Despite the inspiring performance,
traditional batch-based cross-modal hashing methods have
struggled to adapt to the dynamic and timely retrieval of
streaming data (Sun et al. 2023; Sun, Peng, and Ren 2024).
In response to this challenge, online cross-modal hashing has
emerged (Liu et al. 2024). It aims to generate hash codes
on time for the continuously growing streaming data and
dynamically update the hash functions to accommodate the
evolving data characteristics (Zhu et al. 2020).
Existing online cross-modal hashing methods can be
broadly categorized into the supervised (Wang, Luo, and
Xu 2020; Zhan et al. 2021; Kang et al. 2024b) and the unsupervised methods (Xie, Shen, and Zhu 2016; Liu et al. 2022a;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17770

Li et al. 2022). Supervised methods focus on enhancing and
leveraging labels to capture the cross-modal consistency in
streaming data, such as Online Latent Semantic Hashing
(OLSH) (Yao et al. 2019) and Online Discriminative Crossmodal Hashing (ODCH) (Kang et al. 2023b). They attempt to
learn semantic-preserving embeddings under the guidance of
designed semantic labels, measuring the similarity of multimodal streaming data more meticulously. Unsupervised methods primarily lay emphasis on decomposing and reconstructing feature representations to explore the geometric structure
of streaming data. For example, Online Manifold-Guided
Hashing (OMGH) (Liu et al. 2022a) designs a matrix trifactorization framework to decompose high-dimensional features into modality-specific representations and hash codes.
Dynamic Prototype Online Cross-modal Hashing (DPOCH)
(Kang et al. 2024a) generates prototypes incrementally as
sketches of accumulated data and updates them dynamically
for adapting streaming data.
Despite promising advancements, existing online crossmodal hashing methods typically assume either a fully supervised or completely unsupervised scenario. These methods
have overlooked a crucial fact: Real-world scenarios are constantly semi-supervised streaming data scenarios, i.e. data
arrives in a streaming fashion, and each data chunk contains
a small number of labeled instance pairs as well as a large
number of unlabeled and unpaired instances (Zhang, Peng,
and Yuan 2020). The complexity of such a scenario, including data distribution variations across chunks, heterogeneous
modalities, and the lack of supervision and pairing information, poses severe challenges for learning hash codes and
updating hash functions online. To the best of our knowledge,
there are no hashing methods specifically designed to handle
semi-supervised online cross-modal retrieval scenarios.
There are several batch-based semi-supervised crossmodal hashing methods, such as Weakly-supervised Crossmodal Hashing (WCHash) (Liu et al. 2022b), SemiSupervised Semantic-Preserving Hashing (S3PH) (Wang
et al. 2019), and Three-Stage Semi-Supervised Hashing
(TS3H) (Fan et al. 2023). A convincing strategy of these
methods is to complete the semantic label and utilize the
pseudo-labels to discover the similar relationship among
multi-modal data. Despite encouraging retrieval performance,
it is not well-suited for adapting to more complex streaming
data scenarios due to the following reasons: 1) The pseudo-

