The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DECT: Harnessing LLM-assisted Fine-Grained Linguistic Knowledge and
Label-Switched and Label-Preserved Data Generation for Diagnosis of
Alzheimer’s Disease
Tingyu Mo1 , Jacqueline C. K. Lam1 * , Victor O.K. Li1 * , Lawrence Y. L. Cheung2
1

2

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
Department of Linguistics and Modern Languages, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{motingyu, jcklam, vli}@eee.hku.hk, yllcheung@cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

Scheltens, and Hodges 2004; Venugopalan et al. 2021) is
crucial for timely intervention and providing proper care to
patients, potentially slowing the progression of the disease
and improving their quality of life.
AD can be characterized by a range of biomarkers across
different modalities (Blennow and Zetterberg 2018), including demographic, cognitive, brain imaging, blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and genetic markers. Existing diagnostic methods for AD (Young et al. 2024b) often rely
on a combination of clinical assessments, neuropsychological tests, and brain imaging techniques. The most reliable biomarkers adopted by clinicians for AD detection are
highly invasive, time-consuming, and expensive (Laske et al.
2015). Brain imaging and CSF analysis methods face challenges when implemented on a large scale and may not effectively detect the early stages of disease progression. This
underscores the need for more accessible and scalable diagnostic tools for detecting AD in the early phases of disease development (Li et al. 2021). Recent studies have highlighted language impairment as one of the earliest and obvious indicators of decline detectable among AD patients and
the potential of using Cognitive-Linguistic (CL) markers for
predicting AD onset and progression (Fraser, Meltzer, and
Rudzicz 2016; Eyigoz et al. 2020). These findings underscore the desirability of using speech or speech transcript
for early AD detection and therapeutic treatment monitoring. Consequently, there is a growing interest in developing
automated diagnostic tools to analyse linguistic patterns of
AD speech and detect signs of AD onset.
One promising approach is to analyse the spontaneous
speech data of AD patients (Luz et al. 2021b; Yang et al.
2022). However, leveraging spontaneous speech or speech
transcript for AD detection presents significant challenges.
Existing spontaneous speech datasets, such as those from
DementiaBank (Becker et al. 1994), are presented in dialogues, in a Q&A format. They are limited in size and duration, lacking longitudinal temporal and demographic variation. The limited availability of labeled data and the variability in AD patients’ speech styles and linguistic patterns
make it challenging to develop robust linguistic-based diagnostic models that can generalize well to diverse patient
linguistic populations, which may require taking into account their population-specific linguistic features. Moreover,
the speech transcripts of patient-interviewer dialogues often

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is an irreversible neurodegenerative disease affecting 50 million people worldwide. Low-cost,
accurate identification of key markers of AD is crucial for
timely diagnosis and intervention. Language impairment is
one of the earliest signs of cognitive decline, which can be
used to discriminate AD patients from normal control (NC)
individuals. Patient-interviewer dialogues may be used to detect such impairments, but they are often mixed with ambiguous, noisy, and irrelevant information, making the AD
detection task difficult. Moreover, the limited availability of
AD speech samples and variability in their speech styles pose
significant challenges in developing robust speech-based AD
detection models. To address these challenges, we propose
DECT, a novel speech-based domain-specific approach leveraging large language models (LLMs) for fine-grained linguistic analysis and label-switched label-preserved (LSLP) data
generation. Our study presents four novelties: (1) We harness
the summarizing capabilities of LLMs to identify and distill key Cognitive-Linguistic (CL) information (atoms) from
noisy speech transcripts, effectively filtering irrelevant information. (2) We leverage the inherent linguistic knowledge
of LLMs to extract linguistic markers from unstructured and
heterogeneous audio transcripts. (3) We exploit the compositional ability of LLMs to generate LSLP AD speech transcripts consisting of diverse linguistic patterns to overcome
the speech data scarcity challenge and enhance the robustness
of AD detection models. (4) We use the augmented AD textual speech transcript dataset and a more fine-grained representation of AD textual speech transcript data to fine-tune the
AD detection model. The results have shown that DECT, an
integrated, LLM-assisted, speech-based AD detection model
demonstrates superior model performance with an 11% improvement in AD detection accuracy on the datasets from DementiaBank compared to the baselines.

Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an irreversible neurodegenerative disorder affecting 50 million people worldwide. It progressively impairs cognitive functions, leading to memory
loss, confusion, and difficulty in conducting daily activities normally. Early and accurate diagnosis of AD (Nestor,
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24885

