The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MORE: Molecule Pretraining with Multi-Level Pretext Task
Yeongyeong Son1 , Dasom Noh1 , Gyoungyoung Heo1 , Gyoung Jin Park1 , Sunyoung Kwon1, 2, 3 *
1

Department of Information Convergence Engineering, Pusan National University, Korea
2
School of Biomedical Convergence Engineering, Pusan National University, Korea
3
Center for Artificial Intelligence Research, Pusan National University, Korea
{vlddus123, ds.noh, qorskds, rudwls2717, sy.kwon}@pusan.ac.kr

Abstract

et al. 2018), and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) leverage SSL
techniques for efficient pretraining.
This trend in the molecular field is no exception. Obtaining labeled data for molecular tasks is challenging due
to the reliance on costly and inconsistent wet lab experiments, whereas unlabeled molecular data is relatively abundant. Inspired by the success of SSL in NLP and CV, researchers have explored SSL for molecular tasks (Moon, Im,
and Kwon 2023; Hu et al. 2019; Rong et al. 2020). SSL
learns the representations from the data itself, guided by the
predefined pretext task. Thus, the design of the pretext task
is crucial for the performance of SSL (Fang et al. 2024).
The current pretext tasks for molecular graphs often focus
on partial molecular properties. Masked node/edge reconstruction (Hu et al. 2019; Hou et al. 2022; Tan et al. 2023)
captures local features. Similarly, motif-based methods (Ji
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021) emphasize local structural information. Contrastive methods (You et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2021) exploit global graph agreements but often rely on 2D
topological structures, overlooking 3D geometry. Low-level
semantics such as masking and augmentation have been
prevalently used, but high-level semantics such as molecular
weight and polar surface area have been overlooked.
To serve as a fundamental base for the molecular domain,
pretext tasks must exploit different perspectives simultaneously, and the learned representation must be versatile, rich,
and highly generalizable. We propose a novel pretraining
method, Multi-level mOlecule gRaph prE-train (MORE),
which integrates four graph viewpoints: node-, subgraph-,
graph-, and 3D-level, as shown in Figure 1. Our subgraphand graph-level pretext task is different from conventional
approaches, learning predefined local or global information.
To evaluate MORE, we maintain the same neural network
architecture and hyperparameters across methods, varying
only the pretext tasks during pretraining. We use scaffold
split for downstream datasets to assess robustness and generalizability. We compare linear probing and full fine-tuning
performance. Despite pretraining on large data, full finetuning can lead to a forgetting problem, where previously
learned knowledge is lost (Zhou and Cao 2021). We analyze
forgetting in pretrained models, examine individual pretext
tasks, and investigate the scalability of dataset size in pretraining. Our contributions are as follows:

Foundation models, serving as pretrained fundamental bases
for a variety of downstream tasks, try to learn versatile, rich,
and generalizable representations that can be quickly adopted
through fine-tuning or even in a zero-shot manner for specific applications. Foundation models for molecular representation are no exception. Various pretext tasks have been
proposed for pretraining molecular representations, but these
approaches have focused on only single or partial properties.
Molecules are complicated and require different perspectives
depending on purposes: insights from local- or global-level,
2D-topology or 3D-spatial arrangement, and low- or highlevel semantics. We propose Multi-level mOlecule gRaph
prE-train (MORE) to consider these multiple aspects of
molecules simultaneously. Experimental results demonstrate
that our proposed method effectively learns comprehensive
representations by showing outstanding performance in both
linear probing and full fine-tuning. Notably, in quantification
experiments of forgetting the pretrained models, MORE consistently exhibits minimal and stable parameter changes with
the smallest performance gap, whereas other methods show
substantial and inconsistent fluctuations with larger gaps. The
effectiveness of individual pretext tasks varies depending on
the problems being solved, which again highlights the need
for a multi-level perspective. Scalability experiments reveal
steady improvements of MORE as the dataset size increases,
suggesting potential gains with larger datasets as well.

Code — https://github.com/IT-fatica/MORE

Introduction
Foundation models are pretrained on massive amounts of
diverse datasets, enabling effective adaptation to various
downstream tasks. Supervised pretraining based on human
labeling requires extensive labeled data, leading to drawbacks such as high cost, time consumption, label inconsistency, and limited scalability. Self-supervised learning
(SSL)-based pretraining does not require human manual labeling, so can be free from many of the drawbacks caused by
human labeling-based pretraining approaches. Recent foundation models like GPT (Radford et al. 2018), BERT (Devlin
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We design a multi-level pretext task to learn compre20531

