The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging the Semantic Granularity Gap Between Text and Frame Representations
for Partially Relevant Video Retrieval
WooJin Jun, WonJun Moon, Cheol-Ho Cho, MinSeok Jung, and Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{junwoojinjin, wjun0830, hoonchcho, minseokjung0328, jaepilheo}@gmail.com

Untrimmed Video

Abstract
Partially Relevant Video Retrieval (PRVR) addresses the
challenges of text-to-video retrieval in real-world scenarios
where untrimmed videos are prevalent. Traditional PRVR
methods encode videos at two feature scales: (1) frame-level
to capture fine details, and (2) clip-level to recognize broader
content. However, these approaches align both scales with a
single sentence representation, leading to suboptimal performance. In particular, we point out the level mismatch in aligning frame-level video features with a sentence representation, as the entire meaning of a sentence contains broader and
more diverse content than what frame-level features can encode. This misalignment causes frame-level features to capture broader contexts and overlook local fine details. To tackle
this issue, we propose a framework that represents a sentence as a set of multiple components, where each component aligns with frame-level semantics. Specifically, we introduce Semantic-Decomposed Matching (SDM) to adjust
the granularity of the text description to match them with
frame-level video features. In addition to the matching process, we develop the Adaptive Local Aggregator (ALA) to enhance video encoding in capturing finer local details, ensuring
precise text-video alignment at the frame level. ALA adaptively integrates multi-scale local details within short temporal spans obtained by enforcing a strict temporal aggregation
range. Finally, we reinforce detailed encoding at the frame
level with newly designed objectives for both modalities. Extensive experiments integrating our framework with existing
clip branches demonstrate its effectiveness and applicability,
highlighting significant improvements in PRVR performance.

…

…

Frame 12/173

…
Frame 56/173

Frame 45/173

Text Query
“Rachel walks over to Ross and then kisses him.”
Matching Level
Mismatch
…

…

…

…

…

…

…

Frame-level Video Features

Frame-level Video Features

(a) Existing Methods

(b) Ours

Sentence Feature

Semantic units

Text Encoding

…

1

…

Frame Feature

Text/Frame Matching

Figure 1: Comparison of the matching process in the framelevel branch. (a) Existing methods match the entire sentence
query to frame features, leading to a mismatch in content
granularity. (b) Our approach decomposes the broad semantics of a sentence into smaller units that each frame feature
can fully encompass. This aligns the content granularity in
the matching process, allowing the frame-level branch to focus on capturing fine details.

query. However, real-world videos are often lengthy and
untrimmed, containing diverse content. Consequently, typical text-to-video retrieval methods struggle to achieve optimal performance when applied to untrimmed videos, as they
are ill-equipped to identify the relevant segments.
To address this, Partially Relevant Video Retrieval (PRVR) has been proposed (Dong et al. 2022a).
PRVR aims to retrieve an untrimmed video from the storage
that contains the most relevant segment corresponding to
a given text query. The core challenges in PRVR lie in 1)
precisely encoding all varying lengths of contents in long
untrimmed videos and 2) aligning the features of the text
query with the video features in a joint representation space.
Traditional PRVR approaches (Dong et al. 2022a; Wang
et al. 2024c,b) primarily focus on the former challenge by
implementing dual encoding strategies to handle varying

Introduction

With the growing demand and supply of videos, text-tovideo retrieval has drawn significant attention in research
communities. Given a text query as input, text-to-video retrieval aims to retrieve the video most relevant to the query in
the video database (Luo et al. 2022; Deng et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2024a; Tian et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023; Gorti et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2020; Dong, Li, and Snoek 2018; Miech
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019a). The conventional paradigm
of text-to-video retrieval operates under the assumption that
videos are trimmed so that every frame is relevant to the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4166

