The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Speedup Techniques for Switchable Temporal Plan Graph Optimization
He Jiang, Muhan Lin, Jiaoyang Li
Carnegie Mellon University
{hejiangrivers, muhanlin, jiaoyangli}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) focuses on planning
collision-free paths for multiple agents. However, during the
execution of a MAPF plan, agents may encounter unexpected
delays, which can lead to inefficiencies, deadlocks, or even
collisions. To address these issues, the Switchable Temporal Plan Graph provides a framework for finding an acyclic
Temporal Plan Graph with the minimum execution cost under
delays, ensuring deadlock- and collision-free execution. Unfortunately, existing optimal algorithms, such as Mixed Integer Linear Programming and Graph-Based Switchable Edge
Search (GSES), are often too slow for practical use. This
paper introduces Improved GSES, which significantly accelerates GSES through four speedup techniques: stronger admissible heuristics, edge grouping, prioritized branching, and
incremental implementation. Experiments conducted on four
different map types with varying numbers of agents demonstrate that Improved GSES consistently achieves over twice
the success rate of GSES and delivers up to a 30-fold speedup
on instances where both methods successfully find solutions.

1

0

1

2

0

1
3
4
Execution cost = 7

(a) Grid

5

(b) TPG

0

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Execution cost = 11

(c) Delayed TPG

Figure 1: (a) shows an example of a MAPF problem. In the
initial MAPF plan, Agent 1 moves from A to H (red arrows)
and visits G first. Agent 2 moves from E to D (blue arrows)
and visits G after Agent 1. (b) shows the TPG of the initial plan. Each row of vertices encodes an agent’s path with
superscripts 1, 2 differentiating agents. The black arrow encodes the precedence that agent 2 can only visit G2 after
agent 1 arrives H 1 . The bold number near a vertex v i shows
the earliest possible time for agent i to arrive at this vertex.
The execution cost below the TPG shows the overall cost of
these two agents. (c) shows the TPG with a 2-timestep delay
at vertex A1 , which is encoded by two dashed vertices.

Introduction

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) (Stern et al. 2019) focuses on planning collision-free paths for multiple agents to
navigate from their starting locations to destinations. However, during execution, unpredictable delays can arise due
to mechanical differences, accidental events, or sim-to-real
gaps. For instance, in autonomous vehicle systems, a pedestrian crossing might force a vehicle to stop, delaying its
movements and potentially causing subsequent vehicles to
halt as well. If such delays are not managed properly, they
can lead to inefficiencies, deadlocks, or even collisions.
To address these issues, the Temporal Plan Graph (TPG)
framework was first introduced to ensure deadlock- and
collision-free execution (Hönig et al. 2016; Ma, Kumar, and
Koenig 2017). TPG encodes and enforces the order in which
agents visit the same location using a directed acyclic graph,
where directed edges represent precedence. However, the
strict precedence constraints often lead to unnecessary waiting. For example, as shown in Figure 1c, a delay by Agent
1 causes Agent 2 to wait unnecessarily at vertex F 2 because
TPG enforces the original order of visiting G. In such cases,

switching the visiting order of these two agents would allow
Agent 2 to proceed first, avoiding unnecessary delays.
To capture this idea, Berndt et al. (2024) introduced the
notion of a switchable edge that can be settled in one of
two directions, each representing one possible visiting order of two agents at a location. Then, they proposed the
Switchable Temporal Plan Graph (STPG), a superclass of
TPG that contains a set of switchable edges. By gradually
settling these switchable edges, STPG allows the search for
a Temporal Plan Graph (TPG) that encodes optimal visiting orders to minimize total travel time under delays. However, both Berndt’s original solution based on Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) and the subsequent Graph-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23212

