The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GRSN: Gated Recurrent Spiking Neurons for POMDPs and MARL
Lang Qin1,2 , Ziming Wang1,2 , Runhao Jiang1,2 , Rui Yan3 * , Huajin Tang1,2,4
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
4
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-Machine Integration, Zhejiang University
qinl@zju.edu.cn, zi_ming_wang@outlook.com, RhJiang@zju.edu.cn, Ryan@zjut.edu.cn, htang@zju.edu.cn

𝑎𝑡−1

1 0 0 1

𝑎𝑡

SNNs

Decoder

0 1 0 1

1 0 1 0

0 1 0 1

1 0 0 1

𝑆𝑡+1

𝑎𝑡+1

Figure 1: Temporal mismatch issue in SRL algorithms. The
figure shows the basic model of SRL methods; it uses spike
results of multiple time steps to decode for one-step value
function calculation or action selection in RL.

In SNN learning algorithms, firing rates are often used
to calculate continuous values due to the discrete nature of
spikes. However, the firing rates, which are in [0, 1], are
difficult to map onto continuous values (such as continuous
actions and Q-values) in RL that do not have value range
limitations. There are generally three types of approaches to
address or avoid this issue in order to achieve deep spiking
reinforcement learning (SRL): (1) ANN-SNN conversion
methods for RL; (2) a hybrid framework for the actor-critic
(AC) method; and (3) directly trained SNNs for RL.
The conversion algorithms (Patel et al. 2019; Tan, Patel,
and Kozma 2021) avoid the aforementioned mapping problem by using a pre-trained ANN-RL model to transform
the SNN model, thus avoiding direct involvement in the
learning process of RL algorithms. However, the conversion algorithms often require high simulation time steps
due to the computational precision requirement, resulting
in increased energy consumption and inference delay. To
reduce simulation steps, a hybrid framework (Tang, Kumar,
and Michmizos 2020; Tang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022)
for the AC method has been proposed. This approach combines spiking actor networks and artificial critic networks
and utilizes a gradient descent algorithm for collaborative
training. The critic networks that require precise calculations
are completed by ANN, while SNN is only used for selecting
actions. This hybrid framework successfully reduces the
need for simulation time steps, thereby reducing energy
consumption and inference delay.
Clearly, the hybrid framework method is only applicable
to RL algorithms based on the AC method. Additionally,

Code — https://github.com/StillWolf/GRSN-SNN
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.15597

1

SNNs

1 0 1 0

Spike Train

Spike Train

𝑆𝑡−1

𝑄 𝜋 (𝑆𝑡 −1 , 𝑎 𝑡−1 , 𝜃)

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are widely applied in various fields due to their energy-efficient and fast-inference
capabilities. Applying SNNs to reinforcement learning (RL)
can significantly reduce the computational resource requirements for agents and improve the algorithm’s performance
under resource-constrained conditions. However, in current
spiking reinforcement learning (SRL) algorithms, the simulation results of multiple time steps can only correspond to a
single-step decision in RL. This is quite different from the
real temporal dynamics in the brain and also fails to fully
exploit the capacity of SNNs to process temporal data. In
order to address this temporal mismatch issue and further
take advantage of the inherent temporal dynamics of spiking
neurons, we propose a novel temporal alignment paradigm
(TAP) that leverages the single-step update of spiking neurons to accumulate historical state information in RL and
introduces gated units to enhance the memory capacity of
spiking neurons. Experimental results show that our method
can solve partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) and multi-agent cooperation problems with similar performance as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) but
with about 50% power consumption.

Single-Step Decision
Single-Step Decision
Temporal Mismatch
Multi-Steps
Multi-Steps
𝑆𝑡
Decoder

Abstract

𝑄 𝜋 (𝑆𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝜃)

2

Introduction

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) possess unique spatiotemporal dynamics and all-or-none firing characteristics, enabling them to perform low-power and high-speed inference
on neuromorphic hardware (Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019;
Pei et al. 2019). With the continuous improvement of SNN
training algorithms, the learning capability and network
scalability of SNNs are gradually approaching those of
artificial neural networks (ANNs) (Wang et al. 2023; Lian
et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2023). Therefore, in recent years,
there have been more and more efforts to explore SNNs
as alternatives to ANNs in the field of deep reinforcement
learning (DRL), aiming to reduce the computational cost and
inference latency of intelligent agents.
* Author for correspondence.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1483

