The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SwiftTry: Fast and Consistent Video Virtual Try-On with Diffusion Models
Hung Nguyen* , Quang Qui-Vinh Nguyen* , Khoi Nguyen, Rang Nguyen
VinAI Research, Vietnam
{v.hungnm66, v.quangnqv, v.khoindm, v.rangnhm}@vinai.io

Abstract
Given an input video of a person and a new garment, the
objective of this paper is to synthesize a new video where
the person is wearing the specified garment while maintaining spatiotemporal consistency. Although significant advances have been made in image-based virtual try-on, extending these successes to video often leads to frame-to-frame
inconsistencies. Some approaches have attempted to address
this by increasing the overlap of frames across multiple video
chunks, but this comes at a steep computational cost due to
the repeated processing of the same frames, especially for
long video sequences. To tackle these challenges, we reconceptualize video virtual try-on as a conditional video inpainting task, with garments serving as input conditions. Specifically, our approach enhances image diffusion models by incorporating temporal attention layers to improve temporal
coherence. To reduce computational overhead, we propose
ShiftCaching, a novel technique that maintains temporal consistency while minimizing redundant computations. Furthermore, we introduce the TikTokDress dataset, a new video tryon dataset featuring more complex backgrounds, challenging
movements, and higher resolution compared to existing public datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms current baselines, particularly in terms of
video consistency and inference speed.

Figure 1: Results of our SwiftTry compared to those of
ViViD (Fang et al. 2024), a previous method for video tryon. Our method preserves garment texture detail and consistency while achieving over 60% faster runtime.
mands of processing long video sequences. Previous methods (Xu et al. 2024b; He et al. 2024; Fang et al. 2024) often
struggle with temporal inconsistencies, resulting in visual
artifacts and flickering between frames, which undermines
the realism of the virtual try-on experience. Additionally,
the high computational cost of rendering high-quality results
over extended sequences limits the practicality of these approaches in real-world applications.
Another challenge is the lack of an adequate evaluation
dataset. The first public video try-on dataset, VVT (Dong
et al. 2019b), only includes basic pattern garments, formfitting T-shirts, uniform backgrounds, static camera angles,
and repetitive human motions. More recently, ViViD (Fang
et al. 2024) introduced the first practical dataset for video
virtual try-on. However, it struggles to handle in-the-wild
scenarios, such as complex movements and diverse backgrounds, making it difficult to meet the demands of realworld applications. Moreover, the poor quality of video tryon results can often be attributed to the inaccurate masks extracted using human parsing segmentation (Li et al. 2020),
which are applied to each frame of the video.
In this paper, we address these challenges with two key
contributions. First, we introduce a new high-quality dataset,
named TikTokDress, consisting of 817 videos specifically

Introduction
Video virtual try-on is an emerging research area (Chen et al.
2021; Rogge et al. 2014; Pumarola et al. 2019; Dong et al.
2019b; Kuppa et al. 2021; Zhong et al. 2021; Jiang et al.
2022; He et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024b; Fang et al. 2024;
Zheng et al. 2024) with significant potential in fashion and
e-commerce. The ability to realistically visualize how a garment appears on a person in a video could transform online
shopping. However, despite recent advances in image-based
virtual try-on (He, Song, and Xiang 2022; Choi et al. 2021;
Lee et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2023; Zhu et al. 2023; Kim et al.
2023), extending these capabilities to video remains challenging due to the need for spatiotemporal consistency and
the high computational costs of processing long sequences.
A significant challenge in video virtual try-on is balancing
the need for temporal coherence with the computational de* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6200

