The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Practical Offloading for Fine-Tuning LLM on Commodity GPU
via Learned Sparse Projectors
Siyuan Chen1 * , Zhuofeng Wang2 , Zelong Guan1 , Yudong Liu1 , Phillip B. Gibbons1
1

Carnegie Mellon University,
2
Peking University
siyuanc3@andrew.cmu.edu, wangzf2003@stu.pku.edu.cn, zelongg@andrew.cmu.edu, yudongltech@gmail.com,
gibbons@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract

GPU

Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) requires significant memory, often exceeding the capacity of a single GPU.
A common solution to this memory challenge is offloading
compute and data from the GPU to the CPU. However, this
approach is hampered by the limited bandwidth of commodity
hardware, which constrains communication between the CPU
and GPU, and by slower matrix multiplications on the CPU.
In this paper, we present an offloading framework, LSPOffload, that enables near-native speed LLM fine-tuning on
commodity hardware through learned sparse projectors. Our
data-driven approach involves learning efficient sparse compressors that minimize communication with minimal precision
loss. Additionally, we introduce a novel layer-wise communication schedule to maximize parallelism between communication and computation. As a result, our framework can fine-tune
a 1.3 billion parameter model on a 4GB laptop GPU and a 6.7
billion parameter model on a 24GB NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU.
Compared to state-of-the-art offloading frameworks, our approach reduces end-to-end fine-tuning time by 33.1%-62.5%
when converging to the same accuracy.

S

𝑄𝑄𝑡𝑡

𝑑𝑑

𝑊𝑊0
∈ 𝑅𝑅 𝑚𝑚×𝑛𝑛
h

𝑃𝑃𝑡𝑡

CPU
∇𝑆𝑆
Δ𝑆𝑆

M

V

Optim. States

Frozen Parameters
Parameter & Optim. States
Learned Sparse Projector

Figure 1: LSP-Offload

Code — https://github.com/gulang2019/LSP-Offload

1

h

Introduction

Recent years have highlighted the remarkable success of
billion scale LLMs. Hand-to-hand with task performance improvements are the ever-growing model sizes and the strong
demand for powerful computing resources that are available
only in high-end clusters. Fortunately, fine-tuning provides
everyday ML practitioners the accessibility to LLMs by allowing them to adapt a pre-trained model to downstream
tasks using less onerous computational effort. However, finetuning’s memory and compute demands are still daunting.
For example, under a default fine-tuning configuration that
uses the fp16 data type with the Adam optimizer (Kingma
and Ba 2014), the memory footprint is 8 × #Parameters bytes,
which means top-notch commodity workstation GPUs (e.g.,
NVIDIA 4090 GPU and AMD 7900XTX with 24GB memory
each) are able to hold only smaller LLMs (3B parameters).
With commodity laptop GPUs (e.g., NVIDIA A1000 with
4GB memory), even 0.77B parameter LLMs do not fit.
* Correspondence Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23614

A variety of techniques have been proposed to reduce
the memory demand during fine-tuning. A typical solution
from system researchers is to offload part of the compute
and memory from GPU to CPU, leveraging the fact that
commodity laptop CPUs typically have 4x the memory of
laptop GPUs and commodity workstation CPUs can provide
4TBs of memory (per socket). Although offloading is able
to scale the trainable model size, large batch sizes are essential to remain efficient despite the limited PCIe bandwidth
between CPU and GPU (Rajbhandari et al. 2021). In fact, we
show that training with offloading is inherently bounded by
either the CPU-GPU communication or the compute on CPU,
especially on commodity hardware where the limited GPU
memory dictates small batch sizes. Therefore, offloading
itself can hardly save us from the scaling challenge.
Meanwhile, another promising method from ML researchers for memory-reduction is parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT). The key idea of PEFT is to limit the trainable
parameters to a carefully designed subspace (e.g., a low rank
subspace (Hu et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2024) or only part of the
model (Guo, Rush, and Kim 2020)), so the GPU can train the
model without offloading as long as it can hold the parameters and minimal optimizer states for the trainable parameters.
However, though more memory-efficient, PEFT methods can
suffer from slow convergence or sub-optimal training results
due to their overly constrained space for parameter updates.
In this paper, we show how to mitigate the memory
challenge by combining both approaches. We present LSPOffload (Fig. 1), a novel fine-tuning framework that (i) mitigates bottlenecks in offloading approaches by a new approach
to refactor the offloading process and (ii) trains efficiently by

