The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multiple Feature Refining Network for Visual Emotion Distribution Learning
Qinfu Xu1 , Shaozu Yuan2 , Yiwei Wei3 , Jie Wu1 , Leiquan Wang1 , Chunlei Wu1 *
1

Qingdao Institute of Software, College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China)
2
JD AI Research
3
China University of Petroleum (Beijing) at Karamay
xqfupc@163.com, wuchunlei@upc.edu.cn

High
Frequency

Abstract
The significance of visual emotion distribution learning
(VEDL) has surged, particularly with the growing inclination
to convey emotions through images. The key of VEDL lies in
capturing both low- and high-level features within the same
visual content, thus promoting the model for salient and subtle emotion awareness. To learn the distribution of emotions
involved in images, most previous works learn coarse semantic knowledge with unbiased filtering. Consequently, they focus on the entire scene and suffer from the redundancy of
semantic-irrelevant information, which diminishes the affective coherence, impeding the comprehension of emotional attributes within the treated features. In light of this, we reanalyze from the perspective of information filtering and propose
a novel method called Multiple Feature Refining Network
(MFRN). To minimize low-level feature redundancy, we design a wavelet-based separated frequency modeling, named
Spectral Mixer, to learn invariant representations and enhance
emotion saliency in low-level image features. At the higher
semantic level, we design a Semantic Graph Prompt Learning
for emotional semantic filtering, ensuring the purity of emotional information and providing the model with richer content semantics. Experiments conducted on three commonly
used datasets have demonstrated the superiority of our MFRN
model over cutting-edge methods.

Low
Frequency
CNN Patch

Attention Patch

Our Refined Method

(a) Comparison of Different Patches
High-level Semantics

Emotional Semantics

Flag
Roof
Window

Awe

Fear

Contentment

Building

Low-level Semantics

Brightness

Contrast

Margin Texture

Color

(b) Illustration of Visual Semantic Diversity

Figure 1: Illustration of the difference of patches and the
nature of visual semantics. (a) is the comparison of different
patches in VEDL. (b) shows the visual semantic diversity.

lution to tackle the issue, which advocates that visual content has more sentiment diversity. Previous works on VEDL
can mainly be categorized into two types: (1) CNN-based
methods (Yang, She, and Sun 2017; Xiong et al. 2019; He
and Jin 2019) that employ Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) as feature extractor or progressive integration component. (2) Attention-based methods (Xu and Wang 2021;
Zhao et al. 2019; Song et al. 2018) adopt an attention mechanism to participate in the feature representing of the emotion analysis. However, the semantic filtering of both two
methods is unbiased from the emotional perspective. Therefore, the features they extracted may contain numerous disturbances that hinders the in-depth content learning.
Specifically, existing visual emotion distribution learning
methods often suffer from two issues: (1) Information redundancy. As is shown in Figure 1 (a), CNN-based approaches tend to calculate at multiple scales through progressively deeper layers, leading to overlapping features (He
et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2022). As a result, the redundancy in the
treated features might introduce noise, making it challenging
to distill essential emotional cues. Similarly, in Transformer-

Introduction
Image emotion analysis has garnered substantial research interest due to its ability to effectively convey the diverse range
of emotions expressed by individuals (Lu et al. 2019; Song
et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023b). Presently, this field finds application in diverse areas, including multimedia retrieval and
social network analysis (Veltmeijer, Gerritsen, and Hindriks
2021; Zhang, He, and Lu 2019; Song et al. 2021). However, in practice, an image inherently encapsulates a blend
of various emotions, rather than being characterized by a
singular emotion. This is because individuals may exhibit
distinct preferences and responses to the same image. The
intricate interplay of these varied emotions within an image
gives rise to the formidable challenge of emotion ambiguity (Plutchik 1982). Along this line, visual emotion distribution learning (VEDL) was proposed as a promising so* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8924

