The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GVMGen: A General Video-to-Music Generation Model
with Hierarchical Attentions
Heda Zuo1 , Weitao You1 * , Junxian Wu1 , Shihong Ren2 ,
Pei Chen1 , Mingxu Zhou1 , Yujia Lu3 , Lingyun Sun1
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
Shanghai Key Laboratory for Music Acoustics, Shanghai Conservatory of Music
3
School of Design and Fashion, Zhejiang University of Science and Technology
{zuoheda, weitao you, wujunxian}@zju.edu.cn, shren@shcmusic.edu.cn
{chenpei, zhoumingxu}@zju.edu.cn, luyujia0426@zust.edu.cn, sunly@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

are less important for video blogs or documentaries (Corner 2002). Many other variables, such as shots and compositions, are overlooked despite the high relevance, particularly in movies. Studies like (Hussain et al. 2023; Tang et al.
2024) rely on Large Language Models (LLMs) as a bridge.
However, LLMs often summarize the video and music into
some static styles while ignoring details like emotions and
the exact physical variables with temporal changes. Such explicit feature alignment may ignore high-related information
which cannot be computed or described, while considering
redundant unrelated features, thus limiting the depth and coherence of the music-video correspondence.
Moreover, music features derived from variable or language transformations are neither diverse nor detailed
enough to guide vivid and artistic music generation. Many
of these approaches are even constrained to MIDI music (Su,
Liu, and Shlizerman 2020; Gan et al. 2020), which simply encodes each musical note as a numeric symbol. Consequently, the generated music from these models tends to
be monotonic and lacks rich diversity and universality.
In addition, inadequate evaluation metrics and datasets
further constrain the effectiveness of video-to-music generation models. Most existing works assess music-video correspondence primarily through subjective evaluation (Ji, Luo,
and Yang 2020; Surı́s et al. 2022), which is costly and often biased, failing to guide the model training correctly. Existing datasets (Zhuo et al. 2023; Kang, Poria, and Herremans 2024) primarily consist of music videos (MVs) with
music in MIDI format. These datasets exhibit low diversity
and weak music-video correspondence, thereby limiting the
efficacy of models trained on them.
In this paper, we propose a General Video-to-Music
Generation model (GVMGen), which can generate highrelated music in various styles for different types of video.
Unlike previous models, GVMGen refrains from explicitly
defining variable relationships or relying on language transformation between visual and musical features. Instead, we
extract hidden visual features through spatial self-attention
and transform them into musical features through both spatial and temporal cross-attention. By adopting an implicit
attention mechanism for feature transformation, GVMGen
preserves the most relevant features in alignment, thereby
enhancing the music-video correspondence. Moreover, im-

Composing music for video is essential yet challenging, leading to a growing interest in automating music generation
for video applications. Existing approaches often struggle to
achieve robust music-video correspondence and generative
diversity, primarily due to inadequate feature alignment methods and insufficient datasets. In this study, we present General
Video-to-Music Generation model (GVMGen), designed for
generating high-related music to the video input. Our model
employs hierarchical attentions to extract and align video features with music in both spatial and temporal dimensions, ensuring the preservation of pertinent features while minimizing redundancy. Remarkably, our method is versatile, capable of generating multi-style music from different video inputs, even in zero-shot scenarios. We also propose an evaluation model along with two novel objective metrics for assessing video-music alignment. Additionally, we have compiled
a large-scale dataset comprising diverse types of video-music
pairs. Experimental results demonstrate that GVMGen surpasses previous models in terms of music-video correspondence, generative diversity, and application universality.

Code & Cases — https://chouliuzuo.github.io/GVMGen/

Introduction
In videos, music plays a critical role in enhancing emotional resonance by aligning rhythm, style, and affectivity
to achieve a high degree of correspondence. Traditionally,
this task falls within the purview of professionals, while
amateurs often find it challenging, characterized by timeconsuming processes and potential copyright infringement.
Consequently, the automatic generation of music based on
video presents significant utility for both amateurs and industry professionals.
One of the core challenges in video background music
generation is identifying the cross-modal relationships between visual and musical elements. Previous studies (Di
et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023; Zhu et al.
2022) define rule-based connections between specific variables, such as motion speed and color. However, these variables are only significant for certain types of videos which
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23099

