The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Fault-Tolerant Search by Fast Indexing of Subnetworks
Davide Bilò1 , Keerti Choudhary2 , Sarel Cohen3 , Tobias Friedrich4 , Martin Schirneck5
1

Department of Information Engineering, Computer Science and Mathematics, University of L’Aquila, Italy
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
3
School of Computer Science, The Academic College of Tel Aviv-Yaffo, Israel
4
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam, Germany
5
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Austria
davide.bilo@univaq.it, keerti@iitd.ac.in, sarelco@mta.ac.il, tobias.friedrich@hpi.de, martin.schirneck@univie.ac.at
Abstract

the resulting data structures are called sensitivity oracles. In
the past two decades, many sensitivity oracles have been
designed for classical network problems, e.g., connectivity (Patrascu and Thorup 2007; Duan and Pettie 2009, 2010,
2017), shortest paths (Cho, Shin, and Oh 2024; Demetrescu
et al. 2008; Chechik et al. 2012; Duan and Pettie 2009; Bilò
et al. 2023; Duan and Ren 2022; Dey and Gupta 2024; Gu
and Ren 2021) and routing (Chechik et al. 2012).
We continue this line of work by designing data structures
that, given a network problem Π, a network G = (V, E)
with n nodes and m links, and a parameter f , preprocesses
G into a oracle with sensitivity f that, when queried with a
set F ⊆ V ∪ E of size |F | ⩽ f , reports a solution for Π in
G−F . Specifically, we study the following problems Π.
• L-H OP S HORTEST PATH: Given two nodes s, t ∈ V , is
there a shortest s-t path in G−F with at most L links?
• k-PATH: Does G−F contain a simple path with k links?
• k-C LIQUE: Does G−F contain a clique of k nodes?
In fact, we can handle all problems with the property that any
certificate solution S ⊆ G for Π, like e.g., a k-path, is also
a certificate solution of G′ for Π, for every S ⊆ G′ ⊆ G.
Although we focus on decision problems, our data structures
are also capable of reporting a certificate solution.
A naive solution consists in enumerating all possible subnetworks, one for each F ⊆ V ∪E with |F | ⩽ f , and storing
a static data structure for each computed subnetwork. This
is, however, prohibitively expensive w.r.t.
and
 both space
|+|E|
preprocessing time as there are |V ⩽f
= Θ(nf + mf )
subnetworks if node and link failures can occur. We need a
more efficient way to construct subnetworks that allow us
to make the data structure fault tolerant. Moreover, we also
need some compact and time-efficient indexing scheme to
quickly access the correct subnetworks upon query.
Our motivation aligns with the work of (Cho, Shin, and
Oh 2024), which addresses fault tolerance in dynamic settings such as navigation, logistics, and communication networks, where rapid rerouting is crucial. Similarly, (Blum,
Funke, and Storandt 2018) motivates using preprocessing to
reduce the search space for path finding. Many real-world
networks have a small diameter, and this makes our work
relevant as we assume only the existence of all-pairs shortest paths of length bounded by a parameter L. The works
by Ouyang, Yuan, Qin, Chang, Zhang, and Lin (2020) and

We design sensitivity oracles for error-prone networks. For a
network problem Π, the data structure preprocesses a network
G = (V, E) and sensitivity parameter f such that, for any set
F ⊆ V ∪ E of up to f link or node failures, it can report the
solution of Π in G−F . We study three network problems Π.
• L-H OP S HORTEST PATH: Given s, t ∈ V , is there a shortest s-t-path in G−F with at most L links?
• k-PATH: Does G−F contain a simple path with k links?
• k-C LIQUE: Does G−F contain a clique of k nodes?
Our main technical contribution is a new construction of
(L, f )-replacement path coverings ((L, f )-RPC) in the parameter realm where f = o(log L). An (L, f )-RPC is a family G of subnetworks of G which, for every F ⊆ E with
|F | ⩽ f , has a subfamily GF ⊆ G such that (i) no subnetwork in GF contains a link of F and (ii) for each s, t ∈ V , if
G−F contains a shortest s-t-path with at most L links, then
some subnetwork in GF retains at least one such path. Our
(L, f )-RPC has almost the same size as the one by Weimann
and Yuster (2013) but it improves the time to query GF from
5
e
O(f 2 Lf ) to e
O(f 2 Lo(1) ). It also improves over the size and
query time of the (L, f )-RPC by Karthik and Parter (2021)
by nearly a factor of L. From this construction, we derive oracles for L-H OP S HORTEST PATH, k-PATH, and k-C LIQUE.
Notably, our solution for k-PATH improves the query time of
the one by Bilò et al. (2022a) for f = o(log k).

Introduction
Networks are central structures in computer science as they
can model different types of relations we encounter in realworld applications. Numerous algorithms and data structures have been developed to solve problems in static networks where nodes and links do not change over time. However, as networks in real life are prone to transient failures, many of these algorithms require recomputations from
scratch even when only a few network components are malfunctioning. In many applications one may have an a priori known bound f on the number of simultaneous failures,
especially in the context of independent failures where the
likelihood of multiple failures decreases exponentially. This
is called the fault-tolerant setting or sensitivity analysis and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26463

