The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Causally Consistent Normalizing Flow
Qingyang Zhou1 , Kangjie Lu2 , Meng Xu1
1

University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
University of Minnesota, Minnesota, America
qingyang.zhou@uwaterloo.ca, kjlu@umn.edu, meng.xu.cs@uwaterloo.ca
2

Abstract

Fortunately, recent works have proposed GMs that are
causally consistent by design. Causal NF (Javaloy, Martin, and
Valera 2023) and VACA (Sánchez-Martin, Rateike, and Valera
2022) ensure causal consistency by limiting their models to
minimal structural complexity. More specifically, Causal NF
restricts the model depth to zero, i.e., eliminating middle layers in NF; while VACA applies a similar restriction to its encoder structure. In other words, causal consistency is guaranteed at the expense of the utility of these models—the ability
to approximate any arbitrarily complex distributions of observations. For instance, the training objective of Causal NF
is to minimize the discrepancy between the distributions of
latent variables and the pre-selected distributions by users
(e.g. Gaussian). However, as shown in Figure 1a, a Causal
NF trained on a nonlinear Simpson dataset is not able to accomplish the objective. The distribution of the third latent
variable, highlighted in green in Figure 1a, deviates significantly from the Gaussian distribution.
In this paper, we introduce Causally Consistent
Normalizing Flow, abbreviated as CCNF, that is a
causally consistent GM by design without sacrificing
utility, i.e., approximating arbitrarily complex distributions
based on universal approximation theorems (details in
Theorem 5.2). A key innovation of CCNF is to translate an
SCM into a sequence (details in Secion 4). The sequential
representation of an SCM eliminates the constraints of
maximum layer depths without compromising causal
consistency, enabling a more flexible model architecture in
CCNF (details in Section 5). Subsequently, CCNF employs
normalizing flows with partial causal transformations to
effectively capture the causality in the data, which is further
elaborated in Section 4 and Section 5.
We demonstrate that CCNF is inherently causally consistent and capable of performing causal inference tasks such as
interventions and counterfactuals. To the best of our knowledge, CCNF is the first causally consistent GM that can approximate any distributions of observation variables across
multiple layers. In comparison, CCNF outperforms existing models like Causal NF in similar tasks, as shown in 1b.
Additionally, CCNF proves effective in real-world applications, addressing significant issues such as unfairness. Applying CCNF to the German credit dataset (Hofmann 1994),
we observe notable improvements: a reduction in individual
unfairness from 9.00% to 0.00%, and an increase in overall

Causal inconsistency arises when the underlying causal
graphs captured by generative models like Normalizing
Flows are inconsistent with those specified in causal models
like Struct Causal Models. This inconsistency can cause unwanted issues including the unfairness problem. Prior works
to achieve causal consistency inevitably compromise the expressiveness of their models by disallowing hidden layers. In
this work, we introduce a new approach: Causally Consistent
Normalizing Flow (CCNF). To the best of our knowledge,
CCNF is the first causally consistent generative model that
can approximate any distribution with multiple layers. CCNF
relies on two novel constructs: a sequential representation of
SCMs and partial causal transformations. These constructs
allow CCNF to inherently maintain causal consistency without sacrificing expressiveness. CCNF can handle all forms of
causal inference tasks, including interventions and counterfactuals. Through experiments, we show that CCNF outperforms current approaches in causal inference. We also empirically validate the practical utility of CCNF by applying it
to real-world datasets and show how CCNF addresses challenges like unfairness effectively.

Code — https://github.com/UWCSZhou/CCNF
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12401

1

Introduction

Causal generative modeling is generative models (GMs)
that utilize given causal models like structure causal models (SCMs) for data generation (Komanduri et al. 2024). It
has been widely researched on different types of GMs like
VAE (Yang et al. 2021), GAN (Kocaoglu et al. 2017), Normalizing Flow (NF) (Javaloy, Martin, and Valera 2023) and Diffusion
Model (Sanchez and Tsaftaris 2022).
However, most approaches have a problem that they can
only approximate the causality relations instead of enforcing
the consistency between the causal graph induced by GMs
and the causal graph in given SCMs. The problem is called
casual inconsistency problem in prior works (Javaloy, Martin,
and Valera 2023) and will be discussed in detail in Section 3.
This could lead to critical societal issues (e.g. the one in Section 2), which have yet to be adequately addressed.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22974

