The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RA-GAR: A Richly Annotated Benchmark for Gait Attribute Recognition
Chenye Wang1 , Saihui Hou1,2 * , Aoqi Li1 , Qingyuan Cai1 , Yongzhen Huang1,2 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
2
WATRIX.AI
chenye.wang@mail.bnu.edu.cn, housaihui@bnu.edu.cn, {rookie, caiqingyuan}@mail.bnu.edu.cn,
huangyongzhen@bnu.edu.cn

Semantic Long-term
Female
Female
Long hair
Long hair
Fist
Fist
Gait
Toe-in
Toe-in
Attributes
Gray sweater
Brown coat
...
...

Abstract
Gait attracts growing interest from researchers due to its advantages as a non-invasive and non-cooperative biometric
feature. Current gait-based attribute recognition methods primarily focus on estimating attributes such as gender, age,
and emotions. However, there is insufficient attention to diverse gait attributes in various covariate scenarios. In this
paper, we design and collect a Richly Annotated benchmark for 15 gait attributes, named RA-GAR, comprising
data from 533 individuals with over 120,000 sequences. To
our knowledge, RA-GAR represents the largest and most diverse benchmark of gait attributes currently available. Furthermore, to fully leverage the semantic information and enhance attribute-specific local perception, we propose a twostage CLIP-based method for Gait Attribute Recognition,
named CLIP-GAR. Experiments on the RA-GAR and MAGait datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of CLIP-GAR,
showing significant improvements in mean accuracy and F1
score.

Static & Motion

Figure 1: The overview of gait attributes. The attributes proposed in green are semantic attributes with long-term identity invariance and cover both motion (such as toe-in) and
static (such as fist) attributes. However, the attributes in red
do not meet the long-term identity invariance standards, so
they are not within the scope of our consideration.

serve as clues to help security departments quickly track
suspects. Second, gait attributes have the potential to enhance the interpretability of gait recognition systems. Mainstream deep learning-based gait recognition methods have
proven effective in capturing complex spatio-temporal features, thereby enhancing recognition accuracy (Lin, Zhang,
and Yu 2021; Fan et al. 2023a). Nevertheless, the outputs from these black-box models often suffer from a lack
of transparency (Chen et al. 2021). Incorporating attribute
recognition holds promise for understanding the differences
between the probe and gallery.
Most existing open-source gait datasets are primarily designed for identity recognition tasks and only include basic attribute annotations. For instance, CASIA-B (Yu, Tan,
and Tan 2006) provides annotations for gender and height
attributes. There are a limited number of datasets specifically created for the gait attribute recognition task. Song et
al. (Song et al. 2023) propose a dataset with multi-attribute
annotations tailored for the gait attribute recognition task,
named MA-Gait. This dataset comprises recordings of 95
subjects, resulting in over 13,000 sequences. However, MAGait does not consider attribute recognition in various covariate scenarios, particularly when subjects are carrying
backpacks or changed their clothes, limiting the potential
applications of attribute recognition in real-world scenarios.
Additionally, the attributes proposed in MA-Gait are relatively limited, with emotional attributes being insufficient
for long-term identity recognition.
Therefore, we design and collect a richly annotated

Datasets — https://github.com/BNU-IVC/RA-GAR

Introduction
Gait is one of the most promising behavioral biometrics because it can be captured from a distance without requiring any cooperation from the subject (Bouchrika et al.
2011). Current gait attribute recognition methods primarily focus on gender and age attributes, facilitating various
applications in surveillance videos (e.g., finding lost children/elderly) (Zhang, Wang, and Li 2022). Additionally,
some studies utilize gait to analyze individual emotions,
such as happiness, anger, etc., which is considered an important and challenging problem in computer vision and psychology (Hu et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2024).
However, gait as a behavioral biometric encompasses
richer attribute information, including toe-in, toe-out, arm
swing, etc.. Exploring attribute recognition complements the
gait community and deepens the understanding of gait patterns. First, the task of attribute recognition contributes to
the development of more intelligent gait recognition systems. In the process of tracking criminals, attributes can
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7591

