The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Graph-Based Cross-Domain Knowledge Distillation for Cross-Dataset
Text-to-Image Person Retrieval
Bingjun Luo, Jinpeng Wang, Zewen Wang, Junjie Zhu* , Xibin Zhao,
BNRist, KLISS, and School of Software, Tsinghua University
luobingjun@gmail.com, {wjp21,wang-zw19,zhujj18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zxb@tsinghua.edu.cn

Cross-Domain

Abstract
Source

Target

Cross-Modal

Image

Video surveillance systems are crucial components for ensuring public safety and management in smart city. As a fundamental task in video surveillance, text-to-image person retrieval aims to retrieve the target person from an image gallery
that best matches the given text description. Most existing
text-to-image person retrieval methods are trained in a supervised manner that requires sufficient labeled data in the target
domain. However, it is common in practice that only unlabeled data is available in the target domain due to the difficulty and cost of data annotation, which limits the generalization of existing methods in practical application scenarios.
To address this issue, we propose a novel unsupervised domain adaptation method, termed Graph-Based Cross-Domain
Knowledge Distillation (GCKD), to learn the cross-modal
feature representation for text-to-image person retrieval in a
cross-dataset scenario. The proposed GCKD method consists
of two main components. Firstly, a graph-based multi-modal
propagation module is designed to bridge the cross-domain
correlation among the visual and textual samples. Secondly, a
contrastive momentum knowledge distillation module is proposed to learn the cross-modal feature representation using
the online knowledge distillation strategy. By jointly optimizing the two modules, the proposed method is able to achieve
efficient performance for cross-dataset text-to-image person
retrieval. Extensive experiments on three publicly available
text-to-image person retrieval datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed GCKD method, which consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines.

Text

The man has short black
hear. He is wearing a
white hat, blue long
sleeve shirt, white pants,
and black shoes.

ҘҘ

A woman wearing a pink
top, a green and white
skirt and a pair of black
shoes.

A man wearing a white
shirt, a pair of black
shorts and a pair of white
shoes.

Figure 1: An illustration of cross-dataset text-to-image person retrieval task. The source dataset contains paired imagetext annotations, while the target dataset only contains unpaired images and texts. This task faces both cross-domain
shift and cross-modality gap challenges. Part of the figures
comes from (Ding et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021, 2024).

Introduction
Person retrieval is a fundamental problem in the field of
video surveillance, which has attracted extensive attention
from both scientific research and practical applications (Jing
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2023). Text-to-image person retrieval
is a subtask of person retrieval, which aims to retrieve the
target person from the image gallery that matches the given
text description (Li et al. 2017; Yan et al. 2023). This task
is associated with both image-text retrieval (Li et al. 2021)
and image-based person retrieval (He et al. 2021). Different from image-based person retrieval, text-to-image person
retrieval is able to retrieve the target person only based on

the given query text, which is more user-friendly and easily accessible than using query image (Jiang and Ye 2023;
Bai et al. 2023). Thus, text-to-image person retrieval has attracted increasing attention in recent years (Zhu et al. 2021;
Shu et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2024). With the advancement of
deep learning technology (Fan et al. 2024; Gu et al. 2020),
the performance of text-to-image person retrieval has significantly improved. Recently, large language models (Radford
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Shao et al. 2024) have further
enhanced this performance.
However, most existing text-to-image person retrieval
methods are trained in the supervised manner, which requires a large amount of high-quality annotated image-text
alignment datasets in the target application scenario. These

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

568

