The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Progressive Self-Learning for Domain Adaptation on Symbolic Regression of
Integer Sequences
Yaohui Zhu1 , Kaiming Sun2 , Zhengdong Luo3 , Lingfeng Wang1 *
1

College of Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology
2
School of Computer Science, Shenyang Aerospace University
3
Xinjiang Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yaohui.zhu, lfwang}@buct.edu.cn, sunkaiming@stu.sau.edu.cn, luozhengdong21@mails.ucas.edu.cn
Formula generator

Target sequence

Abstract
S

Symbolic Regression of Integer Sequences (SRIS) aims to
discover precise mathematical formulas from integer sequences. The neural machine translation-based method of
SRIS trains the model using randomly generated data, and
directly utilizes the trained model for inference on target sequences. However, the method often fails to effectively generalize to the target sequence, since the randomly generated
data can not adequately cover the distributions of target data,
i.e., there are distribution differences between them. In this
work, we propose a progressive self-learning (PSL) method
to explicitly capture sequence-formula distributions of the
target domain. Specifically, a source domain dataset is generated by incorporating initial terms of the target domain to
reduce the sequence distribution gap between the source domain and the target domain. Meanwhile, a self-learning loop
strategy is adopted to improve the ability of the model to capture the sequence-formula distribution of the target domain.
In this strategy, a neural machine translation model is used to
learn the mappings from sequences to formulas in an end-toend fashion. Then, this model is employed to explore candidate formulas of the target sequence using beam search. After
verifying these candidate formula correctness, some of them
are retained as training data for the next learning. Experimental results on OEIS datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method surpasses current state-of-the-art methods in accuracy, and also discovers new formulas.

t

1, 1, 2, 5, 14, 42,
132, 429, 1430…

Transformer

M

Verification

1, 1, 2, 5, 14, 42,
^
S t 132, 429, 1430…
Prediction sequence

a1  1

an 

(4n  6) an 1
n

^

Ft

Candidate formula

Figure 1: The process of formula verification. The correctness of F̂ t is checked by comparing S t and Ŝ t term by term.

prime conjectures (Wang 2022), but also serves modern scientific and technological fields, such as cryptography and
data compression. We can see, it is of far-reaching significance to the study of SRIS.
The neural machine translation-based methods (Lample
and Charton 2020; Biggio et al. 2021; d’Ascoli et al. 2022)
exhibit great potential for SRIS. These methods train a translation model of transformer on randomly generated data, and
directly utilize the model for inference on target sequences.
However, the model struggles to generalize to the target sequences, since the generated data can not adequately cover
the distributions of target data, i.e., there are distribution differences between them. For example, the model cannot discover the formula of sequence A214993, i.e., [11, 121, 1341,
14871,...], in OEIS (Sloane et al. 2018), while this formula is
a simple linear recurrence an = 12an−1 − 10an−2 − an−3 .
Relying solely on source domain data may not be a promising approach. How to use both generated source data and target sequences to discover the formulas of target sequences
is a significant problem, known as the Domain Adaptation
on Symbolic Regression of Integer Sequences (DASRIS).
However, this problem has barely been explored before.
Previous domain adaptation works (Yang et al. 2021;
Chang et al. 2021; Karouzos, Paraskevopoulos, and Potamianos 2021) have been applied mainly in the fields of computer vision, focusing on aligning the data distribution of
the source domain and the target domain. These domain
adaptation methods have the same category space between
the source domain and the target domain. Aligning the distributions of the source and target domains allows accurate semantic representations of target domain samples. In

Introduction
Symbolic Regression of Integer Sequences (SRIS) aims to
discover precise mathematical formulas from integer sequences by generating symbolic expressions. Compared
with the method of using approximate nonsymbolic expressions (Lu et al. 2021), the SRIS task needs to produce explicit formulas, which provide strong interpretability. Currently, a larger number of integer sequence formulas have yet
to be discovered, such as the prime sequence and the busy
beaver sequence. Exploring these patterns advances mathematics and science. For example, studying the patterns of
prime sequences not only helps solve mathematical problems such as Goldbach’s conjecture (Wang 2022) and twin
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1692

