The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

3D Annotation-Free Learning by Distilling 2D Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Models for Autonomous Driving
Boyi Sun1, 2 , Yuhang Liu1, 2 , Xingxia Wang1 , Bin Tian1, 3 , Long Chen1, 3 , Fei-Yue Wang1 *
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Zhongke JingYu Sensing Technology Co., Ltd
3
Waytous
{sunboyi2024, liuyuhang2021, wangxingxia2022, bin.tian, long.chen, feiyue.wang}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Point cloud data labeling is considered a time-consuming and
expensive task in autonomous driving, whereas annotationfree learning training can avoid it by learning point cloud
representations from unannotated data. In this paper, we propose AFOV, a novel 3D Annotation-Free framework assisted
by 2D Open-Vocabulary segmentation models. It consists of
two stages: In the first stage, we innovatively integrate highquality textual and image features of 2D open-vocabulary
models and propose the Tri-Modal contrastive Pre-training
(TMP). In the second stage, spatial mapping between point
clouds and images is utilized to generate pseudo-labels, enabling cross-modal knowledge distillation. Besides, we introduce the Approximate Flat Interaction (AFI) to address the
noise during alignment and label confusion. To validate the
superiority of AFOV, extensive experiments are conducted
on multiple related datasets. We achieved a record-breaking
47.73% mIoU on the annotation-free 3D segmentation task
in nuScenes, surpassing the previous best model by 3.13%
mIoU. Meanwhile, the performance of fine-tuning with 1%
data on nuScenes and SemanticKITTI reached a remarkable
51.75% mIoU and 48.14% mIoU, outperforming all previous
pre-trained models.

Figure 1: Segmentation results of AFOV annotation-free
training. More illustrations are presented in Appendix D.

data without the need for manual supervision. Multi-modal
annotation-free algorithms for 3D scene perception tasks
integrate the internal structure of point clouds with image
or text knowledge to generate objectives. They bypass the
costly manual annotations, bridging the gap between traditional 3D perceptual models and unannotated data.
Existing 3D annotation-free methods (Chen et al. 2023b;
Zeng et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023a; Peng et al. 2023)
aim to transfer knowledge from visual foundation models (VFMs), e.g., Contrastive Vision-Language Pre-training
(CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) or Segment Anything (SAM)
(Kirillov et al. 2023), to point cloud representations. However, 3D annotation-free models based on CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) suffer from intolerable noise, while SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023) fails to correspond texts and images. Therefore, we seek high-quality image segmentation models with
textual correspondences to serve as teacher models for 3D
annotation-free learning. Recently, CLIP-based 2D openvocabulary segmentation models (Zhou, Loy, and Dai 2022;
Yu et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023; Cho et al. 2023) have demonstrated excellent performances. They employ contrastive
learning to extract textual and image features from a shared
embedding space and are capable of segmenting and identifying objects from a set of open classes in various environments. These models provide us with image segmentation and labels corresponding to the segmented regions,

Code — https://github.com/sbysbysbys/AFOV

Introduction
As neural-network-based 3D scene perception methods, e.g.,
object detection (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Shi et al. 2020;
Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Lang et al. 2019), point cloud segmentation (Qi et al. 2017a,b; Choy, Gwak, and Savarese
2019), etc., become increasingly complex in their network
architectures with a growing number of parameters, methods relying solely on enhancing model structures are reaching a point of saturation. Meanwhile, approaches to enhancing model performance through data-driven methods heavily
rely on time-consuming and expensive manual annotations.
Due to constraints such as insufficient class annotations, applying traditional point cloud perception methods to largescale unlabeled data meets significant challenges.
Annotation-free learning is a powerful machine learning paradigm that enables representation learning from
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7078

