The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

What Are Step-Level Reward Models Rewarding?
Counterintuitive Findings from MCTS-boosted Mathematical Reasoning
Yiran Ma1 * , Zui Chen2 * , Tianqiao Liu3 , Mi Tian3 , Zhuo Liu4 , Zitao Liu5† , Weiqi Luo5 ,
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
3
TAL Education Group, Beijing, China
4
University of Rochester, New York, USA
5
Jinan University, Guangzhou, China
mayiran@zju.edu.cn, chenzui@shanghaitech.edu.cn, {liutianqiao1, tianmi}@tal.com, zhuo.liu@rochester.edu,
{liuzitao, lwq}@jnu.edu.cn
2

Math Problem:

Abstract

There are 6 students playing tennis and twice that number
playing volleyball. There are 16 boys and 22 girls playing soccer.
If each student only participates in one group, how many
students are there in total?

Step-level reward models (SRMs) can significantly enhance
mathematical reasoning performance through process supervision or step-level preference alignment based on reinforcement learning. The performance of SRMs is pivotal, as they
serve as critical guidelines, ensuring that each step in the reasoning process is aligned with desired outcomes. Recently,
AlphaZero-like methods, where Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) is employed for automatic step-level preference annotation, have proven particularly effective. However, the
precise mechanisms behind the success of SRMs remain
largely unexplored. To address this gap, this study delves into
the counterintuitive aspects of SRMs, particularly focusing
on MCTS-based approaches. Our findings reveal that the removal of natural language descriptions of thought processes
has minimal impact on the efficacy of SRMs. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that SRMs are adept at assessing the complex
logical coherence present in mathematical language while
having difficulty in natural language. These insights provide
a nuanced understanding of the core elements that drive effective step-level reward modeling in mathematical reasoning. By shedding light on these mechanisms, this study offers
valuable guidance for developing more efficient and streamlined SRMs, which can be achieved by focusing on the crucial
parts of mathematical reasoning.

Thought:

The problem involves calculating the total number of students
by adding up the number of students in each group. Firstly, we
need to ﬁnd out how many students are playing volleyball. Since
there are 6 students playing tennis, and it's stated that there are Step1
twice that number playing volleyball, we multiply 6 by 2.

Math Expression:

Students Playing Volleyball = 6 * 2 = 12

Thought:

Now you can answer the problem in this step. We also have
the number of boys and girls playing soccer, which is 16 and
22 respectively. To ﬁnd the total number of students, we add
up the number of students in all three groups.

Math Expression:

Step2

Total Students = Students Playing Tennis + Students Playing
Volleyball + Boys Playing Soccer + Girls Playing Soccer = 6 +
12 + 16 + 22 = 56
So, there are 56 students in total. The answer is 56.

Figure 1: Each step in an LLM’s process of solving mathematical problems can be divided into the thought process
and the execution of corresponding calculations. We find
that natural language descriptions of the thought processes
are not essential for step-level reward modeling.

Introduction

prompting, can significantly enhance model performance on
reasoning tasks (Zhou et al. 2023; Besta et al. 2024; Ding
et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2022; Wei et al.
2022; Zheng et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024; Zhan et al. 2024).
Recently, guided tree-search methods further improved
reasoning performance by exploring various reasoning paths
through online simulation to identify the optimal solution
paths (Hao et al. 2023, 2024; Feng et al. 2023). Although
a better reasoning path leads to a better performance, the
length of these reasoning chains leads to an exponential increase in the search space, resulting in substantial computational costs. Given the high expense of LLM inference, performing an online tree search for each reasoning problem
introduces repeated and unnecessary overhead.
To address this issue, step-level reward models (SRM)

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated their
remarkable capabilities across a wide range of tasks, such
as information extraction, natural language understanding,
etc (Zhao et al. 2023), totally revolutionizing the deep learning community. Among these capabilities, reasoning stands
out as a critical area of focus, especially mathematical reasoning, which needs to be further improved due to its complex nature. Numerous studies have shown that multi-step
reasoning often facilitated through Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
* These authors contributed equally. Work was done during their

internships at TAL Education Group.
†
Zitao Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24812

