The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KeyGS: A Keyframe-Centric Gaussian Splatting Method for Monocular Image
Sequences
Keng-Wei Chang, Zi-Ming Wang, Shang-Hong Lai
National Tsing Hua University
percyx987654321@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, ziming614@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, lai@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract

NeRF employs ray-marching, which leads to slow inference
due to the high computational demands of sampling along
rays and feeding data to an MLP. In contrast, 3DGS uses
differential rasterization without an MLP, enabling real-time
inference speeds.
In many NeRF and 3DGS reconstruction pipelines, a
common approach involves using software like COLMAP
(Schonberger and Frahm 2016) for Structure from Motion
(SfM) to estimate camera poses. SfM extracts SIFT features
from images, applies the RANSAC algorithm for pose estimation, and performs bundle adjustment for refinement.
However, this method often struggles under extreme conditions, such as noisy images, textureless regions, low resolution, or varying lighting, leading to inaccurate pose estimates. Moreover, SfM becomes computationally expensive
with an increasing number of images due to the complexity
of RANSAC and pairwise bundle adjustment. To overcome
these challenges, some researchers focus on refining camera poses during 3D reconstruction or on methods that avoid
SfM altogether.
To further refine camera pose estimates in SfM, various
approaches (Lin et al. 2021; Chen, Chiu, and Liu 2024;
Jeong et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024; Heo et al.
2023; Park et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Shi et al. 2022;
Meuleman et al. 2023; Bian et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2021b;
Lin et al. 2023; Sucar et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2024; Zhu et al.
2022) have been proposed to jointly refine camera poses,
either starting from noisy initial poses or without any initial pose information. Bundle-Adjusting Neural Radiance
Fields (BARF) (Lin et al. 2021) is the first NeRF method
to use dense photometric signals for alignment. It also introduces a heuristic coarse-to-fine strategy that progressively
increases the signal frequency to effectively refine camera
poses. Joint TensoRF (Chen, Chiu, and Liu 2024) provides theoretical analysis indicating that image alignment
may encounter gradient oscillation with high-frequency signals. To address this issue, it employs Gaussian filter to reduce frequency and utilizes a grid-based NeRF, TensoRF
(Chen et al. 2022) as their representation. There are also
more extreme approaches that completely avoid using any
initial camera pose. Nope-NeRF (Bian et al. 2023) considers neighboring sequences and uses a monocular depth estimation model like DPT (Ranftl, Bochkovskiy, and Koltun
2021) to minimize reprojection error. Recently, with the

Reconstructing high-quality 3D models from sparse 2D images has garnered significant attention in computer vision.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has gained prominence due to its explicit representation with efficient training
speed and real-time rendering capabilities. However, existing methods still heavily depend on accurate camera poses
for reconstruction. Although some recent approaches attempt
to train 3DGS models without the Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) preprocessing from monocular video datasets, these
methods suffer from prolonged training times, making them
impractical for many applications.
In this paper, we present an efficient framework that operates without any depth or matching model. Our approach
initially uses SfM to quickly obtain rough camera poses
within seconds, and then refines these poses by leveraging the
dense representation in 3DGS. This framework effectively
addresses the issue of long training times. Additionally, we
integrate the densification process with joint refinement and
propose a coarse-to-fine frequency-aware densification to
reconstruct different levels of details. This approach prevents
camera pose estimation from being trapped in local minima
or drifting due to high-frequency signals. Our method significantly reduces training time from hours to minutes while
achieving more accurate novel view synthesis and camera
pose estimation compared to previous methods.

Introduction
In recent years, 3D photorealistic reconstruction has gained
popularity, especially with differential rendering techniques
(Kerbl et al. 2023; Mildenhall et al. 2021; Edavamadathil Sivaram, Li, and Ramamoorthi 2024; Wang et al.
2021a; Xu et al. 2022). These methods use a novel approach,
representing the 3D model as a differentiable volume field
or a traditional representation, and optimize it through a differential rendering pipeline, leading to exceptionally highquality reconstructions.
Notable representations include Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) and the recently popular
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023). Both
methods use volume rendering (Tagliasacchi and Mildenhall 2022), but they differ significantly in their approaches.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1989

