The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Best Arm Identification with Quantum Oracles
Xuchuang Wang1 , Yu-Zhen Janice Chen1 , Matheus Guedes de Andrade1 , Jonathan Allcock2 ,
Mohammad Hajiesmaili1 , John C.S. Lui3 , and Don Towsley1
1 College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA
2 Tencent Quantum Laboratory, Tencent, Hong Kong
3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

{xuchuangwang, yuzhenchen, mguedesdeand, hajiesmaili, towsley}@cs.umass.edu,
jonallcock@tencent.com, cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

quantum network may contain multiple channels between
source and destination nodes. Among these channels, one
may want to determine the “best” one, where “best” may refer, for example, to the channel with the highest fidelity (Liu
et al. 2024) or with the lowest noise (Li, Deng, and Zhou
2008). Another example is in distributed quantum computing (Cacciapuoti et al. 2019), where different quantum computers may have different performances when applied to the
same problem, and one wants to identify the quantum computer that provides the best performance for a given task.
Although one can still apply classical BAI algorithms to
address these problems, we aim to show that the quantum
information feedback from these quantum systems can be
leveraged to improve the learning efficiency.
In this paper, we study the BAI problem in quantum systems, where the learner can query the arms using quantum
queries. More specifically, we study two key advantages of
quantum feedback in BAI: (1) quantum parallelism (Chuang
and Yamamoto 1995), and (2) quantum entanglement (Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen 1935). The quantum Monte
Carlo estimator (parallelism, Lemma 1) provides a more efficient estimator for the learner to estimate arm rewards. Additionally, multi-qubit oracles with entangled quantum superposition inputs enable the learner to query multiple arms
simultaneously (coherently) within a single query. We model
the former advantage by weak quantum oracles, one for
each arm, and the latter by a constrained quantum oracle
which can query several arms coherently (both detailed in
Section 2.2). When a constrained oracle can query all arms
coherently, we call it a strong quantum oracle.
The development of effective algorithms for both oracles
necessitates the use of quantum computing to manage quantum information feedback and leverage quantum parallelism
and entanglement. However, obtaining a valid output from
a quantum computing subroutine, such as amplitude amplification (Brassard et al. 2002), typically demands multiple consecutive queries on the same arm or a subset of
arms for the constrained oracle. This characteristic renders
the classical BAI algorithm design and analysis ineffective
for BAI with quantum oracles. Consequently, it is imperative to contemplate new algorithm designs and analyses for
BAI with quantum oracles. On the other hand, to investigate the fundamental limit of quantum BAI problems, we
need to establish query complexity lower bounds. However,

Best arm identification (BAI) is a key problem in stochastic
multi-armed bandits, where 𝐾 arms each has an associated reward distribution, and the objective is to minimize the number
of queries needed to identify the best arm with high confidence. In this paper, we explore BAI using quantum oracles.
For the case where each query probes only one arm (𝑚 = 1),
we devise a quantum algorithm with a query complexity upper bound of 𝑂˜ (𝐾Δ −1 log(1/𝛿)), where 𝛿 is the confidence
parameter and Δ is the reward gap between best and second
best arms. This improves on the classical bound by a factor of
Δ −1 . For the general case where a single query can probe 𝑚
arms (1 ⩽ 𝑚 ⩽ 𝐾) simultaneously, we propose an algorithm
√
−1
˜
with an upper bound
√ of 𝑂 ((𝐾/ 𝑚)Δ log(1/𝛿)), improving by a factor of 𝑚 compared to the 𝑚 = 1 case. We also
provide query complexity lower bounds for both scenarios,
which match the upper bounds up to logarithmic factors, and
validate our theoretical results with Qiskit-based simulations.

1

Introduction

Best arm identification (BAI) is a fundamental problem
in the bandits and online learning communities (Audibert,
Bubeck, and Munos 2010; Bubeck, Munos, and Stoltz 2011;
Mannor and Tsitsiklis 2004). Given 𝐾 ∈ N+ arms, each
arm 𝑘 is associated with a reward distribution with unknown
mean 𝜇 𝑘 , and the goal of BAI is to identify the arm with
the largest mean reward, with a confidence of 1 − 𝛿, using as
few queries as possible. The number of queries required is
called the query complexity. Each query, in the classical setting, corresponds to the learner pulling (sampling) one arm
and observing a reward drawn from the arm’s reward distribution. As the learner only cares about finding the best arm,
the BAI problem is a pure exploration problem. BAI has
many real world applications, such as, clinical trials (Robbins 1952), network routing (Barrachina-Muñoz and Bellalta 2017), and crowdsourcing (Zhou, Chen, and Li 2014).
Recent progress in building quantum computers (Arute
et al. 2019; Chow, Dial, and Gambetta 2021) and quantum
networks (Wehner, Elkouss, and Hanson 2018; Azuma et al.
2022) has been encouraging, and wide applications of quantum systems are envisaged in the near future. In these quantum systems, BAI problems also emerge. For example, a
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21321

