The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Single-Loop Federated Actor-Critic across Heterogeneous Environments
Ye Zhu, Xiaowen Gong
Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA
{yzz0211,xzg0017}@auburn.edu

Abstract

2023; Xu, Wang, and Liang 2020) and single-loop variants
(Qiu et al. 2021; Chen, Sun, and Yin 2021; Hong et al. 2023;
Chen and Zhao 2023). In non-asymptotic analysis of AC,
the double-loop variants facilitate a decoupled convergence
analysis of the critic and the actor, involving a policy evaluation sub-problem in the inner loop and a perturbed gradient descent in the outer loop. While the double-loop variant simplifies the convergence analysis, it is rarely adopted
in practice due to its requirement for accurate critic estimation (Kumar, Koppel, and Ribeiro 2023), making it typically
sample-inefficient. The key distinction between double-loop
and single-loop variants lies in their methods for achieving
convergence. Double-loop AC requires a sufficient number
of iterations for value evaluation in the inner loop to ensure
convergence. In contrast, the single-loop method eliminates
this requirement by preserving the critic’s memory throughout the process, providing a significant advantage in terms
of efficiency.
Federated reinforcement learning (FRL) is an emerging
distributed learning framework that integrates the key concepts of federated learning (FL) and RL (Fan et al. 2021;
Khodadadian et al. 2022; Xie and Song 2023; Zhu and Gong
2023). Its growing prominence is driven by its versatility in
real-world applications such as autonomous driving (ShalevShwartz, Shammah, and Shashua 2016; Kiran et al. 2021)
and resource allocation (Ye, Li, and Juang 2019; Yu et al.
2020). Existing FRL methods, such as FedSARSA (Zhang
et al. 2024) and FedTD (Khodadadian et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2023), are widely applied to stochastic problems with
single-level structure. Instead, FRL with nested formulations, has not been studied. In this paper, we propose singleloop federated actor critic (SFAC), where agents in heterogeneous environments perform AC learning in a two-level
federated manner. Specifically, SFAC is composed of federated critics (FedC) where critics perform heterogeneous federated TD learning for policy evaluation by aggregating their
local value function models, and federated actors (FedA)
where the actors perform federated policy update for policy improvement by aggregating their local policy gradients.
Through local information aggregation, SFAC enables the
learning of a shared policy that achieves strong average performance across all agents’ heterogeneous environments.
In addition to common challenges in FRL, such as Markovian sampling and multiple local iterations, the conver-

Federated reinforcement learning (FRL) has emerged as a
promising paradigm, enabling multiple agents to collaborate
and learn a shared policy adaptable across heterogeneous environments. Among the various reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms, the actor-critic (AC) algorithm stands out for its
low variance and high sample efficiency. However, little to
nothing is known theoretically about AC in a federated manner, especially each agent interacts with a potentially different environment. The lack of such results is attributed to various technical challenges: a two-level structure illustrating the
coupling effect between the actor and the critic, heterogeneous environments, Markovian sampling and multiple local
updates. In response, we study Single-Loop Federated Actor
Critic (SFAC) where agents perform AC learning in a twolevel federated manner while interacting with heterogeneous
environments. We then provide bounds on the convergence
error of SFAC. The results show that the convergence error
asymptotically converges to a near-stationary point, with the
extent proportional to environment heterogeneity. Moreover,
the sample complexity exhibits a linear speed-up through the
federation of agents. We evaluate the performance of SFAC
through numerical experiments using common RL benchmarks, which demonstrate its effectiveness.

Introduction
In single-agent reinforcement learning (RL), policy improvement can be effectively facilitated by the Policy Gradient Theorem (Sutton et al. 1999) when using parameterized policies. This theorem represents the policy gradient as
a product of the score function and the action-value function, serving as the cornerstone for numerous RL algorithms.
Among these, actor-critic (AC) algorithms stand out by employing temporal difference (TD) learning to approximate
the action-value function, unlike Monte-Carlo algorithms
(Williams 1992), which rely on sampling entire trajectories
to estimate the value function. AC algorithms not only make
better use of available samples but also significantly reduce
the variance in policy updates, leading to more stable and
efficient learning.
In AC algorithms, two primary methods are commonly
used: double-loop variants (Kumar, Koppel, and Ribeiro
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23054

