The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EXCGEC: A Benchmark for Edit-Wise Explainable Chinese
Grammatical Error Correction
Jingheng Ye1 * , Shang Qin1 * , Yinghui Li1 , Xuxin Cheng2 , Libo Qin3 , Hai-Tao Zheng1† ,
Ying Shen4 , Peng Xing1 , Zishan Xu1 , Guo Cheng1 , Wenhao Jiang5†
1

Tsinghua University,
2
Peking University,
3
Central South University,
4
Sun Yat-Sen University,
5
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
{yejh22, qin-s23, liyinghu20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) GEC

Existing studies explore the explainability of Grammatical
Error Correction (GEC) in a limited scenario, where they ignore the interaction between corrections and explanations and
have not established a corresponding comprehensive benchmark. To bridge the gap, this paper first introduces the task of
EXplainable GEC (EXGEC), which focuses on the integral
role of correction and explanation tasks. To facilitate the task,
we propose EXCGEC, a tailored benchmark for Chinese
EXGEC consisting of 8,216 explanation-augmented samples
featuring the design of hybrid edit-wise explanations. We
then benchmark several series of LLMs in multi-task learning settings, including post-explaining and pre-explaining.
To promote the development of the task, we also build a
comprehensive evaluation suite by leveraging existing automatic metrics and conducting human evaluation experiments
to demonstrate the human consistency of the automatic metrics for free-text explanations. Our experiments reveal the effectiveness of evaluating free-text explanations using traditional metrics like METEOR and ROUGE, and the inferior
performance of multi-task models compared to the pipeline
solution, indicating its challenges to establish positive effects
in learning both tasks.

Target

Source

Source

Explanation

(b) GEE
Target

Target

(c) EXGEC

Source

Post-explaining

Pre-explaining

Explanation
Source: 接待的游客约在6000人次左右。

The number of tourists received is about 6000 people approximately.
Target: 接待的游客约在6000人次。
The number of tourists received is about 6000 people.
Error Type: 词语冗余 (Word Redundancy)
Error Severity: 2
Error Description: 表达数量时，【约】和【左右】都含有大约的意思，同时使用

这两个词汇导致语义重复。使用一个即可清晰表达含义，所以应该删除【左右】。
When expressing quantities, both【 约 】and【 左 右 】have similar
meanings of "approximately". Using both of these words together
results in semantic redundancy. Using only one of them is sufficient to

Code & Data — https://github.com/THUKElab/EXCGEC

convey the meaning clearly. Therefore, 【左右】should be deleted.

Introduction

Figure 1: Task definitions of GEC, GEE, and EXGEC.
We highlight 【evidence words】, {correction}, linguistic
knowledge, error causes, and revision advice parts.

Despite the notable advancements in Grammatical Error
Correction (GEC) (Bryant et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023a; Li
et al. 2025), there still exists a lack of profound examination
into the explainability of GEC (Dwivedi et al. 2023), which
is critical in educational scenarios for L2 (second language)speakers (Wang et al. 2021). These mainstream users, who
often face challenges in creating grammatically accurate and
fluent texts, may be confused or even misguided if they are

provided with limited access to only corrective texts. Therefore, augmenting the explainability of GEC is unquestionably beneficial for the progression of GEC as well as related
fields, such as essay scoring (Stahl et al. 2024), intelligent
tutoring systems (Montenegro-Rueda et al. 2023).
As illustrated in Figure 1, existing tasks like GEC and
Grammatical Error Explanation (GEE) typically address either correction or explanation, ignoring the interaction be-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25678

