The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Joint Knowledge Editing for Information Enrichment and Probability Promotion
Wenhang Shi1 , Yiren Chen2 , Shuqing Bian3 , Xinyi Zhang1 * , Zhe Zhao3 * , Pengfei Hu3 , Wei Lu1 ,
Xiaoyong Du1
1

Renmin University of China
2
Peking University
3
Tencent
{wenhangshi, xinyizhang.info, lu-wei, duyong}@ruc.edu.cn, yrchen92@pku.edu.cn, shuqingbian@gmail.com,
{nlpzhezhao, alanpfhu}@tencent.com
Abstract
Knowledge stored in large language models requires timely
updates to reflect the dynamic nature of real-world information. To update the knowledge, most knowledge editing
methods focus on the low layers, since recent probes into
the knowledge recall process reveal that the answer information is enriched in low layers. However, these probes only
and could only reveal critical recall stages for the original answers, while the goal of editing is to rectify model’s prediction for the target answers. This inconsistency indicates that
both the probe approaches and the associated editing methods are deficient. To mitigate the inconsistency and identify
critical editing regions, we propose a contrast-based probe approach, and locate two crucial stages where the model behavior diverges between the original and target answers: Information Enrichment in low layers and Probability Promotion in high layers. Building upon the insights, we develop
the Joint knowledge Editing for information Enrichment and
probability Promotion (JEEP) method, which jointly edits
both the low and high layers to modify the two critical recall stages. Considering the mutual interference and growing
forgetting due to dual modifications, JEEP is designed to ensure that updates to distinct regions share the same objectives
and are complementary. We rigorously evaluate JEEP by editing up to thousands of facts on various models, i.e., GPT-J
(6B) and LLaMA (7B), and addressing diverse editing objectives, i.e., adding factual and counterfactual knowledge. In all
tested scenarios, JEEP achieves best performances, validating
the effectiveness of the revealings of our probe approach and
the designs of our editing method.

Figure 1: Using probability as information indicator, we directly observe the original answer’s information flow within
the model. By further contrasting information flow of the
original and target answers, we identify two critical recall
stages for knowledge editing: Information Enrichment in
low layers and Probability Promotion in high layers.
now “Argentina” is the correct response. Common methods
like retraining model with revised corpora is prohibitively
costly, while continually fine-tuning on the corrected dataset
causes catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989;
Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Shi et al. 2023). Consequently, there
is a growing interest in Knowledge Edit, whose goal is to update the model’s original knowledge to the target knowledge
both efficiently and accurately (De Cao, Aziz, and Titov
2021; Mitchell et al. 2022).
Knowledge editing methods can be categorized based on
whether they modify model parameters (Yao et al. 2023).
Weight-preserved methods incorporate additional structures
to handle each editing requirement, facing scalability issues as the number of edits increases. (Huang et al. 2023;
Hartvigsen et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024). Therefore, we focus on weight-modified methods, which could accommodate considerable updates in a single operation, and include two distinct methods (Meng et al. 2022b; Tan, Zhang,
and Fu 2023; Li et al. 2024). Meta-learning methods train

Code — https://github.com/Eric8932/JEEP

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are renowned for their extensive knowledge storage, addressing queries by recalling
the encoded knowledge (Petroni et al. 2019; Touvron et al.
2023). However, their original knowledge might be incorrect or outdated due to the swift pace of global events, demanding timely updates to this stored information (Jang
et al. 2022). For instance, the answer “France” to the query
“World Cup’s winner is” remains valid until year 2022, but
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15160

