The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multisensory Machine Intelligence
Ruohan Gao
University of Maryland, College Park

The future of Artificial Intelligence demands a paradigm
shift towards multisensory perception—to systems that can
digest ongoing multisensory observations, that can discover
structure in unlabeled raw sensory data, and that can intelligently fuse useful information from different sensory modalities for decision making. While we humans perceive the
world by looking, listening, touching, smelling, and tasting,
traditional form of machine intelligence mostly focuses on a
single sensory modality, particularly vision. Therefore, my
research, which I call multisensory machine intelligence,
aims to enpower machines to emulate and enhance human
capabilities in seeing, hearing, and feeling, ultimately enabling them to comprehensively perceive, understand, and
interact with multisensory world.
Particularly, my research focuses on two important aspects of the multisensory world: multisensory objects
(Fig. 1a) and multisensory space (Fig. 1b). In both aspects, we have made technical innovations on addressing three important problems—1) Capturing: how can we
build systems to reliably and efficiently capture multisensory data from real-world objects and space? 2) Modeling:
how to effectively model multisensory objects and space
with the right representation and physics-based differentiable simulation algorithms? 3) Applications: what new
cross-modal/multi-modal applications can be enabled in vision, graphics, and robotics with a unified multisensory representation?
My new faculty highlight talk will also be structured into
the following two main parts:
Multisensory Objects. Our everyday activities involve
perception and manipulation of a wide variety of objects.
First, I study how to model the multisensory signals of real
world objects, virtualizing each object by encoding its intrinsics (texture, material type, and 3D shape) with an implicit neural representation. Then we can render its visual
appearance, impact sound, and tactile readings based on
any extrinsic parameters. We introduce a dataset called O B JECT F OLDER that contains 1,000 implicitly represented objects each containing the complete multisensory profile of
an object, and we succesfully perform Sim2Real transfer
by learning from them. Vice versa, we also design differentiable inverse rendering algorithms for Real2Sim appli-

Sound Source
Sound Source
Extrinsics
Extrinsics

Audio

Audio

Object Intrinsics
Object Intrinsics

(a) Multisensory Objects

(b) Multisensory Space

Figure 1: Multisensory Machine Intelligence. My research
studies two important aspects of the multisensory world: (a)
multisensory objects, and (b) multisensory space.
cations, where we infer a variety of physical properties of
objects from their real-world observations.
Multisensory Space. Apart from objects, the space we
live in is also multisensory. We see where the objects are
and how the room is laid out, and we also hear them: soundemitting objects indicate their locations, and sound reverberations reveal the room’s main surfaces, materials, and dimensions. The two senses naturally work in concert to interpret spatial signals. Leveraging the spatial signal in videos,
we devise approaches to lift a flat monaural audio signal
to binaural audio by injecting the spatial cues embedded
in the accompanying visual frames. We also introduce the
more general visual acoustic matching task, where we transform the sound recorded in one space to another space depicted in the target visual scene. Recently, we have also
proposed a differentiable room impulse response rendering
framework that allows us to synthesize novel acoustic experiences through the space with any source audio. Beyond
learning from passively captured videos or audio recordings,
we have also explored sight and sound in embodied learning
settings, exploring tasks such as embodied audio-visual navigation and echolocation in 3D environments.
My research draws inspiration from how we humans
make use of all our senses in our everyday activities, thus it
is highly interdisciplinary and involves various research areas, including computer vision, robotics, machine learning,
augmented reality, acoustic learning, and cognitive science.
My AAAI-25 new faculty highlight talk will survey my research experience and future plans on the research topics
discussed above.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28710

