The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Is Your Image a Good Storyteller?
Xiujie Song1 , Xiaoyi Pang1 , Haifeng Tang2 , Mengyue Wu1 * , Kenny Q. Zhu3 *
1

X-LANCE Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
China Merchants Bank Credit Card Center, Shanghai, China
3
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas, USA
1
{xiujiesong, fointpang, mengyuewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, 2 thfeng@cmbchina.com, 3 kenny.zhu@uta.edu
Abstract
Quantifying image complexity at the entity level is straightforward, but the assessment of semantic complexity has been
largely overlooked. In fact, there are differences in semantic complexity across images. Images with richer semantics
can tell vivid and engaging stories and offer a wide range of
application scenarios. For example, the Cookie Theft picture
is such a kind of image and is widely used to assess human
language and cognitive abilities due to its higher semantic
complexity. Additionally, semantically rich images can benefit the development of vision models, as images with limited
semantics are becoming less challenging for them. However,
such images are scarce, highlighting the need for a greater
number of them. For instance, there is a need for more images like Cookie Theft to cater to people from different cultural backgrounds and eras. Assessing semantic complexity
requires human experts and empirical evidence. Automatic
evaluation of how semantically rich an image will be the first
step of mining or generating more images with rich semantics, and benefit human cognitive assessment, Artificial Intelligence, and various other applications. In response, we propose the Image Semantic Assessment (ISA) task to address
this problem. We introduce the first ISA dataset and a novel
method that leverages language to solve this vision problem.
Experiments on our dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach.

(a)

Figure 1: The Cookie Theft pictures. (a) is the original version and (b) is an updated version.

Many studies (Cummings 2019; Tasnim et al. 2022) have
revealed the reasons behind the success of this picture. Its
essence is being a “good storyteller,” capable of telling a
complete and engaging story. Based on the research of the
psychologists, two of its most important characteristics can
be summarized as follows: (1) It contains a rich but not excessive number of entities, making it well-suited for eliciting longer narrative descriptions. (2) It is rich in semantics,
enabling it to tell an interesting story. The semantics are derived from reasonings made by observing the entities and
their relationships in the image. For instance, the Cookie
Theft tells a story about two children attempting to steal
cookies from a jar when their mother is not looking. The
mother-child relationship between the characters in the image is deduced through further reasoning based on observing
the content in the image.
Though the Cookie Theft picture is widely used, there are
still limitations. It is outdated since it has been proposed
for half a century and it cannot be well applied to different
cultures (Berube et al. 2019; Steinberg, Lyden, and Davis
2022). To avoid these issues, people often have to modify or
replace the image in different application scenarios (Berube
et al. 2019; Hussein et al. 2015; Domı́nguez et al. 2006; Oh
et al. 2012; Prasad, Dash, and Kumar 2012). For instance,
Figure 1 (b) is an updated version of the Cookie Theft. This
means more images of this kind are necessary.
Besides, this kind of image is not only useful for humans
but also for Artificial Intelligence (AI). With the development of vision models, especially Large Vision-Language
Models (LVLMs), their abilities are increasing rapidly. Sim-

Data and code — https://github.com/xiujiesong/ISA

1

(b)

Introduction

How complex can a picture be? What kind of story can be
told via a single picture? As the saying goes, “a picture is
worth a thousand words”. However, not every picture contains such rich information. The Cookie Theft picture (Figure 1 (a)) is a good exemplar of complex semantic information expressed via visual language. It is a well-known picture commonly used to assess language and cognitive abilities in humans. It was first introduced in the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination published in 1972 (Goodglass,
Kaplan, and Weintraub 2001) and remains widely utilized to
this day.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25165

