The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GPU-Accelerated Parallel Bilevel Optimization for Robust 6G ISAC
Xingdi Chen, Kai Yang*
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, China
xingdichen@tongji.edu.cn, kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

objective bilevel optimization problem can be formulated as

This paper initiates the first exploratory study to investigate
the robust integrated sensing and communication (ISAC) systems under channel estimation errors from the perspective
of GPU-accelerated bilevel optimization. Within this framework, the upper-level problem is dedicated to simultaneously
optimizing communication and sensing objectives, quantified
respectively by weighted sum rate and Cramér-Rao lower
bound, while the lower-level problem considers the channel
uncertainties. We then propose an efficient algorithm that can
find a set of Pareto optimal solutions with different trade-offs
among communication rates and sensing accuracy. The theoretical analysis regarding the convergence rate has also been
provided. Furthermore, we design a bilevel optimization inspired deep neural network architecture for that can be realized efficiently on GPU platform. Experiments have been
conducted to evaluate the performances of proposed methods.
In particular, the proposed GPU-accelerated parallel bilevel
optimization can accelerate the convergence speed by up to
50 times compared to conventional gradient-based methods.
This characteristic renders it especially suitable for real-time
applications, exemplified by the demanding requirements of
robust ISAC in upcoming 6G networks.

min

[F1 (x, y), F2 (x, y)]T

s.t.

G(x, y) ≤ 0

x

y ∈ arg min
y′

s.t.

[f1 (x, y ′ ) , f2 (x, y ′ )]T

(1)

g (x, y ′ ) ≤ 0,

where x ∈ Rn1 and y ∈ Rn2 are the upper-level and lowerlevel variables, respectively. Both upper-level and lowerlevel objectives are vector-valued. We refer to G as the
upper-level constraint and g as the lower-level constraint.
Apparently, robust optimization, characterized by a maxmin or min-max structure, is fundamentally a bilevel optimization problem.
Integrated sensing and communication (ISAC), a revolutionary technology for future sixth-generation (6G) wireless
networks, has received significant attention recently. Unlike
conventional wireless networks with communication functionality only, ISAC seamlessly integrates both communication and sensing, paving the way for numerous environmentand location-aware applications such as autonomous driving, smart city, and factory automation (Liu et al. 2022a;
Zhang et al. 2022b). Beamforming, one of the most promising multi-antenna techniques, can shape transmit signals in
specified directions, playing a crucial role in enhancing the
system performance of ISAC. Extensive studies on beamforming design have been proposed to provide high-quality
communication and sensing services (Hua, Xu, and Han
2023; Liu et al. 2022b, 2020; Cheng et al. 2024; Xu et al.
2023).
However, most prior works on beamforming design for
ISAC assume the knowledge of channel state information
(CSI) at base stations (BSs) is perfectly known. Unfortunately, CSI errors, which can have catastrophic effects on
the performance of both communication and sensing (Wang
et al. 2024), are inevitable due to the following three reasons (Tajer, Prasad, and Wang 2011). Firstly, channel estimation based on statistical methods cannot provide accurate
channel estimates when training samples are limited, which
is referred to as estimation error. Secondly, the amount of
bits reserved for quantized CSI feedback is small in future
wireless networks, leading to what is known as quantization
error. Thirdly, the communication channel is time-varying.

Introduction
Recently, bilevel optimization has gained significant interest
in machine learning, with applications in various areas like
hyperparameter optimization (Liu et al. 2021; Franceschi
et al. 2018), meta-learning (Ji et al. 2020; Ji, Yang, and
Liang 2021) and neural architecture search (Liu, Simonyan,
and Yang 2018; Xue et al. 2021). Bi-objective optimization research is a crucial component of the multi-objective
optimization, which has also achieved significant success
in multi-task learning (Chen and Kwok 2022a,b; Lin et al.
2019). Multi-objective bilevel optimization can be applied
to robust meta-learning, robust neural architecture search,
and multi-task learning(YE et al. 2021; Ye et al. 2024).
However, bi-objective bilevel optimization is underexplored, with only a handful of related studies (Gutjahr
and Dzubur 2016; Camacho-Vallejo et al. 2022). The bi* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11167

