The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CMT: A Memory Compression Method for Continual Knowledge Learning of
Large Language Models
Dongfang Li, Zetian Sun, Xinshuo Hu, Baotian Hu, Min Zhang
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
crazyofapple@gmail.com

Abstract
/RQJWHUP
0HPRU\

,QWHJUDWH1HZ.QRZOHGJHLQWR
/DUJH/DQJXDJH0RGHOV

Large Language Models (LLMs) need to adapt to the continuous changes in data, tasks, and user preferences. Due to their
massive size and the high costs associated with training, LLMs
are not suitable for frequent retraining. However, updates are
necessary to keep them in sync with rapidly evolving human
knowledge. To address these challenges, this paper proposes
the Compression Memory Training (CMT) method, an efﬁcient and effective online adaptation framework for LLMs that
features robust knowledge retention capabilities. Inspired by
human memory mechanisms, CMT compresses and extracts
information from new documents to be stored in a memory
bank. When answering to queries related to these new documents, the model aggregates these document memories from
the memory bank to better answer user questions. The parameters of the LLM itself do not change during training and inference, reducing the risk of catastrophic forgetting. To enhance
the encoding, retrieval, and aggregation of memory, we further
propose three new general and ﬂexible techniques, including
memory-aware objective, self-matching and top-k aggregation.
Extensive experiments conducted on three continual learning
datasets (i.e., StreamingQA, SQuAD and ArchivalQA) demonstrate that the proposed method improves model adaptability
and robustness across multiple base LLMs (e.g., +4.07 EM &
+4.19 F1 in StreamingQA with Llama-2-7b).

5HWULHYDO


8SGDWHG
.QRZOHGJH

6WRUDJH



(QFRGLQJ

:RUNLQJ
0HPRU\

Figure 1: In general, memory can be divided into three stages:
(1) encoding involves reorganizing and transforming external
information; (2) storage entails hierarchically categorizing
and preserving information in long-term memory; (3) retrieval extracts information from long-term memory.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become the core of
natural language processing (NLP) (Touvron et al. 2023a;
OpenAI 2023). The current challenge is how these LLMs
adapt to rapidly changing world knowledge, especially in the
context of increasing new data and growing model complexity (Shi et al. 2024). Typically, LLMs are trained on static and
pre-deﬁned datasets. For example, the Llama-3.1 model is an
open-source large language model by Meta, with a training
dataset over 15 trillion tokens (Llama Team 2024). However,
in practical applications, language usage habits, information
content, and user needs are all dynamically changing (Wu
et al. 2024). On the other hand, once training is complete,
the model becomes ﬁxed, and the cost and computational demands of retraining or incremental pre-training is extremely
high. For example, the GPT-3 model has 174.6 billion parameters, and retraining it once requires approximately 3640
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
24413

PF-days of computing power (i.e., performing 10 quadrillion
calculations per second for 3640 days) (Brown et al. 2020).
Therefore, how to adapt downstream tasks effectively and
efﬁciently with updating the model with the new knowledge
while retaining the existing knowledge has become an important and urgent topic.
To address these challenges, existing continual learning
methods dynamically update new incremental knowledge
through techniques such as data replay and incremental task
parameters while balancing the generalization of new and
old knowledge (Schwarz et al. 2018; Riemer et al. 2018; Shi
and Wang 2024). However, data replay and incrementally
adding task parameters bring non-negligible computational
overhead. Additionally, methods like model editing only provide patches to the model, resulting in poor generalization
ability and even causing collapse (Yao et al. 2023). While
it is possible to perform thousands of edits simultaneously,
scalability is low when updating a large amount of knowledge
in large models, and catastrophic forgetting can occur. On the
other hand, memory is the foundation of human intelligence
while humans use memory to achieve continual learning. As
shown in Figure 1, memory impact on intellectual activities such as learning, abstraction, association, and reasoning
in the human brain spans three stages: (1) Encoding: It in-

