The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ProtoCar: Learning 3D Vehicle Prototypes from Single-View and Unconstrained
Driving Scene Images
Hongyuan Liu, Haochen Yu, Bochao Zou* , Juntao Lyu, Qi Mei, Jiansheng Chen, Huimin Ma*
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, China
{hongyuanliu,haochen.yu,lyujuntao,qimei}@xs.ustb.edu.cn,{zoubochao,jschen,mhmpub}@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D models from sensor data is a valuable and
promising direction for developing testing and validation environments in applications like autonomous driving. However, existing methods for 3D modeling often rely on extensive multi-view data or controlled conditions, making them
difficult and expensive to scale. Furthermore, these methods, particularly those based on neural radiance fields, typically produce implicit models that can be challenging to
manipulate and suffer from slow rendering speeds. In this
paper, we introduce ProtoCar, a novel approach that overcomes these limitations by learning 3D vehicle prototypes
from single-view images with diverse and unconstrained visual conditions. ProtoCar uses real-world driving data from
LiDAR and image sensors, and employs 3D Gaussian splatting techniques to represent explicit geometric and texture.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that ProtoCar generates
high-quality 3D models and adapts well to various vehicle
types and challenging visual scenarios, offering a scalable
and effective solution for 3D modeling in environments with
limited and variable visual information.

Input

Novel Views

Figure 1: Driving scene data is often diverse, characterized
by varying vehicle types, lighting conditions, and levels of
occlusion. Our method aims to address the limitations of
existing approaches by enabling the generation of unconstrained single-image to 3D vehicle models using only lowquality real-world data.

Introduction

et al. 2022), voxels(Rukhovich, Vorontsova, and Konushin
2022), and the widely used neural radiance fields (Mildenhall et al. 2021; Jun and Nichol 2023). However, due to the
implicit representation and volumetric rendering process,
methods based on NeRF often consume significant computational resources and are challenging for real-time rendering. Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting(Kerbl et al. 2023) has
achieved high-quality and efficient 3D explicit representation using anisotropic 3D Gaussians.
Due to the reliance on synthetic datasets, the style of the
generated models is often limited to a cartoonish aesthetic,
resulting in an unrealistic appearance. For applications that
demand a high degree of realism, such as safety-critical autonomous driving, this limitation is particularly problematic. Moreover, many image-to-3D models are trained on
extensive, high-quality datasets(Deitke et al. 2024; Downs
et al. 2022). These methods mostly require high-resolution
multi-view images of the object, while also demanding nonocclusion, carefully designed camera parameters. As shown
in Figure 1, real-world scenarios introduce challenges such
as occlusions and diverse viewpoints, which are often not
adequately represented in these datasets. This gap leads to

Perceiving and understanding the 3D world is foundational
for many computer vision applications, such as autonomous
driving, augmented reality (AR), and robotics. As a crucial tool, simulation offers safe and controlled environments
for testing and validation. However, the construction of
3D models necessary for these simulations often requires
significant manual effort and expertise (Dosovitskiy et al.
2017a; Cabon, Murray, and Humenberger 2020; Richter
et al. 2016a).
Rapid and convenient acquisition of 3D assets has become a rapidly evolving area of research. Recent advancements have led to the development of techniques such as
text-to-3D (Poole et al. 2022; Lin et al. 2023) and imageto-3D (Liu et al. 2023, 2024). These methods promise to
automate the creation of 3D models from 2D images or
text, significantly reducing the manual workload involved
in traditional approaches. These methods leverage different
forms of 3D representations, such as point clouds(Nichol
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5460

