The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Matching While Perceiving: Enhance Image Feature Matching
with Applicable Semantic Amalgamation
Shihua Zhang1 * , Zhenjie Zhu1 * , Zizhuo Li1 , Tao Lu2 , Jiayi Ma1†
1

Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072,China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430205,China
suhzhang001@gmail.com, zejzhu@whu.edu.cn, zizhuo li@whu.edu.cn, lutxyl@gmail.com, jyma2010@gmail.com
2

Abstract

correspondences between two-view images. This paper focuses on determining accurate correspondences with existing feature points, better serving subsequent tasks.
A common method to establish point-to-point correspondences is the Nearest Neighbor (NN). Nevertheless, the generated matches are inevitably dominated by interference features due to the matcher’s lack of inter-/intra-image message
interactions. Thanks to the strength of deep learning, SuperGlue (Sarlin et al. 2020) as a precursor builds a graph neural
network (GNN) (Wu et al. 2020) that aggregates information
among feature points to enhance their descriptions. Though
the following methods (Chen et al. 2021; Xue, Budvytis,
and Cipolla 2023; Lindenberger, Sarlin, and Pollefeys 2023;
Zhang and Ma 2024b) have elaborately designed more accurate and powerful matchers, subject to the myopic descriptors that focus on local and geometric features narrowly, they
still behave unsatisfactorily, especially in the case of extreme
situations, including sparse texture, illumination variations,
and occlusions. In fact, besides the local and geometric features, humans that match two images with the naked eyes
further consider the high-level semantic information about
the scene and the objects, so that they rarely err even though
in texture-less or wild scenes. Thus we lean toward asking
the following questions: Q1: Can we perceive the semantic
information during matching to see more than only local or
geometric features? Q2: How to mingle the semantic information applicably during the general matching process?
The conjecture in Q1 that additional semantic information
facilitates the matcher in discriminating some ambiguous
correspondences has been proved recently in MESA (Zhang
and Zhao 2024) and OmniGlue (Jiang et al. 2024). They
utilize semantic consistency, wherein established correspondences should possess identical semantic labels, narrowing
down the exploration area for matching and enhancing the
algorithm’s robustness. However, as for Q2, both of them do
not introduce the semantic messages into the matching process appropriately and effectively. Concretely, these methods that apply semantic priors to pre-select matching regions easily ignore true correspondences if the areas are not
precise, and do not take full advantage of the abundant visual perception features. Besides, though using pre-trained
foundation visual model (Kirillov et al. 2023; Oquab et al.
2024) could provide broad semantic knowledge, it also suffers from being computationally expensive and resource-

Image feature matching is a cardinal problem in computer vision, aiming to establish accurate correspondences between
two-view images. Existing methods are constrained by the
performance of feature extractors and struggle to capture local information affected by sparse texture or occlusions. Recognizing that human eyes consider not only similar local geometric features but also high-level semantic information of
scene objects when matching images, this paper introduces
SemaGlue. This novel algorithm perceives and incorporates
semantic information into the matching process. In contrast to
recent approaches that leverage semantic consistency to narrow the scope of matching areas, SemaGlue achieves semantic amalgamation with the designed Semantic-Aware Fusion
(SAF) Block by injecting abundant semantic features from
the pre-trained segmentation model. Moreover, the CrossDomain Alignment (CDA) Block is proposed to address domain alignment issues, bridging the gaps between semantic
and geometric domains to ensure applicable semantic amalgamation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SemaGlue
outperforms state-of-the-art methods across various applications such as homography estimation, relative pose estimation, and visual localization.

Code — https://github.com/ZeJ-Zhu/SemaGlue

Introduction
Image matching, which aims to establish accurate correspondences between different images of the same scene,
is a critical procedure for various complex vision applications (Ma et al. 2021), such as panoramic stitching (Brown
and Lowe 2007), visual localization (Schönberger et al.
2018), 3D reconstruction (Koutsoudis et al. 2014), and neural rendering (Thies, Zollhöfer, and Nießner 2019). A welldeveloped and effective image matching pipeline begins
with detecting and describing feature points in both images,
where significant efforts have been devoted to practical detectors and descriptors (Lowe 2004; DeTone, Malisiewicz,
and Rabinovich 2018). Subsequently, matching algorithms
are conducted based on the visual descriptions to identify
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10094

