The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FashionTailor: Controllable Clothing Editing for Human Images with Appearance
Preserving
Jie Hou1 , Jianghong Ma1 , Xiangyu Mu1 , Haijun Zhang1 * , Zhao Zhang2
1

Department of Computer Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China
arlo@stu.hit.edu.cn, majianghong@hit.edu.cn, 21B951013@stu.hit.edu.cn, hjzhang@hit.edu.cn, cszzhang@gmail.com

Abstract
The garment structure serves as a crucial medium for expressing the designer’s creative vision and showcasing the distinctive character of clothing items. Effective editing of garment
structure in fashion images allows for an advanced preview
of the design, accelerating the process of garment customization to meet individualized requirements. Although largescale diffusion models have demonstrated impressive image
generation and editing capabilities, no efforts have been made
to exploit their potential in part-level editing of images. Unlike previous research, we define a clothing structure editing
(CSE) task aimed at accurately editing the local structure of
human-centered clothing images through simple instructionbased prompts while maintaining the consistency of clothing appearance. Specifically, this paper develops a new controllable triple-flow framework for structure editing named
Fashion-Tailor. An additional network called ClothingNet is
proposed to extract the clothing details to address the rigid
constraints of the original garment structure. Then, we propose a semantic-refined module to extract the semantic understanding of the source image and adaptively focus on the part
to be edited. We also design a cross-blend attention mechanism to integrate fine-grained clothing features to guarantee precise alignment between appearance and target structure
features. In addition, a garment structure dataset called StructureFashion has been collated, wherein each item of clothing is represented by multiple photos with diverse structure
characteristics, containing over six million pairs. Finally, our
method supports editing the structure of multiple parts on a
garment simultaneously. Extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness of our meth-od for editing part-level human images in StructureFashion dataset and real-scenarios.

Figure 1: Structure editing results generated by FashionTailor, which enables the editing of multiple parts of arbitrary garments simultaneously. Notably, the source images
for rows 2-4 are from the wild dataset.

Introduction
The rise of e-commerce and artificial intelligence is transforming how consumers purchase clothing, making bespoke
clothing production increasingly popular (Nobile and Cantoni 2023). However, the bespoke clothing process is usually complex and challenging for both consumers and merchants. Consumers often need design alterations, reworks,
and even chargebacks due to the difficulty in visualizing how
a garment looks when worn. For merchants, hiring mod-

els to photograph garments with the same style but different shapes is a time-consuming and labor-intensive process.
Thus, obtaining a preview of garment alterations dressed on
models becomes essential. This necessitates a tool capable
of directly modifying the clothing structure within human
images. Clothing structure (Chen 2020) encompasses the design elements of clothing products, including the combina-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3509

