The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Decision-Making for LLM Agents via Step-Level Q-Value Models
Yuanzhao Zhai1,2 , Tingkai Yang1,2 , Kele Xu1,2 , Dawei Feng1,2 * ,
Cheng Yang1,2,3 , Bo Ding1,2 , Huaimin Wang1,2
1

2

National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment
3
Hunan Institute of Advanced Technology, Changsha, China
{yuanzhaozhai, yangtingkai19, dingbo, hmwang}@nudt.edu.cn,
xukelele@163.com, davyfeng.c@qq.com, delpiero710@126.com

Abstract
Agents significantly enhance the capabilities of standalone
Large Language Models (LLMs) by perceiving environments,
making decisions, and executing actions. However, LLM
agents still face challenges in tasks that require multiple
decision-making steps. Estimating the value of actions in specific tasks is difficult when intermediate actions are neither
appropriately rewarded nor penalized. In this paper, we propose leveraging a task-relevant Q-value model to guide action
selection. Specifically, we first collect decision-making trajectories annotated with step-level Q values via Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) and construct preference data. We then
use another LLM to fit these preferences through step-level
Direct Policy Optimization (DPO), which serves as the Qvalue model. During inference, at each decision-making step,
LLM agents select the action with the highest Q value before
interacting with the environment. We apply our method to various open-source and API-based LLM agents, demonstrating
that Q-value models significantly improve their performance.
Notably, the performance of the agent built with Phi-3-mini4k-instruct improved by 103% on WebShop and 75% on HotPotQA when enhanced with Q-value models, even surpassing
GPT-4o-mini. Additionally, Q-value models offer several advantages, such as generalization to different LLM agents and
seamless integration with existing prompting strategies.

Figure 1: Overview of our method. To train the Q-value
model, LLM agents interact with the environment to collect
preference data with Q-value annotations using MCTS. During inference, LLM agents sample multiple candidate actions
and select the best one based on the Q-value model.

Introduction
Autonomous agents powered by large language models
(LLMs) can operate across a wide range of domains, including web navigation (Yao et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2024b),
interactive question answering (Yang et al. 2018), and tool
usage (Ma et al. 2024). By utilizing feedback or observations
from environments, LLM agents can reason and plan using
prompting strategies to accomplish specific tasks (Yao et al.
2023). The resulting text-based outputs and action plans can
then be employed to make API calls and execute operations
within these environments.
Despite these advancements, even agents powered by some
of the most effective LLMs, such as GPT-4, struggle with
complex multi-step decision-making tasks (Achiam et al.
2023). Beyond intermediate environmental feedback, additional task-specific knowledge is necessary to further enhance
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27161

decision-making. Allowing LLM agents to engage in multiple trial-and-error processes during inference, strategies such
as carefully designed reflection (Shinn et al. 2023) or treebased search (Zhou et al. 2024a; Koh et al. 2024) can help
agents iteratively refine their actions. However, this assumption is not always feasible in realistic applications. Recently,
fine-tuning open-source LLM backbones with agent trajectories has emerged as an alternative. While this approach
enables LLMs to acquire more task-specific knowledge, it
can also degrade the general performances of LLMs (Chen
et al. 2024b). Furthermore, state-of-the-art API-based LLMs,
which are more effective for building agents, are not accessible for fine-tuning.
As the number of decision-making steps increases, compounding errors and uncertainties can accumulate (Xi et al.
2024a), exacerbating the problem. Since actions are sampled
from a distribution of text, the greedy action may not always
be the optimal choice in the environment. As shown in Figure 2, suboptimal actions in intermediate steps can lead to
task failure. A common and effective approach to enhancing

