The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Probabilistic Shielding for Safe Reinforcement Learning
Edwin Hamel-De le Court, Francesco Belardinelli, Alexander W. Goodall
Imperial College London
{e.hamel-de-le-court, francesco.belardinelli, a.goodall22}@ic.ac.uk

at least some probability p. This framework comes from a
probabilistic version of what is usually called the “safety”
fragment of Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) (Alshiekh et al.
2018) (Jansen et al. 2020). Although, for simplicity’s sake,
we consider only a subset of that safety fragment, i.e. safety
definable by state-avoidance, it is possible to reduce the
whole fragment to that subset with the usual trick of making
a product between the automaton representing the LTL property and the MDP (Alshiekh et al. 2018) (Jansen et al. 2020).
Thus, the model we use can capture many real-life scenarios,
like a robot’s task of reaching a goal position while avoiding
objects on his path.
Our approach is, to our knowledge, in the framework we
consider, the first approach not based on Linear Programming (Karmarkar 1984) that gives strict formal guarantees
for safety throughout learning and at test time. Instead of
using Linear Programming, that has limited scalability (Sutton and Barto 2018), we leverage sound Value Iteration algorithms (see e.g. (Haddad and Monmege 2018; Quatmann
and Katoen 2018; Hartmanns and Kaminski 2020)), which
are algorithms that improve on Value Iteration in order to
give formal approximation guarantees. We use the values
obtained by Value Iteration over safety costs to construct a
shield that makes the agent’s exploration of the MDP safe
by constraining its actions. Constructing a shield is a wellknown approach to solve constrained RL (Alshiekh et al.
2018; Jansen et al. 2020; Elsayed-Aly et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2023). However, in contrast to shields defined in previous
papers, the shield we construct does not directly constrain
the actions of the agent in the original MDP, but constrains
the actions of the agent in a safety-aware state-augmented
MDP. This approach allows for preserving optimality while
ensuring safety in a probabilistic context. Any RL algorithm
can then be used to solve the shielded MDP, such as PPO
(Schulman et al. 2017), A2C (Mnih et al. 2016), etc. Once
the shield is constructed, it is used to train the agent to maximize its cumulative reward, with no constraint violations
incurred. To summarize, the contributions of the paper are
as follows.
1. We design a shield for a finite MDP as a safety-aware
state-augmention of that MDP using only its safety dynamics.
2. We show that the shield makes the agent’s exploration
safe.

Abstract
In real-life scenarios, a Reinforcement Learning (RL) agent
aiming to maximise their reward, must often also behave in a
safe manner, including at training time. Thus, much attention
in recent years has been given to Safe RL, where an agent
aims to learn an optimal policy among all policies that satisfy
a given safety constraint. However, strict safety guarantees
are often provided through approaches based on linear programming, and thus have limited scaling. In this paper we
present a new, scalable method, which enjoys strict formal
guarantees for Safe RL, in the case where the safety dynamics of the Markov Decision Process (MDP) are known, and
safety is defined as an undiscounted probabilistic avoidance
property. Our approach is based on state-augmentation of the
MDP, and on the design of a shield that restricts the actions
available to the agent. We show that our approach provides
a strict formal safety guarantee that the agent stays safe at
training and test time. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our
approach is viable in practice through experimental evaluation.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to optimise the behaviour of an agent in an unknown environment. Much attention has been given to RL in recent years, because of
its many practical applications, which include for example
playing games (Mnih et al. 2013) or robotics (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013). In many of these applications however, safety, either for the agent or for other humans, is critical. Consequently, Safe RL has been developed, where an
agent has to maximise its cumulative expected reward subject to a constraint. Even though much progress has been
made to provide safety guarantees during training and at test
time, approaches providing strict safety guarantees still rely
on Linear Programming (Karmarkar 1984), which is known
to lack scalability.
Contributions. We design a new shielding approach for
finding a policy that maximizes cumulative reward in a finite MDP with known safety dynamics while guaranteeing
safety throughout the whole learning phase. We consider
MDPs where some states are labelled unsafe, and the safety
we consider consists in avoiding those unsafe states with
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16091

