The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VERO: Verification and Zero-Shot Feedback Acquisition for Few-Shot
Multimodal Aspect-Level Sentiment Classification
Kai Sun,1,2 Hao Wu,3 Bin Shi,1,2 * Samuel Mensah,4 Peng Liu,3∗ Bo Dong1,5
1

Shaanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
3
School of computer science and engineering, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom
5
School of Continuing Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
sunkai@xjtu.edu.cn, wuhao@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, shibin@xjtu.edu.cn, s.mensah@sheffield.ac.uk, liupeng@gxnu.edu.cn,
dong.bo@xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Deep learning approaches for multimodal aspect-level sentiment classification (MALSC) often require extensive data,
which is costly and time-consuming to obtain. To mitigate
this, current methods typically fine-tune small-scale pretrained models like BERT and BART with few-shot examples. While these models have shown success, Large VisionLanguage Models (LVLMs) offer significant advantages due
to their greater capacity and ability to understand nuanced
language in both zero-shot and few-shot settings. However,
there is limited work on fine-tuning LVLMs for MALSC.
A major challenge lies in selecting few-shot examples that
effectively capture the underlying patterns in data for these
LVLMs. To bridge this research gap, we propose an acquisition function designed to select challenging samples for
the few-shot learning of LVLMs for MALSC. We compare
our approach, Verification and ZERO-shot feedback acquisition (VERO), with diverse acquisition functions for few-shot
learning in MALSC. Our experiments show that VERO outperforms prior methods, achieving an F1 score improvement
of up to 6.07% on MALSC benchmark datasets.

Figure 1: Illustrative example of VERO for LVLMs. The
solid line represents the LVLM’s self-verification decision
boundary, separating samples into “changed” (black circles)
and “confirmed” (gray circles) classifications based on the
model’s zero-shot and self-verification predictions on unlabeled data. The distance between circles and the boundary
reflects the uncertainty level after self-verification. We focus
on selecting samples within the low-uncertainty region of
the “changed” class (highlighted in blue), as these are challenging and informative for fine-tuning the LVLM.

Code — https://github.com/absdog/vero

Recent advancements in Few-shot MALSC have primarily focused on fine-tuning small-scale pretrained language models (PLMs), such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019)
and BART (Lewis et al. 2020). Meanwhile, Large VisionLanguage Models (LVLMs) demonstrate remarkable performance on the task using different prompt-based techniques,
including zero-shot (Yang et al. 2024b), few-shot (Li et al.
2023; Ye et al. 2023), chain-of-thought (CoT) (Li et al. 2024)
and most recently self-verification (Gero et al. 2023) - a
better reasoning of CoT, where the LVLM performs a forward reasoning and backward verification to arrive at an answer. Then again, adapting LVLMs to unseen data through
fine-tuning is crucial, yet this process on large-scale data
is costly. Few-shot fine-tuning offers a promising alternative, allowing these models to quickly adapt to new domainspecific data while minimizing the resources and time typically required. However, limited studies have focused on
few-shot fine-tuning of LVLMs for MALSC (Yang et al.

Introduction
With the growing abundance of multimodal data shared on
social media, multimodal aspect-level sentiment classification (MALSC) has gained more attention. MALSC aims to
determine the sentiment polarity of an aspect based on the
given text-image pair. Previous approaches to MALSC focused on enhancing model performance by leveraging large
amounts of training data or incorporating additional auxiliary data (Khan and Fu 2021; Ling, Yu, and Xia 2022; Yang,
Xiao, and Du 2024). However, the collection and annotation of multimodal data for MALSC are inherently timeconsuming and labor-intensive. To address this challenge,
many studies have focused on Few-shot MALSC (Yu and
Zhang 2022; Yu, Zhang, and Li 2022; Yang et al. 2023b),
aiming is to identify and select a few highly informative
samples from a large pool of unlabeled data to optimize the
model performance on the task.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial

Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25210

