The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Attack on Prompt: Backdoor Attack in Prompt-Based Continual Learning
Trang Nguyen1 , Anh Tran1 , Nhat Ho2
1

VinAI Research
The University of Texas at Austin
v.trangnvt2@vinai.io, v.anhtt152@vinai.io, minhnhat@utexas.edu
2

Abstract

Class 0
Task 1

Prompt-based approaches offer a cutting-edge solution to
data privacy issues in continual learning, particularly in scenarios involving multiple data suppliers where long-term storage of private user data is prohibited. Despite delivering stateof-the-art performance, its impressive remembering capability can become a double-edged sword, raising security concerns as it might inadvertently retain poisoned knowledge injected during learning from private user data. Following this
insight, in this paper, we expose continual learning to a potential threat: backdoor attack, which drives the model to follow a desired adversarial target whenever a specific trigger
is present while still performing normally on clean samples.
We highlight three critical challenges in executing backdoor
attacks on incremental learners and propose corresponding
solutions: (1) Transferability: We employ a surrogate dataset
and manipulate prompt selection to transfer backdoor knowledge to data from other suppliers; (2) Resiliency: We simulate
static and dynamic states of the victim to ensure the backdoor trigger remains robust during intense incremental learning processes; and (3) Authenticity: We apply binary crossentropy loss as an anti-cheating factor to prevent the backdoor trigger from devolving into adversarial noise. Extensive
experiments across various benchmark datasets and continual learners validate our continual backdoor framework, with
further ablation studies confirming our contributions’ effectiveness.

1

Class 1

…
…
…

…
Class 4
Task 3
Class 5

…
…
…
…

Class 8
Task 5
Class 9

…
…
…

Data from task
1 to task 5
Inference
Training
Victim
after the most
sequentially,
Promptrecent task
task by task
based
Continual
Learner

…
All classified
normally

…
All classified as
class 4 when
triggered

Figure 1: Multi data supplier scenario in prompt-based continual learning, with one supplier acting as an adversarial
attacker.

data privacy, such as those involving multiple data suppliers.
Nonetheless, such promising results can inadvertently become vulnerabilities, exposing CL to security threats. Indeed, while CL methods effectively address catastrophic
forgetting by preserving and incorporating previously acquired knowledge, they may also unwittingly retain knowledge compromised by adversarial actions. These threats become even more formidable in the multi-data supplier scenario of prompt-based approaches, where the supplied data
might contain hidden harmful information, as shown in Figure 1.
One potential threat is backdoor attack, which manipulates neural networks to exhibit the attacker’s desired behavior when the input contains a specific backdoor trigger.
Typically, adversaries poison a small portion of the training data, causing models trained on this data to misclassify
any images with the triggers as a given target class while
performing normally on clean samples. This makes the attack less likely to be suspected by the victim learner. As
backdoor attacks pose such dangerous threats, increasingly
sophisticated methods are being introduced. These include
black-box scenarios where the attacker has no information
about the model and learning procedure (Saha, Subramanya,
and Pirsiavash 2019; Souri et al. 2021; Turner, Tsipras, and
Madry 2019), or data-constrained cases where adversaries
control only a fragment of the training data (Zeng et al.

Introduction

The adaptability of human learning to absorb new knowledge without forgetting previously acquired information remains a significant challenge for machine learning models.
Continual learning (CL) endeavors to narrow this chasm by
guiding models to sequentially learn new tasks while maintaining high performance on earlier ones. An outstanding
solution to CL is the prompt-based approach (Smith et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2022a,b, 2023; Qiao et al. 2024), which
leverages the power of pre-trained models and employs a set
of trainable prompts for flexible model instruction, accommodating data from various tasks. Thanks to its ability to remember without storing a memory buffer, prompt-based CL
methods are particularly suitable for scenarios prioritizing
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19686

