The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SGFormer: Semantic-Geometry Fusion Transformer
for Multi-modal 3D Panoptic Segmentation
Hongqi Yu1 , Sixian Chan2 * , Xiaolong Zhou3 , Xiaoqin Zhang1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Informatics for Safety and Emergency of Zhejiang Province, Wenzhou University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, China
3
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Quzhou University, China
yuhongqcn@163.com, sxchan@zjut.edu.cn, xiaolong@ieee.org, zhangxiaoqinnan@gmail.com
Point Clouds

Modern methods for autonomous driving perception widely
adopt multi-modal fusion to enhance 3D scene understanding. However, existing methods suffer from inferior semantic extraction in image encoders that treat all pixels equally,
ignoring contextual differences. The generated multi-modal
representations also typically lack comprehensive semantic
and spatial geometry information, which is crucial for the 3D
panoptic segmentation task. In this paper, we propose a novel
Semantic-Geometry Fusion Transformer (SGFormer) that
extracts adaptive semantic contexts, aggregates geometric information and captures the semantic-geometry fusion. First,
in the Image Branch, we tailor semantic contexts for each
pixel with context-guided attention and spatial context alignment to refine semantic details. Second, we transform image
and voxel features into point-pixel geometry representations,
simultaneously learning semantic category priors as embeddings to better represent scene geometry and semantics. Finally, to aggregate semantic information with related geometry, we design a semantic-geometry fusion that combines
the transformer, effectively capturing semantic-geometry relationships into multi-modal panoptic representations. Notably, SGFormer achieves the state-of-the-art (SOTA) results
on the nuScenes and SemanticPOSS, as well as yielding
competitive performance on the SemanticKITTI. Moreover,
SGFormer exhibits superior robustness compared to leading
methods, marking an improvement of 2% to 10%.

LiDAR Feature
C

Camera-View
Image
Encoder

LiDAR-Image
Fusion Feature

Image Feature

Panoptic Network

Voxel
Encoder

Abstract

(a) Naive Feature Fusion
Point-wise Feature

Geometry Feature

MLP

Voxel
Encoder

X

LiDAR Feature

Camera-View

Semantic Feature

Panoptic Network

Point Clouds

Semantic-Geometry
Transformer

C

Image Feature
ASCA

X
MLP

Semantic Feature

(b) Semantic-Geometry Fusion
X Matric Multiplication

C

Concatenation

Semantic stream

Geometry stream

Figure 1: Comparison (a) naive fusion using feature concatenation (b) our semantic-geometry fusion integrating semantic and geometric information.

perception. Image semantic segmentation aims to assign a
predefined category label to each pixel in the image. Many
works adopt deep networks to explore scene contexts (Yang
et al. 2018) and spatial details (Lin et al. 2017a) to ensure
accurate semantics. However, they inevitably suffer from
high computation. To achieve real-time inference, various
efforts are made by designing lightweight networks (Lv et al.
2021) or efficient decoders (Peng et al. 2022). Despite reducing computation, information loss in lightweight networks
leads to misalignment of input and output. Besides, context
modeling methods (Dong et al. 2020; Xu, Xiong, and Bhattacharyya 2023) in existing decoders also lack adaptability
to different inputs. Moreover, we notice most approaches
(Liu et al. 2023; Zhang, Zhu, and Du 2023) in 3D tasks
(e.g., detection, completion) adopt image backbones with
FPN (Lin et al. 2017b) to integrate multi-scale features via
stepwise downsampling, which treats all pixels equally without contextual differences and overlooks representation differences between different level features. These motivate us
to consider: can we aggregate adaptive pixel contexts from

Introduction
3D scene understanding has been a critical task for autonomous driving. One of the key tasks is 3D panoptic segmentation, comprising semantic and instance segmentation
as two sub-tasks. The semantic segmentation aims to assign
semantic labels at the point level, while the instance segmentation intends to identify individual countable objects.
Point clouds and images are two complementary modalities in perception tasks. Point clouds, while rich in spatial
information, are sparse and often struggle to distinguish between foreground and background. While images can provide rich visual information on color and shape to generate
semantic contexts. Hence, a recent trend has emerged to exploit semantic features from image segmentation to improve
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9616

