The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S PACE T IME: Causal Discovery from Non-Stationary Time Series
Sarah Mameche1 , Lénaı̈g Cornanguer1 , Urmi Ninad23 * , Jilles Vreeken1 *
1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
2
Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
3
German Aerospace Center, Institute of Data Science
sarah.mameche@cispa.de, lenaig.cornanguer@cispa.de, urmi.ninad@tu-berlin.de, jv@cispa.de

Abstract

Xp1q

Understanding causality is challenging and often complicated
by changing causal relationships over time and across environments. Climate patterns, for example, shift over time
with recurring seasonal trends, while also depending on geographical characteristics such as ecosystem variability. Existing methods for discovering causal graphs from time series either assume stationarity, do not permit both temporal
and spatial distribution changes, or are unaware of locations
with the same causal relationships. In this work, we therefore unify the three tasks of causal graph discovery in the
non-stationary multi-context setting, of reconstructing temporal regimes, and of partitioning datasets and time intervals
into those where invariant causal relationships hold. To construct a consistent score that forms the basis of our method,
we employ the Minimum Description Length principle. Our
resulting algorithm S PACE T IME simultaneously accounts for
heterogeneity across space and non-stationarity over time.
Given multiple time series, it discovers regime changepoints
and a temporal causal graph using non-parametric functional
modeling and kernelized discrepancy testing. We also show
that our method provides insights into real-world phenomena such as river-runoff measured at different catchments and
biosphere-atmosphere interactions across ecosystems.

t-2

t-1

t

f1 / f2 f1 / f2
Xp1q

Xp1q

Xp2q
g1 / g2
Xp3q

C1 Xp2q
Xp3q

C2 Xp2q
Xp3q
t
R1

R2

R1

Figure 1: Left: A temporal causal graph representing the
data-generating causal mechanism of three variables (Xp1q ,
Xp2q , and Xp3q ). The bold edges indicate a local mechanism
change across contexts (g1 or g2 ) or over time (f1 or f2 ).
Right: Variable measurements from different contexts (C1
and C2 ) and under different temporal regimes (R1 and R2 ).

disease trajectories of patients at multiple locations could
show variability due to varying healthcare infrastructures or
population heterogeneity, and change over time in response
to local interventions or changes in public behavior.
To address such scenarios, in this work we consider a collection of non-stationary time series datasets. Fig. 1, right
shows this setting for three variables that we observe over
time in two contexts. Changes in their data-generating causal
mechanisms (colored) occur at unknown points in time
(Xp1q ), called changepoints, or between contexts (Xp3q ). We
aim to jointly discover changes across temporal and spatial
scales while explaining the underlying causal interactions,
as shown in Fig. 1, left.
Recent methods focus either on changepoint discovery
in single time series (Saggioro et al. 2020) or on multiple
datasets without detecting changepoints (Günther, Ninad,
and Runge 2023). Here, we suggest considering both tasks
simultaneously and looking for recurring, invariant causal
mechanisms. Examples include cities in geographical regions with similar environmental conditions, or time periods
with seasonal trends or economic cycles. Groups of datasets
across which the causal mechanisms do not change are said

Introduction
Gaining insight into the dynamics of complex real-world
processes is closely tied to understanding the causal mechanisms underlying their function. Causal models (Pearl 2009)
allow reasoning about the effect of intervention and distributional change, which makes them especially useful for modeling systems under changing environments or over time.
At odds with this, however, is that established methods for
discovering causal networks from data (Spirtes et al. 2000;
Chickering 2002) often make the simplifying assumption
that all samples have a fixed data-generating process.
This assumption is especially problematic in time series
data. In climate science, for example, measurements often
come from geographical regions experiencing different climatic conditions. Even within a single region, weather patterns are not constant but often shift over time due to seasonality, extreme events, or global climate change. Similarly,
* Equal supervision
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19405

