The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LOMA: Language-assisted Semantic Occupancy Network via Triplane Mamba
Yubo Cui, Zhiheng Li, Jiaqiang Wang, Zheng Fang*
Faculty of Robot Science and Engineering
Northeastern University
{ybcui21, zhli24, wjq013}@stumail.neu.edu.cn, fangzheng@mail.neu.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision-based 3D occupancy prediction has become a popular
research task due to its versatility and affordability. Nowadays, conventional methods usually project the image-based
vision features to 3D space and learn the geometric information through the attention mechanism, enabling the 3D semantic occupancy prediction. However, these works usually
face two main challenges: 1) Limited geometric information.
Due to the lack of geometric information in the image itself, it
is challenging to directly predict 3D space information, especially in large-scale outdoor scenes. 2) Local restricted interaction. Due to the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism, they often use modified local attention to fuse features,
resulting in a restricted fusion. To address these problems,
in this paper, we propose a language-assisted 3D semantic
occupancy prediction network, named LOMA. In the proposed vision-language framework, we first introduce a VLaware Scene Generator (VSG) module to generate the 3D language feature of the scene. By leveraging the vision-language
model, this module provides implicit geometric knowledge
and explicit semantic information from the language. Furthermore, we present a Tri-plane Fusion Mamba (TFM) block to
efficiently fuse the 3D language feature and 3D vision feature. The proposed module not only fuses the two features
with global modeling but also avoids too much computation
costs. Experiments on the SemanticKITTI and SSCBenchKITTI360 datasets show that our algorithm achieves new
state-of-the-art performances in both geometric and semantic completion tasks. Our code will be open soon.

(a) Previous Vision-Only Framework

(b) Our Vision-Language Framework

Figure 1: (a) Previous vision-only framework. (b) Our proposed vision-language framework. Compared to (a), our
method introduces the explicit prior from language to enhance the 3D scene understanding.99K and 99K represents
2D-to-3D and 3D-to-3D feature propagation respectively.

to simultaneously predict occupancy and semantic information in 3D space. Meanwhile, the visual image is often employed to predict 3D semantic occupancy due to its affordability and capacity to provide detailed visual information.
MonoScene (Cao and De Charette 2022) laid the foundation for vision-based 3D semantic occupancy prediction.
By translating multi-scale 2D image features into 3D spaces
based on the camera intrinsic matrix, they developed a
framework for predicting semantic occupancy in 3D scenes
based on 2D images. Based on the “first 2D-to-3D then 3Dto-3D” feature propagation pipeline, further advancements
have been made to enhance prediction accuracy. For example, TPVFormer (Huang et al. 2023) projects each 3D
point into three orthogonal planes and utilizes the attention
mechanism to obtain 3D features from 2D images. OccFormer (Zhang, Zhu, and Du 2023) breaks down the intensive 3D processing into local and global transformers, introducing the dual-path transformer block to better capture
intricate details and overall scene structures.
Despite notable advancements, most existing methods

Introduction
In recent years, the 3D scene understanding of autonomous
driving has received more and more attention. In order to
plan navigation and avoid obstacles more safely, the autonomous driving system needs to perceive the surrounding
3D environment, especially in predicting the occupancy status of the vicinity. However, due to the complexity of the
scene, such as occlusion and interference, it is very difficult
to predict occupancy in real-world scenes.
In order to address these above challenges, the 3D semantic occupancy prediction task (Behley et al. 2019), also denoted as Semantic Scene Completion (SSC), was proposed
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2609

