The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Don’t Think It Twice: Exploit Shift Invariance for Efficient Online Streaming
Inference of CNNs
Christodoulos Kechris, Jonathan Dan, Jose Miranda, David Atienza
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Rte Cantonale
Lausanne, 1015 Switzerland
christodoulos.kechris@epfl.ch
Abstract

sample border effects (Zanghieri et al. 2019), (Kechris et al.
2024b), (Shahbazinia et al. 2024), (Reiss et al. 2019). This
overlap introduces additional computational overhead, and
a considerable portion of the input information is repeated
between successive windows. Shift-invariance is the ability to maintain the same representations when the input is
temporally translated. It can be used to mitigate this additional overhead during online inference. Convolution provides a natural way to introduce shift invariance to a DL
model (Bruintjes, Motyka, and van Gemert 2023).
(Kondratyuk et al. 2021) and (Lin, Gan, and Han 2019)
proposed specific streaming Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architectures for processing videos. For onedimensional time series, (Khandelwal et al. 2021) presented
a real-time inference scheme for CNNs. Their method is
tested on CNNs of limited depth and fixed kernel size without pooling operations. These systems exploit the temporal
translational invariance of the convolution operation, allowing them to skip computations between successive windows
and update only the required layer outputs.
These methods cannot be generalized for performing
streaming inference with any temporal CNN architecture.
Additional operations, such as pooling, padding and dense
layer, are generally used, which are not translation invariant.
Pooling reduces the dimensionality of intermediate representations temporal axis (Zanghieri et al. 2019), (Kechris
et al. 2024b), (Shahbazinia et al. 2024). (Azulay and
Weiss 2019) empirically investigated the connection between Nyquist’s sampling theorem and the lack of translation invariance due to pooling. A low-pass filter on the pooling filter was proposed by (Zhang 2019) as a potential solution to limit the effects of aliasing. Other works have also
proposed similar anti-aliasing filters to mitigate the effect of
pooling (Chaman and Dokmanic 2021), (Zou et al. 2023).
CNNs also use zero-padding (O’shea and Nash 2015).
This introduces positional information in the learned representations, breaking their translation invariance (Kayhan
and Gemert 2020) and further complicating the deployment
of pre-trained CNNs as streaming models.
In this work, we propose exploiting common information in successive windows to reduce computations during inference. Specifically, we focus on CNNs, exploiting
convolution’s inherent translation invariance properties (Von
Zur Gathen and Gerhard 2003). We investigate the two

Deep learning time-series processing often relies on convolutional neural networks with overlapping windows. This overlap allows the network to produce an output faster than the
window length. However, it introduces additional computations. This work explores the potential to optimize computational efficiency during inference by exploiting convolution’s shift-invariance properties to skip the calculation of
layer activations between successive overlapping windows.
Although convolutions are shift-invariant, zero-padding and
pooling operations, widely used in such networks, are not
and complicate efficient streaming inference. We introduce
StreamiNNC, a strategy to deploy Convolutional Neural Networks for online streaming inference. We explore the adverse effects of zero padding and pooling on the accuracy of streaming inference, deriving theoretical error upper
bounds for pooling during streaming. We address these limitations by proposing signal padding and pooling alignment
and provide guidelines for designing and deploying models
for StreamiNNC. We validate our method in simulated data
and on three real-world biomedical signal processing applications. StreamiNNC achieves a low deviation between streaming output and normal inference for all three networks (2.03 3.55% NRMSE). This work demonstrates that it is possible to
linearly speed up the inference of streaming CNNs processing overlapping windows, negating the additional computation typically incurred by overlapping windows.

Code — https://github.com/esl-epfl/streaminnc

Introduction
In many DL time-series inference applications, such as
robotics or healthcare, the model’s output is required when
a new sample is acquired, an inference scheme referred to
as streaming inference. In such an environment, computation optimization methods that rely on batch-parallelization
(Mittal and Vaishay 2019), (Wang, Wei, and Brooks 2019)
are not applicable. Other optimization strategies have been
proposed to reduce inference computations and boost efficiency, such as pruning (Li et al. 2020), dynamic pruning
(Shen et al. 2020) and early exiting (Li et al. 2023).
Time-series DL models often process overlapping data
windows, guaranteeing frequent output and robustness on
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17805

