The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Triadic Closure: Finding Dense Substructures in Social Networks
That Evolve Over Time
Tom Davot, Jessica Enright, Jayakrishnan Madathil, Kitty Meeks
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom
tom.davot@glasgow.ac.uk, jessica.enright@glasgow.ac.uk, jayakrishnan.madathil@glasgow.ac.uk,
kitty.meeks@glasgow.ac.uk

Abstract

model of Kempe, Kleinberg, and Kumar (2002), in which a
temporal graph G consists of a static graph G called the underlying graph or the footprint of G, together with a function
(which we will denote by λ in this paper) assigning to each
edge a (finite) subset of N representing the discrete timesteps
at which the edge appears in the graph or is active. We can
equivalently consider a temporal graph to be a sequence of
static graphs or snapshots, where the tth snapshot contains
all vertices and only those edges that are active at time t.
Modeling social networks in this way, however, introduces a new level of algorithmic challenge. Even problems
that are polynomial-time solvable on static graphs often become NP-hard when a temporal dimension is added; in
some cases this holds even when very strong restrictions
are placed on the footprint of the graph, such as requiring
it to be a path or a star (Mertzios et al. 2023; Akrida et al.
2021). This has prompted significant recent interest in the
design of temporal graph parameters that additionally take
into account temporal information, with the hope of identifying situations in which natural problems admit efficient
algorithms. None of these, however, seems particularly well
suited for the design of efficient algorithms to solve problems on social networks. Some only offer a limited benefit
over restricting the structure of the footprint: the timed feedback vertex number (Casteigts et al. 2021), temporal feedback edge/connection number (Haag et al. 2022), and the
various temporal analogues of treewidth (Fluschnik et al.
2020) are guaranteed to take small values when the footprint
is a tree, so they cannot hope to give tractability for those
problems that remain NP-hard under this (or a stronger)
restriction. Restricting others, such as the vertex-intervalmembership-width (Bumpus and Meeks 2023) has proved
more widely useful in making problems tractable, but this
success comes at a price: the vertex-interval-membershipwidth of a temporal graph representing a social network will
only be small if, at every timestep, most individuals have either (i) never yet formed any connections, or (ii) will never
again form a connection, an assumption that seems unrealistic for the vast majority of social networks.
In general, most of the temporal graph parameters defined so far require that the graph be sparse (in the sense
of having only a linear number of edges active) at every
timestep. Very recent work (Enright et al. 2024) has tried
to address this limitation by introducing temporal analogues

A graph G is c-closed if every two vertices with at least c
common neighbors are adjacent to each other. This definition
is an abstraction of the triadic closure property exhibited by
many real-world social networks, namely, friends of friends
tend to be friends themselves. Social networks, however, are
often temporal rather than static—the connections change
over a period of time. And hence temporal graphs, rather than
static graphs, are often better suited to model social networks.
Motivated by this, we introduce a definition of temporal cclosed graphs, in which if two vertices u and v have at least
c common neighbors during a short interval of time, then u
and v are adjacent to each other around that time. Our pilot
experiments show that several real-world temporal networks
are c-closed for rather small values of c. We also study the
computational problems of enumerating maximal cliques and
other dense subgraphs in temporal c-closed graphs. A clique
in a temporal graph is a subgraph that lasts for a certain period
of time, during which every possible edge in the subgraph becomes active often enough; other dense subgraphs are defined
similarly. We bound the number of such maximal dense subgraphs in a temporal c-closed graph that evolves slowly, and
thus show that the corresponding enumeration problems admit efficient algorithms; by slow evolution, we mean that between consecutive time-steps, the local change in adjacencies
remains small. Our work also adds to a growing body of literature on defining suitable structural parameters for temporal
graphs that can be leveraged to design efficient algorithms.

1

Introduction

Social networks evolve. Influencers gain and lose followers on social media; ants in a colony guide each other to
food; scientists collaborate with their peers. These examples all involve networks in which connections are created
and destroyed as time passes. Moreover, even when a relationship within a network is continuous, the interactions
that provide evidence of that relationship—such as being
in the same location as a friend, or exchanging an email—
only happen at some points in time. All these considerations
mean that temporal information must be taken into account
to gain a full understanding of many social networks. Temporal graphs provide a useful formalism for modeling these
evolving networks; in this work we adopt the widely-used
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26939

