The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sp3ctralMamba: Physics-Driven Joint State Space Model
for Hyperspectral Image Reconstruction
Ge Meng1, 2 , Jingyan Tu1, 2 , Jingjia Huang1, 2 , Yunlong Lin1, 2 , Yingying Wang1, 3 , Xiaotong Tu1, 2 ,
Yue Huang1, 2, 3 , Xinghao Ding1, 2, 3 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, China
{mengg, tujingyan, huangjj, linyl, wangyingying7}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {xttu, yhuang2010, dxh}@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
Hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruction aims to restore the
original 3D HSIs from the 2D hyperspectral snapshot compressive images (SCIs). The key to high-fidelity HSI reconstruction lies in designing refined spatial and spectral attention mechanisms, which are crucial for generating finegrained representations of HSI based on the limited spatial
and spectral information available in SCI. Recently, Mamba
has demonstrated remarkable performance and efficiency in
modeling spatial correlations. Its implicit attention mechanism generates three orders of magnitude more attention
matrices than transformers, significantly raising the performance ceiling for HSI reconstruction. In this paper, we propose a novel joint SSM network named Sp3ctralMamba for
HSI reconstruction. Sp3ctralMamba integrates frequency domain knowledge and physical priors to enhance reconstruction quality. Specifically, we first perform hierarchical decomposition of the 3D HSI embedding to mitigate the negative impact of distant bands on reconstruction. Next, we design a joint SSM block S3 Mamba (S3 MAB) to perform parallel scans of the embeddings from different bands. In addition to the conventional vanilla scan, S3 MAB introduces
a local scanning scheme to address the reconstruction challenges posed by the spatial sparsity of spectral information.
Furthermore, a spiral scanning scheme in the frequency domain is incorporated to enhance the order correlation between
different frequency signals. Finally, we introduce energy priors and structural priors to constrain the generation of spectral and spatial representations during the training process.
Extensive experiments on both simulated and real datasets
demonstrate that Sp3ctralMamba significantly elevates HSI
reconstruction performance to a new level, surpassing SOTA
methods in both quantitative and qualitative metrics.

Figure 1: The visual comparisons between our method and
ViT-based SOTA method on simulated dataset. The MSE
residues between the reconstructed result and the ground
truth in the bottom row demonstrate that Sp3ctralMamba has
better spectral fidelity.

2014; Meng et al. 2020). To collect HSIs, traditional imaging systems require sequential scanning of the scene along
spatial and spectral dimensions, which lacks flexibility and
is time-consuming (Cai et al. 2022b). To this end, a snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) system called coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) is typically used to
compress the information of snapshots along the spectral dimension into one single 2D measurement (Yuan, Brady, and
Katsaggelos 2021). Then, the complete HSI data can be obtained from these compressed measurements using HSI reconstruction algorithms.
Due to the powerful ability to model nonlinear mapping
functions, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
are applied in reconstructing 3D HSIs from 2D measurements. However, the CNN-based methods (Huang et al.
2021; Meng et al. 2021) show limitations in modeling longrange dependencies in the spatial dimension and spectral
self-similarity. The Multi-Head Self-Attention (MSA) module in Vision Transformers (ViTs) excels at capturing nonlocal similarities and long-range dependencies between pixels (Liu et al. 2021), which addresses the limitations of

Introduction
Objects exhibit varying reflectance under different spectral
wavelength. Leveraging this property, hyperspectral imaging is widely used in various fields, such as agriculture
(Ishida et al. 2018), environmental monitoring (Wright, Levermore, and Kelly 2019), object tracking (Kim et al. 2012;
Pan et al. 2003), and medical image processing (Lu and Fei
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6108

