The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GDiffRetro: Retrosynthesis Prediction with Dual Graph Enhanced
Molecular Representation and Diffusion Generation
Shengyin Sun1 * † , Wenhao Yu2∗† , Yuxiang Ren3‡ , Weitao Du4 , Liwei Liu3 , Xuecang Zhang3 ,
Ying Hu5 , Chen Ma1
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Advance Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies
4
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
shengysun4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, whyu24@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {renyuxiang1, liuliwei5, zhangxuecang}@huawei.com,
duweitao@amss.ac.cn, yinghu yh@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, chenma@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

the GLN (Dai et al. 2019) treats chemical knowledge of reaction templates as logical rules, and then models the joint
probability between rules and reactants. As template-based
methods are constrained by predefined templates, templatefree approaches are proposed. For example, Chemformer (Irwin et al. 2022) formulates the retrosynthesis prediction as a
translation task, where the product SMILES (strings describing molecular compositions) and the set of reactant SMILES
serve as the “source language strings” and “target language
strings”, respectively. Template-free methods typically generate reactant SMILES by sequentially outputting individual
symbols, which makes their predictions limited in diversity.
To alleviate issues present in both template-based and
template-free methods, the semi-template framework has recently been adopted, which does not utilize reaction templates and has good interpretability. It predicts the final reactants through the intermediates (synthons) in two steps: first
identifying the reaction center to form synthons, then completing the synthons into reactants. For instance, G2Gs (Shi
et al. 2020) first employs the Relational Graph Convolutional Network (RGCN) (Schlichtkrull et al. 2017) for reaction center identification, and then generates products
through the variational graph translation.
Although existing semi-template methods have achieved
success in some scenarios, we argue that there are still avenues to improve. First, classical methods (Shi et al. 2020;
Dai et al. 2019) solely focus on the nodes within the molecular graph, neglecting the features associated with faces
(edges divide the entire plane into a set of regions, called
faces) in the graph. The features of faces play a crucial role
in the reaction center identification. For example, in a benzene ring, all carbon atoms reside on one face, and the bonds
connecting these carbons exhibit high stability, making them
less likely to serve as reaction centers. Secondly, existing
methods generate reactants based on 2D graphs, ignoring the
3D structural information of molecules to some extent.
To address the above shortcomings, we propose the retrosynthesis prediction with dual graph-enhanced molecular
representation and diffusion generation (GDiffRetro). We
first introduce dual graphs to the reaction center identifica-

Retrosynthesis prediction focuses on identifying reactants capable of synthesizing a target product. Typically, the retrosynthesis prediction involves two phases: Reaction Center Identification and Reactant Generation. However, we argue that
most existing methods suffer from two limitations in the two
phases: (i) Existing models do not adequately capture the
“face” information in molecular graphs for the reaction center
identification. (ii) Current approaches for the reactant generation predominantly use sequence generation in a 2D space,
which lacks versatility in generating reasonable distributions
for completed reactive groups and overlooks molecules’ inherent 3D properties. To overcome the above limitations, we
propose GDiffRetro. For the reaction center identification,
GDiffRetro uniquely integrates the original graph with its
corresponding dual graph to represent molecular structures,
which helps guide the model to focus more on the faces in
the graph. For the reactant generation, GDiffRetro employs
a conditional diffusion model in 3D to further transform the
obtained synthon into a complete reactant. Our experimental
findings reveal that GDiffRetro outperforms state-of-the-art
semi-template models across various evaluative metrics.

1

Introduction

The retrosynthesis task aims to find a set of reactants capable of synthesizing a given product, which is a one-tomany problem. Even for experienced chemists, addressing
such a one-to-many problem is still extremely challenging.
Recently, benefitting from the rapid advancement of deep
learning (DL), researchers have resorted to DL models to design efficient methods for retrosynthesis tasks. Existing DLbased methods (Somnath et al. 2021) can be divided into
template-based, template-free, and semi-template methods.
Template-based methods rely on predefined templates (extracted from a large-scale chemical database). For example,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done as interns at Huawei ACS Lab.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

12595

