The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Verification of Neural Networks Against Convolutional Perturbations
via Parameterised Kernels
Benedikt Brückner1,2 , Alessio Lomuscio1,2
1

Safe Intelligence
Imperial College London
benedikt@safeintelligence.ai, alessio@safeintelligence.ai
2

Abstract

undecided result. Complete approaches often employ an exact encoding of the network at hand. They rely on techniques
such as Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) (Tjeng,
Xiao, and Tedrake 2019; Anderson et al. 2020; Bunel et al.
2020) or Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) (Pulina and
Tacchella 2012; Katz et al. 2017). Incomplete verifiers employ methods such as Semidefinite Programming (Raghunathan, Steinhardt, and Liang 2018; Batten et al. 2021;
Lan, Brueckner, and Lomuscio 2023), or bound propagation
(Wang et al. 2018a,b; Singh et al. 2019b; Xu et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021). They usually overapproximate the true
behaviour of the neural network but can be made complete
by combining them with a Branch and Bound (BaB) strategy. Stronger verifiers either employ tighter relaxations such
as SDP-based ones or linear constraints that reason over
multiple neurons simultaneously (Singh et al. 2019a; Müller
et al. 2022; Ferrari et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022). State-ofthe-art (SoA) verifiers achieve low runtimes through exploiting GPU-enabled parallelism (Brix et al. 2023b,a).
Early approaches established local robustness against
norm-based perturbations, often referred to as white
noise (Pulina and Tacchella 2012; Singh et al. 2018; Katz
et al. 2019). A number of other perturbations were later
proposed. Robustness to photometric perturbations such as
brightness, contrast, hue or saturation changes as well as
more expressive bias field perturbations can be verified by
prepending suitable layers to a neural network (Kouvaros
and Lomuscio 2018; Henriksen et al. 2021; Mohapatra et al.
2020). Verifiers were also extended to handle complex geometric perturbations such as rotations, translations, shearing or scaling, although the efficient verification against
such perturbations requires further modifications and extensions (Kouvaros and Lomuscio 2018; Singh et al. 2019b;
Balunovic et al. 2019; Batten et al. 2024). Other approaches
focus on the efficient verification of robustness to occlusions
(Mohapatra et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2023) or semantically rich
perturbations in the latent space of generative models (Mirman et al. 2021; Hanspal and Lomuscio 2023).
More relevant to this work are previous investigations of
camera shake effects. Guo et al. (2020) examine the performance of networks in the presence of motion blur. The results show a significant degradation of the performance of
the models. This phenomenon can be modeled by applying
a convolution operation using suitable kernels to a given in-

We develop a method for the efficient verification of neural
networks against convolutional perturbations such as blurring
or sharpening. To define input perturbations, we use wellknown camera shake, box blur and sharpen kernels. We linearly parameterise these kernels in a way that allows for a
variation of the perturbation strength while preserving desired
kernel properties. To facilitate their use in neural network verification, we develop an efficient way of convolving a given
input with the parameterised kernels. The result of this convolution can be used to encode the perturbation in a verification
setting by prepending a linear layer to a given network. This
leads to tight bounds and a high effectiveness in the resulting
verification step. We add further precision by employing input splitting as a branching strategy. We demonstrate that we
are able to verify robustness on a number of standard benchmarks where the baseline is unable to provide any safety certificates. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first solution
for verifying robustness against specific convolutional perturbations such as camera shake.

1

Introduction

As neural networks are increasingly deployed in safetycritical domains such as autonomous vehicles, aviation, or
robotics, concerns about their reliability are rising. Networks
have been shown to be vulnerable to Adversarial Attacks,
i.e., perturbations that are often imperceptible, but change
the output of a model for a given instance (Madry et al.
2017). Such adversarial examples have been shown to also
exist in the physical world and pose a threat to algorithms
deployed in practical applications (Tu et al. 2020). Neural
Network Verification has been put forward as a way to address these issues by formally establishing that for a given
input, a network is robust with respect to a set of specified
perturbations; this property is often referred to as local robustness (Katz et al. 2017; Gehr et al. 2018; Singh et al.
2018).
Verification algorithms are usually divided into complete
and incomplete approaches. Given enough time, complete
methods are guaranteed to provide a definitive answer to the
verification problem. In contrast, incomplete methods may
not be able to answer the verification problem, returning an
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27215

