The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-scale Activation, Refinement, and Aggregation: Exploring Diverse Cues for
Fine-Grained Bird Recognition
Zhicheng Zhang1 , Hao Tang1,2 , Jinhui Tang1 *
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
Centre for Smart Health, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{zzc 666, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn, howard.haotang@gmail.com

2

I:Subtle Difference

Abstract
Given the critical role of birds in ecosystems, Fine-Grained
Bird Recognition (FGBR) has gained increasing attention,
particularly in distinguishing birds within similar subcategories. Although Vision Transformer (ViT)-based methods often outperform Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)based methods in FGBR, recent studies reveal that the limited receptive field of plain ViT model hinders representational richness and makes them vulnerable to scale variance. Thus, enhancing the multi-scale capabilities of existing
ViT-based models to overcome this bottleneck in FGBR is a
worthwhile pursuit. In this paper, we propose a novel framework for FGBR, namely Multi-scale Diverse Cues Modeling (MDCM), which explores diverse cues at different
scales across various stages of a multi-scale Vision Transformer (MS-ViT) in an “Activation-Selection-Aggregation”
paradigm. Specifically, we first propose a multi-scale cue activation module to ensure the discriminative cues learned at
different stage are mutually different. Subsequently, a multiscale token selection mechanism is proposed to remove redundant noise and highlight discriminative, scale-specific
cues at each stage. Finally, the selected tokens from each
stage are independently utilized for bird recognition, and the
recognition results from multiple stages are adaptively fused
through a multi-scale dynamic aggregation mechanism for final model decisions. Both qualitative and quantitative results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed MDCM, which
outperforms CNN- and ViT-based models on several widelyused FGBR benchmarks.

Black eye
（a）
Black eye
Black eye

（c）
Black eye

White eye （b）

（d）
White eye

（e）

（f）

II:Diverse Represention
Beak
Beak

Beak

Beak
（g）
Beak

（h）
Beak

Black eye

Figure 1: The primary challenges in FGBR are evident from
bird images. Figures (a) to (d) show subtle species differences, often obscured by complex backgrounds. Figures (e)
to (h) highlight significant scale variations between distant
and close-up shots, making the same body parts appear different and complicating the recognition task.

Introduction
images (Tang et al. 2022; Jiang, Tang, and Li 2024). These
challenges can be summarized as follows:

Birds play a crucial role in the biological chain. However,
the advancement of industrialization and consequent environmental degradation have led to a sharp decline in numerous bird species. Statistics (Malhotra 2022) indicate that
nearly half of all bird species are in decline. Due to their sensitivity to environmental changes, birds’ activities can serve
as indicators of environmental changes. Fine-Grained Bird
Recognition (FGBR) has become a research hotspot, crucial
for the conservation of bird species and natural habitats.
Fine-grained bird recognition is widely recognized as a
challenging task due to the intrinsic characteristics of bird

• Complex Backgrounds: Bird habitats, whether in the
wild or urban environments, often characterized by complex and variable backgrounds that can obscure the subtle
features distinguishing one species from another. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the key difference between
the Yellow-Throated Vireo and the White-Eyed Vireo lies
in the eye color. Complex backgrounds can misdirect the
model’s attention, causing it to focus on irrelevant background elements instead of critical features, leading to
potential misclassification.
• Scale Variations: Bird images often exhibit significant scale variations due to differences in shooting dis-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10385

