The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

pFedGPA: Diffusion-based Generative Parameter Aggregation for
Personalized Federated Learning
Jiahao Lai1 , Jiaqi Li1 , Jian Xu1 , Yanru Wu1 , Boshi Tang1 , Siqi Chen1 ,
Yongfeng Huang2 , Wenbo Ding1 , Yang Li1 *
2

1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
laijh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yangli@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) offers a decentralized approach to
model training, where data remains local and only model parameters are shared between the clients and the central server.
Traditional methods, such as Federated Averaging (FedAvg),
linearly aggregate these parameters which are usually trained
on heterogeneous data distributions, potentially overlooking
the complex, high-dimensional nature of the parameter space.
This can result in degraded performance of the aggregated
model. While personalized FL approaches can mitigate the
heterogeneous data issue to some extent, the limitation of linear aggregation remains unresolved. To alleviate this issue,
we investigate the generative approach of diffusion model
and propose a novel generative parameter aggregation framework for personalized FL, pFedGPA. In this framework, we
deploy a diffusion model on the server to integrate the diverse parameter distributions and propose a parameter inversion method to efficiently generate a set of personalized parameters for each client. This inversion method transforms the
uploaded parameters into a latent code, which is then aggregated through denoising sampling to produce the final personalized parameters. By encoding the dependence of a client’s
model parameters on the specific data distribution using the
high-capacity diffusion model, pFedGPA can effectively decouple the complexity of the overall distribution of all clients’
model parameters from the complexity of each individual
client’s parameter distribution. Our experimental results consistently demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method across multiple datasets, surpassing baseline
approaches.

Figure 1: Parameter collapse can occur when linearly averaging the parameters from different clients. Bright colors indicate high-probability regions of the parameter space,
where the parameters located at the peaks of the model distribution are well-optimized for specific tasks.
has been extended to various application domains, including healthcare and finance (Nguyen et al. 2022). In healthcare, FL trains models on distributed patient data, enabling
cooperative research without compromising privacy (Yang
et al. 2019). In finance, FL helps developing fraud detection
models using data from multiple financial institutions while
ensuring confidentiality (Li et al. 2019).
One challenge in FL is handling the heterogeneity of
data distributions across various devices (Zhao et al. 2018;
Kairouz et al. 2021). For example, in healthcare applications, patient data collected from different hospitals can vary
greatly due to differences in patient demographics, medical
equipment, and local practices. In linear aggregation methods such as FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017a), data in different clients are assumed to share the same distribution.
Non-IID data in local clients can lead to unstable results
(Zhao et al. 2018; Karimireddy et al. 2020b), as illustrated
in Fig. 1. In this case, the parameters θ1 and θ2 from nonIID datasets are aggregated to form θF edavg = (θ1 + θ2 )/2.
While θ1 and θ2 are located in the high-probability regions of the parameter space and are well-optimized for
their respective tasks, their average θF edavg falls into a lowprobability region, causing a collapse. This example high-

Introduction
To meet with the increasing needs of privacy protection, federated learning (FL) has been a popular machine learning
paradigm and research topic for many years (McMahan et al.
2017a). Typically, multiple devices such as smartphones,
sensors, and IoTs (Internet of Things) collaboratively train a
global model under the coordination of a central server. FL
* Corresponding author.
†

Jiahao Lai, Jian Xu, Yanru Wu, Siqi Chen, Wenbo Ding and
Yang Li are from the Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data
Enabling, Tsinghua University.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17999

