The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ABC3: Active Bayesian Causal Inference with Cohn Criteria
in Randomized Experiments
Taehun Cha and Donghun Lee*
Korea University
{cth127, holy}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

an adaptive Neyman allocation (Dai, Gradu, and Harshaw
2023) or Pigeonhole design (Zhao and Zhou 2024). However, these lines of work assume the experimental subjects
are given, not actively choosable.
Active learning is a framework where a practitioner can
choose unlabeled data points and ask an oracle to label them
(Settles 2009). We can further rationalize the experimental
design by adopting an active learning framework. For example, internet companies can choose a member whom they
implement the A/B test, by utilizing the personal information they have gathered. Pharmaceuticals can choose a subject based on their personal information after the applicants
are gathered to save a budget.
To develop a sound active learning method for randomized experiments, (1) it should not violate the standard assumptions in causal inference. Also, (2) the method should
achieve a balance between observation and control groups to
make a sound conclusion. We introduce ABC3, a novel active learning policy for randomized experiments to remedy
these issues. Using the Gaussian process, our policy targets
minimizing the error of individual treatment effect estimation. Our contributions are three folds:

In causal inference, randomized experiment is a de facto
method to overcome various theoretical issues in observational study. However, the experimental design requires expensive costs, so an efficient experimental design is necessary. We propose ABC3, a Bayesian active learning policy for
causal inference. We show a policy minimizing an estimation
error on conditional average treatment effect is equivalent to
minimizing an integrated posterior variance, similar to Cohn
criteria (Cohn, Ghahramani, and Jordan 1994). We theoretically prove ABC3 also minimizes an imbalance between the
treatment and control groups and the type 1 error probability.
Imbalance-minimizing characteristic is especially notable as
several works have emphasized the importance of achieving
balance. Through extensive experiments on real-world data
sets, ABC3 achieves the highest efficiency, while empirically
showing the theoretical results hold.

Code —
https://github.com/AIML-K/ActiveBayesianCausal/
Technical appendix — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11104

1

Introduction

• We theoretically show minimizing the estimation error
on individual treatment effect is equivalent to minimizing
the integrated predictive variance in a Bayesian sense.
• ABC3, the policy minimizing the variance, theoretically
minimizes the imbalance between treatment and control
groups and the type 1 error rate.
• With extensive experiments, we empirically verify ABC3
outperforms other methods while showing theoretical
properties hold.

The major goal of causal inference is to estimate the treatment effect which is a relative effect on the treatment group
compared to the control group. In randomized experiments,
practitioners allocate treatment to subjects to estimate the
treatment effect. Randomized experiments free practitioners
from various theoretical problems prevailing in an observational study, e.g. unmeasured confounders. However, a randomized experiment is usually more expensive than an observational study, as a result, an efficient experiment design
is desirable.
To achieve efficiency in randomized experiments, Efron
(1971) first introduced a biased-coin design, and several
works tried to minimize the estimation bias by achieving
a balance between treatment and control groups (Atkinson 2014). Antognini and Zagoraiou (2011) extended this
to covariate-adaptive design to achieve a balance, not only
between treatment-control groups but also within sampling
strata. Several recent works target the same goal using

After examining related works in Section 2, we formalize
our problem in Section 3. Then we introduce ABC3 and its
theoretical properties in Section 4. We empirically verify the
performance and properties of ABC3 in Section 5. Then we
conclude our paper with several discussions and limitations
in Section 6 and 7.

2

Related Works

There are several works exploring an active learning policy for observational data (Sundin et al. (2019), Jesson et al.
(2021), and Toth et al. (2022)). Especially, Sundin et al.

* corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26769

