The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Conformal Prediction for Partial Label Learning
Xiuwen Gong 1 , Nitin Bisht 1 , Guandong Xu1, 2 *
1

University of Technology Sydney
The Education University of Hong Kong
Xiuwen.Gong@uts.edu.au, Nitin.Bisht@student.uts.edu.au, guandong.xu@uts.edu.au, Gdxu@eduhk.hk
2

Abstract
Partial label learning (PLL) allows each instance to be annotated with a set of candidate labels, but only one is the
ground-truth label. Although the state-of-the-art (SOTA) PLL
models have shown competitive performance, they cannot get
rid of the negative influence from the noisy false-positive labels during the training process. This leads to a large extent of
uncertainty of PLL models’ prediction, and it becomes unreliable to trust a PLL model’s performance only by its prediction
accuracy. To bridge this gap, we develop a new framework
to quantify the uncertainty for PLL models with valid confidence guarantee, which is named as Conformal Prediction
for Partial Label Learning (CP-PLL). This framework can be
implemented on top of any PLL method to quantify their predictive confidence in terms of average prediction set size with
a use-specified error rate or coverage/confidence level (i.e.,
probability). We prove that the coverage guarantee in PLL
still holds, that is, the ground-truth label can be covered in
the constructed prediction set with the user pre-defined error
rate α when we use the noisy calibration data to carlibrate
the PLL models, which yields to a probability interval of [1α, 1- α + 1/n+1 + ε]. Extensive experiments are conducted
on SOTA PLL methods and benchmark datasets to verify the
effectiveness of the proposed framework.

(a) Automatic face naming

(b) Automatic image annotation

Figure 1: (a) Image of NBA players from sportnews. Each
face has a true name in the candidate label set: {LeBron
James, Karl Malone, Carmelo Anthony, Steve Kerr, Malik
Monk, Austin Reeves, Stephen Curry, Jonathan Kuminga,
Russell Westbrook, Klay Thompson, and Andrew Wiggins}.
(b) A street image of objects. Each object has a true label in
the candidate label set: {car, person, lights, tree}.

Introduction
Partial label learning (PLL) (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011;
Chen et al. 2014; Yu and Zhang 2017) is an important weaklysupervised learning problem that allows each instance to be
annotated with a set of candidate labels, with only one being the true label. PLL has attracted increasing attention in
real-world applications due to its lower labeling cost, such
as, automatic face recognition, automatic object detection,
etc. For example, an image from NBA news contains several
players (Fig.1 (a)), with each player being an instance and
names extracted from the news constituting a candidate label
set; it is required to automatically predict the name of each
player in automatic face naming (Su et al. 2018). For another
example, a street image contains many objects (Fig.1 (b)),
with each object cropped out being an instance, and all labels
annotated online constituting a candidate label set; it is re* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16862

quired to automatically annotate the true label for each object
in automatic object detection (Chen et al. 2020).
PLL research has achieved a big progress by evolving from
conventional PLL models (linear/kernel-based) to deep PLL
models (DNN-based). However, it remains a fundamental
problem that PLL models cannot get rid of the negative influence from the noisy false-positive labels in the candidate
label set during training process, which leads to a large extent of uncertainty of a PLL model’s prediction. It becomes
unreliable to trust a PLL model’s performance only by its
prediction accuracy. Instead, we should ask for valid confidence in its prediction. How to provide a valid confidence
guarantee for the PLL models? Ideally, we expect the valid
confidence to be independent of the PLL models, or PLL
models without being trained to predict confidence. However,
little research has been done to explore this. To bridge this
gap, we are motivated to seek for new evaluation mechanisms
to quantify the uncertainty for PLL models, which is able to
offer the guaranteed confidence.
Inspired by conformal prediction (CP) (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer 2005), a powerful (e.g., model-agnostic,
distribution-free) statistical tool, we provide a novel insight
into PLL with guaranteed confidence in terms of coverage
guarantee for the constructed prediction sets to include the

