The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Wasserstein Distance Constraint and Parameter Sparsification for Batched and
Iterative Knowledge Editing
Shanbao Qiao, Xuebing Liu, Seung-Hoon Na*
Center for Advanced Image and Information Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence,
Jeonbuk National University
{joe,liuxuebing,nash}@jbnu.ac.kr
Abstract

et al. 2021; Agarwal and Nenkova 2022; Gallegos et al.
2023), making iterative updates to LLMs both necessary
and crucial. Retraining or fine-tuning LLMs requires substantial computational resources and time. To achieve timeefficient model updates, the knowledge editing paradigm has
emerged, gaining increasing research attention. Knowledge
editing aims to timely inject new knowledge or correct erroneous knowledge by updating a small subset of model parameters or leveraging in-context learning (ICL) techniques
(Brown et al. 2020; Dong et al. 2022). Developing efficient
and stable knowledge editing methods is critical for the future maintenance of language models.
Existing knowledge editing methods can be broadly categorized into parameter updating methods, meta-learningbased methods, and ICL-based methods. Parameter updating approaches (Cao, Aziz, and Titov 2021; Meng et al.
2022a,b; Li et al. 2023) typically leverage mechanistic interpretability (MI) to identify specific layers in the model
that store new knowledge and rewrite the relevant parameters. Meta-learning methods (Mitchell et al. 2022a; Tan,
Zhang, and Fu 2024) involve training a hypernetwork to
alter the model’s output predictions, whereas ICL-based
methods (Zheng et al. 2023; Zhong et al. 2023) temporarily adjust the model’s output by appending the constructed
prompts to the input query. Most existing work on editing focuses on single-instance sequential editing or massive one-time editing. However, in practice, batched and
iterative editing is preferred in the maintenance of LLMs
(e.g., the model’s knowledge needs to be updated weekly or
monthly as world knowledge changes rapidly). This primarily requires that editing methods are performed at the batch
level. In this regard, ICL-based methods are less practical
for batch execution, as they require lengthy prompts for each
editing instance, which significantly reduces inference efficiency. Moreover, the effects of knowledge editing achieved
through ICL are only temporary, lasting only within the current model run, and do not genuinely integrate the knowledge into the model. Meta-learning-based methods also train
mainly for individual instances at a time, which limits their
ability to achieve satisfactory performance in batched editing.
In contrast, parameter updating methods can perform
massive knowledge editing in a single step, with the number
of edits meeting the typical requirements for model updates

Model knowledge editing has become a widely researched
topic because it enables the efficient and rapid injection of
new knowledge into language models, as well as the correction of erroneous or outdated knowledge. Existing model
knowledge editing methods are typically classified into two
categories: single-instance sequential editing and massive
one-time editing. However, the batched and iterative editing method is better aligned with model updating patterns in
practical applications. In this work, we examine the performance of parameter-update-based models on a novel batched
iterative editing benchmark. Our findings indicate that as the
number of editing iterations increases, the accumulation of
updated parameters leads to a greater shift in the model’s parameter distribution, making it harder to maintain both the
editing performance and the stability of the model. To address
this degradation issue, we propose two methods: the Wasserstein distance constraint and the parameter update sparsification, where the Wasserstein distance constraint optimizes
the transition of parameter distribution before and after editing, and the parameter update sparsification significantly reduces the number of updated parameters, thereby alleviating
instability in the parameter distribution caused by their accumulation over iterations. Our methods are generally applicable to various parameter-update-based knowledge editing
models. Experiments on the zsRE and CounterFact datasets
demonstrate that our methods improve editing performance
and enhance the stability of batched iterative editing in the
later stages across different models.

Code — https://github.com/JoveReCode/WDSP.git

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong
capabilities across a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Touvron et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023;
Petroni et al. 2020). However, as world knowledge continuously evolves and changes, the knowledge stored in the
model parameters can become outdated over time (Onoe
et al. 2022; Dhingra et al. 2022; Liška et al. 2022). Additionally, the models may inherently contain erroneous
knowledge (Zhao et al. 2023; Ji et al. 2023; Lazaridou
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25019

