The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SongEditor: Adapting Zero-Shot Song Generation Language Model as a
Multi-Task Editor
Chenyu Yang1 , Shuai Wang1,3 , Hangting Chen* 2 , Jianwei Yu* 2 , Wei Tan2 , Rongzhi Gu2 , Yaoxun
Xu4 , Yizhi Zhou6 , Haina Zhu5 , Haizhou Li1, 3
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
4
Tsinghua University
5
X-LANCE Lab, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
6
National Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
chenyuyang2@link.cuhk.edu.cn, erichtchen@tencent.com, tomasyu@foxmail.com
Lyric

Abstract
The emergence of novel generative modeling paradigms, particularly audio language models, has significantly advanced
the field of song generation. Although state-of-the-art models
are capable of synthesizing both vocals and accompaniment
tracks up to several minutes long concurrently, research about
partial adjustments or editing of existing songs is still underexplored, which allows for more flexible and effective production. In this paper, we present SongEditor, the first song
editing paradigm that introduces the editing capabilities into
language-modeling song generation approaches, facilitating
both segment-wise and track-wise modifications. SongEditor offers the flexibility to adjust lyrics, vocals, and accompaniments, as well as synthesizing songs from scratch. The
core components of SongEditor include a music tokenizer,
an autoregressive language model, and a diffusion generator, enabling generating an entire section, masked lyrics, or
even separated vocals and background music. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed SongEditor achieves
exceptional performance in end-to-end song editing, as evidenced by both objective and subjective metrics.

Prompt

Infilling Editing

Song Generation

SongEditor
Accomp-to-song

Vocal-to-Song

Figure 1: SongEditor supports various song generation
and editing tasks, involving creating complete songs from
scratch and Infilling Editing. Accomp-to-song and vocal-tosong mean generating full songs based on partial input conditions such as accompaniments or vocals, respectively.
further problems. Therefore, song editing is crucial as it allows for the refinement and enhancement of musical compositions. Moreover, there are instances where only a specific
track, such as vocal or accompaniment, needs to be changed.
How to rewrite the designated part of a song without destroying its contextual consistency and overall musicality, is
a significant challenge for AI song composition.
Currently, there are relatively few studies on end-to-end
song generation in the academic field. State-of-the-art song
generation platforms like Suno1 are generally for commercial use and not open-source. Jukebox (Dhariwal et al. 2020)
can synthesize songs in specific styles and genres, but it
lacks more refined controls such as structural adjustments
or specific instructions. To date, these approaches have primarily focused on pure generation and cannot be directly
applied to editing scenarios.
Ding et al. (2024) proposed SongComposer, which supports various tasks like lyric-to-melody and melody-to-lyric,
potentially allowing for some degree of song editing. However, SongComposer decomposes the song into lyrics and
musical notes (MIDI), retaining no information about vocals
such as timbre. Additionally, there is an unavoidable distor-

Demo — https://cypress-yang.github.io/SongEditor demo/

Introduction
In recent years, applications for generating vocal music have
achieved remarkable results. Compared with speech or accompanied singing voice, a song typically contains multiple sections interspersed with music-only segments like prelude, interlude, and postlude, which requires strict consistency and contextual coherence. Therefore, an ideal song
generation system must be both structure-guided and capable of handling long content.
However, part of the generated song might be unsatisfactory in practice, but regenerating the entire sequence takes
much time and computing resources, and potentially leads to
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

25597

https://suno.com

