The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BiDeV: Bilateral Defusing Verification for Complex Claim Fact-Checking
Yuxuan Liu1 , Hongda Sun1 , Wenya Guo2 , Xinyan Xiao3 , Cunli Mao4 , Zhengtao Yu4 , Rui Yan1 *
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Nankai University
3
Baidu Inc.
4
Kunming University of Science and Technology
{yuxuanliu, sunhongda98, ruiyan}@ruc.edu.cn, wenyaguo@nankai.edu.cn,
xiaoxinyan@baudi.com, maocunli@163.com, ztyu@hotmail.com
Abstract
Complex claim fact-checking performs a crucial role in disinformation detection. However, existing fact-checking methods struggle with claim vagueness, specifically in effectively
handling latent information and complex relations within
claims. Moreover, evidence redundancy, where nonessential information complicates the verification process, remains a significant issue. To tackle these limitations, we propose Bilateral Defusing Verification (BiDeV), a novel factchecking working-flow framework integrating multiple roleplayed LLMs to mimic the human-expert fact-checking process. BiDeV consists of two main modules: Vagueness Defusing identifies latent information and resolves complex relations to simplify the claim, and Redundancy Defusing eliminates redundant content to enhance the evidence quality. Extensive experimental results on two widely used challenging
fact-checking benchmarks (Hover and Feverous-s) demonstrate that our BiDeV can achieve the best performance under
both gold and open settings. This highlights the effectiveness
of BiDeV in handling complex claims and ensuring precise
fact-checking.

Figure 1: An example illustrating how the claim vagueness
impedes the fact-checking process. Latent information encompasses unresolved entities and undetermined attributes;
Complex relations include referential relations and comparative relations.

Code — https://github.com/EthanLeo-LYX/BiDeV

Introduction

between claims and evidence (Kruengkrai, Yamagishi, and
Wang 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Liao et al. 2023). (ii): Large
Language Model (LLM)-based step-by-step methods leverage LLMs to conduct questioning or decomposing progressively (Pan et al. 2023; Zhang and Gao 2023; Wang and Shu
2023). These methods benefit from the advanced semantic
understanding and reasoning capabilities of LLMs, enabling
more nuanced and thorough fact-checking processes.
Despite some promising advancements, several challenges persist in current fact-checking methods, particularly concerning claim vagueness and evidence redundancy.
Claim vagueness poses a primary obstacle in the factchecking process. Figure 1 illustrates an example of obstacles due to the claim vagueness. In terms of content and correlation, claim vagueness can be categorized into two primary types: (i) Latent information encompasses unresolved
entities that cannot be identified explicitly and undetermined
attributes that remain unspecified. (ii) Complex relations include referential relations, where pronouns reference entities
within the claim, and comparative relations, which compare

Fact-checking is crucial for claim verification by collecting relevant evidence and determining their veracity (Guo,
Schlichtkrull, and Vlachos 2022). Disinformation, concealed within plenty of daily news and reports, threatens
the cyber environment and social stability (Liu et al. 2024b).
Given its critical role in combating disinformation, complex
claim verification has attracted considerable attention from
both academics and industry professionals (Thorne and Vlachos 2018; Jiang et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2023).
Recent fact-checking approaches can be broadly categorized into two categories: (i): Specialized Language Model
(SLM)-based end-to-end methods focus on extracting representations of claims and evidence then comparing them
in the feature space for verification (Popat et al. 2018;
Soleimani, Monz, and Worring 2020). Typically, they employ specific fine-tuned modules to establish correlations
* Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

541

