The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SafetyPrompts: A Systematic Review of Open Datasets for
Evaluating and Improving Large Language Model Safety
Paul Röttger1 , Fabio Pernisi1 , Bertie Vidgen2 , and Dirk Hovy1
1

Bocconi University
2
Contextual AI

Abstract

dataset creation, and the variety of purposes served by different datasets, make it difficult for researchers and practitioners
to find the most relevant datasets for different use cases, and
to identify gaps in dataset coverage that future work may fill.
In this paper, we seek to address these issues by conducting
a first systematic review of open datasets for evaluating
and improving LLM safety. We identify 144 datasets published between June 2018 and December 2024 based on clear
inclusion criteria (§2.1) using a comprehensive communitydriven search method (§2.2). We examine these 144 datasets
along several key dimensions, including their purpose (§3.2),
intended use (§3.3), format and size (§3.4), their creation
(§3.5), language (§3.6), licensing and access (§3.7), and publication (§3.8). Our review shows that a growing interest in
LLM safety is driving the creation of more and more diverse
open LLM safety datasets, with most contributions coming
from academia. Major outstanding challenges, on the other
hand, include a clear lack of safety datasets in non-English
languages as well as a lack of naturalistic safety evaluations.
We also review how open LLM safety datasets are used in
practice – in model release publications (§4) and popular
LLM benchmarks (§5) – finding that current evaluation practices are highly idiosyncratic and leverage only a small fraction of available datasets. We argue that this creates clear
scope for standardisation in LLM safety evaluations, and that
model safety evaluations in general could be improved by
better leveraging recent progress in dataset creation (§6).

The last two years have seen a rapid growth in concerns around
the safety of large language models (LLMs). Researchers and
practitioners have met these concerns by creating an abundance of datasets for evaluating and improving LLM safety.
However, much of this work has happened in parallel, and
with very different goals in mind, ranging from the mitigation
of near-term risks around bias and toxic content generation
to the assessment of longer-term catastrophic risk potential.
This makes it difficult for researchers and practitioners to find
the most relevant datasets for their use case, and to identify
gaps in dataset coverage that future work may fill. To remedy
these issues, we conduct a first systematic review of open
datasets for evaluating and improving LLM safety. We review
144 datasets, which we identified through an iterative and
community-driven process over the course of several months.
We highlight patterns and trends, such as a trend towards fully
synthetic datasets, as well as gaps in dataset coverage, such as a
clear lack of non-English and naturalistic datasets. We also examine how LLM safety datasets are used in practice – in LLM
release publications and popular LLM benchmarks – finding
that current evaluation practices are highly idiosyncratic and
make use of only a small fraction of available datasets. Our
contributions are based on SafetyPrompts.com, a living catalogue of open datasets for LLM safety, which we plan to
update continuously as the field of LLM safety develops.

1

Introduction

Ensuring the safety of large language models (LLMs) has
become as a key priority for model developers and regulators.
Consequently, in recent years, researchers and practitioners
have created an abundance of datasets for evaluating and improving LLM safety. Safety, however, is a multi-faceted and
contextual concept that lacks a unifying definition (Aroyo
et al. 2023). This complexity is reflected in the current landscape of safety datasets, which is broad, diverse, and fastchanging. Within just two months of 2024, for example, researchers published datasets for evaluating near-term risks
from LLMs, such as sociodemographic bias (Gupta et al.
2024) and toxic content generation (Bianchi et al. 2024), as
well as datasets for evaluating long-term societal risk potential, around power-seeking (Mazeika et al. 2024) and sycophantic behaviours (Sharma et al. 2024). This rapid pace of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27617

2
2.1

Dataset Review Methodology

Inclusion Criteria

At a high level, we restrict our review to open datasets that
are relevant to LLMs, and specifically relevant to evaluating
and improving LLM safety. More specifically, this means:
In terms of data modality, we only include text datasets.
We do not include image datasets (e.g. Schwemmer et al.
2020; Zhao, Wang, and Russakovsky 2021; Ricker et al.
2022) or audio datasets (e.g. Reimao and Tzerpos 2019; Koenecke et al. 2020; Meyer et al. 2020). We also do not include
datasets targeted at multimodal models, even if one modality
is text, such as in the case of vision-language (e.g. Carlini
et al. 2023; Hall et al. 2023; Wolfe et al. 2023) or text-toimage models (e.g. Bianchi et al. 2023; Parrish et al. 2023;
Luccioni et al. 2024). Further, we do not include datasets tar-

