The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Class and Attribute-Aware Logit Adjustment for Generalized
Long-Tail Learning
Xiaoling Zhou1,2 , Ou Wu1,3 * , and Nan Yang1
1

2

Center for Applied Mathematics, Tianjin University, China
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University, China
3
HIAS, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China
{xiaolingzhou, yny, wuou}@tju.edu.cn
Cao et al. 2019) are primarily based on ptr (y). Additionally,
several imbalanced benchmarks, such as CIFAR-LT (Cui
et al. 2019), are manually constructed based on these assumptions, making existing algorithms well-suited for these
datasets but limiting their generalizability to others.
Recently, Tang et al. (2022) emphasized that the assumption of identical class-conditional probability densities between training and test data cannot be guaranteed for realworld datasets. They have thus identified a new type of imbalance known as attribute imbalance. For instance, concerning the color attribute, the training set may consist
mostly of white doves, whereas the number of white and
dark doves may be equal in the testing set. Attribute imbalance can lead to poor performance of samples with rare attributes and compromise the generalization ability of deep
learning models. Consequently, they formulated a new research problem, named generalized long-tail (GLT) learning, which encompasses both class and attribute imbalances.
An example of GLT learning is shown in Fig. 1. Given the
poor performance of existing LT baselines for GLT learning,
they proposed a regularization technique to learn invariant
features. Despite demonstrating improved performance, the
challenge of attribute imbalance remains unsolved because
the fundamental issue, ptr (x|y) ̸= pte (x|y), has not been
adequately addressed.
This study pioneers the estimation of the class-conditional
probability density (CCPD) ratio between training and test
data. We first introduce a modified Cross-Entropy (CE)
loss, termed class-attribute aware logit-adjusted (CALA)
loss, which incorporates both class priors and the ratio of
class-conditional probability densities as adjustment terms
to address class and attribute imbalances. Next, we develop a novel GLT method called Heuristic-CALA, which
utilizes neighborhood information of samples to estimate
the CCPD ratio within the CALA loss. Notably, HeuristicCALA serves as a generalization of several conventional
LT approaches. Finally, leveraging the strong performance
of meta-learning, we propose another GLT method named
Meta-CALA. This method employs an adjustment network
optimized through meta-learning to estimate the CCPD ratio
based on the neighborhood-related training characteristics of
samples. We conduct extensive experiments across various
learning scenarios prone to class and attribute imbalances:
LT learning, GLT learning, and subpopulation shift learn-

Abstract
Compared to conventional long-tail learning, which focuses
on addressing class-wise imbalances, generalized long-tail
(GLT) learning considers that samples within each class still
conform to long-tailed distributions due to varying attributes,
known as attribute imbalance. In the presence of such imbalance, the assumption of equivalence between the classconditional probability densities of the training and testing
sets is no longer tenable. Existing GLT approaches typically
employ regularization techniques to avoid directly modeling
the class-conditional probability density (CCPD) ratio between training and test data, leading to suboptimal performance. This study aims to directly estimate this ratio, for
which a novel class-attribute aware logit-adjusted (CALA)
loss incorporating both the CCPD ratio and the class priors is
presented. Two new GLT learning methods, named HeuristicCALA and Meta-CALA, are then proposed, which estimate
the CCPD ratio in the CALA loss by leveraging the neighborhood information of samples. Extensive experiments across
diverse scenarios susceptible to class and attribute imbalances
showcase the state-of-the-art performance of Meta-CALA.
Furthermore, while Heuristic-CALA exhibits inferior performance compared to Meta-CALA, it incurs only negligible additional training time compared to the Cross-Entropy loss, yet
surpasses existing methods by a significant margin.

Introduction
Long-tail (LT) learning is a common challenge in many real
applications, where only a few categories are represented by
a large number of instances while many others are represented by only a few (Cui et al. 2019; Zhou, Yang, and Wu
2023). A popular technique to address this challenge is logit
adjustment (Menon et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2024; Zhao et al.
2022). However, existing methods (Tao et al. 2023; Menon
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021) typically assume that the primary
difference between training and test data lies in the prior
probabilities over categories, where ptr (y) ̸= pte (y), while
the class-conditional probabilities for the training and test
data remain the same, i.e., ptr (x|y) = pte (x|y). Additionally, these methods presume uniform prior probabilities over
classes when evaluating model performance. Therefore, the
adjustment terms in existing methods (Menon et al. 2021;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22991

