The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Searching for and Avoiding Hidden Sets Using Queries with Local Feedback
Tomasz Jurdzinski1 , Dariusz R. Kowalski2
1

University of Wroclaw, Poland
2
Augusta University, USA
tju@cs.uni.wroc.pl, dkowalski@augusta.edu

Abstract

in large populations using pooled tests (Dorfman 1943),
and it has also been very vibrant recently during and after the COVID-19 pandemic (Augenblick et al. 2020; Mallapaty et al. 2020; Sinnott-Armstrong, Klein, and Hickey
2020). Although group testing is an area containing relatively simply-formulated combinatorial problems, it has
many applications in other fields. Especially in problems
where there is an unknown sparse sub-structure that could
improve the performance of ML/AI algorithms, e.g., a small
subset of features (model parameters) that determines decisions with high certainty. One could discover such subset by
reverse-engineering the decision vector, in a similar way that
the hidden set is discovered by analyzing feedback vector
to queries. Specific applications include: simplifying multilabel classifiers (Ubaru et al. 2020), approximating the nearest neighbor (Engels, Coleman, and Shrivastava 2021), and
accelerating forward pass of a deep neural network (Liang
and Zou 2021). The related superimposed codes are used
for dimensional reduction and error correction in ML and
(online) decision making, cf. (Hajiaghayi et al. 2024).
In adversarial search, information retrieval and databases,
GT has been applied to extraction and maintenance of the
most frequent elements in data streaming (Cormode et al.
2003; Cormode and Muthukrishnan 2005; Cormode and
Hadjieleftheriou 2008; Yu et al. 2004; Kowalski and Pajak 2022a), construction of signature files (Indyk 1997),
(distributed) reconstruction of noisy pooled data (HahnKlimroth and Kaaser 2022), supporting top-k join queries
in relational databases (Ilyas, Aref, and Elmagarmid 2004),
indexing (Tomasic and Garcia-Molina 1993), and dimensionality reduction (Aggarwal 2001; Ravi Kanth, Agrawal,
and Singh 1998; Shen, Zhou, and Zhou 2007). Group testing is also closely related with coding and information theory (Kautz and Singleton 1964; Porat and Rothschild 2011a;
Cheraghchi and Ribeiro 2019). More information, applications and links could be found in the seminal book (Du,
Hwang, and Hwang 2000) and recent literature (Klonowski,
Kowalski, and Pajak 2022; Kowalski and Pajak 2022b).

Discovering elements of a hidden set, also known as Group
Testing (GT), is a well-established area in which one party
tries to discover elements hidden by the other party by asking
queries and analyzing feedback. The feedback is a function
of the intersection of the query with the hidden set - in our
case, it is a classical double-threshold function, which returns
i if the intersection is a singleton i and “null” otherwise (i.e.,
when the intersection is empty or of size at least 2). In this
work, we enhance GT by two features. First, we introduce a
local feedback framework to this problem: each hidden element is an “autonomous” element and can analyze feedback
itself, but only for the queries to which it belongs. The goal
is to design a deterministic non-adaptive sequence of queries
that enables each non-hidden element to learn about all other
hidden elements. We show that, surprisingly, this task requires substantially more queries than the classic group testing – by proving a super-cubic (in terms of the number of
hidden elements) lower bound and by constructing a specific
query sequence of slightly longer length. Such a query system is also an extension of a well-known superimposed code,
in a way that the decoding can be done only by the owners
of the codewords. Second, we extend the results to the model
where elements may belong to certain clusters and retrieving
them could be done only via queries avoiding elements from
“interfering” clusters. The main challenge is in not knowing
which interfering clusters are non-empty (and thus, need to
be avoided) and how to speed up the retrieval process by asking queries across many clusters. Our algorithms can be generalized to other feedback functions, to adversarial/stochastic fault-prone scenarios, implemented in a distributed setting
and applied to the information theory and codes.

1

Introduction

In the Group Testing (GT) research field, introduced by
Dorfman in 1943 (Dorfman 1943), the goal is to retrieve all
elements of an unknown set K, containing k elements of
some large universe of size n, by asking queries and analyzing answers (so called, feedback vector). Queries are subsets of the universe, for instance, containing elements satisfying some pre-defined search criteria, e.g., a query may
ask for elements having a specific subset of features. Originally GT was applied for identifying infected individuals

1.1

The setting of this work

We consider one of the classical query’s feedback models:
if the intersection of the query with the hidden set is a single element, the id of this element is returned as the query’s
feedback (we say that this element is selected, or revealed);

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27036

